.  DIARY 

AND 

CORRESPONDENCE 

OF 

JOHN  EVELYN,  F.R.S. 

AUTHOR  OF  THE  "  SYLVA." 
TO  WHICH  IS  SUBJOINED 

BETWEEN 

KING  CHARLES  I  AND  SIR  EDWARD  NICHOLAS, 

AND  BETWEEN 

SIR  EDWARD  HYDE,  AFTERWARDS  EARL  OF  CLARENDON, 
AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 

EDITED  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL  MSS.  AT  WOTTON. 

BY  WILLIAM  BRAY,  ESQ.  F.A.S. 
A  NEW  EDITION,  IN  FOUR  VOLUMES. 

CORRECTED,  REVISED,  AND  ENLARGED. 

VOL.  IV. 
LONDON: 

HENEY  COLBUEN  &  CO.,  PUBLISHEES, 

GREAT  MARLBOROUGH  STREET. 
1857. 


CONTENTS. 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN,  WITH  HER  CHARACTER, 
BY  DR.  BOHUN. 

The  Letters  to  which  an  asterisk  is  prefixed  are  printed  here  for  the  first  time. 

Page 

Character  of  Mrs.  Evelyn,  by  Dr.  Bohun   3 

Letters  of  Mrs.  Evelyn   8 

To  Mr.  Bohun  ,    .  ib. 

To  the  same.    May  21,  1668    10 

To  Sir  Samuel  Tuke   11 

To  Mr.  Bohun.    July  17,  1668    ib. 

To  my  brother  Glanville  in  France   12 

To  Mr.  Terryll  in  Ireland.    February  10,  1668-9    ....  14 

To  the  same   15 

To  my  brother  Glanville  in  France  .    '   ib. 

To  my  brother  Glanville  at  Wotton.    September  21,  1670        .    .  16 

To  Mrs.  Evelyn  of  Woodcot.    September  26,  1670 ....  17 

To  the  same                                                                        .  19 

To  my  cousin  Mary  Evelyn.    September  28,  1670  .       .       .  .20 

To  Mrs.  Evelyn  of  Wotton.    1670    ib. 

To  her  son   21 

To  my  brother  Glanville  at  "West  Dean.  December,  1670 .  .  .  22 
To  my  Lady  Tuke,  after  the  death  of  Sir  Samuel  Tuke. 

January  28,  1670-1    23 

To  Mr.  Bohun.    January  29,  1670-1   .24 


iv  CONTENTS. 

Page 

To  Mr.  Bohun.    1671   25 

*  To  the  same.    May,  1671   26 

*  To  my  brother  Glanville.    October  8,  1671   ib. 

*  To  her  son.    October  9,  1671   27 

*  To  Mrs.  Alexander.    October  9,  1671   29 

To  Mr.  Bohun.    March  2,  1671-2   30 

To  the  same.    January  4,  1672    31 

*  To  my  Lady  Ann  Carr.    March  26,  1672    32 

*  To  Mr.  Evelyn.    December,  1672    33 

*  To  Mr.  Bohun.    January,  1672-3    34 

*  To  Mrs.  Saul   36 

*  March  28,  1673    37 

*  To  my  brother  Glanville.    December  the  last,  1673       ...  38 
To  Lady  Tuke.    April,  1685   •    .  40 

*  Mrs.  Owen  to  John  Evelyn.    Eltham,  June  26,  1680      .       .       .  41 

*  John  Evelyn  to  Mrs.  Owen.    June  26,  1680    42 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  BETWEEN  KING  CHARLES  I.  AND 

HIS  SECRETARY  OF  STATE,  SIR  EDWARD  NICHOLAS     .        .  47 

CORRESPONDENCE  OF  SIR  EDWARD  NICHOLAS  AND  VARIOUS 
MEMBERS  OF  THE  ROYAL  FAMILY,  DURING  THE  COMMON- 
WEALTH AND  PROTECTORATE  189 

PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  BETWEEN  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 
(AFTERWARDS  EARL  OF  CLARENDON)  AND  SIR  RICHARD 
BROWNE,  AMBASSADOR  TO  THE  COURT  OF  FRANCE,  IN  THE 
TIME  OF  KING  CHARLES  1  231 

A  SELECTION  FROM  THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  SIR  RICHARD 

BROWNE  327 

GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE      .    .  355 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 

WITH  HEE  CHAEACTEE, 

BY  DR.  BOHUN; 

FROM  THE  ORIGIXAL  IN'  HIS  HAKD-WEITING. 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/diarycorresponde41  eve! 


CHAEACTER  OF  MES.  EVELYN, 

BY  DR.  BOHUN  * 


I  HAD  lately  occasion  to  review  several  letters  to  me 
from  Mrs.  Evetyn  of  Deptford.  After  reading  them,  I 
found  tliey  were  much  to  be  valued,  because  they  con- 
tained not  only  a  complete  description  of  the  private 
events  in  the  family,  but  public  transactions  of  the  times, 
where  are  many  curious  and  memorable  things  described 
in  an  easy  and  eloquent  style. 

Many  forgotten  circumstances  by  this  means  are  recalled 
afresh  to  my  memory ;  by  so  full  and  perfect  a  narration 
of  them,  they  are  again  present  to  my  thoughts,  and  I 
see  them  re-acted  as  it  were  before  my  eyes.  This  made 
strong  impressions  on  my  mind,  so  that  I  could  not  rest 
till  I  had  recollected  the  substance  of  them,  and  from 
thence  some  general  reflections  thereon,  and  from  thence 
drew  a  character  of  their  author,  so  far  only  as  by  plain 
and  natural  inferences  may  be  gathered  from  their 
contents.  This  was  not  performed  in  a  manner  worthy  of 
the  design,  but  hastily  and  incorrectly,  which  cost  no 
more  time  than  could  be  employed  at  one  sitting  in  an 

*  The  Rev.  Dr.  Ralph  Bohun,  D.C.L.,  was  a  scholar  at  Winchester 
College,  aud  was  elected  probationary  fellow  of  New  College,  Oxford,  at  the 
early  age  of  19.  In  1671  he  wrote  a  Discoui'se  on  the  History  and  Nature 
of  Wind  ;  and  in  1685,  he  completed  his  Doctor's  degree.  His  connection 
with  Evelyn's  family  arose  from  his  having  superintended  the  education  of 
his  son. 

B  2 


4 


CHARACTER  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[1695. 


afternoon;  but  in  this  short  models  Mrs.  Evelyn  will 
appear  to  be  the  best  daughter  and  wife,  the  most 
tender  mother,  and  desirable  neighbour  and  friend,  in  all 
parts  of  her  life.  The  historical  account  of  matters  of 
fact  sufficiently  set  forth  her  praises,  wherein  there  could 
be  no  error  or  self-conceit;  and  declare  her  to  be  an 
exact  pattern  of  many  excellent  virtues ;  but  they  are 
concealed  in  such  modest  expressions,  that  the  most 
envious  censurers  can^t  fix  upon  her  the  least  suspicion 
of  vanity  or  pride.  Though  she  had  many  advantages 
of  birth  and  beauty,  and  wit,  yet  you  may  perceive  in 
her  writings  an  humble  indilfference  to  all  Avorldly 
enjoyments,  great  charity,  and  compassion  to  those  that 
had  disobliged  her,  and  no  memory  of  past  occurrences, 
unless  it  were  a  grateful  acknowledgment  of  some  friendly 
office ;  a  vein  of  good-nature  and  resignation,  and  self- 
denial,  runs  througli  them  all.  There^s  nothing  so  despised 
in  many  of  these  letters  as  the  fruitless  and  empty  vanities 
of  the  town ;  and  tliej  seem  to  pity  the  misfortunes  of 
those  wdio  are  condemned  by  their  greater  quality  or 
stations  to  squander  away  their  precious  time  in  unpro- 
fitable diversions,  or  bestow  it  in  courtly  visits  and  con- 
versations. Where  there  happens  to  be  slrj  mention  of 
children  or  friends,  there  is  such  an  air  of  sincerity  and 
benevolence  for  the  one,  and  religious  concern  for  the 
happiness  of  the  other,  as  if  she  had  no  other  design 
to  live  in  the  world  than  to  perform  her  own  duty,  and 
promote  the  welfare  of  her  relations  and  acquaintance. 

There^s  another  observation  to  be  collected,  not  less 
remarkable  than  the  rest,  which  is  her  indefatigable 
industry  in  employing  herself,  and  more  for  the  sake  of 
others  than  her  own  :  This  she  wrote,  not  out  of  vain 
glory,  or  to  procure  commendation,  but  to  entertain 
them  with  whom  she  had  a  familiar  correspondence  by 
letters,  with  the  relation  of  such  accidents  or  business 
wherein  she  was  engaged  for  the  month  or  the  week 
past. 

This  was  a  peculiar  felicity  in  her  way  of  writing,  that 
though  she  often  treated  of  vulgar  and  domestic  subjects, 
she  never  suffered  her  style  to  languish  or  flag,  but  by 
some  new  remark  or  pleasant  digression  kept  it  up  to  its 
usual  pitch. 


1695.] 


CHARACTER  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


5 


Tlie  reproofs  in  any  of  these  numerous  letters  were  so 
softly  insinuated,  that  the  greatest  punishment  to  be 
inflicted  upon  any  disobligation  was  only  to  have  the 
contrary  virtue  to  the  fault  they  had  been  guilty  of,  highly 
applauded  in  the  next  correspondence,  which  was  ever  so 
managed  as  to  please  and  improve. 

Scarce  an  harsh  expression,  much  less  any  evil  surmise 
or  suspicion,  could  be  admitted  where  every  line  was 
devoted  to  charity  and  goodness.  This  is  no  effect  of 
partiality,  but  appears  in  the  particular  instances,  so  that 
the  same  judgment  must  be  made  by  all  unprejudiced 
persons  who  shall  have  a  sight  of  them. 

Any  misfortune  or  disappointment  was  not  mournfully 
lamented,  but  related  in  such  a  manner  as  became  a  mind 
that  had  laid  in  a  sufficient  provision  of  courage  and 
patience  beforehand  to  support  it  under  afflictions.  All 
unfortunate  accidents  are  allayed  by  some  consolatory 
argument  taken  from  solid  principles.  No  kind  of  trouble, 
but  one,  seems  to  interrupt  the  constant  intention  to 
entertain  and  oblige;  but  that  is  dolorously  represented 
in  many  of  the  letters ;  which  is  the  loss  of  children  or 
friends.  That  being  an  irreparable  separation  in  this 
world,  is  deplored  with  the  most  affectionate  tenderness 
which  words  can  express.  You  may  conclude  that  they 
who  write  in  such  a  manner  as  this,  must  be  supposed 
to  have  a  just  sense  of  religion,  because  there  can  scarce 
be  assigned  one  act  of  a  beneficent  and  charitable  temper 
but  has  many  texts  of  the  Gospel  to  enforce  it.  So  that  all 
good  Christians  must  be  very  useful  and  excellent  neigh- 
bours and  friends;  which  made  this  lady  ever  esteemed 
so.  She  was  the  delight  of  all  the  conversations  where  she 
appeared,  she  was  loved  and  admired,  yet  never  envied 
by  any,  not  so  much  as  by  the  women,  who  seldom  allow 
the  perfections  of  their  own  sex,  lest  they  eclipse  their 
own ;  but  as  this  very  manifestly  and  upon  all  occasions 
was  her  temper,  the  world  was  very  grateful  to  her  upon 
that  account.  This  happiness  was  gained  and  preserved 
by  one  wise  qualification ;  for  though  no  person  living  had 
a  closer  insight  into  the  humours  or  characters  of  persons, 
or  could  distinguish  their  merits  more  nicely,  yet  she 
never  made  any  despising  or  censorious  reflections  :  her 
great  discernment  and  wit  were  never  abused  to  sully 


6 


CHARACTER  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[1695. 


tlie  reputation  of  others,  nor  affected  any  applause  that 
might  be  gained  by  satirical  jests.  Though  she  was 
extremely  valued,  and  her  friendship  prized  and  sought 
for  by  them  of  the  highest  condition,  yet  she  ever  treated 
those  of  the  lowest  Avith  great  condescension  and  humanity. 
The  memory  of  her  virtues  and  benefits  made  such  deep 
impression  on  her  neighbours  of  Deptford  and  Greenwich, 
that  if  any  one  should  bring  in  another  report  from  this, 
or  what  was  generally  received  among  them,  they  woidd 
condemn  it  as  false,  and  the  effect  of  a  slanderous  calumny : 
either  they  would  never  yield  that  any  change  should 
happen  to  this  excellent  lady,  or  theyM  impute  it  to 
sickness,  or  time,  or  chance,  or  the  unavoidable  frailties 
of  human  nature.  But  I  have  somewhat  digressed  from 
my  subject,  which  was  to  describe  her  person  or  perfections 
no  otherwise  than  may  be  gathered  from  the  letters  I 
received  ;  *  they  contain  historical  passages  and  accounts 
of  any  more  or  less  considerable  action  or  accident  that 
came  to  her  knowledge,  with  diverting  or  serious  reflec- 
tions as  the  subject  requii-ed,  but  generally  in  an  equal 
and  chaste  style,  supported  by  a  constant  gravity,  never 
descending  to  affected  sallies  of  ludicrous  wit. 

It^s  to  be  farther  observed,  that  though  she  recites  and 
speaks  French  exactly,  and  understands  Italian,  yet  she 
confines  herself  with  such  strictness  to  the  purity  of  the 
English  tongue,  that  she  never  introduces  foreign  or 
adopted  words.  That  there's  a  great  steadiness  and 
equality  in  her  thoughts,  and  that  her  sense  and  expres- 
sions have  a  mutual  dependence  on  each  other,  may  be 
inferred  from  hence — you  shall  never  perceive  one  per- 
plexed sentence,  or  blot,  or  recalling  a  word  in  more  than 
twenty  letters. 

Many  persons  with  whom  she  conversed  or  were  related 
to  her,  or  had  any  public  part  in  the  world,  were  honoured 
by  very  lively  characters  conferred  on  them,  always  just 
and  full  of  discernment,  rather  inclining  to  the  charitable 
side,  yet  no  otherwise  than  as  skilful  masters  who  paint 
like,  yet  know  how  to  give  some  graces  and  advantages  to 
them  whose  pictui^es  they  draw.    The  expressions  are 

*  Copies  of  many  letters  to  Dr.  Bohun  were  found  at  Wotton,  but  not 
those  here  referred  to.  Several  of  them  will  follow,  with  some  addressed 
to  other  correspondents,  as  specimens  of  her  manner  and  great  good  sense. 


1695.] 


CHARACTER  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


7 


clear  find  unaffected,  the  sentences  frequent  and  grave,  the 
remarks  judicious,  the  periods  flowing  and  long,  after  the 
Ciceronian  way ;  yet  though  they  launch  out  so  far,  they 
are  strict  to  the  rules  of  grammar,  and  ever  come  safe 
home  at  last  without  any  obscurity  or  incoherence 
attending  them. 

I  will  only  give  one  instance  of  a  person  who  was 
characterised  by  her  in  a  more  favourable  manner  than  he 
durst  presume  that  he  deserved;  however,  to  show  the 
method  of  her  writing,  I  shall  set  it  down.  "  I  believe 
(such  an  one)  to  be  a  person  of  much  wit,  great  know- 
ledge, judicious  and  discerning,  charitable,  well  natured, 
obliging  in  conversation,  apt  to  forget  and  forgive  injuries, 
eloquent  in  the  pulpit,  living  according  to  known  precepts, 
faithful  to  his  friend,  generous  to  his  enem}^,  and  in  every 
respect  accomplished  ;  this  in  our  vulgar  way  is  a  desirable 
character,  but  you^ll  excuse  if  I  judge  unrefinedly  who 
have  the  care  of  cakes  and  stilling,  and  sweetmeats  and 
such  useful  things." 

Mrs.  Evelyn  has  been  often  heard  to  say  concerning 
the  death  of  her  admirable  and  beloved  daughter,  that 
though  she  had  lost  her  for  ever  in  this  world  yet  she 
would  not  but  that  she  had  been,  because  many  pleasing 
ideas  occur  to  her  thoughts  that  she  had  conversed  with 
her  so  long,  and  been  made  happy  by  her  for  so  many 
years. 

Oxon,  1695,  Se^it.  20. 


[This  character  of  Mvs.  Evelyn  would  appear  to  have  been  written 
thirteen  years  before  her  death.  She  outUved  her  husband  nearly  three 
years,  and,  by  her  will  dated  in  February  1708-9  (the  year  and  month  of 
her  death),  desired  to  be  buried  in  a  stone  coffin  near  that  of  "  my  dear 
husband,  whose  love  and  friendship  I  was  happy  in,  fifty-eight  years  nine 
months  ;  but  by  God's  providence  left  a  disconsolate  widow,  the  27th  day  of 
February,  1705,  in  the  71st  year  of  my  age.  His  care  of  my  education 
was  such  as  might  become  a  father,  a  lover,  a  friend,  and  husband  ;  for 
instruction,  tenderness,  affection,  and  fidelity  to  the  last  moment  of  his  life  ; 
which  obligation  I  mention  Avith  a  gratitude  to  his  memory,  ever  dear  to 
me  ;  and  I  must  not  omit  to  own  the  sense  I  have  of  my  parent's  care  and 
goodness,  in  placing  me  in  such  worthy  hands."] 


8 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[1667. 


LETTERS  OE  MRS.  EVELYN. 


To  Mr.  BohunS' 

Sir, 

I  am  concerned  you  should  be  absent  when  you 
might  confirm  the  suffrages  of  your  fellow  collegiots_,  and 
•see  the  mistress  both  Universities  court;  a  person  who  has 
not  her  equal  possibly  in  the  world,  so  extraordinary  a 
woman  she  is  in  all  things.  I  acknowledge,  though  I 
remember  her  some  years  since  and  have  not  been  a 
stranger  to  her  fame,  I  was  surprised  to  find  so  much 
extravagancy  and  vanity  in  any  person  not  confined 
within  four  walls.  Her  habit  particular,  fantastical,  not 
unbecoming  a  good  shape,  which  she  may  truly  boast  of. 
Her  face  discovers  the  facility  of  the  sex,  in  being  yet 
persuaded  it  deserves  the  esteem  years  forbid,  by  the 
infinite  care  she  takes  to  place  her  curls  and  patches. 
Her  mien  surpasses  the  imagination  of  poets,  or  the 
descriptions  of  a  romance  heroine^s  greatness ;  her  gracious 
bows,  seasonable  nods,  courteous  stretching  out  of  her 
hands,  twinkling  of  her  eyes,  and  various  gestures  of 
approbation,  show  what  may  he  expected  from  her  dis- 
course, which  is  as  airy,  empty,  whimsical,  and  rambling 
as  her  books,  aiming  at  science,  difficulties,  high  notions, 

*  This  letter  appears  to  describe  the  impression  produced  on  the  wi-iter  by 
that  interview  with  Margaret,  Duchess  of  Newcastle,  to  which  reference  is 
made  in  the  Diary,  vol.  ii.  p.  23:  "Went  again  with  my  wife  to  the  Duchess 
of  Xewcastle,  who  received  her  in  a  kind  of  transport,  suitable  to  her 
extravagant  humour  and  dress,  which  was  very  singular."  The  date  there- 
fore will  be  1667. 


1667.] 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


9 


terminatino;  commonly  in  nonsense,  oaths,  and  obscenity. 
Her  way  of  address  to  people,  more  than  necessarily  sub- 
missive; a  certain  general  form  to  all,  obliging,  by  repeating 
affected,  generous,  kind  expressions ;  endeavouring  to  show 
humility  by  calling  back  things  past,  still  to  improve  her 
present  greatness  and  favour  to  her  friends.  I  found 
Doctor  Charlton  with  her,  complimenting  her  Avit  and 
learning  in  a  high  manner;  which  she  took  to  be  so  much 
her  due  that  she  swore  if  the  schools  did  not  banish 
Aristotle  and  read  Margaret,  Duchess  of  Newcastle,  they 
did  her  wrong,  and  deserved  to  be  utterly  abolished.  My 
part  was  not  yet  to  speak,  but  admire;  especially  hearing 
her  go  on  magnifying  her  OAvn  generous  actions,  stately 
buildings,  noble  fortune,  her  lord's  prodigious  losses  in 
the  war,  his  power,  valour,  wit,  learning,  and  industry, 
— what  did  she  not  mention  to  his  or  her  own  advantage  ? 
Sometimes,  to  give  her  breath,  came  in  a  fresh  admirer; 
then  she  took  occasion  to  justify  her  faith,  to  give  an 
account  of  her  religion,  as  new  and  unintelligible  as  her 
philosophy,  to  cite  her  own  pieces  line  and  page  in  such 
a  book,  and  to  tell  the  adventures  of  some  of  her  nymphs. 
At  last  I  grew  weary,  and  concluded  that  the  creature 
called  a  chimera  which  I  had  heard  speak  of,  was 
now  to  be  seen,  and  that  it  was  time  to  retire  for  fear 
of  infection;  yet  I  hope,  as  she  is  an  original,  she 
may  never  have  a  copy.  Never  did  I  see  a  woman  so 
full  of  herself,  so  amazingly  vain  and  ambitious.  What 
contrary  miracles  does  this  age  produce.  This  lady  and 
Mrs.  Philips  !  *  The  one  transported  with  the  shadow  of 
reason,  the  other  possessed  of  the  substance  and  insensible 
of  her  treasure ;  and  yet  men  who  are  esteemed  wise  and 
learned,  not  only  put  them  in  equal  balance,  but  suffer 
the  greatness  of  the  one  to  weigh  down  the  certain  real 
worth  of  the  other.  This  is  all  I  can  requite  your  rare 
verses  with ;  which  as  much  surpass  the  merit  of  the  person 
you  endeavour  to  represent,  as  I  can  assure  you  this 
description  falls  short  of  the  lady  I  would  make  you 
acquainted  with  :  but  she  is  not  of  mortal  race,  and  there- 
fore cannot  be  defined. 

M.E. 

*  The  once  "matchless  Oi'inda  now  forgotten.  An  edition  of  her 
poems  had  come  out  during  the  present  year. 


10 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[1668. 


To  Mr.  Bohun, 

May  21,  1G68. 

If  it  be  true  that  we  are  generally  inclined  to  covet 
what  we  admire,  I  can  assure  you  my  ambition  aspires  not 
to  the  fame  of  Balzac,  and  therefore  must  not  thank  you 
for  entitling  me  to  that  great  name.  I  do  not  admire  his 
style,  nor  emulate  the  spirit  of  discontent  which  runs 
through  all  his  letters.  There  is  a  lucky  hit  in  reputation, 
which  some  obtain  by  the  defect  in  their  judges,  rather 
than  from  the  greatness  of  their  merit :  the  contrary  may 
be  instanced  in  Doctor  Donne,  who,  had  he  not  been  really 
a  learned  man,  a  libertine  in  wit  and  a  courtier,  might 
have  been  allowed  to  write  well ;  but  I  confess  in  my 
opinion,  with  these  qualifications  he  falls  short  in  his 
letters  of  the  praises  some  give  him. 

Voiture  seems  to  excel  both  in  quickness  of  fancy, 
easiness  of  expression,  and  in  a  facile  way  of  insinuating 
that  he  was  not  ignorant  of  letters,  an  advantage  the 
Court  air  gives  persons  who  converse  with  the  world  as 
books. 

I  wonder  at  nothing  more  than  at  the  ambition  of 
printing  letters;  since,  if  the  design  be  to  produce  wit 
and  learning,  there  is  too  little  scope  for  the  one ;  and  the 
other  may  be  reduced  to  a  less  compass  than  a  sheet 
of  gilt  paper,  unless  truth  Avere  more  communicative. 
Business,  love,  accidents,  secret  displeasure,  family  in- 
trigues, generally  make  up  the  body  of  letters ;  and  can 
signify  very  little  to  any  besides  the  persons  they  are 
addressed  to,  and  therefore  must  lose  infinitely  by  being 
exposed  to  the  unconcerned.  Without  this  declaration,  I 
hope  I  am  sufficiently  secure  never  to  run  the  hazard  of 
being  censured  that  way;  since  I  cannot  suspect  my 
friends  of  so  much  unkindness,  nor  myself  of  the  vanity 
to  wish  fame  on  so  doubtful  a  foundation  as  the  caprice  of 
mankind.  Do  not  impute  my  silence  to  neglect.  Had  you 
seen  me  these  ten  days  continually  entertaining  persons 
of  different  humour,  age,  and  sense,  not  only  at  meals,  or 
afternoon,  or  the  time  of  a  civil  visit,  but  from  morning 
till  night,  you  will  be  assured  it  was  impossible  for  me  to 
finish  these  few  lines  sooner ;  so  often  have  I  set  pen  to 
paper  and  been  taken  off  again,  that  I  almost  despaired 


1668.] 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


11 


to  let  you  know  my  satisfaction  that  Jack  *  complies  so 
well  with  your  desires^  and  that  I  am  your  friend  and 
servant,     "  M.  Evelyn. 


To  Sir  Samuel  Tuke. 

Sir, 

I  think  myself  obliged,  since  this  is  the  day 
designed  for  your  happiness,  to  express  the  part  I  take  in 
your  joy,  and  join  my  wishes  for  the  continuance  of  it. 
The  favour  you  intend  me  on  Monday  I  receive  with  much 
satisfaction,  but  fear  you  will  not  afford  it  us  long,  when 
you  find  the  many  inconveniences  of  a  little  house,  a 
disordered  family,  and  the  difference  in  judgments;  all 
which  may  1)0  dispensed  with,  whilst  health,  the  discretion 
of  servants,  and  other  accidents,  permit ;  but  should  there 
be  a  miscarriage  in  any  of  these,  the  end  of  our  joining 
families  ceases,  and  I,  who  am  sensible  of  my  own  defects 
and  tender  of  my  friends^  contentment,  cannot  entertain 
the  hopes  you  Aviil  be  sufferers  many  days.  Let  not  this 
surprise  you,  since  it  proceeds  from  a  cautiousness  in  my 
nature,  which  will  not  suffer  me  to  engage,  where  I  have 
any  part  to  act,  with  that  assurance  some  are  more  happy 
in ;  therefore  prepare  your  lady  with  the  nicety  of  my 
temper,  and  the  truth  of  this,  that  I  may  not  pass  in  either 
opinions  for  a  person  that  promises  more  than  can  be 
performed  by,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

M.  E. 


To  Mr.  Bohun. 

gjj^^  July  17,  1668. 

By  honest  John  and  my  last  to  Jack,  you  have 
learnt  Sir  Samuel  is  entered  into  the  state  of  matrimony. 
I  do  assure  you,  if  marriage  were  the  happy  establishment 
in  his  opinion,  he  has  made  choice  of  a  wife  every  way 
worthy  of  him,  for  person,  quality,  wit,  good  mien,  and 
severe  virtue ;  her  piety  cannot  be  questioned  after  living 
seven  years  a  canoness,  which  includes  all  the  strictness 


*  Her  son,  then  at  College  under  Mr.  Bohun's  care. 


12 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[1668. 


of  a  nun,  tlie  vow  only  excepted.  They  are  both  here  at 
present,  and  will  remain  some  time  till  they  can  fit  them- 
selves for  housekeeping;  I  am  generally  well  pleased  with 
such  favours  from  my  friends,  and  I  am  extremely  satisfied 
with  the  conversation  of  this  fair  lady.  I  am  apt,  I  confess, 
to  enlarge  the  characters  of  them  I  esteem,  but  to  be  just 
to  the  merit  of  this  person  I  ought  to  say  much  more.  I 
will  suppose  your  college  affairs  take  up  much  of  your 
time,  and  that  your  diversions  in  Oxford  are  very  charming; 
yet  neither  should  make  you  so  absolutely  forget  Deptford 
and  those  in  it,  as  not  to  impart  some  of  your  pleasant 
thoughts,  at  spare  moments  especially,  knowing  how  well 
we  receive  your  letters,  and  how  naturally  our  sex  loves 
novelty,  that  I  cannot  but  accuse  you  of  unkindness; 
however,  I  am,  Your  friend  and  servant, 

M.  E. 

To  my  Brother  Glanville^'  in  France. 

Sir, 

I  have  received  your  kind  letter,  and  am  not 
astonished  Mr.  Fuller  finds  so  great  a  difference  between 
a  French  pension  and  Woodcott  table.  Let  him  know 
eating  is  the  least  design  of  travellers ;  that  particular 
waived,  I  still  persevere  in  the  defence  of  France  ;  and  will 
believe,  when  you  have  overcome  the  difficulties  of  the 
language,  and  gained  some  acquaintance  amongst  the 
better  sort,  visited  the  Court,  seen  the  noble  buildings  and 
pleasant  seats  in  and  about  Paris,  you  will  render  to  what 
has  been  related  to  you,  that  it  is  an  excellent  country, 
wherein  indeed  riches  are  partially  distributed,  yet  employed 
to  great  use  and  ornament.  The  people  are  a  little  various 
in  their  tempers,  for  which  blame  the  several  nations  from 
which  they  are  descended ;  but  all  agreeing  in  the  desire  to 
enlarge  their  bounds,  and  augment  the  glory  of  the  prince 
under  whom  the  most  of  them  do  but  breathe.  I  am  sorry 
it  was  not  my  good  fortune  to  stay  till  jou  came,  or  your 
lot  to  come  when  I  was  there,  that  I  might  have  been 

*  See  Diary,  vol.  ii.  p.  367,  for  a  character  of  Mr.  Glanville,  who  had 
married  Evelyn's  sister.  The  letter  is  undated,  but  the  mention  of  Lord 
Arlington's  influence  seems  to  fix  the  year  as  that  immediately  following 
Clarendon's  disgrace,  and  the  triumph  of  the  Cabal ;  namely  1668-9. 


1668,] 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


13 


assisting  to  your  conversation.  An  ambassador  is  daily 
threatened  to  be  sent  from  hence,  but  it  is  not  yet  decided 
which  of  the  two  able  statesmen  shall  carry  it — the  Lord 
Buchan,  or  Mr.  R.  Montagu ;  since  it  does  not  depend  on 
their  abilities  for  the  employment,  but  their  being  disposed 
to  marry  my  Lord  Arlington's  wife's  sister,  as  the  neces- 
sary article  to  arrive  to  that  dignity.  When  either  is 
declared,  you  shall  not  fail  of  the  address  you  desire.  In 
the  meantime  any  English  gentleman  must  be  well  received 
by  my  Lord  of  St.  Alban's.  Though  your  eye  be  con- 
tinually over  my  cousin  your  son,  and  your  care  as  great 
as  a  tender  and  knowing  parent's  can  be,  yet  I  am 
persuaded  you  will  find  the  breeding  in  an  academy  the 
likeliest  way  to  answer  all  ends  except  that  of  expense, 
which  must  be  greater  there  than  elsewhere ;  but  not  to  be 
valued,  considering  the  advantages  of  good  conversation, 
the  emulation  which  young  persons  of  good  birth  raise  in 
one  another,  the  learning  all  manly  exercises  in  community, 
and  the  gaining  a  good  air  and  assurance  best  acquired  by 
example,  which  works  most  with  such  ingenious  and 
observing  tempers  as  my  cousin  seems  to  be.  The  orders 
are  generally  good,  the  discipline  strict,  and,  I  am  informed, 
the  chief  master  in  our  time  has  left  a  nephew  that  not 
only  equals  but  excels  him ;  and  is  also  of  the  religion.*  If 
you  are  inclined  to  take  this  course  with  my  nephew  this 
winter,  you  will  find  him  out  in  the  Faubourg  St.  Germain, 
so  pleasant  a  part  of  the  town  I  admire  you  can  live  out  of 
it.  When  you  walk  to  the  Charity,  if  you  inquire  for  the 
Rue  Farrene  you  may  see  how  pleasantly  our  house  was 
situated.  I  fear  you  will  judge  I  mention  Paris  with  that 
afi'ection  persons  in  age  remember  the  satisfaction  of  their 
youth,  to  which  happiness  was  the  nearest,  at  least  in  their 
opinion,  and  so  past  that  there  is  no  hopes  of  a  return. 
Such,  I  confess,  in  part  are  my  thoughts  of  that  place,  but 
must  not  flatter  myself  you  will  confirm  me  in  them,  who 
arrive  there  in  a  more  discerning  age,  and  carry  with  you 
a  little  prejudice  against  the  people  j  yet  something  is  to  be 
expected  from  the  justice  of  your  nature  in  their  behalf, 
and  from  the  goodness  of  your  nature  in  mine.  Excuse 
the  liberty  of.  Your  aflPectionate  sister, 

M.  E. 

*  A  Protestant,  Mrs.  Evelyn  means. 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[1668-9. 


To  Mr.  Terryll  in  Ireland/' 

Fth.  10,  1668-9. 

Sir, 

I  have  received  yours  with  the  enclosed  to 
Mr.  Bohun,  which  shall  be  conveyed  to  him  with  care. 
I  am  not  to  doubt  of  your  good  reception  w^herc  your 
merit  is  well  understood ;  I  am  rather  to  wish  you  may 
not  meet  with  engagements  to  keep  you  long  out  of  this 
country,  which,  if  so  unhappy  as  to  impart  vices  to  its 
neighbours,  cannot  boast  of  many  virtues  to  spare.  This 
may  truly  be  esteemed  an  admiring  age,  if  distance  from 
what  is  worthy  define  it  well ;  and  what  leads  me  to  this 
opinion  is  the  strange  veneration  paid  to  the  ruins  of 
ancient  structures,  greater  than  the  entire  edifices  ever 
could  pretend  to;  a  sort  of  justice  virtue  challenges  in  our 
time,  and  leaves  the  practice  to  the  choice  of  the  succeed- 
ing age.  To  inform  you  of  what  passes  here  cannot  be 
acceptable,  since  I  suppose  you  are,  not  without  the  usual 
curiosity  of  travellers,  desirous  to  collect  foreign  novelties ; 
which,  should  you  be  exempt  from,  little  is  worth  commu- 
nicating to  you  from  hence.  The  censure  of  our  plays 
comes  to  me  at  the  second  hand.  There  has  not  been  any 
new  lately  revived  and  reformed,  as  Catiline,  well  set 
out  with  clothes  and  scenes;  Horace,  with  a  farce  and 
dances  between  every  act,  composed  by  Lacy  and  played 
by  liim  and  Nell,  which  takes ;  f  one  of  my  Lord  of 
Newcastle's,  for  which  printed  apologies  are  scattered  in 
the  assembly  by  Briden's  order,  either  for  himself  who  had 
some  hand  in  it,  or  for  the  author  most ;  I  think  both  had 
right  to  them.t  State  affairs  I  am  not  likely  to  give  you  an 
account  of,  if  Mr.  B.'s  character  be  taken  of  me,  who 

*  ;Mr.  Terryli  was  the  son  of  Sir  Timothy  (variously  called  by  Evelyn, 
Tirrill,  Tyrell,  and  Tyrill),  as  to  whom  see  vol.  i.  275  and  383  ;  vol.  ii.  99  ; 
and  vol.  iii.  308. 

See  Pepys'  Diary,  last  edition,  vol.  v.  p.  89.  "  Horace  "  was  a  poor 
translation  of  Corneille's  tragedy  by  ]\Irs.  Philips.  See  Evelyn's  Diary,  vol.  i. 
p.  32,  where  Evelyn  contrasts  the  virtue  of  the  authoress  with  that  of  the 
ladies  (Castlemaine  and  others)  before  whom  he  saw  it  performed. 

+  An  entry  in  the  Diary  of  Pepys  (vol.  v.  pp.  100,  101)  will  probably 
explain  this  ailusion. 


1668-9.] 


LETTEES  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


15 


fancies  I  know  nothing  of  the  Dutch  war  till  the  guns 
went  off  at  Chatham;  and  in  my  own  concerns  the  most 
important  good-fortune  which  has  befallen  me  of  late  is 
the  honour  I  have  had  to  kiss  my  lady  your  mother^s 
hands^  with  two  of  your  bisters,  whose  stay  in  town  being 
short  as  well  as  mine  deprived  me  of  the  satisfaction  I 
rejoiced  much  in.  My  father  and  Mr.  Evelyn  are  infinitely 
your  servants,  and  I  am, 

Sii',  your  humble,  &c. 
To  Mr.  Terryll  in  Ireland. 

Sir, 

Had  I  not  been  assured  by  some  of  your  friends 
that  you  were  upon  your  return  into  England  about 
Easter,  I  should  not  have  omitted  my  acknowledgments 
for  your  obliging  letter;  but  since  finding,  upon  better 
information,  that  good  fortune  is  not  so  near,  give  me 
leave  to  beg  your  excuse  for  an  undesigned  fault,  and 
inquire  farther  what  can  be  the  charms  of  a  place  which 
has  not  only  invited  but  detained  persons  of  so  much  wit 
and  merit  in  it  ?  Can  it  be  the  natives^  fame  for  learning 
of  late  years  which  is  the  powerful  attraction?  or  the  Irish 
beauties  above  those  of  other  countries,  which  engages 
through  such  dangerous  seas?  It  cannot  be  judged  by 
Mr.  Terryll  that  interest  only  should  be  the  motive ; 
there  must  be  something  more  reasonable  than  rich  fields 
and  herds  to  souls  so  much  raised  above  the  vulgar.  But 
I  will  give  a  stop  to  my  curiosity,  and  satisfy  myself  that 
the  same  prudence  which  was  our  guide  here  accompanies 
you  everywhere,  and  will  maintain  your  choice  of  every 
thing  but  friends,  which  admits  of  no  objection  except 
the  permission  you  give  me  to  be  of  the  number ;  yet  I 
am  certainly  as  much  as  any, 

Sir,  your  most,  &c. 
To  my  Brother  Glanville  in  France. 

Sir, 

I  have  received  yours  of  the  25th  May,  and  will 
hope  mine  in  answer  to  your  first  came  safe  to  you,  since 
it  passed  under  your  niece^s  cover.    Of  any  person  I 


16 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[1670. 


know,  you  had  the  least  reason  to  visit  France,  either  to 
improve  mien,  wit,  or  style,  since  all  necessary  accom- 
plishments were  ever  granted  you;  but  I  acknowledge  a 
nicer  way  of  raillery  is  practised  where  you  live  than  is 
used  amongst  us,  or  you  would  never  address  yourself  to 
me  for  lessons  in  an  art  too  well  understood  by  you 
already.  All  I  pretend  to  is,  to  keep  myself  on  the  defen- 
sive; plainness  and  sincerity  are  my  best  guards;  I  confess 
beauty  and  youth  sometimes  stand  in  need  of  subtlety 
and  stratagems  to  evade  and  rescue  them  from  the 
surprises  of  men,  but  persons  wanting  those  charms  are 
sufficiently  secured  from  any  attacks  that  may  exercise 
the  invention.  Your  return  hither  will  be  very  pleasing 
to  your  friends.  I  imagine  you  so  furnished  with  such 
critical  and  pleasant  remarks  of  the  countries,  people,  and 
customs,  that,  should  you  oppose  former  characters  of 
France,  your  relation  would  be  rendered  to,  as  being  latest 
and  made  with  most  judgment.  Yet  let  not  curiosity  pass 
in  your  opinion  for  the  only  inducement  which  makes  me 
desire  your  return,  since  your  merit  challenges  my  best 
wishes,  which  shall  accompany  you  till  I  can  assure  you 
in  a  better  manner  how  much  I  am, 

Sir,  &c. 


To  my  BrotJier  Glanville  at  TVotton. 

Q  Sept.  21,  1670. 

I  will  not  study  much  or  long  to  excuse  those 
weak  tears  you  so  slight  and  condemn  in  women,  as 
believing  they  are  always  at  our  command,  but  I  can 
assure  you  neither  the  flesh-pots  nor  the  onions  caused 
them  in  me.  I  have  often  been  as  nobly  and  as  ci^illy 
entertained  at  Wotton,-:^  and  yet  have  I  parted  with  dry 
eyes.  It  is  reality  and  kindness  which  gains  upon  my 
spirit.  I  will  not  deny  but  a  confusion  of  thoughts 
proceeding  from  gratitude,  a  sense  of  my  own  want  of 

*  The  reader  may  be  reminded  that  Evelyn  did  not  succeed  to  the 
paternal  estate  of  Wotton  till  after  his  elder  brother  George's  death  ; 
nearly  thirty  years  after  the  date  of  this  letter. 


1G70.] 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


17 


merit,  an  apprehension  I  sliould  make  unequal  returns, 
with  the  approaching  loss  of  so  much  happiness,  produced 
those  unusual  and  unseasonable  effects  in  me,  though 
common  in  others,  without  the  least  mixture  of  pride  or 
emulation.  This  your  severity  will  hardly  allow  of,  but 
when  you  shall  learn  more  of  my  nature  and  the  secrets 
of  my  heart,  which  I  wish  you  already  knew,  so  I  might 
be  spared  the  telHng  them,  because  advantageous  to  me, 
and  which  are  not  concealed  from  you  out  of  the  least 
distrust  of  your  discretion  or  friendship,  but  from  niceness 
I  cannot  very  well  justify.  Sometimes  philosophical 
reflections  have  been  of  use  to  me,  but  I  was  surprised 
with  abundance  of  kindness,  of  which  you  may  justly 
claim  a  large  share,  since  I  am,  &c. 


To  Mrs.  Evelyn  of  Woodcot. 

Sept.  2G,  1670. 

Dear  Sister, 

The  indisposition  which  you  carried  out  of  town, 
and  the  solitude  you  live  in,  gives  me  a  desire  to  inquire 
after  your  Iiealth,  and  a  title  to  interrupt  your  melancholy 
thoughts,"  though  it  be  but  mth  the  assurance  of  our 
wishes  for  your  perfect  recovery.  One  w'ho  is  of  so 
judicious  a  temper  as  you  are,  cannot,  if  you  give  your 
reason  leave  to  act,  but  be  armed  against  all  accidents 
which  may  disturb  your  quiet  in  a  great  measure.  I 
confess  to  be  wholly  insensible  of  sorrow  or  misfortune  is 
as  little  to  be  wished,  as  it  is  seldom  to  be  found;  since 
the  inequalities  of  human  life  contribute  much  to  the 
happiness  of  it,  so  that  the  variety  of  ills  prove  not  the 
greater  share ;  which  hitherto  your  condition  seems  to  have 
exempted  you  from.  It  is  true  you  have  newly  lost  a 
friend  and  a  guide,  but  you  have  it  now  more  absolutely 
in  you]'  own  power  to  be  whatever  prudence  and  generosity- 
dictates  to  you.  And  as  you  have  it  in  your  power,  so  I  am 
confident  it  is  in  your  will  to  oblige  and  gratify  a  friend, 
especially  one  who  may  challenge  your  kindness  in  some 


*  The  death  of  her  husband  (Evelvn's  brot'ier  Richard)  had  taken  place 
few  months  before. — See  Diary ,  vol.  ii.  pp.  44-5. 

VOL.  IV.  c 


18 


LETTERS  OF  MllS.  EVELYN. 


[1670. 


sort  upon  the  account  of  avowed  services  and  much  worth, 
one  who  has  pursued  your  satisfaction  preferably  to  his 
own  interest,  which  shows  he  lias  a  true  sense  of  honour, — 
and  not  to  keep  you  longer  in  suspense  with  the  character 
of  a  person,  better  known  to  you  by  his  actions  than  by 
any  description  I  can  make  of  him,  it  can  be  no  other 
than  my  brother  Glanvil ;  who  certainly,  being  named, 
tells  you  wherein  you  may  acknowledge  past  obligations 
and  engage  him  for  the  future,  by  advancing  his  preten- 
sions to  my  Lady  Lewtner.  Possibly  you  may  think  it 
early  to  propose  anything  of  that  nature  to  a  discreet 
widow  and  your  own  sister,  who  it  may  be  you  could  wish 
might  never  have  any  thoughts  of  changing  her  condition, 
upon  like  resolutions  of  your  own ;  but  be  assured,  persons 
so  considerable  for  beauty,  virtue,  and  fortune,  will  never 
enjoy  that  calm  of  those  thoughts  long ;  attempts  will  be 
made ;  persons  of  all  degrees  of  merit  and  sufficient  quality 
will  make  addresses,  and  value  themselves  by  breaking 
through  those  rules  of  decency  that  they  may  be  the  first 
discoverers  of  their  extreme ;  therefore  you  ought  not  to 
blame  my  brother  if  he  has  already  given  marks  of  his, 
who  from  a  long  knowledge  of  my  Lady^s  great  merit  and 
obliging  nature,  has  taken  courage  to  lay  himself  at  her 
feet  j  from  whence  he  must  not  hope  to  be  raised  if  she 
were  of  a  haughty  mind,  that  could  allow  of  no  happiness 
but  in  great  titles  and  vast  riches  (in  which  certainly  it  is 
not  wholly  to  be  placed) ;  but  did  it  consist  in  either,  she 
is  so  secured  by  a  large  provision  of  both,  that  she  need 
not  require  an  addition  from  a  husband ;  all  that  seems 
to  be  required  is,  her  choice  in  a  man  that  can  value  her 
perfections,  be  a  friend  to  her  interests,  and  make  her 
happiness  his  own ;  which  qualifications  may  assuredly  be 
allowed  my  brother,  who  protests  with  all  imaginable  zeal 
and  sincerity  that  he  has  no  other  design  but  her  satis- 
faction and  advantage,  and  to  live  with  honour  the  rest  of 
his  days,  towards  which  who  would  not  that  could  assist, 
and  who  better  can  than  yourself ;  an  endeavour  which 
acquits  your  obligations  to  a  sister  that  you  love,  and  a 
friend  that  you  value ;  which  that  you  will  do  cannot  be 
thought  strange,  but  that  I  should  concern  myself  in  my 
Lady  Lewtner^s  affairs  may  appear  so,  being  neither 
solicited  by  my  brother,  who  knows  nothing  of  my 


1670.] 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


19 


presumption  in  his  behalf,  nor  called  to  council  by  you  who 
need  no  advice  to  do  well ;  however  let  me  beg  of  you  to 
give  a  favourable  construction  to  this  freedom,  and  believe 
it  proceeds  from  the  kindest  intentions  I  can  express, 
since  I  am,  Dear  sister,  your,  &c. 


To  Mrs.  Evelyn  of  Woodcot. 

Dear  Sister, 

I  very  much  rejoice  in  the  improvement  of  your 
health,  and  do  still  persist  in  my  opinion  that  you  may 
owe  much  of  your  happiness  and  quiet  to  your  own 
prudence.  I  also  continue  to  believe  that  my  brother 
Glanvil  deserves  very  much  from  you;  and  you  have 
rightly  guessed  my  meaning  by  the  intrigue  between  my 
cousin  Will  and  my  niece,  which  would  have  proved  no 
dishonour  to  him  had  he  resolved  to  succeed  in  it,  since 
we  judge  of  things  of  that  nature  commonly  by  the  event, 
and  not  from  the  means,  but  he  being  tender  of  your 
satisfaction  made  honour  a  very  nice  point.  Give  me  leave 
to  rectify  a  little  mistake  in  Mr.  Evelyn^s  behalf,  who 
though  he  might  often  wish  one  of  the  name  worthy  of  my 
niece,  never  declared  for  my  cousin  Will  more  than  that, 
if  she  should  think  him  sufficiently  deserving,  with  my 
brother  and  your  consent,  it  was  not  a  choice  to  be  con- 
temned and  deplored,  since  he  is  likely  to  make  a  very 
good  man;  and  farther  than  such  a  reply  I  believe  he 
never  made  to  several  discourses  on  that  subject,  urged  at 
several  times  by  many  of  our  relations  and  acquaintance. 
As  to  my  Lady  Lewtner's  concern,  I  do  acknowledge  I 
ought  not  to  have  gone  so  far  had  I  not  flattered  myself 
with  the  hopes  of  your  embracing  any  proposition  so  much 
to  my  brother^s  advantage  ;  but  possibly  you  have  reasons 
in  reserve  more  powerful  than  those  which  are  visible  to 
the  w^orld  against  him ;  and  it  is  not  my  single  opinion, 
but  the  belief  of  many  others,  that  my  Lady,  your  sister, 
though  never  so  prudent  and  cautious,  may  not  injure 
herself  in  marrying  such  a  person  as  he  is ;  yet  I  will  not 
importune  you  to  be  his  advocate  since  you  declare  so 
positive  a  dislike  to  second  marriages  in  general,  the  only 
excuse  you  can  make  for  not  being  his  friend  in  this 

o2 


20 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[1670. 


particular,  be  it  on  the  account  of  gratitude  or  kindness, 
the  word  signifies  little  where  the  intention  is  friendly ; 
exceptions  against  such  strict  rules  are  daily  made,  and 
experience  shows  that  as  unequal  fall  out,  therefore  I  shall 
make  the  less  apology  for  the  failings  of 

Your  humble  servant, 

M.  E. 


To  my  Cousin  Mary  Evelyn. 

Sept.  28,  1670. 

Dear  Cousin, 

I  have  had  often  cause  to  acknowledge  the  noble 
entertainment  and  great  civilities  I  have  received  at 
Wotton,  but  I  never  was  more  sensible  of  my  obligations 
to  my  brother  and  yourself,  than  at  present,  from  a  full 
persuasion  I  was  never  treated  with  more  reality  and 
kindness,  which  gains  infinitely  upon  such  a  temper  as 
mine  is :  I  wish  you  were  as  well  inclined  to  believe  as  I 
am  that  passage  in  Scripture  reasonable,  which  advises  a 
woman  not  only  to  leave,  but  to  forget  her  fatlier^s  house 
for  a  husband,  and  as  w^ell  assured  you  should  meet  with 
as  worthy  and  deserving  a  family  as  I  have  done.  Some 
part  of  this  you  will  think  strange  doctrine,  but  I  seriously 
beg  of  3^ou  not  to  persist  in  your  opinions  concerning 
marriage,  and  thptt  you  will  conform  to  so  good  a  father's 
desires  as  you  have  in  this  particular,  and  endeavour  to 
establish  your  happiness  beyond  his  life,  which,  that  j' ou 
may  long  enjoy,  with  all  other  blessings  I  heartily  wish, 
being  Your  affectionate 

M.  E. 


To  Mrs.  Evelyn  of  Wotton. 

1670. 

Dear  Cousin, 

I  am  so  wxll  persuaded  of  your  good  nature  and 
merit,  and  so  sensible  of  your  best  civility,  that  I  w' ish  for 
a  more  important  occasion  to  express  the  desire  I  have  to 
serve  you.  I  have  endeavoured  to  perform  your  commands 
in  fitting  my  little  niece  with  a  mantle  coat,  bodice  coat. 


1670.] 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


21 


petticoat^  narrow  shoes  and  stockings,  which  I  bespake  two 
sizes  less  than  any  that  are  made  for  a  child  of  a  year  old. 
If  they  prove  to  nurse^s  mind,  or  have  any  fault,  let  me 
know  it  that  the  next  may  be  the  same  or  more  exact.  I  was 
not  willing  to  send  all,  believing  it  some  difficulty  to  fit  the 
lady  by  guess.  Though  you  never  want  very  good  com- 
pany, I  cannot  but  wish  myself  sometimes  two  or  three 
hours  in  a  day  with  you,  to  be  a  witness  of  the  pleasant 
conversation  I  fancy  such  wits  as  Mr.  Duncan  and  others 
of  that  strain  afford  you.  I  hope  my  cousin  Mary  is 
perfectly  recovered ;  that  your  father,  husband,  uncle, 
and  brother  are  in  perfect  health,  to  whom  my  father 
presents  his  most  humble  service  and  particularly  to 
yourself;  assure  them  of  my  humble  service,  and  esteem 
me,  Dear  Cousin, 

Your  humble  servant, 

M.  E. 

To  her  Son, 

Jack, 

I  have  received  your  letter  and  request  for  a 
supply  of  money ;  but  none  of  those  you  mention  which 
were  bare  effects  of  your  duty.  If  you  were  so  desirous 
to  answer  our  expectations  as  you  pretend  to  be,  you 
would  give  those  tutors  and  overseers  you  think  so  exact 
over  you,  less  trouble  than  I  fear  they  have  with  you. 
Much  is  to  be  wished  in  your  behalf :  that  your  temper 
were  humble  and  tractable,  your  inclinations  virtuous, 
and  that  from  choice,  not  compulsion,  you  make  an  honest 
man.  Whatever  object  of  vice  comes  before  you,  should 
have  the  same  effect  in  your  mind  of  dislike  and  aversion 
that  drunkenness  had  in  the  youth  of  Sparta  when  their 
slaves  were  presented  to  them  in  that  brutish  condition, 
not  only  from  the  deformity  of  such  a  sight,  but  from  a 
motive  beyond  theirs — the  hope  of  a  future  happiness,  which 
those  rigorous  heathens  in  moral  virtue  had  little  prospect 
of,  finding  no  reward  for  virtue  but  in  virtue  itself.  You 
are  not  too  young  to  know  that  lying,  defrauding, 
swearing,  disobedience  to  parents  and  persons  in  au- 
thority, are  offences  to  God  and  man  :  that  debauchery 
is  injurious  to  growth,  health,  life,  and  indeed  to  the 


22 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[1670. 


pleasures  of  life ;  therefore,  now  that  you  are  turning  from 
child  to  man,  endeavour  to  follow  the  best  precepts,  and 
choose  such  ways  as  may  render  you  worthy  of  praise  and 
love.  You  are  assured  of  your  father's  care  and  my 
tenderness ;  no  mark  of  it  shall  be  wanting  at  any  time  to 
confirm  it  to  you,  with  this  reserve  only,  that  you  strive 
to  deserve  kindness  by  a  sincere  honest  proceedins:,  and 
not  flatter  yourself  that  you  are  good  whilst  you  only 
appear  to  be  so.  Fallacies  will  only  pass  in  schools. 
When  you  thoroughly  Aveigh  these  considerations,  I  hope 
you  will  apply  them  to  your  own  advantage,  as  well  as  to 
our  infinite  satisfaction.  I  pray  daily  God  vrould  inspire 
you  with  his  grace,  and  bless  you. 

I  am. 

Your  loving  mother, 

M.  Evelyn. 


To  my  Brother  Glanville  at  West  Dean. 

Decemhcr,  1670. 

Sir, 

Though  I  will  not  murmur  that  you  prefer  West 
Dean  to  Deptford  to  pass  your  Christmas  in,  since  the 
attractive  upon  all  accounts  is  so  much  more  powerful,  yet 
give  me  leave  to  lament  the  loss  of  so  good  conversation  as 
I  promised  myself  in  yours  :  but  to  let  you  see  I  can  prefer 
the  satisfaction  of  a  friend  to  my  own,  I  will  turn  my 
complaints  of  you  into  good  wishes  for  the  success  of  so 
reasonable  an  address,  as  I  am  persuaded  you  are  now 
making ;  and  could  I  question  any  perfection  in  the  ladies 
you  so  much  admire,  it  would  only  be  how  one  who  deserves 
so  well  should  so  long  dispute  the  merit  of  such  a  man  as 
you  are ;  do  not  imagine  I  pretend  to  compliment  in  return 
of  those  civilities  you  pass  upon  our  sex,  since,  having  the 
least  title  to  your  praises,  I  will  have  the  least  share  in  the 
acknowledgments ;  but  to  be  just  to  you  and  serious  in 
my  opinion,  I  do  repeat,  what  I  have  so  often  declared  with 
sincerity  in  your  concern,  that  might  I,  after  such  a  loss 
as  a  good  husband  must  be  to  a  virtuous  wife,  hope  to 
repair  it  by  the  choice  of  a  second,  I  should  not  only  hope, 
but  think  myself  secure,  when  I  had  twenty  years  known 


1670-1.] 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELTN. 


23 


and  conversed  with  tlie  freedom  which  honour  and  friend- 
ship permits^  with  a  person  of  so  much  wit,  good  humour, 
generosity,  prudence,  and  integrity  as  you  possess ;  one  of 
so  entire  a  reputation  in  the  world,  so  generally  esteemed, 
and  so  fortunate  in  obliging  others,  and,  to  conclude,  above 
all  one  resolved  to  love  me  disinterestedly,  without  which  I 
confess  the  rest  would  prevail  but  little.  This  my  Lady 
Lewtner  cannot  be  ignorant  of;  and  being  convinced 
that  it  is  true,  how  is  it  possible  she  can  resist  her  own 
happiness  in  making  yours  ?  what  scruple  can  remain  in 
the  breast  of  a  worthy  woman,  who  finds  all  that  is 
desirable  in  her  power  ?  she  may  oblige  you  with  her  person 
and  show  her  generosity  too,  since  you  will  not  pretend  to 
equal  her  in  fortune,  though  in  nothing  else  inferior  were 
articles  to  be  draw^n :  I  would  take  the  liberty  to  own  as 
much  to  the  lady  herself,  were  the  acquaintance  I  have 
with  her  such  as  is  requisite  to  recommend  advice ;  but  I 
dare  not  offer  my  sense  to  be  the  guide  of  another's  actions, 
though  I  flatter  myself  I  do  not  err  in  this  opinion :  but 
what  discourages  me  chiefly  is  the  slight  reception  my 
sister  Evelyn  gave  a  few  lines  I  writ  to  her  on  this 
subject,  who  I  thought  might  have  endeavoured  more 
to  your  satisfaction  than  I  find  she  is  inclined  to  do, 
since  not  inconsistent  with  her  own  interest  and  the  value 
she  has  for  such  a  sister.  Pardon  the  liberty  I  take  to  tell 
you  my  thoughts  plainly,  and  the  interruption  I  give  those 
happy  moments  you  now  enjoy,  to  which  I  wish  to  bring 
increase. 


To  mij  Lady  Tuke  after  the  death  of  Sir  Samuel  Tuke. 

January  28,  1670-1. 

Madam, 

I  acknowledge  these  are  trials  which  make 
Christian  philosophy  useful,  not  only  by  a  resignation  to 
the  Divine  decree,  but  by  that  hope  which  encourages  us 
to  expect  a  more  lasting  happiness  than  any  this  world  can 
give :  without  which  we  were  extremely  wretched,  since 
no  felicity  here  has  any  duration.  We  are  solicitous  to 
obtain,  we  fear  whilst  we  possess,  and  we  are  inconsolable 
when  we  lose.     The  greatest  conquerors  themselves  are 


24 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[1670-1. 


subject  to  this  unsteady  state  of  liumau  nature ;  let  us  not 
murmur  then,  for  we  offend ;  and  though  in  compliance  to 
your  present  sense  of  things  I  could  join  with  you  in 
grieving,  having  made  as  particular  a  loss  as  ever  any  did 
in  a  friend,  I  dare  not  indulge  your  sorrow,  especially  when 
I  consider  how  prejudicial  it  will  prove  to  yourself  and 
those  dear  pledges  that  are  left  to  your  care;  but  I  do 
rather  beg  of  you  cease  grieving,  and  owe  that  to  reason 
and  prudence  which  time  will  overcome.  Were  I  in  so 
good  health  that  I  could  quit  my  chamber,  I  would  be 
daily  with  you  and  assure  you  how  really  I  am  concerned 
for  you.    You  cannot  doubt  the  affection  of  your,  &c. 


To  Mr.  Bohun. 

Sayes-court,  Jan.  29,  1670-1. 

Sir, 

If  a  friend  be  of  infinite  value  living,  how  much 
cause  have  we  to  lament  him  dead !  Such  a  friend  was 
Sir  Samuel  Tuke,  who  retired  out  of  this  life  on  St.  Paul's 
day  [25  Jan.]  at  midnight,  and  has  changed  the  scene  to 
him  and  us,  and  left  occasion  to  all  that  knew  him  to 
bewail  the  loss.  You  need  not  to  be  made  sensible  b}^  a 
character  of  a  person  you  knew  so  well,  and  you  can 
enumerate  virtues  enough  to  lament  and  shed  some  tears 
justly ;  therefore  spare  me  the  sorrow  of  repeating  wliat 
effect  it  has  wrought  on  such  a  mind  as  mine,  who  think 
no  misfortune  worth  regretting  besides  the  loss  of  those  I 
loA'e.  Do  not  blame  me  if  I  believe  it  almost  impossible 
to  meet  with  a  person  so  worthy  in  himself,  and  so 
disposed  to  esteem  me  again;  and  jQt  that  is  not  the 
chiefest  cause  of  my  affliction.  I  might  waive  much  of  my 
own  interest,  had  I  not  so  many  partners  that  will  suffer 
equally.  These  are  the  trials  which  make  Christian 
philosophy  useful,  not  only  b}^  a  resignation  to  the  Divine 
decree,  but  by  that  hope  which  encourages  us  to  expect 
a  more  lasting  happiness  than  any  this  world  can  give, 
without  which  we  were  extrcDiely  wretched,  since  no 
felicity  here  has  any  duration.  The  greatest  conquerors 
themselves  are  subject  to  this  unsteady  state  of  human 
nature,  therefore  well  may  I  submit,  whose  concerns  are 


1671.] 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


25 


trivial  in  respect  of  others.  Yet  this  I  conclude,  that  we 
die  by  degrees  when  our  friends  go  before  us.  But  whilst 
I  discourse  thus  with  you,  I  should  consider  what  effects 
melancholy  reflections  may  have  on  a  splenetic  person, 
one  who  needs  not  cherish  that  temper.  I  will  only  add 
that  I  am  now  able  to  quit  my  chamber,  which  is  more 
than  I  could  do  these  fourteen  days,  and  that 
I  am,  Sir, 

Your  servant, 

M.  Evelyn. 


To  Mr,  Bohun. 

Q  167L 
Sir, 

I  must  believe  you  are  very  busy,  hearing  so 
seldom  from  you,  and  that  you  are  much  in  the  esteem  of 
Dr.  Bathurst,"  since  he  judges  so  favourably  of  your 
friends.  It  cannot  be  the  effect  of  his  discernment  which 
makes  him  give  sentence  in  my  behalf,  being  so  great  a 
master  of  reason  as  he  is ;  but  it  is  certainly  a  mark  of 
his  great  kindness  to  you  that  he  defers  to  your  judgment 
in  opposition  to  his  own.  I  should  not  question  yours  in 
other  things,  but  the  wisest  may  be  allowed  some  grains, 
and  I  conclude  you  no  less  a  courtier  than  a  philosopher. 
Since  my  last  to  you  I  have  seen  "  The  Siege  of  Grenada,^^ 
a  play  so  fall  of  ideas  that  the  most  refined  romance  I  ever 
read  is  not  to  compare  with  it :  love  is  made  so  pure,  and 
valour  so  nice,  that  one  would  imagine  it  designed  for  an 
Utopia  rather  than  our  stage.  I  do  not  quarrel  with  the 
poet,  but  admire  one  born  in  the  declme  of  morality 
should  be  able  to  feign  such  exact  virtue ;  and  as  poetic 
fiction  has  been  instructive  in  former  ages,  I  wish  this  the 
same  event  in  ours.  As  to  the  strict  law  of  comedy  I 
dare  not  pretend  to  judge  :  some  think  the  division  of  the 
story  not  so  well  as  if  it  could  all  have  been  comprehended 
in  the  day^s  actions  :  truth  of  history,  exactness  of  time, 
possibilities  of  adventures,  are  niceties  the  ancient  critics 
might  require ;  but  those  who  have  outdone  them  in  fine 

*  Dr.  Ralph  Bathurst,  Dean  of  Wells,  auci  President  of  Trinity  College, 
in  Oxford,  whose  Life  and  Literary  Remains  were  published  by  Thomas 
Warton. 


26 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[1671. 


notions  may  be  allowed  the  liberty  to  express  them  their 
own  way,  and  the  present  world  is  so  enlightened  that  the 
old  dramatic  must  bear  no  sway.  This  account  perhaps  is 
not  enough  to  do  Mr.  Dryden  right,  yet  is  as  much  as  you 
can  expect  from  the  leisure  of  one  who  has  the  care  of  a 
nursery.  I  am,  Sir,  &c. 

M.  Evelyn. 


To  Mr.  Bohun. 


Sir 


May,  1671. 


I  wish  you  had  remembered  my  answer  to  some 
discourses  you  held  before  your  departure  concerning  my 
cousin  Glanville  :  it  might  have  spared  you  the  trouble, 
and  my  cousins  the  importunity,  of  a  proposition  not  at  all 
to  their  advantage  or  our  satisfaction,  since  Jack  is 
designed  for  the  law  in  good  earnest,  in  w^hich  he  can 
make  little  progress,  should  marriage  intervene ;  neither 
will  his  grandfather,  father,  and  myself  sacrifice  him  for  a 
fortune,  but  shall  rest  satisfied  with  such  a  mediocrity  as 
may  be  obtained  with  stratagem  when  his  age  and  discretion 
will  allow  of  that  tie.  Besides,  having  heard  my  cousin  had 
intentions  to  bestow  his  daughter  and  fortune  upon  one 
of  his  name,  it  would  not  become  us  to  select  for  ourselves 
to  the  prejudice  of  a  relation  we  should  willingly  assist ; 
therefore,  upon  the  account  of  generosity  or  mistaken 
interest,  let  this  design  die  as  civilly  as  you  can  :  when 
your  time  permits  you  to  think  of  coming  to  town,  you 
need  not  question  your  being  welcome  at  Deptford  :  we  are 
all  well  in  health ;  all  our  relations  are  in  town,  your 
Deptford  friends  are  well,  and  I  am. 

Sir,  vour  servant, 

M.  E. 


To  my  Brother  Glanville. 

Sib, 

I  have  of  late  fancied  myself  very  well  established 
in  your  good  opinion ;  I  will  not  examine  merit  or  the 
causes  of  things  too  strictly  for  fear  I  return  to  doubts 
again  :  j^our  last  confirms  my  belief,  being  a  very  obliging 


1671.] 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


27 


letter.  Love  cannot  be  the  motive  from  a  man  pre- 
possessed, nor  can  interest  in  either  of  us  be  the  induce- 
ment ;  it  must  then  be  concluded  a  mutual  disposition  to 
like  one  another^s  inclinations  and  tempers,  -which  we 
will  call  friendship,  and  which,  from  this  day  forward,  let 
neither  piquant  raillery  nor  pleasant  interrupt,  let  neither 
censure  nor  whisper  destroy;  and  if  you  sign  these 
articles  you  shall  never  complain  of  a  breach  on  my  side. 
Well,  what  do  you  think  of  widows  ?  are  they  not  odd 
creatures  ?  There  is  now  a  lady,  newly  a  fine  prize,  near 
you.  Who  hovers  about  her  yet  ?  Can  twenty  years  esteem 
of  the  Sussex  lady  change  into  a  violent  passion  for  the 
Dorking  lady  ?  If  need  were,  cannot  you  imagine  more 
probability  in  an  address  there,  than  the  other  way ;  were 
she  as  considerable,  I  would  advise  it :  but  when  one  goes 
to  yoke  oneself  one  would  be  glad  it  should  be  very 
easy ;  consideration  of  religion  and  fortune  will  come  into 
one^s  head  whether  one  will  or  no  :  and  then,  it  may  be, 
my  friend  Glanville  is  a  happier  man  with  liberty  than  so 
engaged ;  for  marriage  to  such  minds  as  yours  and  mine 
requires  plenty  and  quiet,  without  which  considerations, 
keep  as  you  are,  master  of  yourself ;  take  heart,  and,  let 
fortune  throw  cross  or  pile,  be  merry,  and  alwaj^s  a  friend 
to  one  that  will  ever  be  yours,  since  I  am. 

Dear  Brother,  your  affectionate, 

M.  E. 


To  her  Son. 

Oct.  9,  1671. 

Dear  Jack, 

I  do  not  question  your  being  very  happy  in  so 
fine  a  place  and  so  good  company,  neither  do  I  think  you 
wholly  pass  your  time  in  diversion.  I  wish  you  early 
wisdom  j  it  may  prevent  late  repentance.  Your  father  is 
gone  a  little  journey  with  Mr.  Treasurer,  to  Newmarket, 
and  to  my  Lord  Arlington's  upon  his  earnest  invitation ; " 
your  grandfather  is  newly  recovered  of  a  fit  of  the  gout;  your 

It  was  on  this  occasion  that  Evelyn  dined  familiarly  with  the  King,  and 
was  witness  of  "fondness  and  toying"  highly  characteristic  of  the  time. — 
See  Diary,  vol.  ii.  p.  63. 


28 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[167L 


sisters  are  all  well  except  Moll,  who,  I  fear,  lias  taken  a 
cold  which  may  end  in  an  ague.  Mrs.  Durfe  comes  down 
stairs  after  your  sister  Susan's  fashion,  she  is  yet  so  weak ; 
we  have  been  like  to  lose  Mrs.  Turner,  but  she  is  now 
passed  danger;  we  shall  certainly  lose  Madam  Howard, 
and  your  spouse  who  is  this  night  arrived,  if  the  news  hold 
that  Sir  Thomas  Osborne  brings  his  family  this  next 
summer  to  Deptford ;  Mr.  Bohun  sticks  so  close  to  his 
Spanish  brother  that  we  seldom  see  him ;  I  have  rare 
chocolate  of  his  presenting  for  you.  The  foul  weather 
and  storms  at  sea  have  produced  many  shipwrecks  and 
strange  escapes.  A  seaman  of  this  town,  being  the 
twentieth  in  a  rotten  ship  boat,  which  sunk  by  their 
weight,  and  the  only  one  amongst  them  that  could  swim, 
endeavoured  to  save  the  life  of  two  of  his  companions 
that  laid  hold  of  an  oar  b}^  driving  them  to  the  shore ;  but 
finding  his  skill  and  strength  fail  him  he  shook  off  one  of 
the  men,  who  gave  him  such  a  parting  look  so  full  of 
sorrow  and  pity,  that  though  he  came  safe  to  land  with 
his  other  companion,  he  cannot  banish  the  thought  of 
that  dreadful  farewell,  nor  almost  forgive  himself  for  not 
perishing  with  him.  Another  adventure  of  a  Yarmouth 
fisherman,  not  less  remarkable,  who,  being  at  sea  when  a 
great  storm  arose,  alone  in  a  little  boat  endeavoured  to 
get  to  a  bigger  vessel  which  lay  at  anchor,  but  was 
loosened  by  the  storm  and  set  a  drift,  which  he  would 
have  recovered,  but  in  the  attempt  lost  his  oars,  the  waves 
dashing  over  him,  sd  as  he  was  almost  overturned  into 
the  sea;  when  he  saw  a  ship  not  far  off,  towards  which  he 
made,  and  by  signs  implored  aid,  which  they  speedily 
granted,  and  hauled  him  aboard.  Few  hours  after,  God 
gave  him  an  occasion  to  show  his  gratitude ;  they  being 
strangers,  unacquainted  with  the  coast,  and  in  great 
danger  of  striking  against  the  sands,  which  this  old 
seaman  perceiving,  though  he  could  not  be  understood  by 
them  in  words,  made  them  sensible  by  taking  tlie  rudder 
hastily  from  the  steersman  and  turning  another  course, 
and  so  brought  them  safe  to  Yarmouth,  where  he  saw  his 
own  abandoned  barque  returned  safe  also  freighted  with  as 
many  men  as  she  could  bring  to  harbour,  which  seemed 
to  be  a  kind  of  providence  for  the  safety  of  these  men, 
who  else  had  perished  in  a  bigger  vessel.    To  this  accident 


1G71.] 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


29 


it  were  desirjible  that  some  fine  lady  had  made  an  escape 
to  complete  the  adventure,  which  might  have  given  you  a 
subject  for  a  copy  of  verses, — but  what  may  not  a  poet 
add  ?  Amongst  the  ships  that  made  the  late  discovery  of 
the  new  strait,  one  had  the  ill  fortune  to  perish  with  most 
of  her  men,  and  those  few  which  escaped  were  preserved 
by  the  generosity  of  a  seaman  that  could  swim,  who 
ventured  five  times  with  success  to  the  rescue  of  five  of 
his  companions  which  he  brought  safe  to  shore,  but 
perished  endeavouring  to  bring  in  the  sixth ;  an  attempt 
that  merits  a  better  fate,  and  not  outdone  in  the  Roman 
story,  since  more  greatness  of  mind  has  not  been  often 
expressed.  Were  you  here,  there  would  be  no  end  of 
these  stories  ;  but  it  is  time  I  finished  this  discourse,  to 
remember  my  obligations  to  my  brother  for  his  favours 
to  you,  and  to  wish  my  cousin  joy  of  the  little  one,  since 
I  hope  the  sorrowful  hour  is  past.  My  service  to  my 
cousin  Joe,  to  my  cousin  John,  and  to  my  cousin  Mary 
when  she  returns. 

I  am,  your  loving  mother, 
M.  E. 


To  Mrs.  Alexande7\ 

Oct.  d,  1671. 

Since  there  has  happened  so  much  foul  weather  I  have 
very  much  rejoiced  that  you  did  not  make  the  Irish 
voyage,  and  do  congratulate  the  safe  arrival  of  your  fair 
Ladies.  Had  you  been  very  kind  you  would  have  passed 
some  of  your  time  at  Deptford,  but  when  I  remember  how 
little  diversion  there  is  here,  and  how  ill  you  were  treated, 
I  forgive  your  long  absence.  I  have  sent  your  treasure, 
and  approve  of  your  generosity.  Christian  has  left  a 
small  bundle  for  you,  which  Dubourg  will  deliver  you.  I 
hope  it  will  not  be  long  before  I  come  to  town,  and  if  I 
can  hear  where  to  find  you,  I  will  endeavour  to  let  you 
know  it,  that  I  may  wait  upon  your  Ladies,  whose  affec- 
tions you  cannot  fail  of  as  soon  as  you  are  known  to  them. 
I  have  manj'-  strange  adventures  and  remarkable  escapes 
at  sea  to  relate  for  the  encouragement  of  one  that  were 
ready  to  embark ;  but  since  you  are  not  in  any  such 
,  hazard,  I  will  reserve  them,  till  I  see  you,  and  do  wish  you 


30 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[1671-2. 


established  to  your  satisfaction :  it  is  but  what  you  merit, 
and  it  is  what  I  would  contribute  to  were  I  capable,  since 
no  person  is  more  affectionately  your  friend,  than  is 

M.  E. 

To  Mr.  Bohun.'' 

Sayes-courty  March  2,  1671-2. 

Sir, 

When  I  have  assured  you  that  my  usual  indis- 
position has  treated  me  so  severely  this  winter,  that  I 
have  had  little  leisure  to  think  of  anything  but  the  means 
of  gaining  health  and  ease,  I  am  persuaded  you  will  excuse 
me  if  I  have  not  decided  in  my  thoughts  which  was  the 
greatest  captain,  Csesar  or  Pompey ;  whether  M.  De  Rosny 
were  not  a  great  politician,  a  brave  soldier,  and  the  best 
servant  that  ever  Prince  had  for  capacity,  fidelity,  and 
steadiness,  a  man  strangely  disinterested,  infinitely  fortu- 
nate, and  every  way  qualified  to  serve  such  a  master  as 
was  Henry  the  Great,  who,  notwithstanding  human  frailties, 
was  worthy  to  be  faithfully  dealt  with,  since  he  knew  how 
to  judge  and  to  reward.  But  why  do  we  always  look  back 
into  times  past  ?  we  may  not  reproach  our  own,  since  here 
is  at  this  present  a  scene  for  gallantry  and  merit,  and 
whilst  we  may  hope,  we  must  not  condemn.  Should  I 
tell  you  how  full  of  sorrow  I  have  been  for  the  loss  of 
Dr.  Bretton,t  you  only  would  blame  me ;  after  death 
flattery  ceases,  therefore  you  may  believe  there  was  some 
cause  to  lament,  when  thousands  of  weeping  eyes  witnessed 
the  affliction  their  souls  were  in ;  one  would  have  imagined 
every  one  in  this  parish  had  lost  a  father,  brother,  or 
husband,  so  great  was  the  bewailing;  and  in  earnest  it 
does  appear  there  never  was  a  better  nor  a  more  worthy 
man.  Such  was  his  temper,  prudence,  charity,  and  good 
conduct,  that  he  gained  the  weak  and  preserved  the  wise. 
The  suddenness  of  his  death  was  a  surprise  only  to  his 
friends ;  as  for  himself  it  might  be  looked  upon  as  a  deliver- 

*  Mr.  Bohun  had  now  completed  his  superintendence  of  young  Evelyn's 
education,  and  gone  into  residence  at  Oxford,  "  having  well  and  faithfully/' 
says  Evelyn,  "performed  his  charge." — See  Diary,  vol.  ii.  p.  53. 

,  +  Minister  of  Deptford  ;  he  died  in  February,UC71-2. 


1672.] 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN". 


31 


ance  from  pain,  the  effect  of  sickness ;  and  I  am  almost 
persuaded  God  snatched  him  from  us,  lest  he  might  have 
been  prevailed  with  by  the  number  of  petitions  to  have 
left  him  still  amongst  us.  If  you  suspect  kindness  in  me 
makes  me  speak  too  much,  Dr.  Parr  *  is  a  person  against 
whom  you  cannot  object ;  it  was  he  who  preached  the 
funeral  sermon,  and  as  an  eflPect  of  truth  as  well  as 
eloquence  he  himself  could  not  forbear  weeping  in  the 
pulpit.  It  was  his  own  expression  that  there  were  three 
for  whom  he  had  infinitely  grieved,  the  martyred  King, 
my  Lord  Primate,  t  and  Dr.  Bretton ;  and  as  a  con- 
firmation of  the  right  that  was  done  him  in  that  oration, 
there  was  not  a  dry  eye  nor  a  dissenting  person.  But  of 
this  no  more. 

M.  Evelyn. 


To  Mr.  Bohun, 

January  4,  1672. 

Sir, 

Do  not  think  my  silence  hitherto  has  proceeded 
from  being  taken  up  with  the  diversions  of  the  town, 
the  eclat  of  the  Court  gallantry,  the  entertainment  of 
the  wedding  masquerades,  which  trebled  their  number 
the  second  night  of  the  wedding  that  so  there  was  great 
disorder  and  confusion  caused  by  it,  and  with  w^hich  the 
solemnity  ended  :  neither  can  I  charge  the  housewifery  of 
the  country  after  my  return,  or  treating  my  neighbours 
this  Christmas,  since  I  never  find  any  business  or  recrea- 
tion that  makes  me  forget  my  friends.  Should  I  confess 
the  real  cause,  it  is  your  expectation  of  extraordinary 
notions  of  things  wholly  out  of  my  way.  Women  were  not 
born  to  read  authors,  and  censure  the  learned,  to  compare 
lives  and  judge  of  virtues,  to  give  rules  of  morality,  and 
sacrifice  to  the  Muses.  We  are  willing  to  acknowledge  all 
time  borrowed  from  family  duties  is  misspent ;  the  care  of 
children's  education,  observing  a  husband's  commands, 

*  Richard  Parr,  D.D.,  Vicar  of  Reigate  and  Camberwell.  He  died 
Nov,  2,  1691.  The  funeral  sermon  alluded  to  was  printed  iu  1672.  See 
Manning  and  Bray's  History  of  Surrey,  vol.  i.  p.  323. 

+  Archbishop  Usher. 


32 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYX. 


[1672, 


assisting  the  sick,  relievinf::  tlie  poor,  and  being  serviceable 
to  our  friends,  are  of  sufficient  weight  to  employ  the  most 
improved  capacities  amongst  us;  and  if  sometimes  it 
happens  by  accident  that  one  of  a  thousand  aspires  a  little 
higher,  her  fate  commonly  exposes  her  to  Avonder,  but  adds 
little  of  esteem.  The  distaff  will  defend  our  quarrels  as 
well  as  the  sword,  and  the  needle  is  as  instructive  as  the 
pen.  A  heroine  is  a  kind  of  prodigy ;  the  influence  of  a 
hlazing  star  is  not  more  dangerous  or  more  avoided. 
Though  I  have  lived  under  the  roof  of  the  learned,  and 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  science,  it  has  had  no  other  effect 
on  such  a  temper  as  mine,  but  that  of  admiration,  and 
that  too  but  when  it  is  reduced  to  practice.  I  confess  I 
am  infinitely  delighted  to  meet  in  books  with  the  achieve- 
ments of  the  heroes,  with  the  calmness  of  philosophers, 
and  with  the  eloquence  of  orators ;  but  what  charms  me 
irresistibly  is  to  see  perfect  resignation  in  the  minds  of 
men,  let  whatever  happen  of  adverse  to  them  in  their 
fortune  :  that  is  being  knowing  and  truly  wise;  it  confirms 
my  belief  of  antiquity,  and  engages  my  persuasion  of 
future  perfection,  without  which  it  were  in  vain  to  live. 
Hope  not  for  volumes  or  treatises  ;  raillery  may  make  me 
go  beyond  my  bounds,  but  when  serious,  I  esteem  myself 
capable  of  very  little,  yet  I  am, 

Sir, 

Your  friend  and  servant, 

M.  E. 


To  my  Lady  Ann  Carr, 

Mavcli  26,  1672. 

Madam, 

I  can  assure  you  neither  the  cold  weather  nor 
the  hilliness  of  the  ways  has  kept  me  thus  long  from 
paying  my  respects  to  your  Ladyship,  but  an  indisposition 
to  which  I  am  subject,  and  which  has  treated  me  so 
severely  this  winter,  that  I  have  been  confined  to  my 
chamber  and  house  above  three  months  without  once 
venturing  out  so  far  as  the  church ;  a  kind  of  weaning  me 
from  that  sensible  loss  we  have  made  by  the  death  of 
Doctor  Bretton ;  a  more  worthy  man  there  never  was,  and 
one  in  whom  there  is  so  many  things  to  be  justly  said  in 


1672.] 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


33 


his  praise,  that  should  I  but  enter  upon  the  discourse  you 
might  fear  the  length  of  my  letter.  I  know  not  how  to 
acknowledge  your  Ladyship^s  last  favour  by  any  return  of 
news  from  hence.  Madam  Howard  has  almost  quitted 
this  place,  with  whose  concerns  I  am  as  little  acquainted 
as  during  her  last  long  absence ;  yet  I  wish  all  imaginable 
happiness  to  that  family.  The  marriage  of  Betty  Turner 
with  a  citizen  of  London  is  the  latest  joy  has  been  in  this 
parish,  the  fame  of  which  has  not  reached  your  Ladyship 
yet,  at  which  fine  clothes,  fine  company,  and  great  feasting 
could  not  be  wanting.  'My  father  has  been  so  happy  as 
to  be  free  from  the  gout  this  winter.  Mr.  Evelyn  is  at 
present  taking  care  of  those  that  fall  by  the  hands  of  the 
Dutch,  being  gone  to  visit  Chatham  and  Dover,  and  the 
rest  of  those  places  where  sick  and  prisoners  put  in ;  Jack 
is  with  him.  My  little  flock  of  girls  are  all  well,  and  I 
promise  myself  so  much  health  as  may  give  me  leave  to 
wait  upon  my  Lady  Vere  and  your  Ladyship  very  suddenly. 
I  keep  the  portrait  of  the  Duchess  of  Richmond  with  care, 
that  1  may  return  if  you  should  desire  it ;  I  am  so  out  of 
the  way  of  such  kind  of  wits  that  I  dare  not  pretend  to 
judge  of  it,  yet  I  fancy  the  Duchess  deserves  all  that  is 
said  of  her ;  and  did  the  author  pass  for  lover,  much  more 
might  have  been  expected  from  him,  but  he  has  nov,^ 
another  kind  of  gallantry  in  chase,  which  I  wish  may 
prove  successful  to  him  and  those  other  brave  men  that 
daily  hazard  themselves  in  the  war.  I  am  so  near  the 
guns  that  your  Ladyship  will  not  wonder  that  I  should  be 
solicitous  for  a  happy  event,  and  I  am  not  less  concerned 
to  be  esteemed. 

Madam,  your  most  humble  servant, 

M.  E. 


To  Mr.  Evelyn. 

December,  1672. 

My  Dear, 

I  hope  you  do  not  imagine,  though  I  live  in  the 
country  and  converse  with  sea-nymphs,  now  and  then 
with  a  tarpaulin  hero,  that  I  do  not  apprehend  the 
difference  between  this  kind  of  felicity  and  that  which 
you  possess  in  a  glorious  Court,  amongst  great  beauties 

VOL.  IV.  D 


34 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[1672-3. 


and  wits,  and  these  so  refined  that  the  charm  of  that 
splendour  has  no  power  on  their  spirits;  persons  whose 
ideas  are  of  a  higher  nature,  whose  minds  are  pure  and 
actions  innocent ;  these,  if  I  could  be  capable  of  envy,  I 
should  make  the  subject,  but  I  am  so  far  from  failing  in 
that  kind  that  I  rejoice  in  your  happiness.  I  acknowledge 
you  a  better  judge  of  such  perfections,  and  to  merit  the 
honour  of  being  an  admirer  of  the  calm,  prudent,  and 
beautiful  Alecone,  the  friendship  of  the  sprightly  saint, 
and  to  be  allowed  the  liberty  of  a  playfellow  to  Ornethia, 
whose  excellencies  unite  your  admiration  and  esteem, 
since  you  have  qualifications  which  may  entitle  you  to  as 
much  good  fortune  as  any  man.  If  knowledge  and 
discernment  in  curious  and  choice  speculations,  joined 
with  virtues  not  common  though  desirable  in  your  sex, 
may  obtain  return  of  friendship  from  persons  who  cannot 
be  unjust,  and  therefore  must  allow  you  a  share  of  their 
esteem,  you  may  pretend ;  but  should  I  hope  for  a  part,  it 
must  be  upon  no  other  account,  but  as  I  have  a  little 
interest  in  you,  and  possibly  a  kindly  thought  of  by  jou, 
which  happiness  produces  many  advantages  to 

AORTINSA.* 


To  Mr,  Bohun. 

January y  1672-3. 

Sir, 

I  find  the  slight  cares  of  a  family  are  great 
hindrances  to  the  study  of  philosophy,  and  that  one  grows 
less  and  less  capable  of  improvements  by  books,  as  one 
grows  more  acquainted  with  the  world ;  yet  amongst  those 
fine  experiments  Avhich  fall  in  my  w^ay,  could  I  meet  with 
any  one  equally  curious  with  those  of  the  Greshamites, 
though  as  unuseful  and  trifling,  I  might  hope  in  time  to 
be  in  something  famous ;  learning  is  become  so  easy  of 
access  by  the  late  industry  of  some  who  have  removed 
the  bar  language  put  to  the  illiterate,  and  make  women 
pretenders  to  judge  of  Alexander's  valour  and  conduct, 

*  Mrs.  Evelyn  makes  sad  havoc  of  classical  names  in  this  playful  letter  to 
her  husband,  but  they  are  left,  with  her  signature,  as  she  writes  them. 


1672-3.] 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


85 


and  determine  whether  the  effeminacy  and  imbeciUty  of 
the  Persians  did  not  abate  of  the  miracles  of  such  a 
conquest;  that  it  was  suddenly  and  unjustly  gained,  and 
as  precipitously  lost ;  and  yet  allow  the  man  heathen 
worth  who  made  all  that  stir  till  prosperity  made  him 
forget  himself.  He  might  have  expected  a  better  fate ;  but 
this  subject  has  been  in  so  many  boys'  mouths  and 
themes,  that  it  is  reasonable  for  me  to  give  it  over  and 
fall  upon  Dr.  Pierce's  sermons,  which  is  a  great  step 
from  Homer's  admirer.  Not  to  dispute  the  eloquence  of 
the  person  who  appears  more  like  a  Grecian  orator  than  a 
Christian  preacher  for  three  parts  of  each  sermon, — which 
how  necessary,   now   whole   countries   are   under  the 
Christian  profession,  I  know  not, — one  Avould  imagine 
26  hundred  years  had  worn  out  the  remembrance  of 
idolising  insensible  orators;  that  there  were  no  more  need 
of  drawing  instances  from  the  moral  men  to  encourage 
virtue,  where  light  and  joyful  truth  have  had  such  influ- 
ences.   But  for  the  selections  of  young  students  whose 
first  compositions  are  far-fetched,  and  keep  alive  the 
stories  of  the  ancients  by  succession  in  the  pulpit,  one 
should  hardly  know  who  Socrates  and  Zeno  were ;  and  of 
what  importance  to  the  congregation,  few  in  it  under- 
stand. The  great  example  should  be  Christ,  His  doctrine, 
and  the  effects  of  it  in  the  first  ages  of  the  church,  when 
innocency  and  purity  filled  the  minds  of  men  ;  when  the 
sincerity  of  their  words  appeared  by  the  manifestation 
of   good  works;   when  the   leaders  and   people  lived 
in  mutual  charity  and  love.    If  this  could  be  brought 
into  fashion  again  it  were  a  happy  effect  of  men's  labours. 
And  since  I  have  seen  that  piece  of  the  primitive  Chris- 
tianity, I  fancy  we  are  strangely  out  of  the  way  to  heaven ; 
self-denial  is  a  kind  of  by-path,  and  many  necessary 
circumstances  of  a  true  believer  are  Avholly  out  of  use. 
Do  not  wonder  I  treat  with  you  in  this  style,  since  I  am 
assured  you  own  it  as  the  greatest  honour  that  could  have 
happened  to  you  to  serve  at  God's  altar,  and  therefore 
cannot  be  displeased  when  anything  is  suggested  to  His 
glory.    Your  last  to  Mr.  Evelyn  gave  us  hope  of  seeing 
you  suddenly. 


d2 


36 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[1672-3. 


To  Mrs.  Saul 

Mrs.  Saul^ 

The  esteem  I  have  had  for  you  as  a  neighbour 
and  a  deserving  person,  makes  me  more  concerned  for  the 
general  censure  upon  your  late  quitting  your  husband  and 
family  :  had  you  consulted  real  friends  with  your  design, 
they  never  Avould  have  advised  a  separation  without 
equal  consent  of  both  parties ;  there  is  something  so  strict 
and  binding  in  the  marriage  vow,  that  but  upon  extra- 
ordinary causes  (the  examples  of  which  are  rare)  any 
divorce  can  be  lawful :  women  especially  being  very  tender 
how  they  violate  that  obligation,  choosing  rather  to  bear 
wdth  infirmities,  to  pray  for  and  endeavour  the  reformation 
of  an  ill  man,  by  all  the  ways  respect  and  love  can 
suggest,  and  to  bear  injuries  patiently,  valuing  their 
mutual  reputation  above  particular  satisfaction,  as  the 
necessary  duty  of  a  good  wife,  and  the  common  effects  of 
a  good  Christian,  which  qualification  enables  persons  to 
overcome  their  own  inclinations  for  a  better  end  yet  than 
present  or  worldly  advantages,  and  secures  their  future 
and  more  lasting  happiness.  There  is  no  state  of  life 
unattended  with  cares  and  troubles,  afiiictions  are  common 
and  fall  to  every  one^s  share  more  or  less,  therefore  w^e 
should  not  without  great  presumption  expect  to  run  the 
course  of  this  life  so  smoothly  as  to  meet  with  no  rub  by 
the  way.  I  take  the  more  freedom  to  enlarge  upon  this 
subject  with  you,  because  I  am  really  sorry  one  who 
appeared  so  sensible  of  what  became  her  upon  all  accounts, 
as  I  have  often  observed  you  were,  should  take  such  ill 
measures  in  this  last  action  as  you  have  done ;  you  cannot 
be  ignorant  how  many  there  are  who  rejoice  at  peoples' 
misfortunes,  and  think  they  excuse  their  own  errors  by  pub- 
lishing others'  failings ;  and  I  wish,  and  wish  it  heartih^, 
you  had  not  justified  your  husband  by  hurting  yourself. 
I  do  remember  some  occasional  discourse  of  yours  to  me 
in  confidence,  concerning  some  of  his  miscarriages,  which 
obliged  me  to  lament  for  you  both,  that  a  couple  so 
likely  by  the  agreeableness  of  person,  quality,  fortune, 
and  age,  should  meet  with  any  interruption  to  their 
happiness ;  but  do  now  infinitely  bewail  it  is  come  to  so 


1672-3.] 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYK 


37 


wide  a  breach.  I  was  in  hopes  you  had  convinced  Mr.  S. 
that  it  ^vas  both  reasonable  as  well  as  convenient  to  reform 
the  ill  habits  company  might  have  engaged  him  in,  and  that 
he  had  wholly  designed  to  take  off  your  suspicion  of  a 
relapse ;  which  disposition  to  virtue  and  kindness  should 
have  been  complied  with,  and  cherished  by  welcome  at 
home^  and  all  endeavours  used  to  confirm  him  in  so  good 
a  resolution.  I  know  not  what  the  real  cause  of  dislike  is 
on  your  part  at  present,  neither  will  I  judge.  But  were  I 
recommend  Mr.  S.  to  a  wife  in  the  temper  I  find  him,  I 
should  pronounce  in  his  behalf  that  he  is  likely  to  make 
a  wife  as  happy  as  any  man  I  know,  if  good  humour, 
generous  inclinations,  industr}^,  and  many  other  good 
qualities,  you  have  yourself  done  him  the  right  to  acknow- 
ledge him  possessed  of,  can  contribute  towards  it.  Pray 
be  so  kind  to  yourself  and  him  to  return  to  all  the  duties 
of  a  wife  ;  to  forgive  past  faults  like  a  Christian,  to  forget 
them  like  a  friend ;  to  begin  your  friendship  upon  a  new 
account ;  and  as  caution  for  him,  give  me  leave  to  be  the 
person;  your  word  is  sufficient  for  yourself.  Since  he 
desires  so  earnestly  to  make  you  happy,  banish  all  obstacles; 
do  not  entertain  a  thought  that  may  check  a  blessing 
offered  to  you  both.  You  will  oblige  me  infinitely  by  a 
ready  consent  to  so  just  a  request,  you  will  overcome  by 
it  the  prejudicial  reports  concerning  you,  recover  your 
friends,  make  an  experiment  which  if  successful  will  prove 
worth  your  while.  Who  would  not  try  it,  and  submit  to 
harder  conditions  than  any  I  hope  you  will  find  ?  I  beg  of 
you  to  consider  well  what  is  offered  you,  and  assure  your- 
self that  my  zeal  proceeds  from  a  perfect  belief  of  jour 
innocency  and  merit,  and  a  desire  to  reunite  persons  who 
have  both  deserved  so  well  the  esteem  of 

Your  friend  and  servant, 

M.  E. 


March  28,  1673.* 

Sir, 

I  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  two  of  your  letters 
unanswered  :  That  of  the  20th  this  day  came  to  my  hands, 

■*  The  address  of  this  letter  is  lost.  It  was  probably  written  to  one  of  her 
relatives  at  Wotton. 


38 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[1673. 


with  a  note  to  Will.  Ha^xs,  whicli  I  have  given  him.  He 
will  punctually  observe  your  orders  concerning  your  horse ; 
for  the  beer,  according  to  his  judgment  of  things,  he  be- 
lieves, since  it  is  left  undisturbed  to  which  cellar  it  should 
go,  it  most  properly  belongs  to  his,  as  being  worst  fur- 
nished of  any  in  Deptford ;  yet  upon  second  orders  it 
shall  be  bestowed  where  you  please.  You  need  not  fear  a 
long  comment  upon  the  lady's  censure  of  my  indulgence 
to  children,  since  I  confess  myself  too  much  inclined  to 
that  failing ;  but  I  have  a  maxim  never  to  disturb  the 
company  with  my  own  affairs,  in  showing  dislike  to  servants^ 
mistakes  and  children's  faults;  so  that  sometimes,  I  believe, 
I  pass  for  a  very  fond  mother  and  remiss  mistress ;  yet  it 
may  be,  in  a  convenient  place,  both  are  reproved;  and 
amongst  those  who  understand  civility  very  well,  this 
method  is  not  unacceptable.  Were  I  willing  to  entertain 
grief,  I  could  answer  to  every  particular  of  your  first  letter ; 
but  since  there  is  no  recalling  of  the  dead,  let  us  not 
mingle  past  sorrows  with  the  present ;  every  moment 
produces  new  occasions  to  exercise  our  morality.  To 
comply  with  Mrs.  Palmer's  request  it  is  impossible,  till  I 
am  as  much  convinced  of  the  excellency  of  my  style  as 
Mr.  Alderson  is  of  his  preaching,  who  assured  me  his  last 
funeral  sermon  was  an  elaborate,  judicious,  well-timed 
piece ;  and  then  all  the  scraps  I  have  written  shall  be  at 
her  service.  And  in  the  meantime  advise  her,  since  she  is 
a  person  of  wit,  bred  under  Doctor  Bathurst's  wing,  and. 
lives  in  the  air  of  the  university,  to  hazard  some  of  her 
own  lines  abroad,  and  try  what  justice  may  be  in  the 
world.  If  I  do  not  enlarge  at  this  time,  impute  it  to 
Easter-Eve ;  and  excuse  this  character,  scarce  legible. 

I  am.  Sir, 

Your  servant. 

To  my  Brother  Glanville. 

Decern,  the  last,  1673. 

Sir, 

I  am  not  naturally  suspicious,  especially  where 
I  have  an  esteem.  I  was,  I  acknowledge,  a  little  thought- 
ful what  the  cause  of  your  silence  might  be,  yet  never 
doubted  your  friendship ;  and  since  it  was  on  so  reason- 


1673.] 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


39 


able  an  account^  I  am  not  only  pacified  for  the  loss  of 
those  kind  expressions  which  I  am  always  sure  of  from 
you,  but  would  have  added  many  good  wishes  to  your 
endeavours  for  the  success  in  the  Captain's  concern,  which, 
by  this  time,  I  hope  is  out  of  question.  Pray  assure  him 
and  his  lady  I  am  their  humble  servant.  When  you  are 
disposed  to  make  us  happy  with  your  conversation,  you 
cannot  fail  of  welcome  in  a  family  that  rejoice  in  the 
hopes  of  seeing  you.  You  have  conversed  so  much  in  the 
world,  that  you  cannot  be  io^norant  either  of  your  own 
merit,  or  how  kindly  you  will  be  received  by  those  that 
have  a  real  value  for  you.  Be  assured  neither  care  nor 
industry  would  be  wanting  if  an  occasion  would  offer. 
Whatever  else  is  unequal  to  you  must  be  forgiven.  The 
unsteadiness  of  the  times  is  such,  that  a  great  man's 
favour  is  no  sooner  gained,  but  one  is  to  begin  again ; 
and  the  difficulty  is  to  know  where  a  new  endeavour  may 
be  made.  The  next  lesson  will  try  how  fast  some  of  them 
sit.  If  you  were  one  of  the  house,  you  have  a  talent  that 
might  improve  what  interest  you  please.  I  suppose  your 
correspondent  is  so  good,  I  need  not  entertain  you  with 
news.  The  satisfaction  I  had  in  a  week's  stay  in  town 
was  not  so  great  that  I  should  trouble  you  with  the  rela- 
tion of  it,  besides  the  honour  to  have  the  Duchess's  hand, 
visit  the  Duchess  of  Modena,  &c.  Only  this  particular  I 
cannot  omit  concerning  Sir  George  Lane,  who  is  married 
to  a  daughter  of  my  Lord  of  Dorset,  a  young,  handsome 
person,  who  has  5000/.  to  her  portion.  The  son  desires  to 
go  into  Ireland ;  to  oblige  him  perfectly,  the  father  settles 
3000/.  a  year  on  his  son,  and  reserves  as  much  for  a  second 
venture :  makes  her  a  thousand  a  year  jointure,  and  all 
the  advantages  in  Ireland.  I  have  had  the  honour  to  wait 
on  the  lady,  and  to  give  them  both  joy.  My  father  has  had 
his  turn  in  town — proceeds  as  vigorously  as  he  can  in  his 
affair,  but  they  stand  it  out,  which  forces  him  to  issue  out 
an  arrest  against  them.  What  that  course  may  produce 
is  yet  to  learn.  He  seemed  desirous  to  finish  it  himself, 
as  being  best  able  to  dispute  their  right,  or  defend  his  own ; 
but  the  gout  seizes  him  so  often,  though  with  less  violence, 
that  he  is  the  more  solicitous  to  end  it.  He  is  at  present 
in  bed,  but  not  very  ill.  We  have  our  workmen  still,  but 
hope  a  little  time  will  finish  all.    Your  brother  watches 


40 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[1685. 


and  prays  still.  Jack  studies  and  ruminates;  the  girls 
make  a  noise ;  and  I  lend  a  little  of  my  time  to  any  one 
that  seems  to  want  it.  How  well  I  pass  the  hours  in 
which  I  am  not  serviceable  to  others,  I  am  no  good  judge. 
The  conclusion  of  this  year  with  this  day,  puts  me  in 
mind  to  wish  you  happiness  with  all  imaginable  joy  the 
next. 

I  am,  &c. 


To  Lady  Tuke. 

Apnl,  1685, 

How  to  express  the  sorrow  for  parting  with  so  dear  a 
child  is  a  difficult  task.  She  was  welcome  to  me  from  the 
first  moment  God  gave  her,  acceptable  through  the  whole 
course  of  her  life  hj  a  thousand  endearments,  by  the  gifts 
of  nature,  by  acquired  parts,  by  the  tender  love  she  ever 
showed  her  father  and  me  :  a  thread  of  piety  accompanied 
all  her  actions,  and  now  proves  our  greatest  consolation. 
The  patience,  resignation,  humility  of  her  carriage  in  so 
severe  and  fatal  a  disease,  discovered  more  than  an  ordinary 
assistance  of  the  Divine  goodness,  never  expressing  fear  of 
death,  or  a  desire  to  live,  but  for  her  friends'  sake.  The 
seventh  day  of  her  illness  she  discoursed  to  me  in  particular 
as  calmly  as  in  health,  desired  to  confess,  and  receive  the 
blessed  Sacrament,  which  she  performed  with  great  de- 
votion ;  after  which,  though  in  her  perfect  senses  to  the 
last,  she  never  signified  the  least  concern  for  the  world, 
prayed  often,  and  resigned  her  soul.  What  shall  I  say ! 
She  was  too  great  a  blessing  for  me,  who  never  deserved 
anything,  much  less  such  a  jewel.  I  am  too  well  assured 
of  your  Ladyship's  kindness  to  doubt  the  part  you  take  in 
this  loss ;  you  have  ever  showed  yourself  a  friend  in  so  many 
instances,  that  I  presume  upon  your  compassion  ;  nothing 
but  this  just  occasion  could  have  hindered  me  from  welcom- 
ing you  to  town,  and  rejoicing  with  the  best  friend  I  have  in 
the  world — a  friend  by  merit  and  inclination,  one  I  must 
esteem  as  the  wife  of  so  worthy  a  relation  and  so  sincere 
a  friend  as  Sir  Samuel  was  to  me  and  mine.  What 
is  this  world  when  we  recall  past  things  !  what  are  the 
charms  that  keep  our  minds  in  suspense  !  without  the 


1680.] 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


41 


conversation  of  those  we  love,  what  is  life  worth  !  How 
did  I  propose  happiness  this  summer  in  the  return  of  your 
Ladyship  and  my  dear  child — for  she  was  absent  almost 
all  this  winter  ! 

She  had  much  improved  herself  by  the  remarks  she  had 
made  of  the  world  and  all  its  vanities — What  shall  I  add  ! 
I  could  ever  speak  of  her,  and  might  I  be  just  to  her 
without  suspicion  of  partiality,  could  tell  you  many  things. 
The  papers  which  are  found  in  her  cabinet  discover  she 
profited  by  her  reading — such  reflections,  collections  out 
of  Scripture,  confessions,  meditations,  and  pious  notions, 
evidence  her  time  was  not  spent  in  the  trifling  way  of 
most  young  women.  I  acknowledge,  as  a  Christian,  I 
ought  not  to  murmur,  and  I  should  be  infinitely  sorry  to 
incur  God^s  further  displeasure.  There  are  those  yet 
remaining  that  challenge  my  care,  and  for  their  sakes  I 
endeavour  to  submit  all  I  can.  1  thank  my  poor  Cousin 
a  thousand  times  for  her  kind  concern,  and  wish  she  may 
live  to  be  the  comfort  you  deserve  in  her,  that  God  will 
continue  the  blessing  of  both,  and  make  you  happy — 
which  is  the  prayer  of  her  who  is 

Yours,  most  affectionatelv, 

M.  E. 


[To  these  letters  of  Mrs.  Evelyn,  may  be  subjoined  two  letters  which  have 
come  into  the  Editor's  possession  since  the  volume  containing  her  husband's 
correspondence  was  printed,  but  which  so  agreeably  illustrate  Evelyn's 
habits  and  intercourse  with  his  neighbours  and  friends  that  it  is  worth 
including  them  in  this  collection.] 

Mrs.  Owen  to  John  Evelyn. 

Eltham,  June  26,  1680. 

Honoured  Sir, 

I  am  heartily  sorry  that  I  forced  you  to  buy 
tulips  for  your  fine  garden.  I  must  confess  your  guineas 
look  more  glorious  than  now  these  tulips  do ;  but,  when 
they  come  to  blow,  I  hope  you  will  be  better  pleased  than 
now  you  are.  I  have  sent  you  some  of  my  ordinary  sort, 
and,  sir,  when  mine  are  blown,  if  you  please  to  come  and 


42 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


[1680. 


see  them^  Mr.  Evelyn  shall  buy  no  more,  but  have  what 
he  pleases  for  nothing.  I  am  so  well  pleased  with  those 
that  I  have,  that  I  shall  neither  buy  more,  nor  part  with 
any,  unless  it  be  to  yourself. 

I  cannot,  sir,  send  my  husband^s  service  to  you,  because 
I  do  not  acquaint  him  with  ray  trading  for  tulips.  Sir 
John  Shaw  I  cannot  yet  speak  with  (being  taken  up  so 
much  with  visitors),  as  to  know  his  miud  about  a  gardener. 
Sir,  I  now  beg  your  pardon  for  my  rude  lines,  and  desire 
you  to  assure  yourself,  that  my  husband  and  I,  upon  any 
occasion,  shall  be  alway  ready  either  to  ride  or  go  to 
serve  you  or  yours.  Thus  having  no  more,  but  desiring 
to  have  my  service  to  yourself,  your  lady,  and  Sir  Richard 
Browne,  and  your  beloved  progeny,  I  shall  take  leave,  and 
subscribe  myself, 

Your  most  humble  servant,  to  command, 

Amy  Owen. 


John  Evelyn  to  Mrs.  Owen. 

June  26,  1680. 

MoN  Amy  (that  is.  My  Friend), 

I  am  not  so  well  pleased  with  Mrs.  Owen's 
letter  as  with  her  tulips,  because  I  am  assured  there  must 
needs  be  some  mistake,  and  that  my  gardener  (who, 
perhaps,  does  not  care  that  I  should  purchase  anything 
but  through  his  hands  and  in  the  common  manner), 
as  was  to  tell  you  that  I  would  come  myself  and 
make  friends  with  you,  did  leave  out  that.  Can  you 
ever  imagine  that  I  looked  on  your  kindness  as  an 
imposing  on  me  ?  Sure,  you  know  me  better  than  to 
think  so ;  and  that  when  I  told  you  flowers  of  less  value 
would  better  become  my  poor  garden,  it  was  neither  to 
save  my  money  nor  reproach  your  merchandise.  But  I 
assure  you  I  not  only  thank  you  for  [them],  but  shall 
condemn  you  for  a  very  unwise  woman  if  you  should  for- 
bear to  continue  a  traffic  which  is  so  innocent,  so  laudable, 
and  so  frequent  even  among  very  great  persons.  You 
and  I,  therefore,  must  come  to  a  better  understanding 
upon  this  chapter.  In  the  meantime  I  had  a  good  mind 
to  have  sent  you  your  last  present  back  again,  till  all  this 


1680.] 


LETTERS  OF  MRS.  EVELYN. 


43 


had  been  cleared ;  for  I  do  not  love  to  be  overcome  in 
point  of  generosity,  tbough  I  see  that  for  this  present  I 
must  be.  You  seem  to  think  I  complained  I  had  not  full 
measure,  and  think  now  to  make  it  up  by  overwhelming 
me  with  your  kindness.  This  is  a  revenge  that  I  cannot 
long  endure,  as  you  shall  be  sure  to  find,  the  first  oppor- 
tunity I  can  lay  hold  on.  In  the  meantime  I  thank  you 
most  heartily  for  all  your  good  intentions,  and  the  kind 
offices  w^hich  both  you  and  the  Doctor  have  ever  been 
ready  to  do  me.  Sir  Jo.  Shaw  did  us  the  honour  of  a 
visit  on  Thursday  last,  when  it  was  not  my  hap  to  be  at 
home,  for  which  I  was  very  sorry.  I  met  him  since 
casually  in  London,  and  kissed  him  there  unfeignedly.  I 
chided  myself  that  I  was  not  there  to  receive  him.  Two 
of  our  coach-horses  are  still  so  lame,  that  we  have  not 
been  able  to  stir  out  this  fortnight ;  but  so  soon  as  they 
are  in  very  tolerable  condition,  my  wife  and  I  will  not 
fail  of  kissing  your  hands,  and  repaying  this  civility  to 
Sir  John  ;  and  so  with  our  best  respects  to  you  and  your 
Doctor, 

We  remain,  &c. 


PEIVATE  COEEESPONDENCE 

BETWEEK 

KING  CHARLES  I. 

AKD  HIS 

SECRETARY  OF  STATE,  SIR  EDWARD 
NICHOLAS ; 

WHILST   HIS   MAJESTY   WAS  IN   SCOTLAND,  1641, 
AND  AT  OTHER  TIMES  DURING  THE  CIVIL  WAR. 


THE 

CORRESPONDENCE  OE  CHARLES  I. 

AND 

SIR  EDWARD  NICHOLAS. 


Few  more  valuable  or  more  interesting  illustrations  of  English 
history  have  been  at  any  time  made  public  than  the  Private  Cor- 
respondence between  Charles  I.  and  his  secretary -of -state,  Sir 
Edward  Nicholas.  These  letters  were  found  at  Wotton,  with  the 
correspondence  of  Evelyn  ;  his  father-in-law,  Sir  Richard  Browne, 
whose  papers  he  inherited,  having  been  connected  by  marriage  with 
Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas  ;  and  since  their  publication  they  have  been 
quoted  and  commented  upon  by  every  historian  or  critic  of  the 
period  on  which  they  throw  so  much  curious  and  important  light. 

In  no  respect  illustrating  or  forming  part  of  Evelyn's  history,  the 
reason  which  existed  for  modernising  the  spelling  in  the  case  of  the 
Diary  and  Letters"  did  not  here  apply.  These  papers  are  strictly 
historical  documents,  and,  as  such,  are  presented  in  all  respects 
precisely  as  they  were  found  ;  with  the  king's  apostils,  by  way  of 
answer  or  remark  to  his  secretary's  information,  printed  as  written 
in  the  margin  of  the  secretary's  dispatches  ;  with  the  queen's  notes 
and  messages  appended  ;  with  the  occasional  ciphers  as  in  the 
originals  ;  and,  thi'oughout,  whether  in  these  particular  letters  or  in 
the  few  additional  ones  of  later  date,  with  a  strict  adherence  to  the 
exact  orthography  of  the  individual  writers. 

The  date  of  the  commencement  of  the  letters  is  one  of  the  most- 
critical  in  the  life  of  the  king.  It  was  that  of  the  journey  to  Scot- 
land, which  preceded  the  fatal  attempt  to  arrest  the  five  members. 
The  king's  motives  for  this  journey  have  been  variously  surmised  and 
stated  ;  but  that,  besides  his  hope  of  effecting  a  better  understanding 
with  the  Scotch  parliament  by  personal  communication  with  its 
members,  they  also  included  an  attempt  by  means  of  the  new  anti- 
covenanting  Scotch  party  which  had  been  secretly  formed  by  Montrose, 
to  obtain  evidence  available  against  the  popular  leaders  in  England, 
may  be  gathered  from  a  study  of  the  present  correspondence.  The 
feeling  entertained  in  the  House  of  Commons  as  to  what  was  involved 
in  the  kmg's  departure  became  manifest  as  soon  as  it  was  ascertained 


48 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


[1641. 


to  have  actually  taken  place  ;  commissioners  being  immediately 
named  and  appointed  to  proceed  to  Scotland,  ostensibly  to  treat  with 
tlie  Scots  concerning  the  satisfaction  of  the  treaty  under  discussion,  but 
really  to  thwart  as  far  as  possible  the  king's  suspected  intentions.  The 
new  secretary-of-state,  Nicholas,  appointed  on  the  flight  of  Winde- 
bank,  had  it  left  to  him  in  chai'ge  by  his  royal  master  to  furnish  diligent 
information,  during  his  absence,  of  what  was  going  on  in  London  ; 
and  his  letters,  noted  and  answered  in  the  margin  by  Charles,  and 
posted  back  to  the  writer,  form  the  bulk  of  the  succeeding  corre- 
spondence. They  begin  with  the  king's  first  letter  from  Edinburgh, 
written  five  days  after  he  quitted  London,  and  continue  during  the 
whole  of  the  stay  in  Scotland.  After  Charles's  return  there  is  a 
considerable  interval  in  the  correspondence,  but  it  is  resumed  at  the 
period  of  the  treaty  of  Uxbridge,  for  which  Nicholas  was  appointed 
one  of  the  commissioners ;  and  is  continued  through  the  vicissitudes 
and  disasters  of  the  M-ar,  up  to  the  king's  detention  by  the  army  of 
the  Scots,  and  his  imprisonment  at  Holdenby  and  in  the  Isle  of  Wight. 

Of  Sir  Edward  Nicholas,  who  plays  so  prominent  a  part  in  this 
correspondence,  and  of  whom  Clarendon  remarks  that  he  was 
appointed  secretary  upon  the  king's  observation  of  his  virtue  and 
fidelity,  and  without  any  other  recommendation,  some  brief  account 
may  be  expected  by  the  reader.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  John 
Nicholas,  Esq.,  of  Winterbourne  Earls,  in  the  county  of  Wilts  ;  was 
born  in  Api'il,  1592-3,  educated  at  Oxford,  and  entered  of  the  Middle 
Temple  ;  resided  some  time  in  France,  and  on  his  return  to  England, 
directed  his  thoughts  to  public  business.  His  first  official  appointment 
was  in  the  time  of  James  I.  He  was  named  one  of  the  six  clerks  in 
chancery  ;  and  afterwards  became  secretary  to  Lord  Zouch,  Lord 
Warden  of  the  Cinque  Ports,  who  surrendered  tliat  employment  to 
please  the  king,  by  enabling  him  to  confer  it  on  the  Duke  of  Buck- 
ingham. The  duke  continued  Nicholas  in  his  office,  and  advanced 
him  to  be  secretary  to  the  Admiralty.  The  commissioners  appointed 
to  administer  the  affairs  of  the  Admiralty,  on  the  duke's  death,  also 
continued  Nicholas  as  their  secretary  ;  and  he  retained  the  oflSce  till 
16.36,  when  Algernon,  Earl  of  Northumberland,  being  appointed 
Lord  High  Admiral,  he  was  removed  to  the  clerkship  of  the  council. 
This  brought  him  more  within  the  personal  view  and  knowledge  of 
the  king,  from  which  resulted  his  selection  for  the  office  of  seci'etary- 
of-state,  when  the  flight  of  Windebank  left  it  vacant  in  1641.  He 
received  his  knighthood  at  Whitehall,  at  the  close  of  November,  1641, 
the  day  after  the  king's  return  from  Scotland.  For  his  activity  and 
earnestness  in  the  execution  of  his  duties,  he  had  meanwhile  become 
obnoxious  to  the  Parliament,  and  was  one  of  those  excepted  in  the 
terms  which  they  offered  to  the  king  after  he  had  raised  his  standard 
at  Nottingham,  Notwithstanding  this  exception,  however,  they  did 
not  refuse  to  receive  him  as  one  of  the  king's  commissioners  at  the 
treaty  of  Uxbridge.  He  was  at  Oxford  during  the  time  it  was 
besieged  by  the  parliament  forces.  On  the  death  of  the  king  he 
went  to  France,  and  afterwards  joined  the  exiled  prince  at  Rouen,  on 
his  arrival  there  from  Jersey. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


49 


In  this  service  he  remained,  discharging  it  at  various  places  in 
Fi-ance  and  Holland,  till  the  treaty  of  Breda,  when  Charles  went  to 
Scotland.  On  his  return,  Nicholas  again  joined  him  at  Aix  ;  and 
when  the  Restoi'ation  came,  in  1660,  he  was  continued  as  secretary. 
In  October  1662,  being  then  about  seventy  years  of  age,  he  finally 
resigned  the  secretaryship,  in  which  he  was  succeeded  by  Bennet,  after- 
wards Earl  of  Arlington.  He  refused  a  peerage  offered  him  by  the 
king  ;  and  retiring  to  his  seat  at  West  Horsley,  in  Surrey,  an  estate 
which  he  had  purchased  of  Carew  Raleigh,  Esq.  (son  of  Sir  Walter), 
died  there  in  September  1669.  In  the  church  of  that  parish  are 
monuments  erected  to  him  and  his  descendants,  who  continued  there 
till  1749.  He  left  four  sons.  In  1641,  it  would  appear  from  the 
letters  now  printed,  he  had  a  house  at  Tliorpe,  in  Surrey. 

The  reader  of  these  letters  will  scarcely  need  to  be  told  that  he 
was  not  only  a  devoted  servant  of  Charles  I.,  but  a  diligent  and  faithful 
adviser,  never  scrupling  to  offer  his  opinion,  and  that  a  conscientious 
and  honest  one.  It  is  to  the  king's  credit  that  he  allowed  him  to  do 
so,  commending  his  openness,  though  unhappily  for  himself  he  did 
not  always  attend  to  the  advice  so  given.  It  was  Charles's  greatest 
misfortune  to  have  had  few  counsellors  so  judicious,  industrious,  and 
experienced  as  Nicholas  ;  of  such  unimpeachable  integrity,  or  of  a 
temper  so  unambitious  and  averse  to  intx'igue. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Nicolas,  Your  aduertisments  to  me,*  is  so  far 
from  displeasing  to  me^  that  I  comand  you  to 
continew  it,  &  that  as  often  as  conuenientlie  ye  may. 
Deliuer  thease  incloseds.  (I  hope  ye  know  by  that 
yesterday  that  on  [one]  is  to  my  Wyfe.)  So  I  rest 

Your  friend, 

Charles  R. 

Eden.    15  Aiifj.  1641. 

Aduertise  my  Wyfe  vpon  euery  dispache,  that  she 
may  (if  she  will)  wryt ;  &  make  one  when  &  as  often 
as  she  will  comand  you. 

*  This  letter  is  evidently  the  first  sent  by  Charles  to  Sir  Edward 
Nicholas,  in  answer  to  his  first  communication  respecting  the  pro- 
ceedings subsequent  to  the  King's  departure.  The  royal  journey 
was  by  no  means  agreeable  to  the  Parliament ;  for,  so  late  as  the 
7th  of  August,  the  Commons  desired  the  Lords  to  join  with  them  in 
an  attempt  to  delay  the  King's  departure  for  fourteen  days,  Charles, 
however,  gave  his  assent  on  that  day  to  several  Bills  both  public  and 

VOL.  IV.  E 

1 


50 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


The  Queen  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Maistre  Nicholas,  I  liaue  reseaued  your  letter: 
and  that  you  send  me  from  the  King :  which  writes 
me  word  he  has  been  vere  well  reseaued  in  Scotland : 
and  that  both  the  armie  :  and  the  people  :  have 
shued  a  creat  joye  to  see  the  King  :  and  such  :  that 
theay  say  was  neuer  seen  before  :  praj^  god  it  may 
continued  :  for  the  letter  that  I  writt  to  you  counsern- 
ing  the  commissionaires  it  is  them  that  are  toe 
dispatch  bussinesse  in  the  Kings  absence :  I  thank 
you  for  your  care  of  geuing  me  aduises  of  what 
passes  at  London  :  and  soe  I  reste 

Your  fraud, 
Henriette  Marie  R. 

Otelands,*  the  19  August. 
Indorsed,'-  For  Mistre  Nicholas." 

lu  Sir  E.  N.'s  writing  : 
«  19°  Aug.  1641.    The  Queenes  IC"  to  me." 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King, 

May  it  please  yo'  most  excellent  Ma*% 
Yesterday  I  receaved  yo''  Ma*'"  of  the  17th  of  this 
month,  &  in  it  one  to  the  Queene,  &  another  to 
my  Lo:   Keeper  :  f  I  forthw^  presented  yo'"  Ma*'" 

private,  and  then  bade  the  ParHament  farewell.  The  next  day, 
Sunday,  the  Commons  sat  for  the  purpose  of  forming  and  presenting 
a  petition  on  the  subject.  On  the  9th,  his  Majesty  again  gave  the 
royal  assent  to  four  Bills,  and  took  leave  a  second  time,  telling  the 
Parliament  that  he  should  return  before  Michaelmas,  if  possible.  At 
two  o'clock  he  set  off,  accompanied  by  the  Elector  Palatine  and  the 
Duke  of  Richmond. 

*  Oatlands  at  this  time  was  the  Queen's  property,  having  been 
gi'anted  to  her  some  years  before,  by  the  King,  for  her  life.  In  the 
preceding  year,  1640,  her  son,  Henry  of  Oatlands,  was  born  there. 
Oatlands  had  long  been  a  royal  mansion  ;  but  the  house,  which  then 
stood  on  low  ground,  was  pulled  down  during  the  Protectorate,  with 
the  exception  of  a  small  part,  which  was  again  given  up  to  the 
Queen  upon  the  Restoration. 

t  Sir  Edward  Lyttelton,  soon  after  created  Lord  Lyttelton.  He 
succeeded  Finch,  and  it  was  not  inaptly  said  of  him  that  he  was  a 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  COIIRESPONDENCE.  51 


to  tlie  Queene,  w'^  when  she  had  read,  her  Ma*'" 

comanded  me  to  forbeare  to  deliver  that  to  my  Lo. 

Keeper,  &  took  it  into  her  owne  custody,  for  that 

her  Ma*'*"  said  it  was  written  att  her  entreaty,  &  Apostyiedin 

that  there  is  now  noe  occasion  for  y°  delivery  of  it,  tlianj':* 

as  her  Ma*'^  tells  me  she  will  by  her  next  satisfy 

yo^"  Ma*'*",  &  I  hope  I  have  donne  nothing  but  my  Yearveme 

duty  in  obeying  her  Ma*'^'  comaund  touching  that 

letter. 

Satterday  morning  the  Comittees  did  set  forth 
towards  Scotland,t  &  that  day  the  Peers  adiourned 
their  House  till  too-morrow  :  it  is  conceaved  there 
will  not  be  much  business  donne  now  in  P^liam^t  % 
untill  they  shall  understand  of  the  arrivall  and 
recepcon  of  their  Comittees  by  yo''  Ma*'^,  whereon 
all  their  eyes  are  fixed. 

The  Constable  of  y*'  Tower  is  comanded  by  y^ 
j^Qdes  jjQuse  forthw^'  to  reside  constantly  in  the 
Tower,  &  order  is  given  (as  I  am  credibly  tould)  that 
there  shal  be  40  souldiers  added  to  reinforce  that 
garrison,  w*"^  new  soldiers  are  to  be  contynued  & 
paid  by  the  P^liamH  here  during  yo'  Ma*'""  absence. 

Upon  a  Conference  had  betweene  both  Houses, 
there  is  an  order  of  P^liam^t  for  y^  present  disarming 

good  Englishman,  a  good  subject,  and  learned  in  the  laws  ;  but,  not 
having  the  same  dexterity  that  his  predecessor  had,  he  was  not  so 
fitly  qualified  for  his  important  trust  in  such  perilous  and  critical  times. 

*  What  is  apostyled  by  the  King  will  be  printed  in  the  margin  of 
the  passages  so  noted. 

These  Commissioners  were  appointed  by  both  Houses  on  the 
16th  of  August,  with  instructions  to  negotiate  with  the  Scottish  Par- 
liament respecting  the  affairs  of  that  kingdom.  Their  real  mission 
was  to  counteract  the  anticipated  effects  of  the  King's  presence  in 
Scotland, 

X  Here  the  Secretary  hardly  shows  his  usual  discernment. 
The  Commons  had  been  very  busy  since  the  King's  departure  : 
having  brought  fresh  chai'ges  against  the  impeached  Bishops ;  voted 
Perry,  Jermyn,  and  Suckling,  guilty  of  high  treason  ;  and  established 
a  complaint  against  the  Queen's  Capuchin  Friars.  Though  the  King 
was  gone,  yet  Commissioners  were  left  to  exercise  the  royal  functions 
in  Parliament,  and  the  assent  was  given  to  the  Bill  for  Tonnage  and 
Poundage  on  the  16th  of  August.  Before  adjournment  also,  they 
had  made  fresh  orders  against  the  Recusants,  and  also  for  raising 
money  speedily  for  the  use  of  the  army. 

E  2 


52 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


of  all  Recusants/'-  and  some  Comittees  of  the  Houses 
are  appointed  to  see  statutes  on  that  behalf 
forthw''  put  in  execucon. 

Upon  consideracon  of  y*"  great  ielousies  that  are 
raysed  here  &  spread  abroade,  as  if  there  were  some 
intencons  to  make  use  of  some  of  y"  armyes  to  y^ 
preiudice  of  y"  Parliam^,  and  upon  the  apparent 
delay  that  hath  been  used  in  y^  paying  off^  &  dis- 
banding y^  English  armye,  w''''  hath  bene  cleerely 
throughe  y*"  negligence  of  those  whom  y^  Parliam* 
hath  imployed  in  that  service,  I  humbly  beseech  yo' 
hauTtlvue     Ma*^^  to  givc  mo  leaue  to  offer  to  yo'  Ma*'"  con- 
thTincS'  sideracon,  whether  it  may  not  be  fitt  for  yo'  Ma*'^ 
to  the         p^sently  to  wryte  yo''  Tres  to  the  Speaker  of  one  or 
Sj^^that  both  Houses,  taking  notice  of  y^  delay  &  sloth  that 
wShaue^  hath  bene  used  in  y^  disbanding  the  armies,  w'^^' 
youaduer-    Jiavo  bcue  kept  ou  footc  here  to       srreat  e;ree- 

ticemywyfe  r        i  rts  •         p   -\T     i.i        o  i 

of  it.  vaunce  oi  yo'  sub*"^^  in  y^  North,  &  att  a  heavy 
charge  to  yo'"  kingdome  in  England  in  g'rall,  not- 
withstanding yo'  Ma*'^  hath  from  tyme  to  tyme  by 
frequent  speeches  to  both  Houses  often  called  upon 
them  to  ease  this  yo''  kingdome  of  that  greevous 
burthen.  Yo'"  Ma^'"  now  understanding,  that  (when 
by  y^  agreem*  w*^  the  Scots  all  the  Englishe  forces 
are  to  be  disbanded)  y*'  Lo.  G^rall  hath  advertised  y^ 
Houses  that  there  wants  140.  thousand  pounds  to 
finishe  that  worke,  therefore  yo""  Ma*'^  may  be  pleased 
to  quicken  the  Parliam*  here,  &  to  let  them  know 
how  sensible  yo''  Ma*'^  is  of  y""  long  sufferings  of  yo' 
people  of  England,  &  to  comaund  the  Houses,  (all 
other  matters  set  apart,)  forthwith  to  apply  them- 
selves to  free  this  yo^  kingdome  of  soe  heavy  &  dayly 
a  charge.  Such  a  letter  would  let  yo''  people  here 
see  yo'  care  &  affec^on  to  them,  &  make  appeare 
cleerely  to  the  world  that  there  is  noe  intenc^on  on 
yo"  Ma^'^^  p*^  to  make  use  of  the  army  here,  as  may 
be  otherwise  insinuated. 

*  This  originated  in  a  complaint  from  the  Commons  to  the  Lords 
on  the  17th  of  August,  that  the  laws  for  disarming  them  were 
neglected,  and  that  many  of  them  were  even  screened  by  members  of 
the  Upper  House. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


53 


I  humbly  beg  yo'  Ma*'''  p'don  for  this  bokl  & 
tedious  discourse,  av*"^  is  noe  other  than  an  effect  of 
the  dutifull  affeccon  of 

most  humble  &  most 

obedient  servaunt^ 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

As  I  was  closing  this  packet,  I  receaved  one  from 
Edenburgh,  wherein  was  yo''  Ma*'''^  le'"  of  the  19*^' 
present :  I  shall  lett  my  Lo.  Keeper  understand 
what  yo""  Ma*'^  hath  comaunded  me  to  deliver  to  my 
Lo.  Ch.  Justice  Bankes  (who  is  now  in  his  circuit  in 
Suffolke)  touching  y^  4  Iriwshe  regiments,"  and  desire 
his  Lo^^  (in  y*"  others  absence)  to  acquaint  y'  Lo'^^' 
House  therewith.  Yo'-  Ma*'^'  le'  of  y^  19*'^  p'sent  I 
have  sent  to  y^  Queene. 
Westminster,  23°  Aucj.  1641. 

Under  this  date,  in  the  King's  writing,  "  Eden.  28." 
Indorsed,  "  For  yo''  Ma''«."     And  signed  by  the  King,  "  Yours 
apostyled." 

Likewise  indorsed  by  Sir  E.  N.    "  My  le'  to  y«  King  of  y«  23  Aug. 
1641.    Apostiled  ye  28^A." 


The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Nicholas,  I  thanke  you  for  the  account  you  haue 
giuen  by  yours  of  the  14,  comanding  you  still  to  con- 
tinew  the  same  course,  as  lykewais  that  in  my  name 
ye  tell  the  same  to  my  Lord  Cheefe  justice  Bankesf 
also  :  So  I  rest 

Your  frend, 

Charles  E. 

Eden  :  19  Aug:  1641. 

You  must  tell  my  L.  Cheefe  justice  Bankes  from 

*  When  the  Irish  regiments  were  on  the  point  of  being  disbanded, 
the  Ambassadors  of  France  and  Spain  made  an  appheation  to  the 
Parliament  on  the  14th  of  August  for  leave  to  hire  several  regiments 
for  foreign  service  ;  but  their  application  was  refused. 

f  Sir  John  Banks,  who  had  succeeded  Sir  Edward  Lyttelton  as 
Chief  Justice  of  the  Common  Pleas. 


54^  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [16il. 


mc  that  I  am  so  far  now  engaged  to  the  Spanish 
Embassador*  for  fower  regiment,  that  I  cannot  now 
goe  backe,  for  it  was  asseured  me  before  I  cam  from 
London  that  bothe  Houses  were  content,  onlie  it 
wanted  the  formahtie  of  voting :  whereupon  I  gaue 
an  absolute  order  for  the  leaning  &  transporting  of 
those  men,  but  also  reiterated  my  promises  to  the 
Embassador  :  wherefor  he  must  tell  the  Houses  from 
me  that  thease  leauies  must  not  be  stoped. 

C.  R. 

Addressed  :  "For  your  selfe." 

Indorsed  by  Sir  E.  N.  «19°  Aug:  1G41:  R.  23".    His  Ma^i"  igr 
to  me." 

Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo''  most  excellent  Ma*'*, 
This  morning  about  6  o'clock  I  receaved  by  y*" 
hands  of  ]\Ir.  Murray  yo^  Ma*''^  of  the  22th,  &  have 
acquainted  my  Lo.  Keeper,  that  yo""  ^la*'*'  is  well 
satisfyed  w*^  his  letf,  whereof  his  Lo^p  is  very  glad, 
&  acknowledgeth  yo""  Ma,*'"'  great  goodnes  to  him 
in  it. 

Before  my  receipt  of  yo'"  Ma*'^^  last  letter  I 
had  acquainted  my  Lo.  Keeper  (in  y^  absence  of 
my  Lo.  Ch.  Justice  Bankes)  w^'  what  yo""  Ma*'^ 
commanded  me,  touching  yo'  Ma*'^^  engagem*  for 
transportac'on  of  4  regiments  of  Irishe  for  y^  service 
of  the  Spanishe  King,  &  w^  y^  reasons  of  it,  &  his 
Lo^P  having  that  morning  made  y""  same  knowne  to 
the  Lo'^''^,  they  thereupon  had  next  day  a  con- 
ference w^'  y^  Comons  House,  the  result  of  w*''' 
conference  is  not  as  yet  reported  to  y*  Lo^^^  House, 
but  I  am  tould,  that  the  Comonsf  are  very  much 
against  these  4  regiments  going  for  Spayne,  in  regard 

*  Don  Alonzo  de  Cardenas.  This  is  noticed  in  the  preceding  letter. 

t  On  the  28th  of  August  when  the  House  of  Commons  again  took 
this  affair  into  consideration,  Sir  Benjamin  Rudyard  spoke  loudly 
against  it,  founding  his  objections  principally  upon  the  points  here 
stated  by  Sir  Edward  Nicholas.  The  Commons  then  refused  assent 
to  the  measure,  in  which  the  Lords  agreed  with  them  ;  and  a  letter, 
expressing  their  refusal,  was  sent  to  the  King. 


I  see  your 
discretion 
may  bee 
trasted  in 
greater 
maters. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


55 


it  crosseth  w*^'  vo''  Ma^''^"  &  y*'  Houses  Declaration 
against  y""  Spanyard  on  behalf  of  y^  Prince  Elector ;  * 
&  therefore  my  Lo.  Keeper  thinkes  not  fitt  to  hasten 
y*"  report  of  that  conference :  As  soone  as  there  shal 
be  any  order  or  resolucon  in  it  by  y^  Parliam*,  I  shall 
advertise  it  to  yo''  Ma''".  I  sent  yo""  Ma*'*''  letter  to 
Sir  Ph.  Maynewaringt  by  an  expresse  messenger 
into  Northamptonsh:  whither  S'"  Phillip  was  gonne 
2  dayes  before  my  receipt  of  yo'  Ma''^'  to  him. 

Since  Satterday  last  there  hath  beene  noe  business 
done  in  Parliam*  of  any  publique  nature  J  that  I  can 
heare  of ;  but  only  the  order  made  by  the  Lo*^^^ 
touching  y*"  election  of  y*"  present  Sheriffs  of  London, 
whereof  I  gave  advertisem*  to  Mr.  Thre^r  §  by  myne 
of  y"^  23'^  II  This  day  y-  Lo.  Mayor  was  att  the 
Upper  House  to  get  an  alteration  of  that  their  Lo^^ 
order,  but  the  House  would  not  recede  from  it 
in  an}'-  p'ticular,  whereat  y""  Lo.  Mayor  and  cheif 
cittizens  seeme  to  be  much  troubled. 

*  Charles  Louis,  Elector  of  Bavaria,  Prince  Palatine  of  the  Rhine, 
and  nephew  to  Charles  L,  being  the  sou  of  his  sister  Elizabeth,  Queen 
of  Bohemia. 

f  He  was  of  Over  Peover,  in  Che.shire,  and  father  to  the  first 
Baronet  of  that  name,  so  created  after  the  Restoration.  He  was 
Sheriff  of  Cheshire  in  1639,  and  Captain  in  the  Cheshire  light  horse. 
Collins  does  not  mention  his  knighthood. 

J  Again  the  Secretary  is  remiss,  or  at  fault.  Public  business  was 
certainly  going  forward.  On  the  25th  of  August  the  Lords  seques- 
trated the  temporalities  of  Dr.  Roger  Manwaring,  Bishop  of  St. 
David's,  for  his  contumacy  to  an  order  of  the  House  ;  and,  on  the  day 
on  which  Sir  Edward  wrote  his  letter,  both  Houses  had  a  conference 
respecting  a  proposed  recess  of  Parliament. 

§  "  Mr.  Treasurer,"  that  is.  Sir  Henry  Vane  the  elder. 

|]  This  evidently  relates  to  the  dispute  then  existing  between  the 
Lord  Mayor  and  the  Commons  of  London  ;  the  former  laying  claim 
to  the  choice  of  one  of  the  Sheriffs,  by  a  prescription  of  three  hundred 
years.  The  Livery  refusing  to  abide  by  this,  the  Court  of  Aldermen 
petitioned  the  King  to  decide  upon  the  affair  ;  but  the  King  referred 
it  to  the  House  of  Lords,  who,  after  some  delay,  ordered  that  the  Com- 
monalty should  proceed  to  tlie  choice  of  the  two  Sheriffs,  at  the  same 
time  recommending  that  they  would  have  those  who  had  already  been 
nominated  by  the  flavor.  The  Sheriffs  chosen  were  George  Garret 
and  George  Clark.  Sir  William  Acton,  Bart,,  was  the  then  Lord 
Mayor  ;  but  he  was  superseded  by  the  Parliament,  and  replaced  by 
Sir  Edmund  Wright. 


56 


THE  NICHOLAS  COPJiESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


beereyester-      ihcre  IS  here  great  expectation  what  recepcon  to'" 
night.         Ma^'^  will  give  to     Comittees  sent  hence.    1  wishe 
yo'"  Ma*'^  could  have  soe  tymely  expedited  yo""  affaires 
there,  as  that  you  might  have  bene  reddy  to  come 
away  before  their  arrivall  there.* 

Yesterday  y'"  Comons  orderedf  that  y"  pay  of  Coll. 
Willmot,  Aslibournham,  &  y*"  rest  of  y^  soldiers 
(that  are  questioned  in  P'liam^t)  shalbe  sequestred 
untill  their  busines  shalbe  heard  &  adjudged.  And 
upon  occasion  of  y^  discourse  of  that  busines,  Mr. 
Seidell  did  then  in  that  house  deliver  his  opinion 
with  much  confidence,  that  by  y"  Act  of  Oblivion 
Mr.  Percy  and  ^Ir.  Jermyn,J  &  all  y*"  rest  that  are 
questioned  with  them,  are  freed  and  pardoned,  w'''' 
he  argued  so  strongly  out  of  the  very  words  of  that 
Act,  as  y^  sages  of  that  house,  who  oppugned  his 
opinion,  did  not  (in  y"  iudgem*  of  able  men)  give  any 
reasonable  or  satisfactory  answere  to  it:  the  House 
seemed  to  be  much  amazed  att  this  slipp  in  that 
Act,  &  were  not  well  pleased  with  him  who  delivered 
this  opinion  :  some  said  that  it  was  not  in  y"  intencon 

*  The  names  of  the  Commissioners  were  Lords  Bedford  and 
Howard  of  Esricke,  Hampden,  Fiennes,  Sir  Phihp  Stapleton,  and 
Sir  William  Armyne.  The  Secretary  seems  to  entertain  a  reason- 
able fear  of  the  King's  being  brought  into  collision  with  such 
Commissioners. 

t  Not  recorded  in  the  Parliamentary  Debates. 

Ij:  Jermyn  had  been  especially  implicated,  by  the  confession  of 
Colonel  Goring,  in  the  alleged  plot  contrived  by  certain  officers  of  the 
array  to  secure  StrafTord's  escape,  and  overawe  and  dissolve  the 
Parliament,  by  marching  the  army  on  London  and  making  the  King 
absolute.  Balfour,  the  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower,  baffled  that  part 
of  it  relating  to  Strafford  ;  and,  a  quarrel  arising  between  the  leaders 
of  the  design,  Goxniig  and  Wilmot  ("  Gorrein  et  Hailmot,"  as  Madame 
de  Motteville  calls  them  in  her  account  of  the  affaii'),  which  Jermyn 
had  in  vain  done  his  best  to  reconcile,  Goring  made  a  quasi  discovery 
of  the  plot  to  Lord  Newark,  from  whom,  through  Lords  Bedford 
and  Kirabolton,  it  reached  Pym.  Goi-ing  subsequently  asserted 
that  for  his  own  part  he  had  refused  concurrence  with  the  proposals 
to  put  the  army  into  a  posture  to  serve  the  King,  and  send  a  Declai'atiou 
to  Parliament  that  Episcopacy  should  not  be  infringed  upon,  and 
that  the  King's  revenue  should  be  established  ;  for  he  said  that  he 
thought  it  belonged  to  an  army  to  maintain,  not  to  contrive,  acts  of 
state.  At  the  same  time  he  professed  that  his  particular  object,  in 
joining  in  the  proposed  measures,  was  to  solicit  "  a  redresse  for  the 
miseries  of  the  souldiers." 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


57 


of  y*'  House  to  pardon  them,  whereupon  it  uas  replyed 
that  lawes  are  to  be  understood  according  to  the 
words  in      Act,  &  not  according  to  the  intencon  of 

makers,  further  than  y"  words  will  beare. 

This  day  the  House  of  Peers  have  comitted  to 
prison  y^  man  that  printed  the  scandalous  ballet 
concerning  the  Qu.  Mother's  going  away,  &  will 
consider  of  further  punishm*  for  him,  and  they  have 
ordered  that  these  ballets  shalbe  burnt  by  y*"  hand  of 

V*"  hangman.  Thankehim 

The  inclosed  from  my  Lo.  Marshall*  will  give  jorhfs^^"' 
yo'  Ma'''  an  account  of  y'  cause  of  y'  Qu.  Mother's 
stay  att  Dover. 

Albeit  this  employm^  w"^^  yo''.  Ma*'*"  hath  bene 
pleased  to  honour  me*  w'thall,  hath  drawne  much 
envy  vpon  me,  &  (as  I  heare)  set  some  on  worke  to  f^f^g^^J  f^^^^ 
prye  into  my  accons  past  &  present,  yet  since  I  enioy  fuu  measure, 
y*"  comfort  of  yo""  Ma*'"  grac'ous  opinion  &  accep- 
taunce  of  my  poore  &  homiest  endeavours,  I  shall 
not  valine  any  mans  mallice,  but  rather  smile  att 
their  ignoraunce,  that  conceave  there  is  any  other 
felicity  in  this  imploym*,  then  to  deserve  to  be 
accounted  an  honest  man,  & 
Yo^  Ma*'" 

most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas.      i  receaued 
The  Queene  sent  me  word  she  had  written  lately  day.^^^'*^"^ 
to  yo""  Ma*'%  &  would  not  write  by  this  dispatche. 

Westminster,  26°  Aug. 
Written  by  the  King,  «  Eden.  31,  1641." 
Indorsed,  "  For  yo''  most  excellent  Ma*'«." 
Written  by  the  King, "  Yours  apostyled." 

Further  indorsement  in  the  hand-writing  of  Sir  E.  N. :  "  26  A  ug. 
1641.    Myne  to  his  Ma^^e  apostiled  31"  Aug. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas, 

Nicholas,  I  haue  nothing  to  answer  to  yours  of 
the  20  :  (w"^*"  I  receaued  yesterday  in  the  euening), 

*  Thomas  Howard,  Earl  of  Arundel  and  Surrey. 


58 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


save  onlie  to  tlianke  for  your  advertisments :  but 
Leering  from  good  hand,  that  the  House  of  Comons 
meanes  to  refuse  my  General  Pardon,*  I  haue 
thought  fitt  to  comand  you,  to  comandmy  L.  Keeper 
to  thinke  of  a  DecLiratiou  to  be  put  fourth  in  my 
name  (in  case  my  Pardon  be  refused)  to  make  my 
fauorable  intentions  knowen  to  all  my  English 
subjects,  how  1  consulted  it  with  the  best  lawers,  to 
make  it  of  most  aduantadge  that  might  bee  for  all 
my  said  people.  This  being  the  sumrae,  for  the 
forme  &  the  penning,  I  leave  it  to  bee  consulted 
there :  to  w*"^*  end,  I  command  you  first  to  goe  to  my 
Wyfe,  to  receaue  her  directions  in  it  (for  she  knowes 
my  mynde  fully  in  this  particular)  and  according  to 
what  she  shall  direct  you,  to  command  my  Lo.  Keeper 
for  the  drawing  of  it,  fitt  for  my  hand,  y/ith  all 
speede,  &  so  I  rest 

Your  frend, 

Charles  R. 

Eden,  25  Aug:  1641. 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

fied^iththis         ^^^y     please  y°'"  most  excell°*  Ma''% 
account.  Yo'r  Ma''^^  of  the  25th  of  this  moneth  founde  me 

at  Oatlands  on  Sunday  last,  as  I  was  attending  the 
Queenes  com^aunds,  where  I  p^sently  p^sented  to  her 
Royall  hand  yo'^  Ma*'^^  1%  &  acquainted  her  ]\Ia''" 
what  you  had  written  to  me  concerning  a  Declarac'on; 
her  ^I'd}'"  saith  that  she  now  vnderstands  that  y^ 
Com'ons  will  not  suddainly  refuse  yo"*  Ma*'^'  Pardon ; 
but  howsoever  she  com^aunded  me  to  speake  w*^  my 
Lo.  Keeper  about  it  according  to  yo""  Ma*'^^  le%  & 
to  Avishe  him  to  consider  of  a  fitting  Declarac'on 

*  This  will  be  found  fully  explained  in  a  subsequent  letter.  The 
King  appears  to  have  wished  to  secure  Percy,  Wilmot,  Ashburn- 
ham,  and  the  others  engaged  with  them,  from  the  wrath  of  the 
Parliament,  but,  unwilling  to  pardon  them  expressly  by  name,  he 
issued  this  General  Pardon  in  order  to  include  them,  without  appear- 
ing to  confirm  the  charges  brought  against  them  as  acting  under  his 
privity  and  directions. 


1641.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


59 


agreeable  to  yC  Ma*'"  direcc^ons,  that  it  may  be  reddy 
in  case  the  G'ral  Pardon  shal  be  refused,  &  this  to 
be  donne  w*^'  all  possible  secrecy.  My  Lo.  Keeper 
promiseth  to  p'^pare  such  a  Declarac'on  against  too- 
morrow,  &  hath  wished  me  then  to  attend  his 
Lo^'P  to  Oatlands,  there  to  shew  it  to  her  Ma*'*",  & 
as  soon  as  it  shal  be  perfected  to  send  it  for  yo''  ro3^al 
approbac^on.  The  busines  will  well  beare  this  delay, 
for  that  y'^  Peers  have  this  day  adiourned  their  House 
till  Munday  next ;  and  y^  Commons  (I  heare)  intend 
to  adiourne  too-morrow,  also  till  Munday ;  &  it  is 
resolvM  that  both  Houses  shall  adiourne  on  Wensday 
sennight  till  y"  26th  of  Octob"".  I  humbly  desire  to 
know  jo''  Ma*'*"^  pleasure  whether  when  this  Declarc'on 
shall  be  printed,  it  may  not  be  fit  to  shew  y*"  same  to 
my  Lo.  Banks  or  Mr.  Attorney,*  or  both,  before  it 
be  engrossed  for  yo'  Ma*'"  hand.  I  have  bene  tould 
that  some  take  excepc'ons  to  j-o""  Ma*'"  Pardon,  for 
that  it  excepts  all  matters  of  eccl^all  cognisaunce, 
albeit  y'^same  exception  is  in  y"  Pardon  of  31°  Jacobi, 
but  I  beleeve  that  this  excepc^on  of  theirs  is  but  a 
pretence,  &  that  y^  mayne  thing  that  they  dishke  in 
it  is,  that  Mr.  Percy  &  y^  rest  of  his  company  are 
comprehended  in  it.  Both  Houses  have  had  a  con- 
ference upon  yo'"  Ma*'"  answear  and  reasons  sent  by 
Mr.  Nichols  f  touching  y""  commission,  and  I  heare, 
thoughe  many  would  have  bene  better  pleased  that 
yo""  Ma*'^  had  signed  y^  commission  for  their  committees, 
yet  they  doe  not  much  dislike  yo'^  Ma*'"  answeare, 
since  by  yo'"  gracmous  permission  their  committees  have 
leave  to  come  to  Edenburg  to  doe  the  busines  they 
are  principally  sent  for.{    I  have  herew*^  sent  yo"" 


Show  it  to 
both. 


I  am  of  yoiu- 
mynd  ;  for 
their  petition 
to  mee  was 
to  have  it  as 
neer  to  that 
of  21  Jacobi 
as  might  bee. 


*  Sir  Edward  Herbert,  Knt. 
t  This  was  Mr.  Anthony  Nichols,  Member  for  Bodmyn,  whom  the 
Commons,  on  the  18th  August,  had  ordered  to  be  their  messsenger  to 
carry  the  Petition,  Commission,  and  Instructions  to  Edinburgh  for 
the  King's  approbation.  It  is  stated  in  the  Parliamentary  Records, 
that  the  sum  of  lOOOZ.  was  then  ordered  for  the  «  Commissioner's 
Charges." 

X  The  King's  answer  was  read  to  both  Houses  on  the  30th,  in 
which  he  said  that  he  did  not  find  it  necessary  to  sign  any  such 
Commission;  but  was  "graciously  pleased  to  give  leave  to  the  said 


60  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


I  com'and 
yontospeake 
with  tlie  L. 
Keeper,  my 
I  J.  Banices, 
and  my 
learned 
Councell, 
to  see  what 
course  is  best 
to  be  taken 
to  stop  ttieas 
insolencies 
in  tyme  to 
cnm. 


I  willinglie 
grant  your 
desyre. 


1  receaued 
yours  of  the 

2  :  the  6  of 
this  monthe, 
vpon  w'ch,  & 
other  rea- 
sons, to  stay 
thisdispache 
untill  the  8 : 
euen  now  I 
receaued 
your of  the  4: 
w'ch  re- 
quyres  no 
answer. 
Eden,  8  Sept. 


Ma*'^  substance  of  2  messages  delivered  yesterday 
from  y"  Commons  to  y*"  Peers.  The  ordinance  therein 
menc'oned  touching  y''  disarming  of  Recusants  is 
this  day  ordered  to  be  printed  (as  I  heare).  There 
hath  bene  some  of  yo""  Ma*'^^  deer  killed  in  Windsor 
forrest  neer  Egham  by  y*"  inhabitants  of  that  towne 
&  of  y*"  parishes  adioyning,  -who  hunted  in  y''  day 
tyme  by  80  &  100  in  a  company :  S""  Ar.  Maynwaring* 
hath  bene  amongst  them,  and  w*^'  good  words  & 
promises  hath  made  them  forbeare  for  y^  p^sent. 
When  both  Houses  shal  be  adiourned  till  OctoV  I 
beleeve  here  wil  be  little  or  noe  busines  in  this 
towne,  where  y^  sicknes  &  small  pox  increaseth, 
and  therefore  if  yo'  Ma*'*"  please  to  give  me  leave,  I 
humbly  desire  to  reside  att  Oatlands  or  att  my  house 
att  Thorpe  (w"**  is  but  3  myles  from  Oatlands), 
whether  I  can  take  order  that  all  packets  shall  w^^'out 
any  delay  or  p^ludice  be  brought  to  me.  I  assure 
yo'  Ma*'^  I  would  not  p'^sume  to  crave  this  favour,  if 
I  could  imagine  that  any  inconvenience  or  delay 
might  thereby  happen  to  y^  services  yo''  Ma*'^  hath 
bene  pleased  to  comitt  to  y^  care  of, 
y  Ma^'^^ 

Most  humble  and  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw^  Nicholas. 

Westminster,  31°  Aug.  1641.    Apostyled  7°  7'^'. 

Eden.  5  Sep. 
Indorsed,  "  For  yo''  sacred  Ma'"^." 
And  by  the  King,  "  Yours  apostyled." 


Members  to  come  and  attend  us  here  in  Scotland,  to  see  the  ratifica- 
tion of  the  said  Treaty,  and  what  else  belongs  thereunto."  The  Par- 
liamentary Debates  say,  that  "  these  reasons  seemingly  contented 
both  Houses,  for  we  hear  no  more  of  the  matter  from  either  of  the 
Journals  ; "  but  Sir  Edward  Nicholas  explains  the  business  with 
more  probability. 

*  He  had  property  in  Chertsey,in  the  vicinity;  and  on  thelTth  of 
September  was  appointed,  along  with  many  othei's,  to  hold  an  inquest 
in  the  bounds  of  Windsor  Forest,  within  the  bailiwick  of  Surrey. 
The  people  had  been  enraged  by  the  proceedings  of  the  Justice  in 
Eyre,  the  Earl  of  Holland.  See  Manning  and  Bray's  Bist.  Surreyy 
vol.  I.    Introduction,  pp.  xii.  xiii. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


61 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 


May  it  please  yo'  Ma'% 

Since  my  lef  of  y^  26tli  of  this  moneth  it  hath 
bene  here  ordered  by  both  Houses  of  Parliam*^  that 
out  of  monny  accruing  to  y''  Ma*'""  by  vertue  of  y'^ 
last  Act  of  Tonnage  &  Poundage^*  there  shal  be 
paid  for  the  use  of  the  Nav}^  10  m.  lb.  for  this  moneth 
of  Aug  :  and  15  m.  for  each  of  y^  other  3  monethes 
to  y^  first  of  Decemb"  next^  amounting  in  all  to 
55  m.  lb.  and  upon  a  message  sent  by  y''  Parliam*^ 
to  y"  Commission"  of  y^  Treasury,  they  have  given 
warraunt  accordingly. 

There  hath  bene  a  conference  between  y^  2  Houses 
about  some  course  to  be  taken  for  preserving  of  the 
myne  of  saltpeetre_,  but  there  is  noe  order  as  yet 
settled  for  it. 

The  sentence  whereby  London  Derry  was  adiudged 
forfeited  to  y""  Ma*%  is  by  y""  House  of  Commons  (as 
I  heare)  declared  Nul,  &  that  land  thought  fit  to  be 
restored  backe  to  y^  Citty  of  London.f 

The  Parliam*  here  (upon  a  conference  of  both 
Houses)  hath  resolved  to  make  a  recesse  on  wensday 
y''  8th  of  Sep^^'^  to  y'^  26th  of  OctoV  next,  unlesse 
before  that  day  there  shal  liapen  some  emergent 
busines,  w'^^'  it  is  thought  wil  be  as  y^  intelligence 
from  Scotland  shall  please  us  here. 

The  Qu.  Mother  J  remaines  still  att  Dover,  ex- 


You  must 
comand  my 
learned 
Councell,  in 
my  name, 
that  they 
doe  what 
they  may 
that  the 
same  vote 
passe  not  the 
Higher 
House. 


*  This  was  taken  into  consideration  by  the  House  of  Commons  on 
the  26th  of  August,  in  consequence  of  long  arrears  due  to  naval 
officers,  and  the  provisions  in  the  magazines  having  been  found  to  be 
decayed.  Part  of  the  money  was  also  to  be  expended  in  fitting  out 
ten  men  of  war  and  ten  merchant  ships  for  the  defence  of  the  narrow- 
seas  ;  the  charge  of  which  would  amount  to  57,000Z.,  of  which  only 
1200^.  as  yet  was  to  be  appropriated  out  of  the  tonnage  and  poundage. 
The  farmers  of  the  Customs  were  ordered  to  make  good  the  defi- 
ciency, to  the  amount  of  15,000Z.  per  month. 

f  This  refers  to  the  proceedings  of  the  Star  Chamber  against  the 
City  for  non-performance  of  conditions  in  the  charter  granted  to  them 
by  James  the  First.    Vide  Rushworth,  vol.  iv.,  p.  376. 

X  i'  e.  the  Queen  Dowager  of  France,  i  The  departure  of  the 


62 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


You  may 
asseure 
euery  one, 
that  now  all 
difficulties  ar 
pased  heerc, 
as  I  have 
co'manded 
Vane  to  tell 
you  more  at 
large.* 


pecting  (as  my  Lo.  Marshall  writes  to  me  tins 
morning)  y*"  returne  of  a  messenger  from  Flanders, 
soe  as  tuesday  next  wil  be  ye  soonest  tliat  her  Ma*'^ 
wil  embarque. 

All  things  are  like  to  be  now  very  still  here,  every 
mans  expectac^on  being  fixed  upon  yo'  ^Nla*'"'  &  the 
Parliaments  proceedings  there,  w*^^  I  beseech  God 
to  direct  &  governe,  as  may  be  most  for  y*"  honor  & 
prosperity  of  yo'"  Ma*'^  &  of  your  royall  posterity  & 
all  yo'"  kingdomes,  and  this  shall  ever  be  y^  dayly 
prayers  of, 

Yo'-  Ma*'^^ 
Most  humble  &  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 


As  I  was  making  up  this  packet  I  receaved  an 
order  of  the  Upper  House  of  Parliam*  to  Sir  Jo. 
Penington  f  fo.  y^  stay  of  ships  bound  for  Ireland,  a 


Queen  Mother  from  England,  where  she  had  arrived  in  1638,  had  been 
strongly  urged  forward  by  the  Parliament  party.  In  a  curious  reprint 
of  Grebner's  astrological  book,  with  its  observations  on  the  life  and 
death  of  Charles,  it  is  said  that  on  her  coming,  "  all  men  were  against 
her,  for  it  was  observed  that  wherever  or  unto  whatever  Coxmtry 
this  miserable  old  Queen  came,  there  followed  immediately  after  her 
either  the  plague,  war,  famine,  or  one  misfortune  or  another." — Yet 
the  same  writer,  when  speaking  of  her  departure,  says,  "a  sad 
spectacle  it  was,  and  produced  tears  from  mine  eyes  and  many  other 
beholders,  to  see  an  aged  leane  decrepit  poore  Queen,  ready  for  her 
grave,  necessitated  to  depart  hence,  having  no  place  of  residence  in 
this  world  left  her,  but  where  the  curtesie  of  her  hard  fortune 
assigned  it.  She  had  beene  the  onely  statelie  and  magnificent  woman 
in  Europe." — She  had,  whilst  in  England,  an  allowance  of  lOOZ.  per 
day  ;  and  the  Parliament  gave  her  10,O0OZ.  for  travelUng  expences 
on  her  departure. 

*  Up  to  this  period,  notwithstanding  the  affair  of  Strafford,  the 
king  appears  to  have  put  perfect  trust  in  the  elder  Vane,  to  whom 
his  indulgence  and  favour  had  at  all  times  been  remarkable.  Sir 
Philip  Warwick,  in  his  Memoirs,  states  a  curious  instance  of  it ; 
where,  speaking  of  the  economy  of  Charles's  Court,  he  says  that 
*'  besides  the  women  who  attended  on  his  beloved  Queen  and  Consort, 
he  scarce  admitted  any  great  officer  to  have  his  wife  in  the  family. 
Sir  Henry  Vane  was  the  first  that  I  knew  in  that  kind,  who,  having  a 
good  diet  as  Comptroller  of  the  Household,  and  a  tenuity  of  fortune, 
was  winked  at ;  so  as  the  Court  was  filled,  not  crammed." 

'f'  Sir  John  Pennington  was  a  distinguished  naval  officer  of  the 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


03 


coppy  whereof  I  send  inclosed,  but  whether  there  be 
any  such  ships  in  y^  Downes,  I  cannot  learne  y" 
certeynty.  The  Queenes  Ma^'"  tells  me  she  will  not 
wryte  till  Munday  by  Mr.  Murray. 

Westminster,  28°  Aug,  1641. 
Eden.  3  Sep. 


The  King  to  the  Lord  Keeper, 
My  Lo.  Keeper, 

answer  that  I  can  giue  to  yours  of  31.  of  Aug. 
is  only,  that  I  am  very  well  satisfyed  w*^  it :  where- 
fore y*"  cheefe  subiect  of  this  is,  that  hauing  under- 
stood, that  y''  Lower  House,  in  passing  y"  Bill  of 
Tunnage  and  Poundage,  forgot  to  reserue  that 
aduantage  to  y*"  merchant  in  diuers  comodities  w''^' 
I  haue  usually  granted,  therefore  I  co^maund  you 
tell  y""  Citty,  in  my  name,  that  thoughe  their  owne 
burgesses  forgot  them  in  P^liam^t,  yet  I  meane  to 
supply  that  defect  out  of  my  alFecc^on  to  them,  soe 
that  they  may  see  that  they  need  noe  mediators  to 
me,  but  my  owne  good  thoughts ;  for  as  yet  I  assure 
you  that  I  have  not  bene  sued  to  in  this  particular 
by  any  on  their  behalfe.    Soe  I  rest 

Your  assured  frend, 

C.  E. 

Eden.  7  Sep.  16*41. 

I  have  commanded  Nicholas  to  speake  to  you  con- 
cerning the  insolencies  committed  in  y^'  forest. 

The  above  is  in  Sir  E.  N.'s  handwriting,  and  is  thus  indorsed  : 
«  70  -jhris^  ig4i^    Coppy  of  his  Ma""  lef^  to  my  Lo.  Keeper,  to  be 
communicated  to  the  Citty," 


period,  and  was  appointed  by  the  King,  a  few  months  afterwards,  to 
the  command  of  the  fleet ;  but  against  this  the  Parliament  remon- 
strated in  favour  of  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  and  Sir  John  was  obhged 
to  resign.  There  was  another  Pennington,  at  this  time,  extremely 
active  ;  but  his  name  was  Isaac,  and  he  is  very  harshly  spoken  of  by 
the  royalist  writers,  as  a  man  who  had  enriched  himself  most  flagi- 
tiously in  the  service,  or  rather  through  the  influence  and  power,  of 
the  Parliament.    He  was  a  merchant  in  the  City. 


64 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


This  dis- 
pache  I  re- 
ceaued  tliis 
mominf?.  but 
tell  ray  Wyfe 
that  I  haue 
found  falte 
with  you, 
because  none 
of  hers  was 
within  it. 


Tell  him, 
that  I  am  sa- 
tisfyed  with 
his  letter,  as 
indeed  I  am 
with  you  for 
the  cou- 
tinuall  ac- 
counts ye 
giue  mee 
of  my 
businesses. 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

In  the  King's  hand  : 

Monday  20  Sep. 

May  it  please  yo'  Ma*'^, 

I  have  by  my  Lo.  Carr  receaved  yo'  Ma*'^' 
com^iunds  of  y'^  8th  of  this  moneth,  apostiled  upon 
my  lef  of  y*"  31th  of  Aug.  last,  &  have  presented  y' 
Ma*'"  to  my  Lo.  Keeper,  whoe  hath  alreddy  com*'uni- 
cated  to  my  Lo.  Mayor  the  effect  of  yo""  Ma*'^' 
gracious  intenc^on  towards  y^  merchants  tliat  Avere 
not  provided  for  by  y^  Act  of  Tonnage  &  Poundage, 
w*"^  was  most,  dutifully  &  gratefulh^  receaved'  by 
y^  Lo.  Mayor,  who  will  make  known  yo"  Ma*'^' 
great  goodnes  to  all  y^  merchants  of  this  Citty. 
My  Lo.  Keeper  hath  appointed  my  Lo.  Bankes, 
Mr.  Attorney,  S""  Art.  Maynewaring  &  myself,  to 
attend  his  Lo^p  att  his  house  in  y^  country  on  Mun- 
day  next,  to  consider  of  y^  ryot  committed  in  yo' 
Ma*'^'  forrest  of  Windsor,  &  of  some  fitting  course  to 
prevent  y^  killing  of  any  more  deere  there. 

I  have  herew*^'  sent  yo'"  Ma*'^  a  list  of  y^  names 
of  y""  Committees  of  y*" 
c^ons  given  to  them, 
difficulty. 

The  Committees  of  y^  Lo*^'  met  yesterday  in  y' 
afternoone  in  y^  Painted  Chamber,  &  those  of  y*" 
Commons  in  y*"  Excheq'  Chamber  apart  hj  themselves, 
&  afterwards  iointly.  All  their  busines  was  to 
peruse  &  annsweare  le'^',  w'^^  they  receaved  from  my 
Lo.  G^rall,*  &  their  Comittees  in  Scotland,  &  to 
take  order  for  monnyes  for  paym*  of  the  army, 
trayne  of  artillery,  and  garrisons. f  They  have 
given  order  to  my  Lo.  Adm"  to  send  shipps  to 
y*"  Holy  Island  J  to  fetch  thence  ordinance  and 


Commons  House,  &  y*"  instruc- 
w^'i  I  have  gotten  w*^  some 


*  Earl  of  Essex. 

t  The  Lord  General  stated  in  his  letters  that  it  was  the  intention 
of  the  Scottish  Pai'liamcnt  to  keep  5000  in  array,  until  the  whole  of 
the  English  army  was  disbanded,  and  the  fortifications  at  Berwick 
and  Carhsle  slighted." 

±  On  the  coast  of  Northumberland. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


65 


amunic^on,  &c.  as  yo'  Ma*'"  by  y^  order  inclosed  may 
perceave.  I  lieare  that  these  ComMttees  have  written 
to  y*"  Committees  in  Scotland,  that  if  by  their  next 
let"  they  shall  certefy  them  that  there  is  noe  more 
busines  for  them  in  Scotland,  then  they  will  con- 
sider of  calling  them  home. 

By  a  coppy  herew"'  sent,  yo""  Ma*'^  will  perceave 
y*"  course  that  is  here  taken  for  paym*  &  discharge 
of  y*^  garrison  of  Carlile,  &  accordingly  the  Pay- 
master hath  alreddy  receaved  £4000,  &  is  too- 
morrow  to  have  y""  rest  of  the  monny,  for  y^  p^sent 
carriage,  whereof  he  hath  taken  order,  soe  as  it  shal 
be  there  by  y"  3d  or  4th  of  8^"'',  w*'^  is  y*"  soonest  it 
can  possibly  be  carried  thither  by  cart. 

The  Declarac^on  of  y''  Commons  House  *  was  Sun- 
day last  read  in  y*"  parishe  church  here  in  West- 
minster, &  is  sent  to  y"  sheriffs  of  all  counties  to  be 
published.  There  is  noe  man  prayeth  more  fervently 
for  yo''  Ma*'"^  prosperous  dispatch  of  yo'  affaires 
there_,  &  safe  &  speedy  returne,  than 

Yo'^  Ma*'" 

Most  humble  and  most  obedient  servaunt, 

EDW^  Nicholas. 

I  heare  y^  Committees  here  have  taken  order  for 
monnyes  for  paym*  &  discharge  of  yo""  Ma*'"  garrison 
at  Berwick,  &  that  it  is  to  be  sent  downe  att  3 
severall  sendings,  w^ii  will  require  some  longer  tyme. 

Westminster,  15°  Sep^>-'%  1641. 


Si7'  Edivard  Nicholas  to  the  King, 

May  it  please  yo'"  most  excell''*  Ma*'*", 
According   to  my   advertisem*   yesterday,  both 
Houses  of  Parliam*  have  this  day  adiourned  till  20** 

*  This  was  against  all  superstitious  rites  and  observances  in  public 
worship  ;  amongst  which  were  enumerated  crucifixes,  images  of  the 
Virgin  Mary,  bowing  at  the  name  of  Jesus,  &c.  Tliey  also  ordered 
the  Communion  Tables  to  be  moved  from  the  east  end  of  all  churches 
and  chapels  ;  and  all  sports  and  pastimes  to  be  prevented  on  Sunday. 

VOL.  IV.  y 


66 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


Octo^'  next.  They  have  appoynted  Comittees  to 
meete  during  the  recesse,*  &  their  first  day  of 
meeting  is  to  be  Tuesday  next,  &  then  they  are  to 
adiourne  from  tyme  to  tyme  as  they  shall  thinke 
good.  Their  principall  busines  is  to  receave  & 
annsAvcare  all  le''  from  Scotland,  according  to 
instrucc'ons  alreddy  given  to  the  Comittees  there, 
whom  they  have  power  to  call  home  if  they  see 
cause.  They  have  also  power  to  send  downe  monny 
to  y*"  army,  &  to  doe  what  they  shall  think  requi- 
site for  y"  disbanding  of  it,  &  to  dispose  of  y*" 
cannons  and  artillery  in  y^  North,  &  they  are  to 
make  report  of  the  whole  busines  att  y^  next  meet- 
ing of  both  Houses. 

There  was  not  att  parting  a  very  p'fect  agreem' 
(as  I  heare)  betwene  the  2  Houses  in  all  things, 
for  the  Peers  declyning  to  ioyne  w'^  the  Commons 
in  orders  touching  inno vacuous  in  y^  Church,  the 
Commons  notwithstanding  ordered  y^  same  to  be 
printed,  the  particulars  of  w''^'  orders  are  here  in- 
closed.f  I  heare  that  the  Lo'''  &  Com^'ons  have  inti- 
mated that  none  of  the  disbanded  soldiers,  either 
horse  &  foote,  Englishe  or  Irishe,  shalbe  p^mitted 
to  serve  either  the  ffrench  or  Spanislie  King,  but 
that  they  may  serve  the  States. J  Upon  a  report  that 
the  Spanish  and  ffrench  §  AmbMors  had  treated 
w*''  diverse  of  the  horse  &  foote  to  serve  their  raasters, 

*  Lists  of  those  Committees  may  be  found  in  the  ninth  volume  of 
the  ParHamentary  History,  p.  536. 

f  The  Lords  did  not  quarrel  with  the  spirit  of  the  I'esolutions  of 
the  House  of  Commons  ;  but  they  made  some  slight  alterations  in  the 
details.  The  Commons,  however,  went  further  on  the  day  before 
adjournment  than  they  had  previously  done  ;  for  it  was  ordered  that 
a  lecture  might  be  set  up,  and  an  orthodox  minister  maintained,  at 
the  ex])ense  of  any  parishioners,  to  preach  on  various  occasions 
throughout  the  week,  and  also  on  the  Sabbath  where  there  was  no 
sermon. 

J  This  leave  to  serve  the  States  does  not  appear  on  the  Parlia- 
mentary Records. 

§  Popular  prejudice  had  arisen  to  a  great  height  against  these 
diplomatic  personages  ;  the  House  of  Lords  having  found  it  necessary 
on  the  30th  of  August  to  issue  an  order  for  the  punishment  of  some 
rioters  who  had  insulted  the  French  Ambassador  and  his  servants. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


67 


the  Commons  House  sent  2  of  their  members  to  each 
of  their  AmbMors,  to  know  by  what  Avarr*  they  did 
goe  about  to  le^y  any  soldiers  here,  &  by  whose 
procurement  they  obteyned  such  warr*^,  but  (it 
seemes)  they  could  discover  nothing  att  all. 

As  soone  this  day  as  the  L^'  House  was  adiourned, 
I  receavcd  from  Withering's  deputy  2  packetts  of 
le",  one  directed  to  yo''  Ma.*'^  and  y^  whole  P^liam*, 
the  other  to  y^  L*^'  in  P^liam* ;  both  w'^^  I  have  sent 
now  to  Mr.  Th^rer  *  for  yo'"  Ma*'^  I  humbly  beseech 
yo'  Ma*'^  that  this  le'  may  be  scene  by  noe  other  eye 
than  yo''  owne,  for  I  assure  you  the  houses  are  very 
inquisitive  after  these  that  advertise  yo''  Ma*'''  of  any 
parliament  busines.  I  hope  yo"*  Ma*'*^  will  now  hasten 
for  England,  to  put  jo''  affaires  here  in  good  order, 
the  armies  being  all  disbanded  but  4  regim*^  I 
humbly  beg  your  Ma*'^'  pardon  for  this  tedies  dis- 
course from, 

Yo'  Ma*'^^ 
Most  humble  and  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 


I  receaued 
yours  of  the 
8 :  yesterday, 
this,  this 
day:  but  tell 
my  Wife, 
tliat  in 
nether  of 
them,  there 
was  anie 
from  her. 

If  you  would 
haue  beene 
sure  of 
secrecie,  you 
should  haue 
inclosed 
them  under 
my  couer. 

Be  confident 
I  will  as 
soone  as  I 
may. 


It  was  almost  nine  o^clock  at  night  before  y^ 
Commons  did  adiourne  j  but  y^  Lo*^^  adiourned  at  3 
in  y^  afternoone. 


Westminster,  9°  Sep^'''%  1641. 

Eden.  13. 
"  For       sacred  Ma^'^" 
**  Yours  apostyled." 

In  Sir  E.  N.'s"liand\\Titing  :  «  9«  Se^^'-^^  1641.  apostil.  i; 


/Sir  Edwa7^d  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo''  Ma'tie, 
The  le''  inclosed  from  my  Lo.  Marshall  will  give 
yo''  I\Ia*'''  an  accompt  of  y^  Q.  Mothers  landing  & 
recepc^on  in  y'^  Low  Countries,  by  y''  care  of  y^ 
Prince  of  Orange.  The  Houses  of  Parliam*  here 
begin  to  be  att  some  difference  one  w*^  another; 

*  Sir  Henry  Vane. 

F  2 


68 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


I  am  not 
much  sorie 
for  it. 


J  am 
that. 


riad  of 


You  may 
now  say 
confidentlie 
in  my  name 
that  tliey  ar. 


the  Peers  take  it  not  well  that  Commons  comanded 
to  be  printed  an  order  for  abohshing  of  innova- 
c'ons,  &c.*  w^^'out  their  approbac^on,  &  thereupon 
their  Lo^'^'  caused  to  be  printed  a  former  order  made 
for  observing  Booke  of  Com'on  Prayer^  Avhereupon 
(I  heare)  y*"  Commons  made  (on  thursday  night  a  little 
before  their  adiournem*)  a  Declarac^on  against  y^ 
Lords  said  former  order,  &  some  of  y^  L*^*^'  have 
also  made  a  protestac'on  against  y^  same  &  entred  it 
in  their  house,  as  yo'  Ma*'*"  may  perceave  by  y^  pro- 
testacc^on  herew*^  sent,  &  by  the  Declarac^on  of  y'^ 
Commons  House,  w"^  (I  am  tould)  is  sent  to  Mr. 
Th^rer  by  his  sonne,  but  I  cannot  here  procure  a 
coppy  it-t  I  have  herew*^'  sent  yo^  Ma^'^  a  coppy  of 
an  ordinance  of  both  Houses  concerning  y*"  raysing 
&  transporting  of  forces  out  of  England  and  Irland. 
By  a  le""  ^^"^  is  sent  in  this  packet  from  S""  John 
ColepeperJ  to  Marq.  Hamilton,  &  by  another  sent 
by  young  S""  H.  Vane  to  his  father,§  yo''  Ma*'^  (if  you 
call  for  y"  same)  may  see  all  the  passages  of  y^ 
Commons  House  since  Munday  morning,  w""^  have 
beene  soe  various  &  dissonant,  as  may  be  worthy  yo"" 
-^/j-^ties  observac^on  &  informac'on. 

There  hath  beene  nothing  spoken  hitherto  in 
Parliament  concerning  yo'"  Ma*'"  General  1  Pardon. 
If  yo'  Ma*'^  overcome  all  difficulties  there,  &  make 
firme  to  you  yo""  good  people  of  that  kingdome,  I 

*  This  is  the  order  formerly  alluded  to.  Previous  to  adjournment, 
on  the  9th,  the  Lords  desired  a  conference  on  the  subject  of  orders 
respecting  Divine  Service  :  but  the  Commons,  without  noticing  that 
desire,  instantly  passed  a  resolution  "  that  this  House  doth  not  con- 
sent to  these  orders,  or  to  any  of  them."  The  Lords  who  protested 
against  the  proceedings  of  the  Upper  House  were  Bedford,  Warwick, 
Clare,  Newport,  Wharton,  and  Kimbolton. 

f  Copies  of  these  Declarations  may  be  found  in  Rushworth's  Col- 
Jections  ;  also  in  Nalson's. 

X  He  was  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer. 

The  elder  Vane  continued  to  hold  the  office  of  Treasurer  only 
■until  the  26th  of  November,  when,  immediately  after  the  King's 
return,  he  was  succeeded  by  Lord  Falkland.  Nicholas  seems  to  desire 
to  convey  to  the  King  in  a  very  marked  way  the  continued  relations 
of  intimacy  and  correspondence  existing  between  the  elder  and  the 
younger  Vane. 


1641.]         THE  XICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


G9 


beleeve  it  will  not  be  difficult  for  you  to  put  all 
things  here  in  good  order  att  y*"  next  recesse,  by 
carrying  a  steddy  and  moderate  hand  upon  yo' 
affaires. 

Yo""  Ma"*"  will  I  hope  pardon  the  tedious  and 
empty  le*''*       you  receave  from, 
Yo--  Ma*^'^^ 

Most  humble  and  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Westminster,  10  Sep^'''",  1641. 

Eden:  16: 
"  For  yo""  sacred  Ma"i^" 

"  Yours  apostyled."    10  7^''%  lG-11.  Apost.  16^ 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo*"  Ma*'^_, 
I  cannot  add  any  thing  of  advertisem*  worthy  yo'" 
Ma*'""'  notice  since  my  last  of  y"  10th  of  this  present, 
only  I  can  tell  yo""  Ma*'*"  that  y^  Declarac'on  of  y^ 
Commons  (whereof  I  could  not  then  procure  a  coppy) 
is  now  printed,  as  y*"  Duke  of  Uichmondt  can  shew 
yo"^  Ma''%  to  whome  I  have  sent  one  from  y*"  Ea.  of 
Portland.J    Mr.  Th'rer's  1"  of  y*^  7'^  present,  puts 


Oh  'he  OppO- 

sit'-  i>nge,  in 
the  King's 
ha  111  I -writing. 

I  co'raand 
you  to  draw- 
up  anie  such 
■warrant,  as 
my  Wyfe 
shall  direct 
you,  for  the 
disposing  of 
the  great 
Collar  of 
Rubies  *  that 
is  in  Hol- 
land, &  tell 
her  how  I 
ha^e 

directed  you 
to  wait  her 
co'mands  in 
this;  &  that 
I  anil  confi- 
dent of  your 
secrecie  in 
this,  &  anie 
thing  else, 
that  I  shall 
trust  you 
with.  C.R. 


*  This  was  an  affair  requiring  delicate  management,  tliougli  not 
now  so  dangerous  as  it  became  two  years  later,  when  the  Parliament, 
understanding  tliat  the  Queen  had  pawned  the  crown  jewels  in 
Holland,  ordex'ed  that  whoever  had,  or  should  pay,  lend,  send,  or 
bring,  any  money  or  specie  into  the  kingdom,  for  or  upon  those 
jewels,  or  accept  of  any  bill  hereafter,  should  be  considered  an  enemy 
to  tlie  state. 

+  De  Lai'rey,  in  his  characters,  describes  the  Duke  as  at  the  head 
of  the  royalist  Lords,  not  only  from  his  near  relationship  to  the  King, 
but  also  on  account  of  his  personal  qualities.  At  the  early  age  of 
twenty-one  he  had  been  made  a  Privy  Councillor,  and  married  to  the 
Duke  of  Buckingham's  daughter.  "  His  wit,  his  courage,  and  his 
affection  for  the  King,  made  him  worthy  the  esteem  and  favour  of 
the  Court.  But  two  qualities  which  he  had,  prevented  his  being 
serviceable  to  the  King,  who  loved  him  :  the  one  was,  his  too  great 
diffidence  of  himself ;  and  the  other  (quite  opposite)  too  great  a 
haughtiness  in  point  of  honour.  By  the  first  he  rendered  himself  too 
dependent ;  and  by  the  latter,  too  obnoxious." 

X  Jerome  Weston,  second  Earl  of  that  title  ;  a  family  now  extinct. 


70 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPOJ^DENCE.  [1641. 


Queene  in  expectac'on  every  liowre  of  1"  from  yo' 

Ma*'"  by  y*^  Lo.  Carr. 
^achldthis  Besides  y"  Queenes  le"",  yo'  Ma^''^  will  herein 
asisdesyred,  receave  ono  from  my  Lo.  Keeper,  ^vho  humbly  prayes 
KeepeJ^that  Jo'  Ma*'"*  pkasure  for  a  new  Sheriff  for  Nottingham- 
specdie*  ^  sheire,  as  Mr.  Th'rer  will  acquaint  yo""  Ma*'".  I  find 
account  of  alreddy  that  I  shall  not  (now  y"  Parliam*  is  adiourned) 
I  Bend  him.  have  much  occasion  to  trouble  yo'"  Ma*'"  w*^  F',  but  I 

shalbe  never  the  lesse  vigilant  &  industrious  in  my 

care  to  approove  myself 

Yo''  Ma*'"^ 

Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Westminster,  13°  Sep'"''',  1641. 
Eden.  17. 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 


And  this 
lykewais  is 
meerlie  for 
the  conuey- 
ance  of 
thease  two 
inclosed. 


Ye  had 
reason. 


Eden  :  23 
Sept.  1641. 


May  it  please  yo""  most  excellent  Ma*'", 
I  receaved  yesterday  yo''  Ma*'"^  of  the  13th  of  this 
moneth  by  Mr.  ffrisoll,  &  in  it  a  lef  to  the  Queene, 
w"^  I  instantly  presented  to  her  Royall  hands,  &  ac- 
quainted her  w*^  what  yo""  Ma*'"  comaunded  me.  Her 
Ma*'"  tells  me  she  wrote  lately  by  my  Lo.  Carr,*  & 
intends  to  write  againe  to  yo'  Ma*'"  on  Munday  next 
by  Mr.  Wm.  Murrey,  &  therefore  forbeares  to  send 
by  this  packet,  w"^'  I  now  dispatch  for  conveyaunce  of 
the  inclosed  from  my  Lo*^  Keep''.  I  had  sent  the  2 
lef^  (w"^'  were  directed  to  yo"^  Ma*'"  &  y"  Parliam*) 
under  yo""  Ma*'"'  owne  cover,  but  that  I  founde  it  was 
divulged  by  Witliering's  deputy,  that  there  were 
such  le*''  came  to  his  hands,  and  by  him  sent  to  me, 
soe  that  it  had  beene  a  vayne  thing  for  me  to  have 
concealed  y"  same  from  Mr.  Th^rer,  who  I  was  sure 
had  advertisem*  of  them  by  another  hand.  All 
things  here  are  in  a  great  still,  every  one  being  busy 
in  listening  after  the  proceedings  of  the  Parliam't  in 


*  Lord  Ker  of  Cesford  ;  son  to  the  Earl  of  Roxburgli,  Lord  Privy- 
Seal  of  Scotland,  the  first  peer  of  the  family,  and  ancestor  of  the 
Dukes  of  Roxburgh. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  71 


Scotland,  where  Mr.  Tli^rer  writes  the  people  are 
stiffe,  &  seeme  to  be  resolute  not  to  recede  from  their 
proposic^ons,  w*'^  in  my  poore  iudgem*"  is  bad  newes, 
and  of  very  ill  example  to  us  here. 

I  humbh^  thanke  yo''  Ma*'^  for  yo'  gracious  leave 
granted  me  to  reside  at  my  house  att  Thorpe,  for  y'' 
sickness  &  small  pox  contynues  very  rife  in  London 
and  Westminster.  I  am  now  once  a  day,  or  att  least 
once  in  2  dayes,  att  Oatlands,  and  intended  to  be  att 
Westminster  every  tuesday  &  wensday,  to  attend 
what  slialbe  donne  there  by  the  Comittees,  having 
nothing  in  my  afFecc^on  or  ambition  soe  much,  as  by 
an  exact  dilligence  &  fidelity  to  approve  mvself 
yr  Ma^-^ 

Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Thorpe,  18°  Scpf"-'%  1641. 


Sir  Edivarcl  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo'  most  excel*  Ma*% 
Yesterday  I  sent  by  packet  a  le^'  to  yo'"  Ma*^''  from 
the  Lo.  Keeper,  &  should  not  now  have  troubled 
yo'  Ma*"",  but  that  the  oportunity  of  safe  convej^aunce 
by  this  gent,  doth  prompt  me  humbly  to  minde  yo"" 
Ma*'^  of  some  things  in  my  poore  opinion  Avorthy 
yo-'  Royall  considerac^on. 

I  am  confident  yo""  Ma*'^  doth  by  this  time  cleerly 
perceave,  how  it  is  here  insinuated  upon  all  occasions, 
that  Popery  (w""^  is  generally  exceeding  distastefull 
to  yo'  su^*^  of  this  kingdome)  is  too  much  favoured 
by  yo'"  clergy  here,  &  in  yo'  owne  Court,  &  that  this 
opinion  (how  vniustlv  soever  laid  bv  Brownists*  on  i  thanke  you 
TO'  Ma*^'^^  governm^tf  hath  &  doth  (more  than  any  Srm^l 
thing)  preiudice  yo'  Ma'^'  in  y''  esteeme  &  aff'ecc'oii  J^^' 
of  yo'  people,  whose  love  I  humbly  conceave  to  be  Bishobrikes, 
soe  much  yo'  Ma*'"'  interest,  as  that  it  ought  to  be  co'mand  yon 

*  The  "  Brownist"  schism  began  as  early  as  the  time  of  Elizabeth  ; 
and  their  founder  was  able  to  boast,  on  his  death-bed,  that  he  had  been 
in  thirty-two  prisons  during  his  religious  warfare  with  the  established 
authorities. 


72 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


to  direct  the 
I?,  of  London 
to  send  rae  a 
list  of  all  the 
vacant 
Bishobrikes, 
&  those  notes 
w^h  he  &  I 
made  con- 
cerning the 
filling  of 
those  places. 


Brownrigg. 


Hitherto,  I 
lyke  your 
opinion  well^ 
but  concern- 
ing the  rest, 


preserved  &  reteyned  by  yo'  Ma*'''  by  all  possible 
meanes  :  Avlierefore  I  humbly  ofter  to  yo'  Ma*'*"'  con- 
siderac^on,  wlietlier  it  be  not  requisite,  tliat  yo""  Ma*'*' 
should  now  (during  this  recesse)  give  some  publique 
assuraunce  to  the  contrary :  w^''  I  humbly  conceave 
may  be  donne  by  yo''  p^sent  conferring  of  such 
■gpricks  eccles''''"  dignities  as  are  now  voyde  vpon 
persons,  of  wliome  there  is  not  the  least  suspicion 
of  favouring  the  Popish  partie,  such  as  may  be 
Dr.  Prideaux,*  Bromwicli,  Gouge,  Mr.  Shute,  &  y^ 
like,  if  they  will  in  these  tymes  accept  of  such 
p^ferm*',  for  I  assure  y'  Ma*'"  I  am  vnknowne  to  all 
and  every  one  of  them.  Such  men  thus  p^ferred, 
would  not  only  give  assurance  of  yo""  Ma*'*"  firme 
resoluc^on  to  maynteyne  the  Protestant  religion  here 
professed,  but  by  filling  vpp  of  y^  vacant  Bp'"'''^'  w*'' 
such  persons,  yo""  Ma*'*'  would  gayne  not  only  their 
votes  for  Episcopacy,  &c.  but  many  more,  who  seeing 
such  divines  p*'fered,  Avould  rest  confident  that  there 
is  noe  intenc^on  to  introduce  or  connive  at  Popery. 

Also  concerning  the  booke  of  Co'mon  Prayer,  (to 
partes  whereof  y"  late  Declarac'on  of  y"  Co'mons 
House  shewes  there  is  some  excepc^on),  yo''  Ma*'" 
having  constituted  such  B^p",  may  be  pleased  to 
declare  yo''  reddines  to  reforme  what  shalbe  thought 
amisse  in  it  by  jo"  clergy  &  Parliam*,  w^"*'  will  prevent 
those  that  (in  a  zeale  w*''out  knowledge)  seeke  to 
overthrow  y"  good  government  &  order  wisely  esta- 
blished in  this  Church  :  &  thus  by  yo'"  Ma*'"'  tymely 
moderac'on,  you  will  put  a  bitt  in  their  mouthes, 
who  (vpon  a  popular  pretence  of  y*'  reliques  of  Popery) 
cry  downe  all  that  is  of  good  order  or  decency  in  the 
Church. 

And  for  a  further  assuraunce  of  yo""  Ma*'*"  integrity 
in  this  reformac^on,  I  humbly  off'er  it  to  yo""  Ma*'"'  con- 
siderac^on  whether  it  may  not  be  necessary  (before  y" 


*  Prideaux  was  Canon  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford  ;  he  was  made 
Bishop  of  Worcester  in  1641,  and  died  in  1650.  Dr.  Ralph 
Brownrigg,  Master  of  Catherine  Hall,  Cambridge,  and  Prebendary 
of  Durham,  was  made  Bishop  of  Exeter  in  1611.  Gouge  and  Shute 
were  high  in  the  confidence  of  the  Puritan  party,  and  remained 
steady  to  their  old  congregations. 


1641.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


73 


next  meeting  in  P^liam*)  to  send  away  all  the  Capu- 
cins*  &  dissolve  their  cloyster^  for  if  yo'  Ma*""  doe  it  not 
yo'self,  I  am  misinformed  if  y"  P^liam^t  fall  not  vpon 
them  when  they  come  againe  together;  &  it  AYould 
be  much  more  for  yo""  Ma*'""'  hon"",  &  more  acceptable 
to  yo*"  people,  &  (it  may  be)  safer  for  y*"  Capucins,  if  in 
that  particular  yo'"  Ma*'*'  prevented  the  P^liam^'. 

And  now  I  humbly  beg  yo""  Ma*'*"'  pardon  for  my 
presumc^on  in  tendering  to  yo*"  great  wisdome  these 
my  vndigested  thoughts,  w*"^'  I  assure  yo'*  Ma*'*"  have 
beene  comunicated  to  noe  other  person  in  the  world, 
but  are  (w^^'out  any  p^tic^lar  designe)  meerely  the 
yssues  of  my  weake  iudgem^  &  indulgent  care  of  yo'" 
Ma*'*"'  honor,  p'^servac^on  &  service,  w*"''  I  preferre 
before  any  thing  in  this  world  that  can  concerne 
Yo'  sacred  Ma'^'^^ 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Thorpe,  19  1641. 

Eden.  26. 
"  For  yo""  sacred  Ma*'=." 
"  Yours  apostyled." 

Supersmbed  by  Sir  E.  N,  «  19"  Sepf^.i,,  1641.  Apostl.  26°.  his 
Ma''«  thankes  me  for  his  le'"  and  my  freedome  in  it.  It  was  sent 
by  Mr.  W"\  Murrey." 


I  know  not 
what  to  say, 
if  it  be  not  to 
aduertice  my 
Wyfe  of  the 
Paiiaments 
intention 
concerning 
hir  Capu- 
chins, &  so 
first  to  hearc 
what  she  will 


On  the  con- 
trair  I 
thanke  you 
for  this  hon- 
nest  free- 
dome. 


Si7'  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo''  most  excellent  M^tie,  i  wonder  of 

Yesterday  S""  Job  Harby,t  &  I  attended  the  orcVispe.j 
Queene  about  yo''  Ma*'^'  collar  of  rubies,  vpon  w'^^  he  before  my"^ 

*  This  order  of  Roman  Catholic  priests  had  been  introduced  on 
the  marriage  of  Charles  with  Henrietta  Maria,  and  had  been  allowed 
to  form  an  establishment  here. 

+  He  was  of  an  ancient  Northamptonshire  family,  the  Harbys  of 
Adston.  His  sister  Emma  was  married  to  Robert  Charlton,  of 
Whitton,  Esq.,  who  suffered  much  for  his  loyalty  in  the  cause  of 
Charles  the  Second.  Their  son  Sir  Job  was  a  Judge  in  the  Common 
Pleas,  and  created  a  Baronet. 

X  This  Crisp  appears  to  be  the  same  person  afterwards  engaged,  in 
1643,  in  the  plan  to  seize  the  city  of  London  for  the  King  ;  to  which 
Edmund  Waller  was  a  party,  according  to  Rushworth's  account, 
though  Clarendon  considers  their  plans  as  completely  distinct. 


74  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


parting  from 
London  that 
it  would  be 
absolutlie 
free,  before 
Bartholemy- 
tyde,  there- 
fore know 
the  cause  of 
tliis  mis- 
taking hou- 
soeuer  I  lyke 
the  cource 
now  taken 
by  my  Wyfe 
in  this. 


It  is  so,  & 
lykes  me 
well. 


I  lyke  your 
proposition, 
and  shall 
gett  as  much 
as  I  may, 
howeuer  I 
thanke  you 
for  your  ad- 
nertisment. 


I  pray  God, 
it  be  to  good 
purpose,  & 
that  there  be 
no  knavery 


I  command 
you  to  send, 
in  my  name 
to  all  those 
Lords  that 
my  Wyfe 
shall  tell  yon 
of,  that  they 
faile  not  to 
attend  at  the 
downe  sitt- 
ing of  the 
Parliament. 


saith  there  is  alreddy  25*"^  Her  Ma^'"  hath  let  him 
vnderstand  yo''  Ma^'^'  pleasure  concerning  dis- 
posing of  it,  whereupon  he  hath  promised  that  he 
and  S'  Jo.  Nulls  (who  hath  bene  formerly  imployed 
in  the  pawning  of  it)  will  forthw*^'  write  to  y^  partie  in 
Holland  w*^  whome  it  h^es  engaged,  to  see  what  more 
monny  ma}^  be  had  vpon  it,  and  if  that  man  will  not 
lend  any  farther  considerable  som^e,  then  S'  Job 
promiseth  to  doe  his  best  to  procure  elsewhere  as 
much  more  vpon  it  as  he  can,  &  therew*^  redeeme  it 
out  of  the  hands  where  it  now  lyes,  &  get  y^  overplus 
for  yo'  Ma*''',  &  he  assures  the  Queene,  tliat  he  will 
doe  this  w*^  secrecy,  and  all  possible  dilligence. 

This  inclosed  from  my  Lo.  Keeper  was  })rought  to 
me  the  last  night  to  be  conveyed  to  yo'"  Ma*'^,  &  will 
I  hope  give  yo""  Ma*'*'  an  account  of  yo'  last  let"  to  his 
Lqpp.  Yo''  Ma*'''  may  be  pleased  to  procure  from  y^ 
P'liament  there  some  further  reiterac^on  of  their 
declarac^on,  that  what  yo''  Ma*'''  hath  consented  vnto 
concerning  y"  election  of  Officers  there  may  not  be 
drawne  into  example  to  yo""  Ma*'"'  preiudice  here,  for 
if  I  am  not  misinformed  there  wilbe  some  attempt 
to  procure  the  like  Act  heere  concerning  OfHcers 
before  y"  Act  of  Tonnage  &  Poundage  wilbe  passed 
to  yo'"  Ma*'"  for  lief. 

I  heare  that  y"  Comittee  of  the  Commons  hath  ap- 
pointed to  take  into  considerac^on  yo""  Ma*'"'  Revenue 
y"  next  weeke,  and  that  they  will  then  set  at  least 
twice  a  weeke.*  I  am  vnwilling  to  give  yo""  Ma*'"  in 
yo''  great  affaires  there  too  long  an  interruption  with 
the  tedious  lynes  of, 

Yo'  sacred  Ma*'"' 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Thorpe,  24°  1641. 

*  The  powers  given  to  these  Committees,  dm'ing  the  recess,  were 
almost  unlimited.  In  vol.  ix.  of  the  Parliamentai'y  History,  page 
537,  a  coj^y  of  them  is  inserted. 


1641.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


75 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King, 

!May  it  please  yo""  most  excellent  Ma*'*", 
Being  yesterday  at  Oatlands  to  attend  the  Queenes 
com^auncls^  her  Ma*'^  gaue  me  this  paper  inclosM,  w^^ 
coraaund  to  send  it  this  day  to  yo'"  Ma*'^ :  it  was 
brought  to  y""  Queene  by  y*'  Lady  Carlile_,*  who  saith 
she  had  it  from  y*"  Lo.  Mandeville.t  I  confesse  it  were 
not  amise  to  have  it  published,  but  I  had  rather  it 
should  be  donne  by  any  other  hand  than  yo''  Ma*'*''' 
or  y^  Queenes,  &  therefore  I  could  wislie  yo''  Ma*'^  i  shaii. 
would  conceale  it  for  a  day  or  2,  by  w*'^  tyme  I 
know  there  wilbe  other  coppies  of  it  sent  into 
Scotland. 

The  late  crosse  orders,  &  vnusuall  passages  in 
P^liam't  a  little  before  y"  Recesse,  are  so  distastfull  to 
y^  wiser  sorte,  as  it  hath  taken  oflp  y^  edge  of  their 
confidence  in  parliamentary  proceedings,  &  I  verily 
beleeve,  that  if  y*"  Houses  (when  they  next  meete) 

*  This  was  the  Dowager  Carlisle,  Lady  Lucy  Percy,  second  wife, 
and,  at  this  date,  widow  of  James  Hay,  first  Earl  of  Carlisle ;  a 
famous  woman  in  her  time,  celebrated  by  Waller  and  others,  and 
supposed  to  have  become  as  intimate  with  Pym  as  she  had  previously 
been  with  Strafford.  Clarendon  accuses  her  of  perplexing  the  King's 
affairs,  and  what  Nicholas  states  of  her  above  seems  to  exhibit  an 
equal  readiness  to  perplex  the  affaii's  of  Parliament.  But,  being 
upwards  of  forty,  she  had  now  perhaps  wholly  given  up  amatory  for 
political  intrigues. 

f  Son  to  the  first  Earl  of  Manchester  of  the  Montague  family,  and 
formerly  a  personal  friend  of  the  King,  having  accompanied  him  on 
his  romantic  journey  to  Spain.  The  nature  of  the  paper  here  alluded 
to,  may  be  surmised  from  the  fact  that  Lord  Mandeville  was  at  this 
time  an  active  member  of  the  Parliament  party,  and  deep  in  the 
counsels  and  confidence  of  Pym.  In  the  preceding  year  he  had  been 
one  of  the  Commissioners  to  arrange  all  causes  of  dispute  with 
Scotland.  He  was  now  best  known,  however,  as  the  Lord  Kimbolton, 
having  at  this  period  been  called  to  the  Upper  House  for  his  father's 
barony,  though  retaining  the  title  of  Viscount  Mandeville  by  courtesy. 
A  little  later  he  was  impeached  with  the  five  members.  His  brother, 
Walter  Montague,  was  a  bigoted  Catholic  priest.  Abbot  of  Pontoise, 
in  France,  and  Confessor  to  the  Queen  after  the  death  of  Father 
Phillips  :  he  is  further  noticed  in  subsequent  letters. 


76  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


It  were  not 
amiss  that 
some  of  my 
seruaunts 
met  lyke- 
wais  to 
counter- 
mynd  ther 
Plots,  to 
w'ch  end 
speake  w'th 
ray  Wyfe  & 
receaue  her 
directions. 


shall  approove  of  wliat  was  then  done,  it  will  loose 
them  reverence  that  hath  bene  heretofore  paid  to 
Parliame^*. 

I  heare  there  are  divers  meetings  att  Chelsey  att  y'' 
Lo.  Mandevilles  house  &  elsewhere  by  Pym  *  and 
others,  to  consult  what  is  best  to  be  donne  at  their 
next  meeting  in  P'liam* :  &  I  beleeve  they  will  in  y^ 
first  place  fall  on  some  plausible  thing,  that  may 
redintegrate  them  in  y*"  people^s  good  opinion,  w'^^'  is 
their  anchor-hold  &  only  interest ;  &  (if  I  am  not 
much  misinformed)  that  wilbe  either  vpon  Papists, 
or  vpon  some  Act  for  expunging  of  Officers  and 
Counsellors  here  according  to  y*'  Scottish  p^cedent, 
or  on  both  together,  &  therefore  it  will  import  yo'' 
Ma*'*",  by  some  serious  and  faithfull  advise,  to  doe 
some  thing  to  anticipate  or  prevent  them  before  their 
next  meeting. 

Yesterday  at  Oatlands  I  understood  that  S'  Jo. 
Berkeley  &  Capt.  O^Nealef  were  come  over,  &  that 
they  had  bene  the  day  before  privately  at  Way- 
bridge  :  I  was  bould  then  to  deliver  my  opinion  to 
y*  Queene,  that  I  did  beleeve  if  they  continued  in 
England  they  would  be  arrested  (thoughe  y^  P'li- 
am^t  sit  not)  by  vertue  of  y^  warrant,  that  was 
given  att  first  to  y^  Sarjant  at  Amies  (attending  y^ 
Commons  House)  to  attache  them.  Her  Ma*'*"  seemed 
(when  I  tould  it  to  her)  to  app^'hend  noe  lesse,  &  will 


*  This  was  a  very  short  time  previous  to  the  City  riots,  and  the 
affair  of  the  London  apprentices.  Subsequently  the  City  found  it 
necessary  to  check  those  riots,  and  Venn,  one  of  their  members, 
having  exerted  himself  to  keep  the  peace,  a  party  pamphlet  observed 
that  the  rioters  would  have  proceeded  to  the  Mansion  House,  "  but 
by  the  providence  of  God,  and  the  great  wisdom  of  Captain  Ven,  they 
were  prevented." 

-f*  O'Neale  was  deeply  implicated  in  what  was  called  the  Army  Plot ; 
the  conspiracy  for  bringing  up  the  English  army  against  the  Parlia- 
ment, before  referred  to  {ante,  p.  56),  in  which  Percy,  Wilmot,  Goring, 
Ashburnham,  and  several  others  were  engaged.  May,  in  his  History 
of  the  Parliament,  p.  65  (Mason's  edition),  calls  O'Neale  an  Irishman 
and  a  Papist ;  and  states  that  he  was  committed  to  the  Tower,  but 
escaped  before  trial.  Berkeley  was  an  officer  of  high  rank,  always 
active  in  the  King's  service,  and  is  I'epeatedly  mentioned  by  Clarendon, 
particularly  as  Governor  of  Exeter,  which  he  was  obliged  to  surrender 
to  the  Parliamentary  forces. 


1641.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


77 


I  believe  take  order  tliat  notice  may  be  given  to 
them  of  y''  danger  of  it,  bvit  her  Ma*^*'  for  y'=  p'^sent 
said  she  knew  not  where  they  were.  i  wonder  at 

The  Queene  being  now  every  day  in  expectac^on  tms,  for  aii 
of  le"  from  yo""  Ma*'^  (having  receaved  non  since  tues-  Sintheuery 
day  last)  doth  forbeare  to  write  by  this  dispatch.        at' fiitSt  i 

Wee  know  not  y*"  importance  of  y"  affaires  there  have  written 
that  deteyne  yo''  Ma*'"  soe  long,  but  it  is  by  those  *^ 
that  wishe  best  to  yo''  service  here,  thought  very 
necessary  that  yo''  Ma*'*"  should  hasten  to  be  here  as 
soone  as  may  be  possible  before  y*"  20tli  of  8^";  and 
if  yo""  Ma*'*"  leave  behinde  you  some  Councellors  that 
you  carryed  hence,  it  is  thought  yo'  Councells  here 
will  not  prosper  the  worse,  nor  be  the  lesse  secreat, 
only  it  may  be  yo''  Ma*'*"  may  thereby  deprive  some 
menc'oned  in  y*"  paper  inclosed  of  their  wonted 
intelligence."  I  beseech  yo""  IMa*""  to  vouchsafe  to 
advertise  me  whether  this  come  safe  to  yo''  Royall 
hands,  &  to  burne  it,  that  it  may  never  rise  in  iudge- 
ment  against, 

Yo'^  sacred  Ma*^"^ 
Most  humble  &  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Thorpe,  27  Sep^'-^',  1641. 
Eden.  2  Oct. 


Si?'  Edivard  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo""  most  excellent  Ma*'", 
I  had  noe  sooner  sent  away  my  packet  on  Munday 
last  but  I  receaved  yo"  Ma*'"'  apostile  of  y"  20*^  p"sent, 
&  w*^  it  a  le''  to  y"  Queene,  w"^  I  forthw*^  p"sented  to 
her  royall  hand,  &  yesterday  I  receaved  yo''  Ma*'"' 
apostile  of  y"  23*^  of  this  moneth,  &  instantly  sent 
away  yo'"  Ma*'"'  lef  to  the  Queene,  &  that  to  my 
Lo. 'Keeper.    I  tould  y"  Queene  that  yo''  Ma*'"  had  ^^t^f^^ J^^^j^^^^* 
blamed  me,  that  in  severall  of  my  dispaches  there  amends  is 
was  no  le"-  from  her  Ma*'",  for  w"^  she  hath  now  made  saJisfa'SiU. 

*  The  allusion  to  the  elder  Vane  is  manifest  here.  The  Treasurer, 
however,  was  now  in  his  northern  seat  at  Raby,  having  temporarily 
left  the  king. 


78 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


a  recompence  by  sending  me  two  l""^,  w''^  yo'  Ma^'* 
shall  herein  receave. 

The  Committees  of  y''  Peers  met  not  yesterday,  but 
will  tuesdav  next.    The  Commons  Comittees*  met, 
&  had  before  them     Jo.  Berkley  &  Capt.  O'Neale, 
i^ope^some  ^ho  coming  over  lately,  were  (as  I  heare)  yesterday 
may  repent    apprehended  by  y"  servaunt  of  y*"  Serjant  att  Armes 
leuSitie.      (attending  y*'  House  of  Commons)  vpon  y'^  first  war- 
raunt  that  was  issued  for  taking  of  them,  & 
Com'ittees  would   not  bayle  them,   though  they 
tendred  it,  alleaging  they  had  not  power  to  doe  it. 

Yesterday  y*"  Remembrancer  of  the  Citty  of  London 
came  to  me  from  the  Lo.  INIayor  &  Court  of  Alder- 
men, &  desired  me  to  present  to  yo''  Ma*'^  the  humble  & 
dutifull  thankes  of  the  Citty  for  yo'^  Ma*'^'  great  grace 
&  goodnes  in  y^  busines  of  Tonnage  &  Poundage. 
I  assure  yo^  Ma*'^  that  yo''  grac^us  le'  concerning 
that  matter  hath  wrought  much  vpon  y^  affecc'ons, 
not  only  of  y^  merchaunts,  but  of  diverse  others  of 
this  Citty. 

The  Remembrancer  tould  me  further,  that  y^  Lo*^ 
Mayor  &  Aldermen  desired  him  to  enquire  of  y^  day 
when  yo'  Ma*'^  wilbe  here,  to  y""  end  that,  according 
to  their  dutifull  affecc'ons,  they  might  meete  yo'  Ma*% 
When  ye      to  attend  yo'^  royall  person  into  this  Citty,  thoughe 
mteii^wiii:        s^^^  y  Citty  (being  become  poore)  were  not  able 
Mji^ay jthen  to  givc  yo""  Ma^'*"  any  p'^sent  according  to  their  custom, 
know  cer-      I  have  promised  to  let  them  know  when  yo""  Ma*'*" 
onue  of"my   wilbc  hcrc  as  soone  as  I  shall  know  y^  certeynty 
returne,but  Of  all  w<^^  I  thousfht  it  mv  dutv'to  advcrtisc 

also  now  all  .  i        -t"  i- 

\ni\  end  yo'  Ma*'^,  that  I  may  therem  doe  nothing  but  what 
may  be  agreeable,  to  yo'  Ma^''''  good  pleasure ;  not- 
w^^'standing  I  humbly  conceave  it  imports  yo''  Ma*'^  to 
cherish  y*"  affecc'ons  &  goodwill  of  this  Citty. 

By  let"  to  particular  p'sons  (w'^^  I  have  scene)  dated 
25° 7^"",  it  is  advertised  from  Edenb.  that  yo""  JNIa*'"  hath 

*  The  Report  of  these  Committees  was  made  to  the  Parliament, 
on  their  meeting,  by  'Mr.  Pym.  A  copy  of  it  is  inserted  in  vol.  x.  of 
the  Parliamentary  History,  p.  1.  Pym,  in  this  i-eport,  says  that 
Berkeley  and  O'Neale  came  voluntarily  to  him,  at  his  lodgings  in 
Chelsea,  for  the  purpose  of  submitting  to  the  orders  of  the  House  ; 
after  which  the  deputy  Serjeant  attached  them  on  the  first  order. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


79 


nominated  v*'  Lo.  Lodifin  to  be  Chancellor.    What-  itisLoudun 


not. 


I  beliue  be- 


liaiie  such 
great  cause 


soever     newes  be  that  is  come  hither  amongst  y*" 
partie  of  y*"  Protesters_,  they  are  observed  to  be  here 
of  late  very  iocund  &  cheerefull,  &  it  is  conceaved  to 
arise  from  some  advertisements  out  of  Scotland,  from  fore  arfbe' 
whose  acc^ons  &  successes  they  intend  (as  I  heare)  they  wm  not 
to  take  a  patterne  for  their  proceeding  here  att  their 
next  meeting.    I  hartely  pray  for  yo'  Ma*'"  speedy  &  of  joy. 
happy  returne,  as  being  (of  all  men)  most  obliged 
to  be 

Yo^"  sacred  Ma*^^^ 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Westminster,  29°  Sep^>-'%  1 64 1 .  ^^^.^  j 

Eden,  5  Oct.  receaved 

"  For  yo'-  sacred  Ma'^^"  yours  of  the 

« V  X  1  J  J,  1 :  Oct. 

"  Yours  apostyled." 

290  -jbris^  1641.    Apost.  5 


Sil'  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo''  most  excell"*  Ma*% 
These  inclosed  from  y''  Queene  &  my  Lo.  Keeper 
were  brought  to  me  y*'  last  night  late  to  be  sent  to 
yo"  Ma*'^  I  have  not  as  yet  receaved  from  the 
of  London*  a  list  of  the  vacant  Bp""'"' :  I  beleeve 
his  LoP  hath  not  finished  the  notes  yo''  Ma*'^  &  his 
Lo^^  made  concerning  that  busines,  w*^^  he  tould  me 
were  very  imperfect. 

I  beseech  yo''  Ma*'^  to  give  me  leave  to  put  you  in 
minde  that  there  is  noe  one  thing  that  you  can  nowdoe^ 
that  will  better  rectify  y*"  ielousies  of  yo''  good  people, 
more  satisfie  their  mindes,  &  settle  their  afiecc'ons  to  idoutnot 
yo""  Ma^%  then  y"  good  choyce  you  make  of  such  as  g"ue  good 
yo'  Ma^'*^  shall  noAv  appoint  to  be  B^p^  ;  &  as  it  wilbe  «'^tistactio. 
much  for  yo''  service  that  y^  new  B^^^  be  plausible 
persons,  &  beyond  excepc^n,  soe  there  would  be  a 
great  care  had  that  noe  B^'p  be  removed,  of  whome 
there  is  any  suspicion  of  being  any  wayes  popishly 
afi'ected,  or  otherwise  much  disliked. 

*  Dr.  Juxon,  afterwards  Archbishop  of  Canterbury. 


80 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


Ye  may  see 
by  this  that 
all  ther  de- 
synes  hit 
not,  &  I  hope 
before  all  be 
done  that 
they  shall 
miss  of 
more.t 


A  ddresse 
them  to  the 
Duke  of 
Richemont. 


You  shall 
doe  well  to 
aduyse  with 
some  of  my 
best  seruauts 
there  how 
this  may  be 
preuentcd, 
for  I  asseur 
you,  that  I 
doe  not 
meane  to 
grant  it. 


The  partie  here,  who  we  say  hath      best  intelli- 
gence from  Scotland  (w''^  is  Mr.  Pyra  &  young 
Hen.  Vane),  report  that  y^  Ea.  of  Arguile*  is 
Chauncellor  of  that  Kingdome ;  it  seemes  it  was  soe 
designed. 

I  hear  Mr.  Th'rer  is  still  at  Raby^J  &  that  he 
will  not  returne  to  Scotl.  before  yo''  Ma*'"  coming 


thence, 


w^ 


makes  me  humbly  to  craue  to'  INIa*'^* 


com'aund  whether  I  shall  contynue  the  addresse  of 
all  packets  still  to  him,  or  to  whome  else. 

I  assure  yo'  Ma*'^  it  is  here  resolved  (if  my  intelli- 
gence doth  not  much  deceaue  me)  to  presse  yo'' 
Ma*'^  at  y^  next  meeting  in  Pliam*  for  y^  like  Act 
touching  y^  elecc^on  of  officers  and  Councellors  here, 
as  yo'  Ma*'''  hath  graunted  to  y*"  Scots ;  &  in  this  I 
believe  yo'  Ma*'^  will  find  a  more  generall  concurrency 
&  accord,  then  hath  bene  in  any  one  thing  this 
P^ham*;  for  many  here  saj,  that  otherwise  all  y^ 
great  offices  and  places  of  councellors  here,  wilbe 
filled  upp  w*^  Scotsmen.  I  beseech  yo'  Ma*'^  to 
vouchsafe  to  consider  well  of  this  particular,  and  be 
pleased  to  conceale  that  you  have  y^  advertisem*  of  it 
from  me. 

I  beseech  God  to  direct  &  assist  yo'  Ma*'^  and 
yo'  Councells  soe  as  you  may  returne  w*^  honour, 
w''^  shall  ever  be  y^  prayer  of 
Yo'  sacred  JMa*'" 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Thorpe,  3  Octob;  1641. 
Eden.  9. 


*  This  report  was  not  true,  as  the  King  observes.  Argyle  was 
not  Chancellor  of  Scotland ;  though  Charles  had  been  induced  to  grant 
hira  a  Marquisate.  In  connection  with  the  fact  that  he  was  after- 
wards beheaded  for  high  treason  (in  the  year  after  the  Restoration), 
it  is  remarkable  that  in  1651  he  had  actually  put  the  crown  upon  the 
head  of  Charles  the  Second  at  Edinburgh. 

f  From  this,  and  the  similar  covert  threats  in  the  margin  of  the  letter 
preceding,  as  well  as  in  others  that  follow,  it  is  obvious  that  the 
King  now  believed  himself  in  possession  of  facts  involving  the 
probable  overthrow  of  the  popular  leaders. 

X  His  own  country  seat. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  COKRESPONDENCE. 


81 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King, 

May  it  please  yo''  most  excell"'  Ma*'^, 
Yesterday  I  receaved  yo'*  Ma*'^'  commands  by  an 
apostile  vpon  my  le""  of  y^  24^^'  of  y*"  last  monetli,  & 
forthw^^  p^sented  yo'  Ma*'"  to  y""  Queene,  and  sent 
that  to  my  Lo.  Keeper ;  &  w*''  this  yo'  Ma*'^  will 
receave  2  let*""  from  Queene^  &  one  from  my  Lo. 
Keeper. 

It  hath  bene  here  confidently  said,  by  those  that 
holde  correspondency  w*^  y^  Engl.  Comittees  in 
Scotland,  that  y^  Ea.  of  Arguile  shalbe  at  length 
Chauncellor,  &  that  y^  Lo*^  Amont-^^  shall  not  be 
Th^rer ;  if  I  am  not  much  misinform^,  they  are 
here  as  peremptorily  resolved  to  presse  &  put  upon 
vo""  Ma*'^  a  Lo.  Th^rer  &  some  other  officers  before  though  i 
they  will  settle  vo''  returne,  &  nothinar  can  brake  cannot  re- 

V  .  *'  .  ^  ,     turns  so 

their  designes  here  but  yo''  Ma***"*  presence ;   &  if  soone  as  i 
yo''  Ma*'^  do  not  hasten  to  be  here  some  dayes  before  yetWrn^con- 
next  meetino;  in  Parliam^  I  doubt  there  w^lbe  few  -V?^* 

J  O  ->  you  will 

that  will  dare  to  appeare  here  to  oppose  y^  party  fynde  ther 

that  now  swayeth ;  &  I  pray  God  there  be  not  some  Tede  forft, 

designe  in  deteyning  yo'"  Ma*'^  there  till  yo""  affaires  ^at^manie 
here  be  reduced  to  the  same  state  they  there  are  in.       miss  of 

T  -I  r  t  •    •         n     '  1  -1        there  ends. 

1  assure  yo""  Ma*'"  y^  opmion  oi  wise  men  here  is,  that 
to  have  what  officers  you  desire  in  that  kingdome 
cannot  make  soe  much  for  your  service  there,  as 
yo""  absence  hence  at  this  tyme  will  preiudice  you  in 
businesses  of  more  importaunce  here  :  and  as  for  the 
Lo.  Montrosse  f  &  y^  rest,  some  here  (that  pretend 

This  was  Levingston,  Lord  Almont,  -svlio  had  the  first  command 
under  Lesley  in  the  Scottish  army,  and  was  afterwards  created  Earl 
of  Callendar.  Charles  had  certainly  intended  to  give  him  the  office 
of  Lord  Treasurer,  but  was  obliged  to  put  it  into  commission, 
naming  the  Earls  of  Argyle,  Glencairn,  Lothian,  and  Lindsey,  as 
Commissioners. 

f  Montrose,  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  remind  the  reader,  had  very 
recently  quitted  the  Covenanting  party,  and  joined  the  King. 
VOL.  IV.  G 


82 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


[1641. 


This  may  be 
trcw  that  you 
say,  but  I  am 
sure  that  I 
miss  sume- 
what  in 
point  of 
honnor,  if 
they  all  be 
not  releued 
before  I  goe 
hence. 


I  retume 
heerewith  to 
the  B.  of 
London,  not 
onlie  his 
noats,  but 
also  how  all 
the  voide 
Bish :  •  ar 


to  understand  y*^  condic^on  of  their  case)  are  of 
opinion,  that  ther  innocency  is  such,  as  they  will 
not  fare  y""  worse  for  yo""  Ma"'''  leaving  them  to  y'' 
ordinary  course  of  justice  there. 

I  am  credibly  assured,  that  y^  Citty  of  London 
growes  very  weary  of  y^  insolent  carriage  of  y^ 
Schismaticks,  finding  their  way  of  governm*  to  be 
■wholly  arbitrary.  Alderman  Gourney  [Gurney] 
(according  to  his  right  and  place)  is  elected  Lo. 
Mayor  notw'^'standing  y^  opposic'on  of  y"  factious 
party,  throughe  y*"  stoutnes  and  good  affecc^on  of  one 
of  y^  new  Sheriffs  (called  Clerck),  who  while  y^  fac- 
tious persons  were  making  a  noyse,  &  would  not 
proceede  to  y^  elecc^on,  proposed  Ald'mau  Gourney 
(who  I  heare  is  very  well  affected  &  stout),  &  carryM 
it,  &  y^  Schismaticks  (who  cryed  noe  elecc'on)  were 
silenced  w*^  hisses,  &  thereupon  y^  Sheriff  dismist 
y^  Court. 

Yo""  Ma*'^  will  herew*^  receave  from  my  Lo.  of 
London  y*'  notes  yo""  Ma*'^  sent  for  to  him ;  his  Lo^^ 
is  soe  lame  in  his  hand  &  shoulder,  as  he  was  not 
able  to  write  to  yo'  Ma*^'',  for  w'^''  he  beggeth  yo"" 
Ma*'^'  pardon.  His  Lo^  desired  me  to  signify  that 
he  hath  sent  yo""  Ma*'*"  y^  same  individuall  papers  & 
notes  w*'''  yo''  Ma*'^  hath  formerly  scene,  because  yo*" 
Ma*'^  is  best  acquainted  w*^  them :  &  he  saith  that 


*  The  new-made  Bishops  were: 
Bristol  .    .  Thomas  Westfield,  Archdeacon  of  St.  Albau's,  of  Jesus 

College,  Cambridge. 
Chichester.  Henry  King,  Dean  of  Rochester,  of  Christ  Church 

College,  Oxford. 

Exeter  .  .  Ralph  Brownrigg,  Prebendary  of  Durham,  Scholar 
and  Fellow  of  Pembroke  Hall,  and  Master  of 
Catherine  Hall,  Cambridge. 

Norwich.    .  Joseph  Hall,  Bishop  of  Exeter. 

Salisbury  .  Bi-ian  Duppa,  of  Chi'ist  Church,  Oxford,  Bishop  of 
Chichester,  Tutor  to  the  Prince,  translated  to 
Winchester. 

Worcester  .  John  Prideaux,  Rector  of  Exeter  College,  Oxford,  and 
Canon  of  Christ  Church,  died  1650. 

York  .  .  .  John  Williams,  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  Lord  Keeper,  died 
1650. 

Carlisle  .    .  James  Usher,  Archbishop  of  Armagh,  ob.  1655.  ' 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


83 


ye  gpricks  voyde  have  a  cipher  set  before 

them  ;  his  Lo^  alsoe  entreated  me  to  acquaint  yo'" 
Ma*'''  that  y*'  party  whome  you  had  in  yo'  thoughts 
for  y*"  B^"*"^  of  Chichester  desires  to  be  spared  for 
that  place,  if  yo"  Ma*""  soe  please,  &  at  yo''  returne  he 
will  acquaint  yo''  Ma*'*"  v/^^     reason  of  it. 

I  have  tould  y^  Queene  what  yo""  Ma*'"  wrote  to 
me  touching  y"  Collar  of  rubies,  &  by  her  Ma*'"^ 
co'maund  I  have  sent  to  speake  w*"^  S''  Job  Harby 
about  that  busines,  whereof  by  my  next  I  shall  give 
yo""  Ma*'""  a  further  accompt.  I  shall  have  a  care  to 
send  in  yo'"  Ma*'*"^  name  to  all  such  Lo'^'  (as  y^  Queene 
shall  direct)  not  to  faile  to  attend  y"  downe  sitting 
of  y^  P'liam*. 

The  Committees  of  both  Houses  met  this  after- 
noone  att  a  conference,  they  were  all  bare-headed 
during  y^  conference,  both  Lo'^'^'  &  Commons  by  a 
privatt  intimac^on,  but  if  y^  Lo'^'  should  have  put  on 
their  hatts,  y"  Commons  were  resolved  to  have  donne 
soe  likewise.  Their  conference  was  concerning  some 
troopers,  who  flock  to  y"  Committees  in  soe  great 
numbers,  as  they  have  agreed  vpon  an  order  to  be 
fortw***  printed  for  sending  them  away,  a  coppy  of 
w'^^  order  is  herew*^  sent.  Vpon  let*""'  from  y^  Lo. 
Howard,  and  y^  rest  of  y^  Committees  (advertising 
that  yo'"  Ma*'^  will  not  come  from  ScotL  this  moneth 
at  soonest)  they  have  leave  to  come  home  as  they 
desire,  w*^  power  to  leave  any  of  their  company 
behinde  them  if  they  shall  see  cause.  The  Comittee 
of  Commons  here,  upon  pretence  that  some  of  their 
let*'*^  have  miscarryed,  doe  now  send  an  expresse 
messenger  w*^  their  let*'"^  to  their  Comittees,  &  I  am 
privatly  tould  that  that  messenger  carries  let*"  that 
advertise  all  their  secret  designes  from  y"  close 
councells  that  have  beene  held  here  :  &  that  he  sets 
not  forth  from  hence  till  too-morrow  noone  at  soonest, 


to  bee  filled 
in  a  noate 
aparte,  all 
w'th  my 
owen  hand ; 
wherein  you 
ar  to  obserue 
two  things 
to  him ;  first 
that  I  haue 
altered 
somewhat 
frome  my 
former 
thoughts,  to 
satisfie  the 
tymes,  &  yet 
1  hope,  that 
I  haue  not 
disserued  my 
selfe,  in  my 
elections : 
secondly, 
that  in  filling 
the  Bish :  I 
haue  voided 
3  Deaneries, 
to  Witt 
Westmins- 
ter, St. 
Paules,  & 
Rocester, 
w<=h  I  haue 
not  thought 
fitt  to  fill, 
untill  my 
returne,  be- 
cause 1  am 
not  yet  well 
resolued  in 
anie  of  them ; 
onlie  I  in- 
tend (if  the 
tymes  will 
suffer  it)  to 
giue  that  of 
Westmins- 
ter *  to  him 
that  I  in- 
tendit  should 
have  been  B. 
of  Chicester. 


•  Westminster  was  at  present  vacant,  in  consequence  of  John 
Williams,  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  afterwards  Archbishop  of  York,  having 
been  suspended  by  the  Court  of  Star  Chamber.  John  Earl  was  the 
next  holder  of  the  Deanery. 

G  2 


84 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


soe  as  this  wil  be  w*^  yo""  Ma^'^  before  hira.  I  beseech 
God  to  send  yo''  Ma*'^  a  speedy,  safe,  &  ho^^^  returne, 
&  soe  will  euer  pray, 

*Yo'  sacred  Ma*^" 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 
Edw.  Nicholas. 

Westminster,  5:  S^"',  1641. 

Edbij,  12. 
"  For  yo*-  Sacred  Ma''^" 
In  the  King's  writing: 
"  Youi's  apostyled." 

5a  Qbris  1641,    Apostil'i  120.    By  S-"  W"^  Balletine.' ] 


The  Queen  to  Si?^  E.  Nicholas. 

Maistre  Nicholas,  I  send  you  the  names  of  the 
Lords  that  I  thinke  fit  to  be  send  for.  You  must  to 
aduertice  the  Bishops  to  be  heer,  so  hauing  no  more 
to  say  I  reste 

Your  assured  frend, 

Henriette  Marie  R. 

Cumberland,  huntintong,  bath,  Northampton, 
Deeuonchier,  bristoll,  Newcastell,  Pawlett,  Couentry, 
Seymer,  Cotintong.* 

If  you  wood  writt  to  bridgeman  f  to  com  and  to 
speake  to  all  is  frends  in  that  contray  is  in  Lencachier 
and  so  to  as  manie  as  ar  your  frends :  for  mene 
others  I  haue  spokne  my  selfe  to  them  already. 

"  For  Maistre  Nicholas." 

Indorsed,  "R.  5"  S**-'*  1641,  the  Queenes  letf  to  me." 


*  The  Peers  here  meant  may  be  easily  understood,  notwithstanding 
her  Majesty's  royal  grant  of  new  names.  The  last,  which  has 
suffered  the  most,  is  evidently  intended  for  the  Lord  Cottiugton. 

f  This  most  probably  was  Sir  Orlando  Bridgeman,  then  Master 
of  the  Court  of  Wards,  and  Attorney  to  the_Prince  of  Wales;  or  it 
may  have  been  one  of  his  brothers,  sons  of  the  Bishop,  two  of  whom 
were  married  into  Lancashire  families. 


1641.] 


THE  NICHOLiS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


85 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo'"  most  excellent  Ma*'*", 
Since  my  last  of  y^  7th  present,  I  receaved  yo'' 
Ma*'^^  comaunds  apostiled  y''  of  this  moneth,  & 
have  presented  3^0'"  Ma*'^'  let*'''  to  y^  Queene,  v/hereof 
I  have  here'''^'  sent  an  aunsweare  from  her  Ma*'^,  w*"^' 
came  this  day  to  my  hands.  I  have  acquainted  her 
Ma*'^  (as  you  were  pleased  to  comaund)  that  yo'  Ma*'*" 
wished  that  some  of  yo''  servaunts  here  would  meete 
to  countermyne  y^  plots  here,  but  y"  Queene  saitli, 
that  cannot  be  done  in  yo'  Ma^'^'  absence.  I  have 
written  let'"^  to  all  such  Lo^"^^,  as  I  have  had  direc""^ 
to  send  unto,  to  attend  att  y^  downe  sitting  of  y^ 
Parliam*.  Touching  yo'  Ma*'^^  Collar  of  Rubies,  y*" 
Queene  wishes  that  nothing  be  donne  in  it  till  y^ 
next  weeke,  when  S'  Job  Harby  saith  he  shall 
receave  answeare  to  his  le""'  sent  into  y^  Low  Coun- 
tries, &  in  y^  meane  tyme  I  am  privatly  to  informe 
myself  b}^  what  warrant  that  iewell  was  put  into  S'' 
Job  Harbyes  or  any  other  hands. 

Yo""  Ma*'^  will  herew^^  receave  a  le*'  from  my  Lo: 
Lieutenant  of  Ireland.*  The  insolency  &  disorders 
of  y*"  disbanded  souldiers  in  &  neer  this  towne  is  soe 
great,  as  y^  Lo*^'  of  y^  Councell  (who  met  this  day  at 
Whitehall)  have  thought  fit  that  some  course  should 
be  forthw*^  taken  to  disperse  &  send  them  away, 
&  to  that  purpose  their  Lo^^^  humbly  desire  to  know 
yo'  Ma*'*"'  pleasure  whether  a  proclamac'on  shal  be 
issued  by  y*"  Lo*^^  Commissioners  (whome  yo'  Ma*^'*"  did 
authorise  to  set  forth  proclamac'ons  upon  certeyne 
occasions  in  yo'  Ma*'''^  absence)  to  y^  effect  of  y*" 
inclosed  printed  order  of  y"  Committees  of  both 
Houses,  (whereof  yo'  Ma*'^  had  formerly  a  coppy 
sent) ;  but  this  their  Lo^^'  intend  should  be  without 
taking  any  notice  of  that  order,  unlesse  yo'  Ma^'*" 
shall  expressly  direct  that  menc^on  be  made  of  it ; 
in  this  particular  their  Lo^^  pray  yo'  Ma*'^'  speedy 
resolucrnQn  &  order. 


I  confesse 
not  so  well, 
but  yet  so 
much  as  may 
doe  much 
good,  tlier- 
fore  be  dili- 
gent in  it. 


You  shall 
doe  well  to 
doe  so. 


I  thiuke  it 
most  fitt. 


by  anie 
meanes. 


*  The  Earl  of  Leicester  had  received  the  appointment,  but  he 
never  went  over  to  take  possession  of  his  Government. 


86 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


[1641. 


The  principall  cause  Lo"^'  meeting  this  day  in 
Councell  was  to  consider  of  some  let^'^  from  Irland 
concerning  Londonderry,  whereupon  they  have  sent 
to  Lo^^  Justices  for  further  inform ac'on  before 
they  can  doe  any  thing  in  it.  I  pray  for  yo"  Ma*'" 
happy  dispatch  of  yo''  great  affaires  there,  &  safe 
returne  for  England,  as  being 
Yo'"  sacred  Ma'^^^ 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Westminster,  9°  Oc^o'"'^  1641. 
Eden.  13. 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo""  most  excellent  Ma*'^, 
I  receaved  (by  young  S""  Rob:  Pye  *)  on  Satterday 
last  yo'  Ma*'^'  cora\'\unds  by  apostile  of  y*"  5'^  p^sent, 
&  am  much  ioyed,  that  there  is  hope  of  yo''  Ma*'^* 
returne  sooner  then  is  generally  reported  here,  where 
it  is  confidently  said  (amongst  y*"  most  authentique 
intelligencers  in  Scottish  affaires),  that  yo'"  Ma"^  will 
not  be  here  till  Christmas,  &  I  assure  yo*"  Ma*'^  they 
give  forth,  as  if  yo'"  Ma*'^  were  likely  to  receaue  but 
an  ill  harvest  of  all  y^  paynes  yo'  Ma*'^  hath  taken : 
But  I  hope  y^  happy  conclusion  of  yo""  businesses 
there,  shall  now  very  shortly,  by  good  effects,  con- 
tradict and  falsify  their  stories. 

I  humbly  conceaue  that  it  may  be  for  yo'  Ma***"* 
honour  &  advantage,  that  y^  Lo:  Mayor  of  London 
wayte  on  yo""  Ma''""  att  yo'  returne,  that  you  may  have 
thereby  opportunity  to  shew  yo^'self  gra^cous  to  yo'' 
people,  by  speaking  a  short  word  now  &  then  to 
them  as  you  passe  amongst  them,  to  cheere  &  en- 
courage  them   in  their  dutifuU  affecc'ons  to  yo*" 
Eoyall  person  ;  &  therefore  I  beseech  yo'  Ma*'",  that 
by  yo''  next  I  may  receave  yo''  pleasure,  whither  I 
I  doe  lyke     shall  iutimat  to  y^  Lo.  Mayor,  that  yo'  Ma*'''  will 
you'silSTuid    expect  that  he  &  his  brethren  attend  yo""  Ma*'^  ac- 
doeso.        cordingly  :  And  I  humbly  desire  to  know  to  whome 
I  shall  addresse  lef'  for  yo"  Ma*'^,  when  you  shalbe  on 

*  Of  Lockhamsted,  Bucks,  Baronet;  a  title  now  extinct. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


87 


yo'  iourney  hither,  for  that  I  beleeve  Mr.  Thre'r  will  to  the  Duke 
not  ride  soe  fast  as  yo''  Ma^'^  The  occasion  of  this  (RiJhmond.) 
dispatch  is  y"  inclosed  from  my  Lo:  Keeper. 

The  Queene  sent  me  word  even  now  that  she  shall 
not  write  by  this  packet.  We  hope  yo''  Ma*'^'  next 
V"^  will  satisfy  yo""  good  servaunts  expectac^on  here 
w*^'  the  desired  newes  of  yo'"  Ma*'^^  happy  &  speedy 
returne,  w''''  is  y°  earnest  prayer  of 
Yo'  Sacred  Ma*^^^ 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Thorpe:  Munday  11°  8*''«  1641. 
Eden:  18 


Sir  Edivayxl  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo'"  most  excellent  Ma*'^, 
Yesterday  I  sent  to  yo'"  Ma*""  in  myne  a  let'r  from 
my  Lo*^  Keeper  by  packet :  and  this  is  to  give  yo*" 
Ma**'^  advertisem*,  that  y*^  Lo'^'^^  of'yo"-  Ma'^^^  Privy 
Councell  met  here  this  morning,  to  consider  of  some 
Irishe  businesses,  when  they  agreed  upon  a  let''  to 
be  forthw*^'  sent  to  yo""  Ma*'^  w*^  their  Lo^*  advise,  for 
divers  reasons  expressed  in  their  said  let''"  (a  coppy 
whereof  for  better  expedic'on  is  here  inclosed),  to 
giue  order  to  yo""  Ma^'*^'  Justices  in  Irland  to  prorogue 
y^  parliam*  there  (w'^^'  is  to  meete  y*"  9th  of  No^^"")  till 
ffebruary  next :  the  originall  under  y''  Lo*^^  hands 
shalbe  sent  to  yo''  Ma*'*"  as  soone  as  it  can  be  got 
signed,  if  yo'  Ma*'^  shall  approve  of  their  Lo^^  advise, 
you  may  be  pleased  for  better  expedic^on  to  send  one 
ief"  imder  yo'  Ma*'*^^  hand  imediatly  from  Edenburg 
into  Irland  by  an  expresse  messenger  to  y''  Lo"^"^* 
Justices,  forth w*^'  to  set  forth  a  proclamac'on  to  that 
purpose :  &  another  by  the  way  of  West  Chester  or 
thereabouts,  least  y^  former  should  miscarry  or 
receave  delay.  The  Lo^*^^  of  yo'  Ma*'^'  Privy  Councell 
here  have  also  this  day  giuen  order  to  the  Justices 
of  Peace  (in  &  neere  London)  to  take  a  course,  that 
a  more  effectuall  and  strict  order  be  taken  for  present 
sending  away  all  y*"  disbanded  souldiers  (w*"^  still 
pester  this  city) :  &  for  shutting  up  of  all  houses 


88 


TPIE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


infected,  for  that  y*"  sicknes  dispersetli  very  mucli  & 
dangerously  hereabouts. 

There  was  this  day  nothing  donne  by  the  Comittees 
of  either  House  worthy  yo"  Ma^'^'  notice.  There  is  a 
strong  report  (spred  by  persons  of  best  creddit  here 
for  intelUgence  &  knowledge  of  y^  proceedings  in 
Scoth)  that  yo""  Ma*'""  will  not  be  here  these  2  moneths, 
but  what  ground  they  have  for  it,  I  cannot  learne. 

There  is  a  whispering  here,  as  if  yo'  Parlijim*  (when  it 
meetes)  would  adiourne  for  some  moneths,  or  to  some 
other  place :  I  tould  my  Lo:  Keeper  this  day  that  if 
y''  P'liam*  should  adiourne  to  a  further  day,  (thoughe 
but  for  a  moneth  or  two)  before  they  passed  y^  Bill 
of  Tonnage  &  Poundage  to  yo'  Ma*''=,  (the  same  being 
graunted  only  to  y""  first  of  Decern:  next,)  it  would 
put  yo''  Ma*'*"  to  a  great  streight  for  want  of  monny  to 
uphold  yo''  house,  &  for  divers  other  occasions  :  and 
I  humbly  offer  it  to  yo'  Ma*'^'  considerac^on,  whether 
it  may  not  be  fitt  for  you  to  let  my  Lo:  Keeper,  & 
some  other  of  yo*"  Ma*'"  best  affected  servaunts  of 
either  House  of  P'liam*  know,  what  you  would  have 
them  to  insist  upon  in  case  there  should  be  any 
moc'on  for  a  further  adiournem*,  before  yo''  Ma""' 
returne,  by  reason  of  y*"  sicknes,  w'^''  growes  soe  rife 
&  dangerous,  as  will  make  such  a  moc^on  willingly 
hearkened  unto.  My  humble  &  earnest  prayers 
shalbe  still  for  a  prosperous  dispatch  of  yo""  affaires 
there,  &  for  yo"  Ma*'*"'  speedy  &  safe  returne,  there 
being  noe  man  so  much  obliged  to  yo"  Ma*'*"  for  yo*" 
gracious  favour,  as 

Yo'^  sacred  Ma*''^^ 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Westminster,  12°  8^'".  1G41. 
Eden:  18: 
Superscribed  "for  yo''  Sacred  Ma''^" 
Written  by  the  King  ;  Yours  apostyled." 

Written  on  the  back  by  Sir  E.  N.:  "Sent  by  Mr.  Mungo  IMurrey, 
and  reed  back  by       post  boy  of  Barbican  the  23""  at  West^'  at 
.9  at  nyg'*'.    His  Ma*'«=  is  constant  in      doctrine  &  discipline  of  y= 
Church." 
to  this  heere: 

therefor  I  com'and  you  to  asseurc  .all  my  seniants  there  that  I  am  constant  for  the  Doctrine  & 
Diseplinc  of  the  Churche  of  Englaud  as  it  was  established  by  Queciie  Elis.  &  my  Father,  & 
resolues,  (by  the  grace  of  God)  to  liuo  &  dey  in  tlie  maintenance  of  it. 


I  TTOuhl  not 

have  that 

intention 

hindered, 

Cambridj^e 

would  be 

best. 

For  this,  I 
would  haue 
you  consult 
with  the 
Keeper  & 
others  of  my 
seniants 
what  to  doe 
in  it,  leaving 
it  to  your 
discretions 
to  doe  as  you 
shall  sec 
cause,  but  1 
would  have 
the  adjurne- 
raent  fur- 
thered by 
anie  meaues. 

As  I  haue 
beene  suffi- 
cientlie  slan- 
dered heere, 
in  sume 
respects,  so 
there  also  I 
heere  that  I 
haue  not 
mist  those 
good  offices, 
though  in  an 
other  kyndo, 
as  being 
resolved,  jtt 
my  rctorne, 
to  alter  the 
forme  of  the 
ChTirche 
gouemement 
in  England 


1641.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  COERESPONDENCE. 


89 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 


May  it  please  yo'"  most  excellent  Ma*'% 
I  receaved  yesterday  yo''  Ma*'^'  apostile  of  y^  9tli 
p'^sent  by  Mr.  Barkley^  &  have  (according  to  yo"" 
jyfj^ties  command)  addressed  this  packet  to  y^  Duke  of 
Richmond,  &  shall  soe  contynue  my  addresses^  untill 
I  shall  understand  of  Mr.  Th'rers  returne  to  Court. 
Yo'  Ma*'^  com^aunds  me  to  advise  w*^  some  of  yo" 
best  servaunts  here,  how  to  p'^vent  the  intenc'ons 
of  some  here  to  presse  yo' Ma*'''  at  y^  next  meet- 
ing in  P'liam*  for  y*"  like  Act  touching  y''  elecc'on  of 
officers  &  councellors  here,  as  you  have  graunted 
in  Scotland.  I  (w*^  all  humility)  assure  yo''  Ma*% 
that  I  conceave  it  no  lesse  difficult  for  me  (now  in 
yo''  absence  when  y^  awe  of  the  Parliam*  is  upon  all 
in  generall)  to  discerne  who  are  yo'  Ma*'""^  best  ser- 
vaunts  here,  then  it  is  almost  impossible  for  such  yo"" 
servaunts,  to  know  what  to  doe  or  advise,  to  p^^ent 
soe  plausible  a  designe,  w*"^  in  my  poor  opinion 
nothing  can  soe  Avell  divert,  as  yo'  Ma"^'  speedy 
returne  :  but  of  this  intend  forthw*^  to  speake  w*^  the 
Queene. 

This  inclosed  is  y*'  lef  from  y^  Lo'^'^'  of  yo'  Ma*'" 
Privy  Counsell,  whereof  in  my  last  by  Mr.  Mungo 
Murrey  *  I  sent  a  coppy :  their  Lo^^',  as  soon  as  they 
rose  from  Councell,  (&  before  y^  \qV  was  drawne) 
dispersed  themselves  to  their  severall  homes  in  y"" 
country,  w*"^  is  y^  cause  (as  I  am  tould),  that  it  was 


If  your  owen 
observation 
doe  not  suffi- 
ciently tell 
you,  lett  my 
Wyfes 
direction 
guyde  yon. 

It  will  be 
^vell  done. 


"  *  Murrey  (Mungo)  was  a  confidential  servant  and  gentleman  of 
the  bedchamber  to  the  King,  who  often  entrusted  him  with  private 
correspondence.  In  February,  1646,  whilst  the  King  was  in  the 
power  of  the  English  Commissionei's  at  Newcastle,  Murrey,  having 
obtained  leave  of  absence  on  pretence  of  visiting  Scotland,  was 
admitted  to  his  Majesty's  presence  before  witnesses  for  the  purpose 
of  kissing  his  hand.  The  Commissioners,  however,  observed  some- 
thing put  into  his  hand  by  the  King  ;  and  having  followed  him, 
when  out  of  the  presence,  they  searched  him,  and  found  a  letter  in 
cypher  directed  to  Montreuil  the  French  agent.  The  letter  was 
immediately  sent  up  to  the  Parliament,  and  Murrey  committed  to 
prison,  but  admitted  to  bail  after  two  days'  confinement. 


90 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


this  day  before  it  was  brought  signed  to  me  for  yo' 
Ma*'^.    The  more  secrecy  and  expedic^on  there  is 
used  in  dispatch  of  yo*"  Ma*'^'  lef  to  y*"  Lo*^*^'  Justices 
(if  you  shall  approove  of  their  Lo^^^  advise)  y^  better, 
&  that  made  me  p^sume  to  hasten  to  yo'  Ma*'^  y*" 
coppy,  before  y^  lef"  itself  was  signed.    I  finde  that 
y**  CoraHtees  of  both  Houses  (by  reason  of  y^  con- 
tynuaunce  of  y^  sicknes)  incline  to  be  very  earnest, 
when  y""  Parliam*  meets  next,  to  perswade  a  further 
adiournem*  for  a  tyme,  but  Mr.  Pym,  &  those  of  his 
1  haue  given  party,  wiU  not  heare  that  y^  P'liam*  shalbe  held  any 
ojSraii    where  but  in  London  or  Westminster :   I  hope  yo"" 
this  aireddy.  Ma^'*"  (if  you   shall   Stay  ^  there  past  y""  18th  pre- 
sent) will  send  some  direcc^ons  to  yo'  servaunts  here 
how  to  apply  their  endeavours  in  P^liam*,  in  case 
there  shalbe  any  debate  touching  an  adiournem^ 
ihauesyned      I  have  hcrcw*^  by  y*' Quccnes  com^aund  sent  yo'' 
forse?that    Ma*'^     draught  of  a  warrant  for  yo'  Ma*'^  hand  for 
atueienf"   y^  dehvcry  of  yo'  Ma*^"^^  Collar  of  Rubies  to  S' 
^"er^oyeii  Boswcll  fo"^  yo'  Ma*^^^  use :  I  tould      Job  Harby, 
Sit  I  liln    that     W°  was  to  kepe  it  till  yo'  Ma''"  should  send 
tymtiir      for  it.     The  Queene  tould  me  yesterday,  that  she 
sr"wifi-^''    would  write  to  yo'  Ma^'Uo  be  pleased  w*^  yo' owne 
Bosweii*  as  hand  to  give  S'  W""  Boswell  order  what  to  doe  w*  y^ 
she  desyres,  ^^-^  CoUar,  for  it  is  apparent,  that  these  mer- 
chaunts  dare  not  have  a  hand  in  the  engaging  of 
it,  but  they  say  they  will  take  order  that,  upon 
receipt  of  yo''  Ma"*^  warraunt,  it  shalbe  safely  delivered 
accordingly. 

If  yo''  Ma*'''  shall  stay  long  from  hence, f  I  humbly 
pray  yo""  Ma*'''  wilbe  pleased  to  let  me  understand  w*' 
Dispaches.    whomc  you  would  havc  me  to  advise  concerning  yo'' 

*  Boswell  seems  to  have  been  an  old  confidential  servant  of  the 
King,  who  mentions  him  as  his  agent  in  1634,  in  a  letter  to  the 
Queen  of  liohemia.  See  Bromlcifs  Royal  Letters,  p.  67.  He  ■was 
also  in  the  confidence  of  the  Palatine  Princes  about  the  same  time. 
Bromley,  p,  79.  He  was  at  this  period  the  British  Resident  at  the 
Hague,  but  afterwards  fell  into  disgrace,  as  we  find  by  a  subsequent 
letter  of  the  Queen  of  Bohemia. 

+  On  this  day  the  King  wrote  a  letter  to  the  Lord  Keeper,  desiring 
him  to  inform  the  Parliament  that  he  was  unavoidably  detained,  but 
that  he  would  make  all  diligence  to  retm-n.  This  was  read  to  the 
Lords  on  the  26th. 


T  haue  tould 
you  in  my 
former 


1641.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


91 


affaires  here,  &  that  yo""  Ma^'^  would  vouchsafe  to 
let  them  know,  how  farre  yo''  Ma*'**  would  have  them  l^}^^^^ 
to  confide  in  me  in  any  yo'  Ma*'*"*  services,  that  I 
may  have  y^  more  creddit  w*''  them,  when  I  shall  have 
occasion  to  attend  them,  &  be  y^  better  able  to 
annsweare  yo'"  Ma*'^'  expectac^on.  I  haue  not  bene 
att  Oatlands  since  Mr.  Berkley  came,  but  am  this 
morning  going  to  wayte  on  y''  Queene,  to  know  if 
her  Ma*"^  hath  any  com'aunds  for 

Yo'  sacred  Ma*^^^ 
Most  humble  &  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Thorpe;  15  8*'-'»,  1641. 
EdExN:  20: 

"For  yo'  sacred  Ma"^."    By  the  King:  "Yours  apostyled." 
15°  S*'-'*  1641.    Apost:  20.  R.  25"  at  9.  at  night. 


Sir  Edivard  Nicholas  to  the  King* 

May  it  please  yo'  most  excellent  Ma*'^, 
Yo'  Ma*^^^  sent  by  S"^  W'"  Ballatine^''-  were  deli- 
vered here  y^  18*^  of  this  moneth  by  4  in  y^  afternoone. 

Upon  let''  from       Encrlishe  Committees  now  in  , 
Scotl:  to  y*^  Committee  here,  relating  y^  newes  of  Mar:  lessecarfuu 
Hamiltons,  the  Ea.  of  Arguiles,  and  Ea:  of  Lanne-  fect^elatfon 
ricks  abandoning  y^  Court  &  Parliam*  there,t  our  ^ess  because 
Committee  here  was  yesterday  in  a  great  fright,  & 

*  Afterwards  Lord  Ballenden,  the  first  Peer  of  that  name.  In 
1640  he  appears,  by  Bromley's  Letters,  pp.  115,  116,  to  have  been 
attached  as  Minister  at  the  Palatine  Court.  He  was  much  in  the 
confidence  of  all  the  branches  of  the  Royal  Family;  and  obtained 
his  peerage  from  Chai'les  the  Second  for  his  very  useful  and  active 
services  during  the  Usurpation. 

■f  This  is  the  affair  which,  in  the  history  of  that  time,  went  by  the 
name  of  "  The  Incident,"  See  Pym's  Report  of  the  Committees  on  the 
re-opening  of  Parliament,  which  may  be  referred  to  in  vol.x.  of  the  Par- 
liamentary History,  p.  5.  Lord  Lanerick's  (or  Lanark's)  relation  of  it 
may  be  seen  in  Hardwicke's  State  Papers,  vol.  ii.  p.  299,  wherein  he 
asserts  that  there  was  a  plan  laid,  by  the  opposite  party,  to  cut  the 
throats  of  himself  and  the  two  Lords  mentioned  in  this  letter;  and 
he  adds,  that  their  "abandoning  the  Court  and  Parliament"  was 
literally  nothing  more  than  quitting  Edinburgh  in  order  to  save  their 
lives.    All  that  is  absolutely  known  in  the  matter  is,  that  Charles 


92 


THE  NICHOLAS  COERESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


I  sent  one  of 
wborie  dis- 
cretion & 
knowledg  I 
was  &  am  so 
confident, 
that  I 
thouglit  his 
discourse 
of  the  busi- 
ness as 
hauing 
beene  an  ey 
wituess  would 
haue  satis- 
fied more 
than  auic 
written  rela- 
tion, there- 
fore I  desyre 
you  to  call  on 
him  in  my 
name  to 
satisfie  well 
afifected  per- 
sones,  of  the 
treuth  of  that 
w'ch  passed 
while  he  was 
heere ;  &,  for 
what  hath 
passed  since, 
I  haue  di- 
rected the 
D:  of  Kich: 
to  giue  you 
such  an" 
account  as 
there  is. 

It  is  now 
under  exa- 
mination, 
w'ch  as  siione 
as  it  (is) 
ended  you 
shall  be  sure 
to  haue. 


(declaring  that  they  conceaved  the  same  to  be  a  plot 
of  Papists  there^  &  of  some  Lo^*^'  &  others  here,) 
sent  p^sent  order  to  y^  Lo:  Mayor  &c.  to  dubble  y" 
gardes  &  watches  of  this  Citty  &  Suborbs,  &  it  is 
thought  that  this  busines  will  this  day  in  Parliament 
be  declared  to  be  a  greater  plot  against  the  King- 
domes  and  Parliam*'  in  Eng:  &  Scotl:  then  hath  bene 
discovered  at  all.  There  have  bene  some  well- 
affected  parliam*-men  here  w**"  me  this  morning  to 
know  whether  I  had  any  relac^on  of  that  busines, 
but  finding  I  had  none,  but  only  a  few  words  from 
Mr.  Sec^rie  Vane,  w'^^  I  shewed  to  them,  they  seemed 
much  troubled,  as  not  knowing  what  to  say  to  it :  I 
hasten  this  of  purpose  to  give  yo*"  Ma*'*"  notice  hereof, 
&  to  pray  yo'  Ma*'^,  that  there  may  be  sent  hither  w*^ 
all  possible  dilligence  a  full  &  p'fect  relac^on  of  y*" 
present  disturbance  there,  &  the  cause  &  grounds 
thereof,  &  what  upon  exa'iac^on  it  appeares  to  that 
parliam*  to  be :  all  w*"^',  I  humbh^  wishe  may  be 
certefyed  hither  in  as  authentique  a  way,*  &  from  as 
vnsuspected  a  hand  as  may  be. 

If  Mr.  Secr'ie  Vane  had  written  to  me,  or  any  of 
his  friends  here,  a  true  narrac^on  of  that  busines,  it 
would  have  given  much  satifacc'on  here,  and  stopped 
the  causles  alarmes  that  are  taken  vpon  y*"  noyse  of 

had  summoned  these  three  Lords  to  attend  his  Court;  but  that  they  not 
only  absented  themselves,  but  quitted  the  city,  and  placed  their 
houses  in  a  state  of  defence;  and  that  on  the  King  demanding  an 
investigation  to  clear  his  honour,  a  secret  committee  of  the  Scotch 
Parliament  made  a  report  in  exculpation  of  his  ^Majesty,  but  justify- 
ing the  three  Lords  in  the  course  they  had  taken.  Clarendon  says 
that  Montrose  had  advised  and  "  frankly  "  undertaken  the  assassina- 
tion of  Hamilton,  his  brother  Lanerick,  and  Argyle;  and  whatever 
reception  may  have  been  given  to  this  proposal  (which  there  is  no 
ground  for  thinking  that  the  King  for  a  moment  sanctioned),  it  is 
hardly  to  be  doubted  that  schemes  were  now  on  foot  between  Mon- 
trose and  Charles,  embracing  a  simultaneous  movement  in  the  three 
kingdoms,  and  sufficiently  explaining  the  alarm  and  excitement  of 
the  Parliamentary  leaders,  especially  on  the  sudden  breaking  out  of 
the  Irish  rebellion.  It  should  be  added  that  the  friends  of  Montrose 
strenuously  assert,  in  opposition  to  the  statement  of  Clarendon,  that 
his  secret  proposal  to  the  King  was  not  for  the  murder,  but  simply 
for  the  arrest,  of  Argyle  and  the  Hamiltons. 

The  Parliament  met  this  day;  the  first  time  after  the  recess. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


93 


it,  that  busiues  being  now  by  y''  relac'on  of  diverse 
Scotsmen  licre  made  mucli  worse,  then  I  beleeve  it 
will  proove  in  y""  end. 

The  Queene  tould  me  yesterday  that  she  will  wryte 
to  yo'"  Ma**^  this  night  or  too  morrow,  bnt  I  thought 
it  not  fitt  to  deferre  this  packet  now  for  her  Ma*'" 
lef,  which  shalbe  hastened  away  as  soone  as  Ishall 
receave  it.  The  inclosed  from  Art:  Hopton,*  I 
receaved  from  my  Lo:  Cottington  w*^  direcc^on  to 
send  it  to  yo'"  Ma*'^ 

Yo'  Ma*'^  will  I  hope  pardon  this  hasty  expression 
of  the  humble  diligence  of 

Yo-*  sacred  Ma*^^^ 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

As  I  was  closing  this,  I  receaved  for  yo''  Ma*'^  this 
le*'  from  my  Lo:  Marshall. 

Written  by  the  King: 

"  Those  of  yours,  W^**  I  returne  not  to  you  apostyled,  I  alwais 
burne." 

WestmixXster,  20:  8*%  1641. 
Eden.  24. 
"  For  yo'^  sacred  Ma*>«." 
"  Yours  apostyled." 
20.  S^'^'o  1641.  Apost.  24°  8*'-'*. 

R.  30  at  7  at  night  at  Thorpe.  Rec.  of  Captain  Smith. 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo'  most  excellent  Ma*'^ 
I  hope  my  le"",  w*'^  I  hastily  wrote  to  yo'  Ma'^^  yes- 
terday by  packet,  wilbe  come  to  yo""  Royall  hands 
before  this,  &  that  wee  shall  speedily  receaue  a 
relac-'on  of  this  busines  concerning  the  Marquis  & 
y*"  rest,  w*'^  all  yo'"  servaunts  here  call  for  very 
earnestly. 

*  He  was  uncle  to  Sir  Ralph  Hopton,  the  famous  Royalist  General; 
and,  when  tlie  latter  was  created  Lord  Hopton,  Sir  Arthur  was  named 
heir  in  remainder,  in  default  of  issue  male;  but,  dying  before  his 
nephew,  he  never  enjoyed  those  honours.  He  was  of  a  Somersetshire 
family,  the  Hoptons  of  Wytham. 


94  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


Of  this  I 

much  won- 
der, for  on 
my  credit  I 
acquainted 
nobodie  with 
the  contents 
thereof,  & 
am  verie 
confident 
that  none 
heerc  knew 
whether  I 
writt  to  him 
or  not : 
therefor  I 
thinke  it  fitt 
that  you 
should  try  as 
much  as  may 
be  how  this 
is  come,  & 
whether  it 
be  an  intelli- 
gence or  con- 
jectur. 

Before  this, 
that  is 
satisfied. 


I  remember 
that  I  had 
some  dis- 
course w'th 
the  Eng: 
Par:  men 
about  Proro- 
gation, but 
I'm  confident 
that  it  was 
efter  my 
Lett:  was 
written,  if  it 
were  serius, 
all  others 
wer  in  con- 
sequence of 
the  Plague 
at  randome. 


Yo*"  Ma^'"  le"  to  my  Lo:  Keeper  was  carefully  deli- 
vered to  his  owne  hands  yesterday  before  y^  sitting 
of  y^  Parliam^  but  his  Lo^p  tells  me,  that  y"  eflPect 
of  it  was  knowne  here  some  dayes  before  he  re- 
ceaved  it :  w*"^  is  an  infinite  p^iudice  to  yo'"  Ma*'" 
affaires  here ;  such  anticipation  of  yo'  Ma*'"  direcc- 
^ons  in  businesses  of  importaunce  renders  y^  same 
impossible,  or  extreame  difficult,  to  be  effected : 
And  I  observe  that  y*'  perfect  intelligence,  that  is 
here  of  all  yo'  Ma*'"  resoluc^ons  &  proceedings  there, 
puts  lief  and  spiritt  into  some  here,  who  w*Wt 
that  encouragem*  &  light,  would  (I  beleeve)  pay  more 
reverence  to  yo''  Ma*'"  councells  and  acc^ons. 

When  yo'  Ma*'^  hath  made  stay  y^  disbanding  of 
5  companies  remayning  in  Barwick,*  it  is  here 
thought  fit  not  to  make  any  order  to  y^  contrary, 
but  it  is  declared  (as  I  heare)  that  from  y*  15th  of 
this  moneth  (w'^^  was  y^  tyme  appoynted  by  y^  Houses 
for  disbanding  all  that  garrison)  those  companies 
shall  have  no  further  pay  from  y^  Comonwealth  as 
it  is  called,  and  concerning  this,  there  is  to  be 
speedily  a  conference  w*^  y^  Jjo^^%  w*^  y^  issue  where- 
of I  shall  acquaint  yo'  Ma*'^  by  my  next. 

Sir  Jo.  Berkley  was  yesterday  committed  to  y^ 
Tower,  &  Capt.  O^Neale  to  y*'  Gatehouse  by  y^  House 
of  Commons  vpon  y^  old  business. f  Yo'"  Ma*'^  will 
herew*^  receave  a  coppy  of  y^  lef  sent  hither  by  y^ 
Committees  in  Scotland,  and  of  y^  order  made  there- 
upon y^  day  before  y"  P'liam*  by  y^  Committees  here. 
I  have  p^sented  yo"*  Ma*'"  lef^  to  y'  B^p  of  London, 
who  hath  promised  to  use  all  possible  expedic^on  in 
p^formaunce  of  yo""  Ma*'"  comaunds  therein. 

The  Lo^^^  Commissioners  have  given  order  for  p''- 
paring  a  Proclamacmon  for  p^sent  dispersing  &  sending 
away  of  y^  disbanded  souldiers,J  as  yo''  Ma*'^  directed 


*  The  jealousy  of  the  Parliament  about  Berwick  was  so  very 
great,  that  when  the  Scottish  army,  upon  their  return  in  August, 
wished  to  march  through  that  garrison,  a  wooden  bridge  was  actually 
ordered  to  be  built  over  the  Tweed,  at  some  distance  irom  the  town. 

+  It  was  also  ordered,  the  Lords  should  be  desired  to  examine 
those  gentlemen  respecting  the  charges  brought  against  them. 

J  May,  in  his  History  of  the  Parliament,  says  that  both  the 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  95 


byyo""  apostile  of  the  13'^  of  this  moneth.  My  Lo: 
Keeper  delivered  me  this  morning  to  be  sent  to  yo"" 
Ma*'^  this  paper,  w*"''  was  p^sented  to  his  Lo^  in  y*" 
nature  of  a  protestac'on  by  y*"  persons  therein  vnder- 
named  :  his  Lo^^  tells  me  he  hath  formerly  acquainted 
yo'  Ma*'"  w''^  that  busines.  My  Lo:  of  Bristoll*  tould 
me  this  day,  that  he  heares  from  severall  hands,  that 
there  is  an  intenc^on  to  question  his  Lo^,  &  his 
Sonne  y^  Lo:  Digby,  but  he  knovves  not  for  what,  & 
he  tells  me  that  nothing  shall  deterre  him  from 
p'formaunce  of  his  duty.  This  day  there  was  twice 
read  in  y""  Commons  House  a  Bill  for  taking  away  the 
Votes  of  Bp^'  in  y^  Ypper  House,  and  that  Bill  is 
comitted,  and  it  is  said  it  will  passe  both  Houses 
w*4n  two  daj^s.  The  disobedience  against  y^  order 
of  y''  House  of  Commons  concerning  innovac'ons,  was 
this  day  questioned  in  that  House,  &  after  a  long 
debate,  there  was  no  way  found  or  resolved  on,  to 
punishe  those  that  disobeyed  y"  same,  for  that  that 
order  was  conceaved  by  most  in  y*  House  not  to  be 
iustifyable  by  lawe,  &  therefore  not  binding. t 

I  have  herew*^'  sent  yo'  Ma*'®  some  notes  of  y^  effect 
of  y®  conference  this  day  betweene  y®  2  Houses.  I 
beseech  God  amongst  those  great  distracc'ons  to 
p^serve  yo'^  Ma*'®  in  safety :  &  I  beseech  yo'  Ma*'®  to 
give  me  leave  once  more  to  put  you  in  minde  to 
hasten  hither  a  true  relac^on  of  y®  vnhappy  inter- 
rupc'on  of  yo""  affaires  there,  for  I  find,  that  yo' 
servaunts  here  are  much  disheartened  that  they  are 


For  diver- 
tion  of  this 
&  other 
mischeefes, 
I  ■would  ye 
should  put 
Bristo  in 
mynde  to 
rene-nr  that 
dispute 
betwixt  the 
two  Houses, 
concerning 
the  Parla- 
ment  Protes- 
tation w'ch 
Southamp- 
ton was  so 
fearse  upon. 


In  this,  I 
hope,  this 
dispache  will 
satisfie  your 
longins,  but 
I  belive,  not 
some  of  yonr 
expectations. 


ai'inies,  English  and  Scotch,  quietly  departed,  conducted  to  their  owne 
homes  by  order  from  Justices  of  Peace  through  the  several  counties." 

*  The  Earl  of  Bristol  had  mingled  much  in  party  politics  previous 
to  this  date.  He  had  been  Ambassador  to  Spain  in  proposing 
Charles's  marriage  with  the  Infanta,  and  was  afterwards  impeached 
in  Parliament  respecting  the  treaty  and  its  failure;  but  he  had  such 
influence  with  the  House  of  Commons  as  to  bring  about  a  counter 
impeachment  against  the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  This  may  account 
for  his  hostility  to  Charles's  friend.  Lord  Strafford,  though  the 
increasing  probabilities  of  civil  war  now  induced  him  to  support  the 
Royal  Cause. 

f  None  of  these  circumstances  are  stated  in  the  Parliamentary 
History  ;  yet  they  are  important  additions  to  the  record  of  those 
times. 


96 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


kept  soe  long  in  darknes  in  a  busines  soe  highly  im- 
porting yo'  hon"",  &  yo""  Ma*'"  owne  person.  I  expected 
a  let'  from  y^  Queene  for  yo'  Ma*'^  this  day,  but  I 
beleeve  her  Ma*'^  purposes  to  send  her  lef^^  by  an 
expresse;  for  that  there  are  none  come  from  her 
Ma*'^  as  yet  to  be  conveyed  by 
Yo'  sacred  Ma*'" 

Most  humble  &  most 

obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Westminster,  21"  8*'-'%  1641. 

Eden:  28: 
"  For  yo''  sacred  Ma«'^" 

"Yours  apostyled." 
Apost:  28  a*'-'*.— R.  P  A^o*'  '*.  at  5  at  night,  by  Mr.  Wm.  Murray. 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo""  most  excellent  Ma*'^, 
I  receaved  Satterday  night  last  yo'"  Ma*'^^  of  y" 
18*^  p^sent,  &  have  safely  delivered  yo'"  Ma*'"  to  y'^ 
Queene  &  my  Lo:  Keeper :  the  messenger  that  was 
sent  w*^  yo""  Ma*'"  said  Tter,  (bruysing  himself  w*^  a 
fall  from  his  horse  soe  as  he  was  not  able  to  ride) 
sent  yo""  Ma*'"  to  me  single  by  y*"  ordinary  post,  w*"^ 
made  me  suspect  that  it  had  bene  intercepted,  but 
it  came  very  safe.  I  have  alreddy  made  known  to 
diverse  Lo^'^'  &  others  yo'  Ma*'"  pious  resoluc^on  to 
mainteyne  constantly  y*"  doctryne  &  disciplyne  of 
y^  Church  of  England,  &  have  by  their  advise 
delivered  extracts  (of  what  yo'  Ma*'^  hath  written)  to 
diverse  of  yo""  Ma*'"  servaunts,  that  yo''  piety  therein 
may  be  vnderstood  by  yo'  good  people  here. 

The  Queene  sent  S'"  Ballatine  from  hence  on 
Friday  last,  &  he  going  im^ediatly  from  Oatlands 
w*^'out  calling  here,  I  lost  y*"  opportunity  of  sending 
by  him,  but  I  p^pared  my  Tter  of  y^  23*^'  reddy 
for  him,  w*"^  I  have  now  sent  by  this  gent.  Mr.  Tho. 
Elliot. 

Wee  here  begin  to  app^hend  that  in  y^  great 
troubles  there,  some  of  yo''  Ma*'"  packets  may  mis- 
carry, &  therefore  I  held  it  my  duty  to  let  yo""  Ma*'^ 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


97 


vndcrstand,  that  since  myne  of  y''  12*^'  (w*'^'  yo'  Ma*'^ 

hath  retiirn'd)  I  have  sent  to  yo'"  Ma*'"  let"  of  y'  15'^*  Lauerttcm 

&  18^^  both  w""''  were  addressed  in  packets  to  y''  D.  aii 

of  Richmond,  &  afterwards  2  other  packets  of  y''  20*''  &  thcase 

&  2r''  directed  to  Mr.  Th'rer. 

As  concerning  y''  adiournem*  of  y""  P^liam*  here, 
my  Lo:  Keeper  tells  me,  that  he  hath,  by  his  I'ter  itistrew. 
sent  in  myne  of  y'^  21*^'  fully  acquainted  yo""  Ma"''  how 

expectac'on  was  here  frustrated.  The  Vpper  House 
did  Satterday  last  reade  y"  Bill  transmitted  to  them 
by  y^  Comons,  for  taking  away  y''  votes  of  &  SJt'^xake 
intend  (as  I  heare)  to  speede  it  as  fast  as  may  be,  t^^g'^oijec- 
notw'^'standing  it  is  said  to  be  against  y""  auntient  tionasmay 
order  of  P^liam*  to  bring  in  a  Bill  againe  the  same 
Sessions,  that  it  was  reiected.*  Yo'  Ma*'*"'  best  ser- 
vaunts  here  remayne  still  in  great  payne,  that  in  all 
this  tyme  they  have  not  receaved  any  p'^fect  relac'on 
of  y^  late  disorders  at  Edinb:  concerning  Mar: 
Hamilton  &  y*'  rest,  &  they  are  the  more  impatient, 
in  regarde  they  heare  that  some  of  y"  Commons  house 
have  coppyes  of  y*"  examinac^ons  taken  in  that 
busines,  &  other  aduertisem*'  touching  y^  same.  I 
beseech  God  to  send  yo'"  Ma*""  forth  of  that  laberinth 
of  troubles  there,  &  a  safe  &  ho'''^  returne  for  Engl: 
■sv^ii  Yrillbe  most  welcome  to  all  honnest  men  here, 
and  to  none  more  then  to 

Yo'^  sacred  Ma"'* 
Most  humble  and  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

"Westminster,  25<'  8*"'^'  1641. 
Eden.  30. 
Written  by  the  King: 

"  I  hope  this  ill  newes  of  Irelandf  may  hinder  some  of  theas  follies 

in  England." 
"For  yo''  sacred  Ma''^" 
"Yours  apostyled." 
25°  8*"«  1641.    Apost.  30  8*''«. 
Rec.  4''iW"*  in  y^  morning. 


*  The  Lords,  however,  did  not"  proceed  so  fai',  until,  on  the  22nd 
of  October,  the  House  of  Commons  sent  up  Mr.  Holies  "  to  put  them 
in  mind  of  their  complaint  exhibited  against  the  thirteen  Bishops  who 
made  the  last  new  Canons,  and  to  pray  a  speedy  proceeding  therein." 

+  This  is  an  allusion  to  the  rebellion  which  broke  out  on  the  25tli 

VOL.  IV,  H 


98  [THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo'"  most  excellent  Ma*'% 
I  sent  to  yo^  Ma^'*^  y^  25tli  of  this  p^sent  2.  let"  by 
Mr.  Elliot,*  &  y^  same  night  I  receaved  yo'^  Ma^'^* 
apostile  of  y*"  20'^',  and  p*'sently  sent  away  yo''  Ma*'^^ 
to  y''  Queene,  &  delivered  that  to  my  Lo:  Keeper.  I 
shall  forthw*^  deliver  yo""  Ma*'*"'  warr*  to  S'  Job  Harby, 
&  hasten  y''  dispatch  of  that  busines. 

I  have  herein  sent  yo""  Ma*'^  a  coppy  of  an  order 
made  by  the  Peers  concerning  y*"  jurisdic^con  of  y 
ArchbP.  of  Cant.  In  this  packet  there  is  sent  to  yo' 
Ma''"  by  my  Lo^.  of  London  severall  Bills  for  yo'" 
Ma^'"'  signature  for  y*"  new  B^',  w*^'  a  l**"  from  his  Lo^ 
touching  that  busines. 

There  is  still  kept  here  a  strict  garde  &  watch 
about  y*"  Parliam*  houses  of  100.  of  y^  trayned  bands, 
besides  diverse  other  watchmen  :  y^  p^'tence  is  an 
apprehension  of  some  conspiracy  of  y*"  Papists  against 
y^  P^liam*  here,  answerable  to  that  against  some 
Lo^  in  Scotl:  &  y*'  alarme  of  popishe  plots  amuse  and 
fright  y^  people  here,  more  then  any  thing,  &  there- 
fore that  is  y^  drum  that  is  soe  frequently  beaten 
uppon  all  occasions ;  &  y*"  noyse  of  an  intenc^on  to 

of  October.  The  King's  memorandum,  or  apostyle,  is  dated  the  30th. 
The  return  of  the  letter  to  Sir  Edward,  on  the  4th  of  November,  is  a 
further  proof  of  the  I'apidity  with  which,  upon  occasion,  news  might 
travel  at  that  period.  As  for  Ireland  generally,  and  the  King's  notion 
of  the  value  of  a  parliamentary  mode  of  government  there,  it  may 
be  worth  quoting  an  anecdote  preserved  in  an  old  tract  in  the  British 
Museum;  where,  in  conversation  with  the  Earl  of  Pembroke,  in 
March  1641,  his  Majesty  is  reported  to  have  said,  "The  businesse  of 
Ireland  will  never  be  done  in  the  way  that  you  are  in;  four  hundred 
will  never  do  that  work;  it  must  be  put  in  the  hands  of  one.  If  I 
were  trusted  with  it,  I  would  pawn  my  head  to  end  that  work.  And 
though  I  am  a  beggar  myself,  yet  (speaking  with  a  strong  assevera- 
tion) I  can  find  money e  for  that." 

This  is  the  same  person  to  whom,  in  1642,  the  Lord  Keeper 
Lyttelton  delivered  the  Great  Seal,  when  the  King  sent  him  for  it. 
Lyttelton,  terrified  at  what  he  had  done,  fled  immediately  afterwards 
to  join  the  King  at  York.  May  states  him  to  have  been  "  a  young 
gentleman,  and  Groom  of  the  Privy  Chamber  to  his  Majesty." 


lien.  Vane 
will  rettime 
all  those 
syned  by 
mee  w'th 
this  Packc 
to  my  L: 
of  l^on: 


1641.]  THE  NICHOLAS  COERESPONDENCE. 


99 


introduce  Popery  was  that  w"''  first  brought  into 
dislike  w*^'  the  people  y""  governement  both  of  y" 
Church  and  Comonwealth.  I  have  not  bene  sparing 
to  make  knowne  yo"  Ma*''''  pious  resoluc'on  to  main- 
teyne  y''  doctrine  &  disciplyne  of  the  Church  of  Engl: 
w*"^  I  perceave  gives  very  good  satisfac^on. 

My  Lo:  Keeper  having  occasion  to  Y/ayte  on  y*" 
Queene  this  day,  did  yesterday  move  y*"  House  for 
leave,  &  tould  their  Lo^'  that  my  Lo:  Bankes  had  a 
co^nisson  dormant  to  be  Speaker  in  his  absence^  but 
y*"  Lo*^^  said  they  would  chiise  their  owne  Speaker,  & 
soe  named  y^  Lo.  P.  Scale,*  whereupon  my  Lo.  Keeper 
said  he  would  (to  avoide  all  question)  rather  stay,  hut 
y^  Lo^'  pressed  him  not  to  forbeare  his  iourney,  least 
y''  Queene  might  take  it  ill,  &  soe  his  Lo^  goes  this 
day  to  Oatlands,  &  y^  Lo.  P.  Scale  is  to  be  Speaker 
in  his  absence. 

Judge  Berkley  t  was  yesterday  att  y*"  bar  in  y'^ 
Vpper  House,  &  there  heard  his  charge  read,  to  w*"'' 
he  pleaded  not  guilty,  &  made  a  prudent  answeare ; 
whereupon  tyme  is  given  him  till  Tuesday  next  to 
produce  witnesses  concerning  soe  much  of  his  charge 
as  relates  to  misdemeanors.  The  House  of  Commons 
did  yesterday  by  vote  declare,  that  y""  13  Bishops,  J 
(who  are  questioned  for  making  y"  new  cannons,) 
ought  not  to  haue  vote  in  Lo*^'  House  in  any 
busines :  &  they  are  this  day  to  have  a  conference 
Lo'^'  thereupon,  &  also  touching  y''  excluding 


I  comaiid 
you  to  speake 
with  tlie 
Keeper  & 
my  L: 
Bankes  to 
see  if  it  can 
bee  waranted 
by  anie  reule 
or  president 
that  the 
Vpper  House 
may  chuse 
there 
Speaker. 


w*^  y 


of  all  y*'  B^'  from  voting  iu  y*^  Bill  (w  is  passed  y* 
Commons  House)  to  take  away  totally  ye  B^'  votes. § 


You  shall 
doe  well  to 
put  the  B.  of 
Lincolne  in 
mynde  con- 
cerning the 
pardon  I 
thought  fitt 
those  13  Bps. 
should  haue 
for  a  pre- 
munire,  that 
you  may 
giue  order  to 


*  Henry  Earl  of  Manchester. 

f  He  was  Justice  of  the  King's  Bencli ;  was  committed  to  the 
Tower  by  the  Lords  on  a  charge  of  high  treason,  and  afterwards  fined 
in  the  sum  of  20,000Z.,  besides  being  declared  incapable  of  all  further 
administration  of  justice. 

X  Tliese  were  Walter  Carle,  Bishop  of  Winchester  ;  Robert 
Wright,  B.  Coventry  and  Lichfield  ;  Godfrey  Goodman,  B,  Gloucester; 
Joseph  Hall,  B.  Exeter  ;  John  Owen,  B.  St.  Asaph  ;  William  Piers, 
B.  Bath  and  Wells  ;  George  Cook,  B.  Hereford  ;  Matthew  Wren, 
B.  Ely  ;  William  Roberts,  B.  Bangor  ;  Robert  Skinner,  B.  Bristol  ; 
John  Warner,  B.  Rochester  ;  John  Towers,  B.  Peterborough  ; 
Morgan  Owen,  B.  Landaff. 

§  The  Bill  went  further  than  Sir  Edward  reports,  for  it  included 


100  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 

u  in^my      ^11  yo--  Ma^'^^  bcst  servaunts  here  pray  for  yo'  Ma*>^' 
Sfthiike   ^P^^^y  ^  ^lappy  dispatch  of  afiaires  there,  conceaving 
itfitt.         yo'  p'^sence  would  be  of  very  much  advantage  to  yo' 
services  here,  &  this  is  also  y*"  earnest  prayer  of 
Yo""  sacred  Ma*'" 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Westminster,  27°  S*"'',  1641. 
Eden:  2:  No: 
By  the  King  : 

I  co'mande  you  to  direct  my  L:  Keeper  in  my  name  to  issew 
out  a  Proclamac'on  co'manding  all  Parlament  Men  to  attend  on  the 
Parlament. 

"  Thanke  Southampton  in  my  name,  for  stopping  the  Bill  against 
the  Bishops  :  &,  that  at  my  co'ming,  I  will  doe  it  myselfe." 

"  For  yo""  sacred  Ma''«." 

"  Yours  apostyled." 
"  27  8'^'«  Apost.  2°.  9^''\— R.  6«  9*''*  1641  at  6.  at  night,  by  Mr. 
Brunker. 


Sir  Edioard  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo'  most  excellent  Ma*% 
My  last  to  yo'  Ma*'*'  was  of  y'  27*^^  p^'sent,  w*^^  I  sent 
by  packet  addressed  to  Mr.  Th^rer.  Yo""  Ma*'*"'  long 
absence  encourages  some  to  talke  in  Parliam*  of  highe 
matters.  It  was  yesterday  in  debate  in  y^  Commons 
House,  that  y*'  Parliam*  may  have  the  approbac^on  of 
all  officers,  councellors,  ambMors,  and  ministers,  and 
yo'  Ma*'*"  y*"  nominac^on.-''    The  reasons  alleaged  for 

"Bishops  and  other  persons  in  holy  orders."  It  was  to  shut  them 
not  only  out  of  Parliament,  but  also  from  the  Privy  Council,  the 
Commission  of  the  Peace,  or  the  execution  of  "  any  temporal  authority, 
by  virtue  of  any  commission."  A  pamphlet  strongly  marking  the 
direction  of  the  public  feeling  was  at  this  time  industriously  and 
widely  circulated,  under  the  title  of,  "  Lord  Bishops  none  of  the 
Lord's  Bishops." 

^"  A  highly  figurative  and  elaborate  speech  was  made  on  this 
occasion  by  "  Master  Smith,  of  the  Inner  Temple,"  which  he  has  done 
posterity  the  favour  to  publish.  In  one  part  he  observes  :  "  Prero- 
gative and  Liberty  are  both  necessary  to  this  kingdom  ;  and,  like  the 
sun  and  moon,  give  a  lustre  to  this  benighted  nation,  so  long  as  they 
walk  at  equal  distances  ;  but  when  one  of  them  shall  venture  into 
the  other's  orb,  like  those  planets  in  conjunction,  they  then  cause  a 


1641.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


101 


it  were,  first  that  it  had  bene  soe  heretofore,  &  soe  is 
conceaved  to  be  an  auntient  right :  that  y*"  ill 
eflects  that  have  bene  by  y*"  councells  &  acc'ons  of 
olde  officers,  councellors,  &c.  &  y*"  feares  that  there 
may  be  y"  like  by  the  new ;  will  make  all  that  hath 
bene  hitherto  donne  nothing,  if  this  may  not  be 
graunted  to  secure  them,  whereby  the  kingdome  may 
be  as  well  p^'served  as  purged.  S*^'^  that  yo''  Ma^'""  did 
heare  particular  &  privat  mens  advise  in  y^  choyce  of 
yo""  offi",  councellors,  &c.  &  therefore  it  can  be  noe 
derogac^on  for  yo""  Ma^'^  to  take  therein  y^  advise  of 
y^  P^liament.  Some  said  that  untill  such  things  as 
these  shalbe  granted  they  cannot  w*^  a  good  con- 
scyence  supply  yo'  Ma*'^'  necessities :  after  a  long 
debate  this  busines  was  at  length  referred  to  a  Select 
Committee  to  p^'pare  forthw*^  heads  for  a  pet""*  to  be 
p^sented  to  yo"  Ma*'"  to  receave  the  P^liam**  appro- 
bac'on  of  such  officers,  councellors,  &c.  as  yo""  Ma*'*" 
shall  choose,  for  better  p^'venc^on  of  y"  great  &  many 
mischeifs  that  may  befall  y"  Comonwealth  by  y^ 
choyce  of  ill  councellors,  officers,  ambMors  &  minis- 
ters of  state,  w*'^'  pet°"  is  to  be  ripened  w*^  all  speede 
&  to  be  p'^sented  to  y*"  House :  there  appeared  soe 
many  in  y"  Commons  House  against  this  busines, 
that  some  conceave  that  there  wilbe  noe  further 
proceeding  in  it,  but  I  doubt  it :  howsoever  I  may 
not  forbeare  to  let  yo'  Ma*'""  know,  that  the  Lo:  ffalk- 
land,  S-^  Jo.  Strangwishe,*  Mr.  Waller,  Mr.  Ed. 
Hide,  &  Mr.  Holborne,  &  diverse  others  stood  as 
Champions  in  maynten^nce  of  yo''  Prerogative,  and 
shewed  for  it  unaunswerable  reason  &  undenyable  ico'mande 

you  to  doe 

p^sedents,  whereof  yo'  Ma*'"  shall  doe  well  to  take  i"  my  nan 
some  notice  (as  yo'  Ma*'"  shall  thinke  best)  for  their  thauViu 


The  Commons  House  having  gotten  notice  of  y"  retume. 

deeper  eclipse."  He  then  concludes  a  string  of  uncouth  metaphors 
by  assuring  the  House  that  it  was  necessary  "  so  to  provide  that 
the  Maecenas's  of  the  times  may  not,  like  great  jacks  in  a  pool, 
devour  their  inferiors,  and  make  poverty  a  pavement  for  themselves 
to  trample  on." 

*  Sir  John  Strangeways,  knt.  of  Melbury  Sampford,  Dorset- 
shire. 


encouragm^t. 


doe  it  my- 
selfe  at  my 


102 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


[1641. 


On  the  con- 
traire  1  com- 
mand you  to 
take  order 
that  these 
Billes  bee 
expedited 
that  they 
may  with  all 
possible  dili- 
gence attend 
the  Parle- 
ment. 


new  B^^'*  that  are  now  making,  some  did  mervale 
that  any  man  should  move  yo'  Ma^'''  for  making  of 
B^"  in  these  tymes,  when  it  is  well  knowne  how  great 
complaints  are  against  them  in  generally  &  some 
would  have  had  a  pet°"  or  message  to  be  sent  to  pray 
yo""  Ma*'''  to  be  pleased  to  stay  y''  constituting  of  any 
more  B^'  till  y"  busines  concerning  Episcopacy  shalbe 
determyned  :  but  this  moc^on  Avas  not  resented  in 
y''  House,  &  soe  y*"  discourse  thereof  fell.f 

There  was  yesterday  a  great  debate  in  y*"  Upper 
House  about  y^  Bill  for  taking  away  y^  B^'  votes,  & 
it  was  very  doubtfuU,  after  a  long  dispute,  w*"^  side 
was  likeliest  to  carry  itt,  but  att  length  both  sides 
agreed  to  put  off  y*"  further  debate  thereof  till  y*'  10*'' 
of  Nov'  next,  before  w'^''  tyme  it  wilbe  tryed,  of  what 
vallidity  impeachm*  against  y*"  13  B^'  will  proove 
to  be. 

The  considerac'on  of  these  particular  passages  may 
be  sufficyent  to  move  yo''  Ma*'*"  to  hasten  yo'  returne, 
&  1  shall  take  y*"  boldnes  to  ad  to  it  one  more,  w^^  I 
observed  at  y^  Councell  Borde,  when  Marq:  Hert- 
ford J  moved  y*"  Lo'^*^'  (upon  occasion  of  these  words 
in  Mr.  Th^rers  let*""  to  me,  viz.  that  he  did  hope  y'' 
P'liamt  of  Engl,  would  interpose  &  hasten  yo'  Ma*'*"* 
returne)  to  consider  whether  it  might  not  be  fit  to 


*  The  superstitious  feeling  which  entered  largely  into  all  the  judg- 
ments of  political  events  at  this  period  is  curiously  exemplified  by  a 
contemporai'y  writer,  speaking  of  the  occurrences  immediately  after 
Charles's  return  :  "  It  happened  one  day,  as  some  of  the  ruder  sort 
of  citizens  came  by  Whitehall,  one  busie  citizen  must  needs  cry, 
'  No  Bishops  !'  Some  of  the  gentlemen  issued  out  of  Whitehall,  either 
to  correct  the  sauciness  of  the  fool  in  words,  if  they  would  serve, 
else,  it  seemes,  with  blowes  ;  what  passed  on  either  side  in  words  none 
but  themselves  knew  ;  the  citizen,  being  more  tongue  than  souldier, 
was  wounded,  and  I  have  heard  dyed  of  his  wounds  receaved  at 
that  tyme  ;  it  hath  been  affirmed  by  very  many,  that  in  or  near 
unto  that  place  where  this  fellow  was  hurt  and  wounded,  the 
late  King's  head  was  cut  off,  the  Scaffold  standing  just  over  that 
place." 

+  The  Parliamentary  History  asserts  that  the  motion  for  a  con- 
ference with  the  Lords,  for  the  purpose  of  drawing  up  a  petition  on 
this  subject,  was  carried,  on  a  division,  by  71  to  53. 

.t  Hertford,  at  this  period,  was  Governor  to  the  Prince  of  Wales. 
This  branch  of  the  Seymours  became  extinct  in  1675. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


103 


move  y''  P'liara*  here  to  that  purpose ;  most  of  y*"  rest 
of  y''  Lo'^'''  of  y''  Councele  declyned  it,  in  regarde  y*" 
le''  was  not  written  to  y*'  Boorde  but  to  me,  &  that 
Mr.  Th'rer  left  it  to  my  choyce  whether  to  acquaint 
them  w*''  it  or  noe ;  whereby  I  observe  that  every 
one  of  yo""  Ma^'*"^  Pr.  Councele  is  not  fond  of  yo' 
speedy  returne  hither.  Yo'"  Ma*""  can  best  make 
iudgm*  by  there  carriages  how  much  it  imports  you 
to  hasten  hither. 

I  have  delivered  yo''  Ma*'"'"  warraunt  concerning 
jo'  Collar  of  Rubies,  and  am  promised  that  this  weeke 
order  shalbe  sent  into  y*"  Low  Countries  for  delivery 
of  y*'  same  accordingly  w*^  all  dilligence  possible.  The 
Queene  toulde  me  on  Wensday  last,  that  she  would 
send  an  expresse  to  yo""  Ma"^  wSn  a  few  dayes,  w*"^'  I 
beleeve  she  hath  donne  by  this  tyme.  This  from  my 
Lo.  Keeper  was  delivered  to  me  for  yo*"  Ma*'*"  this 
afternoone. 

I  assure  yo""  Ma*'''  I  have  bene  warnM  by  some  of 
my  best  friends  to  be  wary  what  I  wryte  to  yo""  Ma*'% 
for  that  there  are  many  eyes  upon  me  both  here  & 
in  Scotl.  &  that  Ttrs  that  come  to  yo'  Royall  hands 
doe  after  oft  miscarry  &  come  to  others  view  :  albeit  it  is  a  Ley. 
this  shall  not  deterre  me  from  p^formaunce  of  my 
duty  in  advertising  yo''  Ma*'*"  of  all  things  that  shall 
occurre  to  my  knowledge  of  certeynty,  importing  yo*" 
Ma*'^^  service,  yet  I  humbly  beseech  yo"  Ma*'^  to 
vouchsafe  to  keepe  to  yo'self  what  I  take  y*"  freedome  i  simii. 
to  imparte,  least,  in  these  tym'es,  that  may  be  rendred 
to  be  treason  in  me,  w*'^  I  humbly  conceave  to  be  y^  JhiTon^^* 


Apost.  6°  g**-'*.— Re<J  11»  Qbris  by  Mr.  Tlio.  Killegrew.* 


*  This  is  the  gentleman  of  facetious  memory,  generally  known  only 
as  the  Court  buffoon  of  the  succeeding  reign,  but  who  had  other  claims, 
not  generally  understood,  upon  the  Royal  notice.  At  this  period  he 
was,  or  had  been,  page  to  Charles  the  First  ;  and  was  afterwards  an 


Wednesday 
last.  Wheu 
ye  deliver 
this  inclosed 
to  my  Wyfe, 
desyre  her 
not  to  open 
it  but  when 
she  is  alone. 


104 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


[1641. 


Sb^  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo'  most  exceir  Ma^'*", 
The  29*^  ofyMast  monetli  I  sent  yo'^  Ma'^'=  a  It^ 
in  a  packet  adressed  to  Mr.  Th^rer,  &  on  Satterday 
last  about  7  at  night  I  receaned  by  Capt.  Smith  *  yo' 
Ma'^^^  co'maunds  apostiled  24°  8^"%  &  according  to 
yo'  Ma^'*""  co^maunds  I  gave  him  yo""  Ma*'"  \V  to  p^sent 
it  to  y^  Queene.  The  relac^ons  w*"''  are  here  made 
by  any  that  come  from  thence,  are  (for  y^  most  p*^) 
varied  &  reported  afterward  by  others  according  to 
y^  sence  and  affec^on  of  each  several  audito'%  &  soe 
become  very  uncertaine,  &  some  are  apt  to  credit 
&  report  y*"  worst  of  businesses,  &  to  silence  what 
they  like  not,  wherefore  I  humbly  conceave,  that  a 
relac^on  written'  by  a  good  &  unsuspected  hand, 
would  not  only  gayne  best  beliefe,  but  be  lesse  sub- 
iect  to  mistakes  &  misreports :  &  I  hope  when  y*" 
examinac^ons  of  y*"  late  disturbances  there  shalbe 
published,  y^  same  will  cleere  all  doubts,  &  giue 
honnest  men  full  satisfac^on.  I  have  shewen  y^ 
Queene  &  some  Lo**^'  the  coppy  of  Marq:  Hamil- 
tons  2.  &  3*^  It"  to  yo'  Ma'%  whereby  he  begs  yo' 
Ma*'^'  pardon,  w*'^  argues  he  is  not  soe  faultlesse,  & 
innocent,  as  we  would  here  render  him.    I  humbly 

attendant  upon  Charles  the  Second  during  his  exile.  Some  allusions 
are  made  to  him  in  subsequent  letters  ;  particularly  where  the  Queen 
of  Bohemia  solicits  a  commission  for  him.  His  family  was  also,  in 
some  degree,  connected  with  the  Royal  family,  by  the  marriage  of 
Mary,  daughter  of  Sir  William  Killegrew,  with  Frederic  of  Zulestein, 
an  illegitimate  son  of  Henry  Prince  of  Orange, 

*  This  Captain  Smith  displayed  great  courage,  as  well  as  loyalty, 
in  the  King  s  service.  In  the  battle  of  Edgehill,  on  the  22ud  of 
October,  1642,  when  Sir  Edward  Verney,  the  Royal  Standard 
Bearer,  was  killed,  and  the  standard  taken,  Smith  rushed  amidst 
the  enemy  and  retook  it,  for  which  he  was  instantly  made  a  knight 
banneret,  and  received  soon  after  a  large  gold  medal,  "  with  the 
King's  picture  on  the  one  side,  and  the  banner  on  the  other,  which 
he  always  wore  to  his  dying  day,  in  a  lai'ge  green  watered  ribband, 
cross  his  shoulders."  He  fell,  two  years  afterwards,  at  Cheriton 
fight,  sometimes  called  the  battle  of  Alresford. 


1641.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


105 


thanke  yo'  Ma*'^  that  you  have  bene  soe  carefuU  of  yo' 
faithful!  servaunt;,  as  to  burne  all  such  of  my  V%  as 
you  returne  not  to  me  apostiled,  w'^^  soe  much  con- 
cernes  ray  safety,  as  I  assure  your  Ma*'*",  I  have  bene 
warned  by  some  of  my  best  freinds  both  there  and 
here,  to  be  wary  in  my  advertisem*',  least  being  too 
good  a  servaunt  (these  are  their  very  words)  doe  me 
hurt. 

I  have,  inclosed,  sent  yo'"  Ma"*"  y^  coppy  of  an 
order*  of  y''  Parliam*'  concerning  their  abundant  care 
of  y^  Princes  highnes  safety  and  education,  the 
reasons  thereof  were  delivered  at  Oatlands  by  my 
Lo.  of  Hollandf  to  y""  Queene,  who  (I  heare)  gave 

*  A  conference  took  place  on  this  subject  between  the  two  Houses, 
wherein  it  was  urged  that  the  Prince  had  recently  been  often  at  the 
Queen's  residence  at  Oatlands  ;  and  though  the  Commons  did  not 
doubt  the  motherly  affection  and  care  of  her  Majesty  to'.\ards  him, 
yet  there  were  some  dangerous  persons  at  Oatlands,  Jesuits  and 
others,  and  therefore  it  was  desired  that  the  Marquis  of  Hertford 
should  be  enjoined  to  take  the  Prince  into  his  custody  and  charge, 
attending  upon  him  in  person,  and  also  that  the  Prince  would  make 
his  ordinary  abode  and  I'esidence  at  his  own  house  at  Richmond.  To 
this  it  was  added,  that  Lord  Hertford  should  place  some  person  about 
the  Pi'ince  to  be  answerable  to  both  Houses  ;  so  that,  in  fact,  the 
Prince  would  have  been  a  complete  prisoner.  When  the  message 
was  sent  to  the  Queen,  she  made  answer  that  the  Prince  was  cele- 
brating his  Sister's  birthday. 

f  Henry  Rich,  first  Earl  of  Holland  (and  second  son  of  the  Earl 
of  Warwick),  so  created  by  James  the  First,  in  1 624.  He  is  recorded 
in  the  Loyal  Martyrologie  by  Winstanley,  as  a  special  favourite  of 
Charles  in  the  early  part  of  his  reign,  being  then  Governor  of  Windsor 
Castle  :  yet,  after  that  date,  says  Winstanley,  "  when  the  Long  Par- 
liament began  to  sit,  and  religion  became  the  bone  of  contention,  he 
sided  with  them  ;  but  afterwards  perceiving  that  they  made  religion 
only  a  cloak  to  cover  their  rebellion,  he  deserted  them,  and  took  up 
armes  for  the  Royal  interest."  Being  defeated  and  taken  prisoner, 
he  suffered  on  the  same  scaffold  with  the  Duke  of  Hamilton  and 
Lord  Capel,  on  the  9th  of  March,  1648.  In  the  charge  of  his  siding 
with  the  Parliament,  Winstanley  goes  further  than  Dugdale,  and 
those  writers  who  copy  from  him  ;  the  latter  asserting  only  that  the 
favours  heaped  on  Holland  by  Charles  made  that  Earl  so  fearful 
of  the  Parliament's  enmity  as  to  induce  him  not  only  to  stand 
neutral  himself,  but  also  to  persuade  the  Earl  of  Essex,  his  near 
kinsman,  and  Lord  Chamberlain,  to  desert  his  Royal  Master  when 
forced  to  fly  fi'ora  Whitehall.  De  Larrey,  a  French  historian,  says 
of  him  that  he  possessed  greater  genius  than  his  brother,  Lord 


106  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


Doe  you  it  in 
my  name. 


I  have  syned 
it,  but  I  will 
not  haue  you 
to  make  use 
of  it  but  as 
my  Wyfe 
shall  direct 
you. 


a  very  wise  and  discreete  answeare  to  y^  same,  as 
(I  beleeve)  her  owne  pen  will  very  speedily  acquaint 
yo^  Ma*'^ 

It  is  said  there  is  a  new  designe  discovered  of 
a  later  intenc'on  then  Mr.  Percyes  to  have  debauched 
y'^  late  Army,  but  what  it  is  I  cannot  learne.  My 
Lo.  Keeper  sent  to  me  this  day  to  acquaint  yo'"  Ma*'**, 
that  y'"  p'^sent  new  Lo.  Mayor  lately  sworne  (named 
Rich.  Gurney),  being  not  in  y^  commission  of  Lieu- 
tenn^cy  for  London  &  liberties,  it  wilbe  necessary 
that  y*  comiss'on  be  renewed  &  his  Lo^  put  into  it, 
w"^^'  may  soone  be  donne,  if  yo''  Ma^'"  please  to  signify 
yo'  pleasure  to  my  Lo.  Keeper  to  that  purpose.  The 
B**  of  Chichester  humbly  desires  yo'  Ma*'*"'  licence  to 
be  absent  from  P^liam^,  for  w''^  purpose  I  have  (at  his 
Lo^''  request)  herein  sent  a  warr*  for  yo''  Ma*'^*  signa- 
ture, if  you  shall  think  fitt  to  signe  it.  It  was 
ordered  on  Friday  last  by  y'^  Commons  that  there 
should  be  heads  p^'pared  for  a  conference  concerning 
a  pet°"  to  be  sent  to  yo'  Ma*^*"  to  stay  y^  making  of  y*" 
new  Bpp',  but  this  hath  not  hitherto  beene  proceeded 
in  any  further,  and  some  thinke  it  wilbe  let  fall. 

There  is  newes  come  to  my  Lo.  Lieutenn't  of 
Ireland  of  a  rebellion  in  y*"  north  of  that  kingdome, 
raysed  (as  it  is  said)  by  Papistes,  whereof  one 
Macguire  *  is  one  of  y^  chiefest ;  I  have  not  scene 
ye  jgter  couceming  it,  but  y^  Lo^'  of  yo'  Ma*'"  Privy 
Councell  sate  yesterday  (when  I  was  at  Oatlands)  in 
close  Councell  about  it,  &  this  day  they  were  w**"  y'' 
House  of  Commons  to  advise  concerning  it  as  I  heare  : 
I  beleeve  yo'  Ma*'*"  hath  before  this  receaved  adver- 
tisem*  of  y*"  certeynty  of  this  busines  out  of  Ireland, 
&  I  doubt  not  but  y^  Lo^*  of  yo'  Privy  Councell 
here,  or  my  Lo.  Lieutenant,  will  forthw*^  give  yo' 
Ma*'"  an  account,  what  they  have  advised  upon 


Warwick,  who  was  "  a  person  of  an  agreeable  wit,  perhaps  a  little 
too  much  libertine,  but  knew  very  well  how  to  dissemble,  and  im- 
posed on  the  people  by  an  affected  devotion,  and  going  regularly  to 
sermons." 

*  He  was  brother  to  the  Lord  Macguire,  who  was  afterwards  tried 
by  order  of  the  Parliament,  and  hanged,  drawn,  and  quartered, 
notwithstanding  he  pleaded  his  Irish  Peerage. 


1641.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  107 


herein  :  if  their  Lo^'^'  doe  it  not  speedily,  I  shall 
write  further  of  it,  as  soone  as  I  may  see  y*"  T"  or 
know  some  certeynty  of  it,  being  unwilling  to  trouble 
yo'"  Ma*'^  in  an  affayre  of  that  nature,  but  upon  good 
grounds,  &  knowledge  of  p^tic^lars. 

If  yo''  Ma*'''  could  settle  yo*"  affaires  well  there,  soe 
as  yo"  might  be  here  y*"  next  weeke,  yo""  best  servaunts 
here  conceave  it  would  then  be  in  yo''  Ma*'*'"  power, 
by  yo"  presence,  to  bring  this  P^liam*  to  a  reasonable 
good  conclusion,  w*"^'  that  it  may  be  soe,  is  &  shalbe 
ever  y^  earnest  prayer  of, 

Y'  saced  Ma*'*^^ 
Most  humble  and  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

"Westminster,  Munday  1°  iVo*'"'*^  1641. 

Eden:  Satferday:  6. 
«  For  yo"-  Sacred  Ma^^^" 

"  Yours  apostyled." 
Apost:  6:  9*"*.— ReC^  11«  9*''^  by  Mr.  Tho:  Killegrew. 


I  hope  this 
next  weeke 
will  put  an 
end  to  this 
Tarlament, 
so  that  ye 
may  expect 
me  by  the 
20 :  of  this 
monthe. 


Si7'  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo''  most  excell"'  Ma*''', 
Since  my  sent  yesterday  by  Mr.  Barclay,  I  have 
receaved  by  Mr.  W"*  Murray  yo""  Ma*'  com^aunds  by 
apostile  of  y''  28th  of  Octob''  &  have  delivered  yo"" 
Ma*'^'  to  my  Lo.  Keeper,  together  w*^  a  packet  from 
Mr.  Th^rer,  conteyning  y''  exa^iac^ons  of  y*'  busines 
touching  Marq.  Hamilton,  &c.  All  w*"^'  were  this 
morning  read  at  y^  Councell  Boorde,  whereupon 
their  Lo^'  resolved  for  y*"  p'^sent  to  make  knowne  in 
the  generall,  that  they  had  receaved  a  faire  dispatch 
concerning  that  busines,  &  that  it  was  like  to  have  a 
speedy,  &  quyet  conclusion  ;  &  their  Lo^'',  being  then 
to  goe  to  y*'  Parliam*  House  about  y*"  Irishe  busines, 
sealed  upp  y^  examinac'ons,  &  appointed  too  morrow 
in  the  afternoone  to  consider  further  of  y*"  same,  & 
to  advise  in  what  manner  to  acquint  y"  Parliam* 
therew*^.  I  heare  that  my  Lo.  Lieutenant  of  Ireland 
hath  by  a  dispatch  this  morning  sent  yo'"  Ma*'^  an 
accompt  of  all  y''  particulars  touching  y^  Rebellion 


108  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


in  that  kingdome,*  av*'^  Parliam*  here  takes  to 
hart,  &  there  is  a  Committee  of  12  Lo*^'  together  w^^ 
some  of  House  of  Commons  appointed  this  evening 
to  goe  into  London  to  treate  \v'^  y^  Lo.  Mayor, 
Aldermen  &  Common  Councell  to  borrow  SO""-^-  to  be 
forthw*''  sent  to  Irland,  to  pay  &  encourage  y^  old 
Army  &  alsoe  such  new  soulcliers  as  are  there  lately 
taken  up  to  make  head  to  y*"  Rebells,  for  w*"^  somes 
y^  Citty  is  to  be  secured  by  Act  of  Parliam^,  both  for 
principall  &  interest. 

It  is  said  that  one  Owen  Conellesf  (a  servaunt  of 
S""  Jo.  Clotworthies)  for  making  y^  first  discovery  of 
y^  Rebellion,  &  for  some  services  donne  against  it, 
shalbe  rewarded  by  y*"  P^liam*  w*^'  y^  gift  of  500" 
present^,  &  be  recommended  to  yo'"Ma*'''  for  a  penc^on 
of  200^  There  is  a  Committee  of  y^  Peers  appointed 
to  peruse  all  F'^  that  are  come  out  of  Irland,  to  con- 
sider of  y*"  p^sent  state  of  Irland,  &  to  further  ex- 
amyne  Owen  Conelles  touching  that  Rebellion  upon 
interrogatories  to  be  exhibited  by  y*"  Comons,  who 
are  to  be  p^'sent  at  y*"  examinac'on,  &  y^  same 
Comittee  is  further  to  consider  of  y^  Recusants  in 
Engl:  that  are  of  estate  &  quallity  &  not  convicted  : 
the  Lo.  Lieut*  of  Irland  is  desired  by  y^  Parliam*  (as 
I  heare)  to  get  together  some  Cap*'  and  Off^''  here 
of  Englishe  to  send  over  forthw*^  into  Irland,  &  his 
Lo^  himself  is  pressed  to  hasten  over  w*^  all  possible 
dilligence.    This   day  father   Phelipps  (one  of  y® 

*  In  vol.  vi.  of  Somers'  Tracts,  p.  378,  is  the  Report  of  the  Lord 
Keeper  to  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  1st  of  November,  1G41  ; 
drawn  up  from  the  dispatches  of  the  Lords  Justices  to  the  Lord 
Deputy,  who  was  then  in  England. 

f  Conally's  (Conelles)  discovery  arose  from  some  accidental  con- 
versation, in  a  tavern,  with  Hugh  Macmahon,  grandson  to  the 
"  Great  Earl  of  Tyrone,"  on  the  night  before  the  intended  seizure 
of  Dublin  Castle  by  the  conspirators,  and  which  was  to  have  been 
followed  by  a  general  attempt  upon  all  the  fortresses  in  Ireland. 
Burton  says  that  both  the  gift  and  the  annuity  were  voted  to  him  by 
the  Parliament,  on  the  recommendation  of  the  Lords  Justices.  He 
was  also  recommended  to  preferment.  His  master,  Clotworthy,  in 
1640,  was  the  seconder  of  Pym's  first  motion  against  the  Earl  of 
Strafford  ;  he  was  also  one  of  the  great  supporters  of  the  self-denying 
Ordinance. 


1641.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


109 


Queenes  priestes)  was  committed  by  y*"  Lo*^'  of  Par- 
liam*  for  refusing  to  be  sworne  vpon  y  Bible,  saying 
it  was  a  false  translac'on.*    There  is  to  be  too  mor- 
row a  conference  between  y*'  2  Houses,  vpon  severall 
heads;   1.  touching  y*"  dissolving  of  y^  Covent  of 
Capuchins ;  2.  about  y''  list  of  y*'  Queenes  priests ; 
3^^  about  a  list  of  y""  Princes  servaunts,  to  y"  end 
that  such  as  are  suspected  in  religion  or  otherwise 
may  be  removed;  4^^  about  y""  governm*  of  y^  Isle 
of  Weight,  that  y''  same  may  be  sequestred.f    If  y*' 
Houses  of  Parliament  were  full  it  is  conceaved  it 
would  be  much  for  y®  advantage  of  yo''  Ma*'*",  &  y*" 
good  of  the  kingdome,  &  therefore  I  humbly  offer  it 
to  yo'"  Ma*'""'  considerac^on,  whether  it  may  not  be  fitt  i  beiiue 
for  yo'  Ma*'*"  to  write  to  my  Lo:  Keeper  to  cause  a  done  tws^n 
proclamac'on  to  be  forth w*^  issued  to  require  all  y^  pa^chTut^n" 
members  of  both  Houses  respectively  (all  excuses  set  aii  euents  i 
apart)  to  attend  y*"  Parliam*  in  person  to  consider  of  to  re'^-iterat" 
such  affaires  as  concerne  y*"  peace  &  good  of  this  e?*ili^m^^^ 
kingdome  &  other  yo''  Ma*''''  dominions.  name. 

Wee  hope  now  shortly  to  heare  of  yo''  Ma*^"'  speedy 
&  certeyne  returne  from  Scotland,  &  that  it  may  be 
^th  i^Qj^r  ^  safety  shalbe  y''  dayly  prayers  of, 
Yo'  sacred  Ma*^-^' 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Enw.  Nicholas. 

The  Commons  are  p^'paring  a  declarac^on  of  y'^  state 

*  On  the  preceding  day  several  resolutions  had  passed  the  Commons 
respecting  the  Capuchin  House  in  the  Strand.  Orders  were  also  given 
that  the  Foreign  Ambassadors  should  be  sent  to,  to  deliver  up  such 
priests  as  were  the  King's  subjects,  then  in  their  houses.  Phillips 
was  brought  before  the  House  as  an  evidence  upon  the  business 
of  Benson,  the  member  for  Knaresborough,  charged  with  selling  pro- 
tections: first  refusing  the  oath  on  pretence  that  it  was  too  general,  and 
might  criminate  himself ;  and,  when  the  Bible  was  brought,  saying, 
that  the  Bible  used  by  them  was  not  a  true  Bible,  and  therefore  his 
oath  would  not  bind  him."  His  committal,  after  repeating  this,  was 
on  the  principle  that  the  words  were  used  without  any  occasion 
given,  to  the  scandal  of  the  Protestant  religion,  and  in  the  face  of 
Parliament. 

t  The  Parliament,  soon  after,  removed  the  Earl  of  Portland  from 
the  government  of  the  island,  and  appointed  the  Earl  of  Pembroke 
in  his  stead. 


110  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 

of  y  kingdome,  as  it  was  when  they  first  met  in 
Parliam*. 

Westminster,  2°  iVo*''*,  1641. 

Eden.  9. 
"  For  yo'^  sacred  Ma'-e." 

"  Yours  apostyled." 
Apost.  9°  9^'-i\—Rec'^  15"  9^"«  by  Mr.  Arth:  Berkley. 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo*"  most  excellent  Ma*'^, 
By  my  let'"  of  y^  2*^  of  this  moneth  I  advertised  yo'' 
By  my  last  I  jy^^''"  of      arrivall  of  Mr.  W"^  Murrey,  &  since  he 

bade  you  .  "  t»  r  t  ■   •  i  i 

expect  inee  brmgs  no  ccrtcync  news  when  yo'  Ma '''intends  to  be 
yet^llow  I*  here,  but  in  generall  that  it  wilbe  shortly,  I  thought 
wmbe«u-  "  it  my  duty  to  put  yo""  Ma*'^  in  minde,' that  y*'  Lo. 
24  before  i^^^  Mayor  &  Cittizens  here  doe  much  desire  to  have 
be  asseured  tymcly  uoticc  wliat  day  yo""  Ma^'*"  will  come  to  this 
differ  nJ'^"  towiic,  that  they  may  have  y^  bono'"  to  waite  on  yo'' 
by  the  grace  Ma*'".  Thcrc  Came  Ftrs  yesterday  from  Irland  w*^ 
of  God,  I  confirme  y*"  newes  of  y^  Kebellion  there,  &  say  that 
fi'om  hence  the  Rebells  are  come  w*^'in  20  miles  of  Dublin,  &  are 
"without^'  very  cruell  to  y''  En^lishe  Protestants,  and  have 
^'^"^in*^^^  donne  much  misclieif  aired dy  in  y"  country : — Tliere 
Lo.  Maior,  is  ordcr  here  for  sending  p^'sently  200O  foote  &  500 
tSfs  from  horse  from  hence  into  Irland :  and  S'"  Ja.  Ashley,*  & 
whe^^t?doe  &  ScHant  Maior  Merrick  and  other  Officers  are 
it,  for  though  forthw^'^to  ffoc  awav  for  that  king^dome.  The  hast  of 
when  I  shall  this  bearer,  (who  came  even  now  to  me  from  y^ 
yeTi\aue  Quccne  for  a  post  warrant)  will  not  give  me  tyme  to 
Ihe  chJke  of  more  to  yo'  Ma*'*'  att  p^sent,  but  that  I  assure  yo" 

the  pi^^li^^j  Ma*'''  yo""  presence  here  is  now  extreame  necessary,  f 

cum  to 

London.  ^  gj^^.  Jj^^q^j  Astley  was  Serjeant  Major  General  of  the  King's 

Army-royal  ;  he  distinguished  himself  much  during  the  Civil  Wars, 
and  was  created  Lord  Astley  of  Reading.  Merrick  was  afterwards 
knighted  by  the  King  ;  yet  he  joined  the  ParHament  forces,  was 
made  Serjeant  Major  General  by  the  Earl  of  Essex,  and  afterwards, 
at  the  siege  of  Reading,  was  appointed  General  of  the  Ordnance, 
being  superseded  in  his  former  office  by  the  famous  Skippon,  by 
order  of  the  Parliament. 

+  It  is  a  fact  deserving  notice  that  the  leading  party  in  the  House 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  Ill 

as  well  for  yo""  affaires  here,  as  in  Irland  :  &  I  beseech 
God  to  send  yo'  Ma*'*-'  a  speedy  &  safe  returne,  w*"^ 
none  desires  more  then 

Yo'  Ma''^^ 

Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Wesminster,  3"  iVo^''«  1641,  att  9.  at  night. 
Eden.  9. 


Sir  Edivard  Nicholas  to  the  King. 


May  it  please  yo'"  most  excellent  Ma*'^, 
I  wrote  to  yo^'  Ma*'*"  a  few  lynes  yesterday  by  an 
expresse  sent  by  y'^  Queene,  &  this  morning  I  receaved 
yo'^  Ma'^"^^  com'aunds  by  apostile  of  y^  30'^  of  8^".  I 
have  herew*''  sent  yo''  Ma*'^  a  lef  from  my  Lo.  Keeper 
(&  to  Mr.  Th'rer  a  Bill)  for  new  Sheriffs  for  this 
next  yeare,  that  yo''  Ma*'°  may  be  pleased  to  prick 
them  there  if  you  soe  thinke  fitt ;  My  Lo.  Keeper 
desirM  me  w*^all  to  send  to  yo''  Ma*'*"  y^  informac'on 
inclosM,  w*"^'  his  Lo^'  receaved  (for  sparing  of  some 
vpon  that  Bill)  since  y''  same  was  made  vp,  that  yo" 
Ma''"  may  be  pleased  to  take  them  into  considerac'on. 

The  Lo'^'^^  of  your  Ma^'*"'  Privy  Councell  here  have 
heard  read  all  y"  exa^iac^cons  concerning  Mar:  Hamil- 
tons,  and  y*"  Earles  of  Arguile  &  Lannerick  absent- 
ing themselves,  &  since  they  receaved  noe  direcc^ons 
to  communicate  those  exa^iac'cons  to  any  other  then 
to  yo"  Privy  Councell,  they  thinke  not  fitt  to  pub- 
lishe  y^  same,  otherwise  then  by  declaring  (to  such  as 
they  shall  have  occasion  to  speake  w'^'  about  that 
business),  that  they  finde  nothing  in  all  those 
exa^iac^ons,  that  in  any  sorte  reflects  vpon  yo' 
Ma*'"'  bono'".  The  exa^iac^ons,  themselves  are  by 
their  Lo^'  left  in  my  hands  vnsealed,  that  any  of  y^ 
Lo*^'  of  yo'  Privy  Counsell  may  see  &  reade  them, 
but  I  am  to  give  noe  coppies  of  y"  same,  &  y"  Lo^*^^ 


The  Keeper 
will  fynd  by 
this  inclosed 
to  him  that 
I  raeane  not 
to  pricke  the 
Bill  of 
Sherifs  vntill 
my  cuming 
home,  so  that 
for  the  pre- 
sent there  is 
no  neede  of 
his  informa- 
tion. 


They  neede 
to  doe  no 
more,  but  as 
they  haue  & 
resolue  to 
doe. 


of  Commons  were  now  as  anxious  for  the  King's  coming  back,  as  his 
friends  could  be  ;  for  on  this  day  it  was  ordered  by  the  House  that  a 
letter  should  be  sent  to  the  King,  pressing  his  return. 


112 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


There  neede 
no  more. 


I  shall  not 
faile  to  pro- 
tect you  ac- 
cording to 
my  Power, 
&  (according 
to  the  owld 
Englishe 
<;ompliment) 
I  would  it 
were  better 
for  your 
sake. 


willed  me  to  signify  to  Mr.  Th'rer,  that  if  yo'  Ma*'^ 
please  thsit  there  shalbe  any  further  publication 
thereof,  they  expect  further  direcc^ons  therein.  I 
have  com'unicated  to  y''  Lo^**',  &  given  them  coppies 
of  Mar:  Hamiltons  3"^  le*'  to  yo'  Ma'%  w'^^  doth  give 
great  satisfacc^on  here  to  all  men,  that  nothing  in 
that  vnhappy  business  doth  in  y*"  least  manner  reflect 
on  yo''  Ma*'*"'  hono^ 

The  Parliam*  here  takes  to  hart  y^  Rebellion  in 
Irland,  &  hath  expressed  a  great  affec^con  to  yo""  Ma^'^^ 
service  in  that  particular.  They  have  resolved  (as  my 
Lo.  Keeper  desired  me  to  signify  to  yo'  Ma*'^)  to  send 
thither  6000  foote  &  2000  horse ;  Avhereof  2000 
foote  &  5O0  horse  presently ;  &  thej^  are  borrowing 
of  y^  Citty  SO""-^,  they  hope  wilbe  sent,  &  in  con- 
fidence, that  they  shall  have  y^  same  to  supply  other 
paym*',  they  are  now  sending  away  20°^- ^v,  w*"^  they 
have  reddy  in  cashe,  &  was  designed  for  other 
affaires.  My  Lo.  Keeper  saith  he  hath  sent  yo'" 
Ma*'^  Ftrs  touching  y*"  Irishe  Rebellion  to  the 
Com'ittee  of  both  Houses  appointed  to  consider  of  & 
take  care  for  all  things  that  concerne  that  business, 
and  will  himself  speedily  give  yo'"  Ma*'^  an  accompt 
of  vo'  Ma*'*"'  comaunds,  w"^''  he  receaved  this  day  in 
y*^  packet  of  y^  30^^  of  8^^^  I  assure  yo^  Ma*^^  I  find 
that  it  is  noe  easie  matter  in  these  mallevolent  tymes, 
for  an  honnest  man  (that  hath  anything  to  doe  in 
afi'aires)  to  p^'serve  himself  &  his  reputac^on  :  but  I 
hope  yo'  Ma*'*'  will  protect  yo'"  faithfull  ser vaunts, 
that  shall  w^^'  integrity  &  dilligence  endeavour  to 
serve  you,  as  will  ever 

Yo""  sacred  Ma'^"' 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edward  Nichola.s. 

There  is  an  Act  passing  for  pressing  of  soldiours 
for  Irland,  w'^^'  hath  bene  twice  read,  and  is  now  in 
y^  Comittees  hands. 

Westminster  4°  iVo*"*  1641. 

Eden:  9. 
"  For  yo"^  sacred  Ma*''e." 

"  Yours  apostyled." 
Apost.  9°  9&'-'».— Rec"  15°  Novemler  by  Mr.  Arthur  Berkley. 


1C41.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


113 


Sir  Edivard  Nicholas  to  the  King. 


May  it  please  yo''  most  excellent  Ma^'% 
I  wrote  to  yo'  Ma*'*=  by  packet  y^  4*^^  of  tins  No^^^  & 
this  now  is  to  convey  y^  inclosed  from  my  Lo.  Keeper: 
I  hope  it  will  meete  yo'  Ma*'"  on  y""  way,  for  that  I 
heare  it  said,  that  yo''  Ma*^^  will  set  forth  on  Mun- 
day  next,  but  because  I  am  not  certeyne  of  it,  I 
haue  directed  this  packet  to  Mr.  Thr'er,  w'^^  other- 
wise I  should  haue  addressed  (according  to  yo'  Ma*'" 
com\iund)  to  my  Lo*^  Duke.*  If  yo"*  Ma*'^  doe  not 
hasten  hither,  I  doubt  y*'  p^parations  for  Irland  will 
goe  on  but  slowly,t  &  soe  may  come  too  late  to 
p^vent  great  mischiefs  there,  notw^^'standing  y^  care 
of  our  Parliam*.  Here  are  besides  (I  assure  yo"" 
Ma"*^)  other  affaires  that  highly  import  yo'^  Ma*''"  hast 
hither :  If  yo""  Ma*'"  please  to  give  leave  to  my  Lo. 
Mayor  &  y"  Cittizens  here  to  wayte  on  you  into 
this  towne,  I  beseech  yo""  Ma*'^  to  com^aund  that 
timely  notice  may  be  given  of  y"  day,  that  they  may 
provide  for  it,  for  y"  best  of  y"  Cittizens  expresse  a 
great  desire  to  shew  their  affec^on  therein  to  yo'' 
Ma*'",  w"''  I  humbly  conceave  it  will  not  be  conveni- 
ent to  declyne. 

I  humbly  pray  for  yo'  Ma*'"'  happy  and  speedy 
returne,  as  being 

Yo'^  sacred  Ma*'"^ 
Most  humble  &  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Westminster,  6°  1641. 
Eden:  13: 


I  oulie  now 
repeate  what 
in  a  former 
I  Bayd,  that 
you  receaue 
order  from 
my  Wyfe  for 
this,  what 
day  it  shall 
be;  with  this 
addition, 
that  you  di- 
rect my  Lord 
Chamher- 
laine  (I 
meane 
Essex)  t  to 
wait  on  my 
Wyfe,  who 
will  giue 
him  direc- 
tions what 
Howses  he 
shall  prepare 
for  my  vse 
against  my 
returne. 


*  Duke  of  Richmond. 

f  Yet  the  Parliament  seems  to  have  been  very  busy  upon  this 
subject ;  for  not  only  was  there  a  Declaration  framed  on  the  4th, 
but  letters  were  also  sent  to  the  Lords  Justices,  pressing  the  most 
energetic  measures  of  defence. 

X  It  is  difficult  to  ascertain  why  the  King  should  express  himself  as 
though  there  might  be  some  doubt  as  to  who  held  the  office.  Essex 
was  Lord  Chamberlain  until  1642,  when  he  was  superseded  by 
Edward,  Earl  of  Dorset. 


VOL.  IV. 


I 


114  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPOKDEXCE. 


[1C41. 


Written  on  the  reverse  of  the  last  Letter. 

Since  I  wrote  the  other  let"  to  yo'  Ma*%  happening 
w*^  y«  opportunity  of  this  messenger  (who  I  hope 
will  deliver  my  lef"  safe  to  yo''  Koyall  Iiands),  I 
thought  it  my  duty  to  make  this  addic^on  to  my 
former  \et%  that  yesterday  in  y^  Comons  House,  it 
was  moved  to  send  instruc'cons  to  y^  Englishe  Com- 
mittees, to  let  yo'  Ma*'*"  knoAv,  that  y^  Parliam*  here 
finds  that  ill  councells  have  bene  y"  cause  of  all  these 
troubles  in  Irland,  and  that  vnlesse  yo''  Ma*'"  wilbe 
pleased  to  discharge  y''  ill  Councellors  that  are  about 
you  &  to  take  such  as  y"  kingdome  can  confide  in,  the 
Parliam*  doth  hold  itself  absolvM  from  giving  assist- 
ance for  y*"  busines  in  Irland :  Some  that  found  fault 
w*^  this  expression  were  chequed,  but  there  was  noe 
p'fect  resoluc^on  in  this,  but  y"  further  considera- 
c^on  thereof  was  put  oft'  to  a  further  day.* 

I  write  this  that  yo'"  Ma*^*"  may  see  how  extreamely 
necessary  it  is  for  you  to  hasten  hither.  I  beseech  yo"" 
Ma*'"  to  keep  to  yo^'self  tliis  addic'on,  &  to  .burne  this 
lef,  w"^  is  now  sent  you  from 
sacred  Ma*'"^ 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Westminster  6"  iVo^'"'«  1641, 
a"  12  a  clock  at  nooue. 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo'  most  excellent  Ma*% 
Since  m.yne  of  y"  6*^'  p^seut  sent  by  INIr.  Greene  a 
servant  of  y"  D:  of  Richmonds,  I  receaved  y"  same 
night  here  at  Oatlands  yo'  Ma*'"'  apostiie  of  y"  2'^, 

*  This  is  a  remarkable  fact,  not  stated  in  the  Parliamentary 
History,  nor  in  the  other  ordinary  records.  It  is  also  worth  notice 
that  the  Secretary  does  not  mention  the  apology  sent  to  the  Lords 
on  this  day  by  the  Queen,  excusing  Father  Phillips,  and  praying 
forgiveness  for  him,  "  if  it  shall  appear  unto  you  that  he  hath  not 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDP^NCE. 


115 


aud  have  sent  yo'  Ma*^"  Pre  to  B^''  of  London 
together  w'^'  y'^  Bills  signed  for  y"  new  B^'^".  I  shall 
carefully  p^forme  all  yo""  Ma*'''*  com^aunds  by  yo""  last,  & 
render  yo'  Ma*'^  a  speedy  account  of  y^  same.  My  Lo: 
Keeper  sent  me  this  evenins^  this  lef  to  be  conveyed  to  i  i;eturne 

i,  _  11    TIT  •       „       •      •      n  "  this  onlie  to 

yo""  ishi^'"  w*^  all  dnhgence,  w*""  is  y*"  principall  cause  show  you 
of  this  dispatch.    I  beseech  yo''  Ma*'^  to  be  pleased  to  JarefJiiit!) 
burne  or  returne  to  me  all  ray  lett'',  for  I  perceave  ^H^^^^^ 
by  y^  strict  enquiry  after  the  writer  of  Mr.  Webbs 
let',  that  there  is  a  vigilant  &  prying  eye  after  all  that 
is  written  hence,  &  I  would  not  willingly,  that  y*" 
lyons  should  be  made  iudges  of  my  eares.  Wee 
hope  yo""  Ma*'*"  will  set  forth  for  these  partes  too 
morrow  senight  at  farthest.    I  can  say  noe  more  to 
move  yo''  Ma*'''  to  hasten  hither  then  hath  bene 
advertised.    I  pray  God  to  send  yo""  Ma*'^  a  speedy 
and  safe  returne.    I  am  confident  yo'  Ma*'^  was  never 
more  welcome  to  y^  better  sorte  of  Londoners  than 
you  Avill  now  be,  &  I  beleeve  y''  whole  kingdome  will 
reioyce  to  heare  of  yo""  Ma*''''  happy  returne,  w^^  wilbe 
y^  best  newes  that  hath  this  yeare  come  to  y^  eares  of 
Yo""  sacred  Ma*'*"' 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Oatlands,  7°  iW'"'*  1641. 
Eden.  13. 


The  Queen  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas, 

Maistre  Nicholas  havinge  reseaued  a  leter  from 
London  to  nitgh  (night)  :  that  there  is  many  of  the 
Lords  that  ar  gone  of  in  the  contree,  and  that  the  ar 
a  fraid  the  shall  want  some  for  the  bussinesse  of  the 
bishops  :  having  heard  that  Carnaruen*  is  in  is  owne 

maliciously  done  anything  against  the  State,  if,  for  my  sake,  you  will 
pass  by  this  present  offence,"  &,c.  The  Lords  would  have  admitted 
him  to  bail,  but  the  Commons  refused. 

*  Robert  Dormer,  Earl  of  Carnarvon  ;  slain  in  lf)43  at  the  battle 
of  Newbury.  It  is  stated  in  Bromley's  Letters  that  his  Countess 
was  niece  to  Sir  Richard  Browne  ;  but  how,  does  not  appear,  for  she 
was  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Pembroke.    When  this  nobleman  was 

I  2 


116  THE  NICHOLAS  COERESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


hous  some  twentie  milles  of  I  belive  very  fit  you 
should  writt  to  him  from  the  King  to  have  him  come 
to  London  for  that  time  this  bearer  will  cary  your 
letter  to  him  and  having  nothing  to  say  more  I  rest, 
Your  assured  friend 

Henriette  Marie  R. 

"  For  Maistre  Nicholas." 

R.  8«  No^"'  1641.    The  Queene  to  me. 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King.^ 

May  it  please  yo""  most  excellent  Ma*% 
Yesterday  I  sent  yo'  [Ma*'*"  a  Ttr  from  my  Lo. 
Keeper  by  packet  addressed  to  Mr.  Th^rer.  This 
day  the  Commons  House  considered  of  y*"  heads  of  y*" 
instrucc^ons  to  be  sent  to  y^  Enghshe  Committees,  & 
after  a  long  debate,  they  voted  y^  same  in  y  House, 
w"^'  was  thereupon  divided,  &  there  were  (as  I  heare) 
110.  votes  against,  &  151.  for  those  instrucc^ons, 
Yon  must     amougst  w''''  there  is  one  head  to  y''  effect,  (but  a 
this  in  the     little  quallified,)  of  what  I  wrote  in  my  postscript  bv 
iTTtte^'os!'  Mr.  Greene.    Those  instrucc'ons  (I  am  tould)  are 
sibie.         -j-Q      transmitted  to  y*"  Lords. 

It  is  here  reported  by  those  who  have  y^  speediest 
^7^*^?F*^^  &  certevnest  advertisem^'  from  Edinbursr,  that  yo"" 

of  God  those  •         •\^  it  -n  •  i 

Will  prove     Ma*'^  Will  uot  bc  hcrc  till  Christmas  :  what  reason 
phets.         they  have  for  it  I  know  not.    The  warr*'  for  y^  new 
are  passing  as  fast  as  may  be  :  I  this  day  put  y*" 
Signet  to  those  for  Yorke  &  Lincolne.t 

I  have  signifyed  yo""  Ma*'"  pleasure  to  my  Lo: 
Keeper  to  issue  a  Proclamac^on  that  all  Parliam*  men 
attend  in  P'liam*,  but  his  Lo^^  saith  a  Proclamac^on 
must  issue  in  y^  ordinary  way,  and  be  first  signed  by 
yo'"  Ma*%  wherefore  I  have  by  his  Lo^'  advise  this  day 

expu'ing  in  the  field,  he  was  asked  if  he  had  any  suit  to  the  King  ? 
He  repUed,  that  "  he  would  not  die  with  a  suit  in  his  mouth,  to  any 
King,  but  the  King  of  Heaven  ! " 

*  This  Letter,  and  the  following  ones  up  to  the  10th  of  Novembei', 
serve  to  fill  up  omissions  in  the  Parliamentary  History  of  the 
period. 

f  These  appointments  did  uot  take  place. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  117 


sent  a  warr*  accordingly  to  yo'  Ma'^'"  Attorney,  to 
p^pare  such  a  Proclamac^on  for  yo""  Ma*''^'  signature, 
^y''^  as  soone  as  I  can  get  from  him  shalbe  speedily 
sent  to  yo"^  Ma*^^  The  Ea.  of  South*''"  hath  bene 
in  North*""'*":  this  senight,  but  wilbe  here  Wensday 
next,  when  I  shall  not  fayle  to  acquaint  his  Lo^  w*'' 
what  yo'  Ma*'""  hath  comaunded  me.  I  heare  there 
was  this  afternoone  brought  into  y^  Commons  House, 
and  there  read,  a  Declarac'on  of  y^  state  of  y""  affaires 
of  this  kingdome,  w"^  relates  all  y^  misgovernmen* 
and  vnpleasing  things  that  have  bene  donne  by  ill 
Counsells  (as  they  call  it)  since  3°  of  3-0'"  Ma*'^'  raigne 
to  this  p^sent,  and  it  reflects  soe  much  to  y^  p^iudice 
of  yo''  Ma*'*"^  government,  as  if  yo'"  Ma*'*"  come  not 
instantly  away,  I  trouble  to  thinke  what  wilbe  y^ 
issue  of  it :  for  surely  if  there  had  bene  in  this 
nothing  but  an  intenc^on  to  have  iustefyed  the  pro- 
ceedings of  this  P'liam*,  they  would  not  have  begun 
soe  high  as  3°.  The  further  considerac'on  of  this 
Declarac'on  is  to  be  had  too  morrow  in  y^  House  of 
Commons.  If  yo''  Ma*'^  shall  not  be  pleased  to  keepe 
to  yo'"self  what  I  have  written,  and  to  burne  this  let', 
I  may  be  lost.  IV  Ma*'^  cannot  so  much  p'^iudice 
yo^'self,  (if  you  come  away  &  leave  all  things  there 
vnfinished,)  as  you  may  now  by  delaying  yo'"  Ma*'" 
returne  one  day  :  I  pray  God  there  be  not  a  designe 
to  deteyne  you  there  against  the  wishes  &  advise 
of  all  yo'  best  servaunts  here  :  God  send  yo*"  Ma*'^  a 
safe  &  speedy  returne,  so  prayeth  alwayes 
Yo""  sacred  Ma*^'^^  " 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Eden.  13. 

Westminster,  8.  No'""'^  1641. 
"  For  yoi"  sacred  Ma''^." 
"  Yours  apostyled." 

go  j^T^brU  1641.    Apost.  13°.  9*'".    Rec.  18.  O^'K 
Sent  by  Sir  H.  Hungate.f 


You  must 
needs  spcake 
with  such  of 
my  servants 
that  you  may 
best  trust,  in 
my  name, 
that  by  all 
meanes  pos- 
sible this 
may  bee 
stoped. 


I  shall  most 
carefully. 


*  Thomas  Wriothesley,  Earl  of  Southampton.  He  died  in  1667, 
without  issue. 

t  Sir  Philip  Hungate,  of  Saxton,  in  Yorkshire,  was  the  first 
Baronet,  so  created  by  Charles  the  First.    No  name  of  "  Sir  H." 


118  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


The  Queen  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Maister  Nicholas,  I  am  vere  sory  that  my  lettre  did 
not  come  time  enouf  to  go.  I  haue  reseaued  yours, 
and  I  haue  writt  to  the  King  to  hasten  is  coming. 
I  send  you  the  letter  and  if  little  Will  ^lurray  is  well 
enouf  I  vould  haue  him  go  backe  againe :  to  scot- 
land  without  comin  yer  for  a  would  haue  him  go  to 
marow  morning :  tel  him  from  me :  but  if  he 
wher  not  well  then  you  must  prouide  some  bodie 
that  will  be  sure  for  my  letter  must  not  be  lost : 
and  I  vould  not  trusted  to  and  ordinaire  poste :  I 
am  so  ill  prouided  whitt  personnes  that  I  dare  truste 
that  at  this  instant  I  haue  no  living  creature  that  I 
dare  send  :  pray  doe  whatt  you  can  to  helpe  me  if 
little  Vill  Murray  can  not  go  to  send  this  letter, 
and  so  I  rest, 

Your  assured  friend, 

Henriette  Marie  R. 

"  For  your  selfe." 

R.  10°  iW'-'*'  1641.     The  Q:  that  I  should  send  an  expr:  M^""  w: 
her  let'. 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo''  most  excellent  Ma*'", 
My  last  was  by  S""  Hen:  Hungate,  w^^  I  hope 
will  come  safe  to  yo'  Royall  hands ;  &  I  now  send 
this  expresse  by  y*'  Queene^s  com^aund  to  convey 
her  Ma*^"^  Vi\  for  her  Ma*'"  saith  she  hath  alreddy 
sent  all  those  she  can  trust,  w*^  expresses  to  yo" 
Ma*'^ ;  Wee  hope  that  some  of  them  will  shortly 
bring  y^  much  desired  newes  of  yo*"  Ma*'*""  returne. 

I  have  spoken  w*^  y'^  of  Lincolne  about  yo'' 
Ma*'^^  pardon  of  y^  13  B^'  for  Premunire,  &  his 
Lo^  saith  he  wisheth  that  y^  pardon  to  them  may  be 

appears  in  the  Baronetage  ;  therefore  the  person  alluded  to,  after- 
wards mentioned  as  Sir  Henry,  must  have  been  one  of  the  numerous 
Knights  Bachelors  of  that  reign. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  119 

geiierall  for  all  things  else  aswell  as  for  Pre-  withaiimy 
munire,  whereof  his  Lo^  will  consider  better,  & 
then  I  shall  give  yo''  Ma*'^  a  further  accompt  of  that 
partic'lar.  My  Lo.  Keeper  tells  me  that  there  are 
many  precedents,  that  y^  Peers  in  P^liam^t  have 
chosen  their  owne  Speaker,  &  that  vntill  y"*  Lo. 
Burleighes  later  tyme,  there  is  scarce  any  Record, 
that  y*"  King  hath  by  Tt'*  pattents  appointed  a 
Speaker  for  that  House.  Yo'"  Ma^'^  ( I  beleeve)  hath 
heard  that  both  Houses  of  Parliam*  made  an  Ordi- 
nance Satterday  last,  that  y^  Lo.  Lieutenant  of 
Irland  shall  forthw^^  rayse  Volontiers  here  in  Engl, 
to  be  transported  for  suppressing  y''  Rebellion  in 
Irland :  yesterday  his  Lo^^  acquainting  some  Par- 
liam*  men,  that  he  doubted  whether  he  might  rayse 
men  w^^out  warr*  vnder  y^  Great  Scale,  his  Lo^^ 
doubt  was  made  knowne  in  y"  Commons  House,  and 
thereupon  it  was  in  that  liouse  declared,  that  an 
Ordinance  of  both  Houses  was  a  sufficyent  warr*  for 
his  LqP'  levying  of  Volontiers  by  beating  of  the 
drum  &c.  &  an  entry  of  such  their  Declarac'on  was 
accordingly  made  in  the  Register  of  that  House. 
I  heare  that  it  is  written  from  Irland,  that  y^  Rebells 
there  giue  forth,  that  they  expect  yo''  Ma*'®  every 
day  att  Don  Luce,*  w''^  is  a  calumny  raysed  by  them 
much  to  yo""  Ma*'*"'  dishonor  &  disadvantage,  only 
to  iustify  their  Rebellion,  &  Avere  fitt  to  be  vindi- 
cated. The  Declarac^on  remonstrating  y''  effects  of 
yo'  Ma*''''  ill  Counceils,  was  yesterday  by  y*"  Commons 
House  taken  againe  into  considerac^on,  &  a  4^^^  parte 
thereof  gonne  thorrow  w*^dl  &  voted  there,  &  y*"  rest 
of  it  wilbe  passed  there,  as  fast  as  may  be,  &  then  it 
is  to  be  transmitted  to  y''  Lo'^'^'.  There  was  yester-  com-and 
day  a  considerac^on  in  y*"  Upper  House  concerning  S  my*^name 
excluding  y''  Papists  Lo'^''',  &  after  a  long  debate  that  ^a¥ueaiimy 
business  was  let  fall,  only  there  was  an  Order  made  seruants  to 
that  y''  lawes  against  Recusants  should  forthw*^  be  the  Lords 
put  in  execuc'on.  Mr.  Attorney  t  (according  yo''  liouse. 
j^/jg^ties  pleasure  signified  to  him)  hath  drawne  a  Pro- 


*  Dunluce  Castle,  near  the  Giant's  Causeway,  in  the  county  of 
Anti'im,  the  seat  of  the  Earls  of  Antrim  ;  now  iu  ruins, 
-t-  Sir  Edward  Herbert,  Knt. 


120  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


clamac'on,  to  comaund  all  Parliam*  men  to  attend  in 
Parliam',  &  having  shewed  it  to  my  Lo.  Keeper,  his 
Lqp  (as  Mr.  Attorney  tells  me)  likes  y''  draught,  but 
saith  he  conceaveth  it  not  fitt  to  issue  any  such  Pro- 
clamac'on,  &  that  he  will  shortly  satisfie  yo'  Ma*^^ 
wiu'fuiT/''  therein.  I  beseech  God  to  send  yo'  Ma^'^  a  speedy 
inlhat  ^^^^  ^  ^^^WJ  i*eturne,  wherein  all  yo"  Ma*''''  best  servaunts 
here  ioin  in  prayer  w*^ 

Yo'  sacred  Ma''*'' 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

The  cause  concerning  y^  13  B^',  and  the  Bill 
touching  Bp'^',  is  to  be  considered  of,  Friday  next. 

Westminster:  10°  iVo^"«  1641,  at  12:  at  noone. 

Eden:  15. 
"  For  yo""  sacred  Ma^'^" 
"  Yours  apostyled." 

10:  96'«  1641.    Apost.  15°.     Ret.  by  Sir  H.  Hungate,  20°  at  one 

o'clock  afternoone. 
This  was  sent  by  Smith  the  Messenger. 


Sir  Edivard  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo'"  most  excellent  Ma*% 
By  the  Queenes  com^aund  I  sent  yesterday  one 
Smith  expressly  w*^  her  Ma*'^'  le"",  w''^  I  hope  he  will 
p^sent  safe,  &  w*^  dilligence  to  your  Royall  hands. 
Wensday  last  there  w^as  a  very  greate  debate  in  y^ 
j^odes  jjouse,  touching  instrucc^ons  p'^pared  by  y^ 
Commons  to  be  sent  to  y''  Englishe  Committees  att 
Edenburg;  six  of  those  instrucc'ons  concerne  y^ 
Rebellion  in  Irland,  w''^'  y*"  Lo"^'''  passed  &  approoved 
of,  the  7*^  was  concerning  ill  Councellors  &  Councells,* 
w*'^'  held  a  very  long  debate,  wherein  I  may  not  for- 

*  Mr.  Prynne  it  was  who  undertook  to  enhghten  the  Lords  upon 
the  subject  of  Evil  Counsells.  His  reasoning  was  founded  upon  the 
anatomy  of  the  human  body.  He  also  prophesied  great  advantages 
from  a  change,  particularly  if  the  King  should  not  bo  permitted  to 
select  any  servants  except  those  approved  by  Parliament.  Vide 
Parliamentary  History,  vol.  x.,  p.  33,  et  seq. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  121 


beare  to  advertise  yo''  Ma*'^ :  that     Ea:  of  Bristoll  & 
his  Sonne  y^  (Lo:  Digby)  did  argue  w*''  soe  much 
reason  *  &  iudgem^t,  as  they  got  y*"  7th  instrucc'on  Thanke 
to  be  fairely  laid  aside,  &  yesterday  att  a  conference  rae.""  ™™ 
of  both  Houses,  the  Lo*^"'  tould  y^  Commons,  that  they 
agreed  to  G  of  y*"  said  instrucc^ons,  but  y''  seventh 
was  of  soe  great  consequence,  as  they  thought  fit  to 
leave  it  to  a  further  tyme :  Yo''  Ma^'^  may  be  pleased 
to  take  notice  of  y^  singular  good  service  that  was  in  ^^^^^ ^^J^ 
that  busines  donne  by  those  2  noblemen,  &  espe-  doeitsiiort- 
cially  by  the  sonne,  who  (I  heare)  did   beyond  '"y^^^f^- 
admirac'on. 

My  Lo:  Keeper  &  Mr.  Attor:  Gen^rall  have 
deferred  the  issuing  of  y*"  Proclamac^on  to  require  all 
Parliament-mens  attendaunce,  as  conceaving  it  to  be 
vnseasonable  att  this  tyme,  &  my  Lo:  Keeper  hath 
promised  that  he  will  give  yo'  Ma*'^  satisfacc^on 
therein. 

I  have  herew*^  sent  yo'  Ma*'^  a  speech  published 
here  in  the  name  of  Mar:  Hamilton,  that  yo'  Ma^^^  one'*^"""' 
may  see  what  artifice  is  here  vsed  by  his  friends  to 
insinuate  into  y''  people  a  good  opinion  of  his  Lo^^ 
piety  and  integrity.  The  House  of  Commons  was 
yesterday  soe  imployed  about  Irishe  aff'aires,  as  they 
meddled  not  w^^  their  Declarac^on,  remonstrating  y^ 
ill  eff'ects  of  bad  Councells.  It  is  advertised  out  of 
Irland  that  y^  rebels  are  30.  thousand  strong,  in 
severall  places  of  that  kingdome,  &  that  they  approche 
towards  Tredaw,t  for  defence  whereof,  y^  Lo*^' 
Justices  have  sent  1000  foote,  and  2  troopes  of 
horse  :  if  y^  rebells  shall  defeate  those  forces,  it  is 
thought  the}^  wilbe  soone  for  Dublin.     The  Lo*^^ 

*  Lord  Digby  had  been  an  active  enemy  of  Lord  Strafford  ;  but 
in  a  speech  made  to  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  21st  of  April, 
1641,  he  recanted  his  former  opinions  respecting  that  Earl,  even 
while  still  describing  him  as  "  a  dangerous  and  insupportable  minister 
to  free  subjects."  His  apparent  objects  were  to  preserve  his  own 
consistency,  yet  to  save  Lord  Strafford's  life;  and  an  abler  man 
would  have  found  it  difficult  to  reconcile  them.  His  speech  closed 
with  a  solemn  protestation  against  any  sentence  of  death  :  "  and  I 
do,  with  a  clear  conscience,  wash  my  hands  of  this  man's  blood." 

+  Tredagh — the  Irish  name  for  Drogheda. 


123  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


Justices  write,  that  vnlesse  there  be  p*"sently  sent 
over  10,000  men,  &  100  "'^  in  monny,  that  kingdom 
wilbe  lost :  whereupon  y*"  Parham*  hath  ordered  to 
increase  y""  6,000  foote  (formerly  directed  to  be 
raised)  to  10,000:  &  they  intend  forthw*^  to  passe 
an  Act  for  raysing  of  200  for  the  service  of  Irland : 
And  where  they  formerly  desired  to  have  only  1000 
Scots,  now  they  will  desire  to  have  10,000  Scots  to 
be  sent  into  Irland  in  such  numbers  as  y*"  Parliam* 
shall  give  direcc'ons. 

Yo*"  INIa^'^  ma}^  by  these  relac'ons  perceave  of  what 
extreame  necessity  &  importaunce  yo""  Ma*'^^  speedy 
returne  is,  w*"^  I  beseech  yo'  Ma^'*"  by  all  meanes  to 
hasten,  for  notw^^standing  all  the  discourses  in  Par- 
liam*,  I  see  nothing  put  into  acc^on.  That  yo'  Ma*'^ 
may  have  a  speedy,  safe,  &  hon''^^  returne  shalbe  ever 
y^  earnest  prayers  of 

Yo'  Ma^'^^ 

Most  humble  and  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

The  last  night  att  10.  a  clock,  after  I  had  closed 
this  ler,  I  receaved  by  Mr.  Tho:  Killegrew  yo""  Ma'^^* 
comands  by  2  apostiles,  &  am  now  going  to  Oatlands 
w*^  yo'  Ma*'*^'  let'  to  y''  Queene,  having  sent  that  to 
my  Lo:  Keeper  :  I  shalbe  carefull  to  p^forme  what  yo'' 
Ma*'"  by  that  dispatch  hath  comaunded  me.  AH 
honnest  men  will  reioyce  at  y*"  welcome  newes  of  yo'" 
Ma*'"'  returne. 

Westminster,  12°  iYo*''*,  1641. 

Eden.  18. 
"  For  yo''  sacred  Ma^ie." 
"  Yours  apostyled." 

120  AV'*'.    Apost.  180.    Ret:  by  Mr.  Proger*  22°  at  9.  morning. 


*  Some  notice  of  this  Mv.  Proger  may  be  seen  in  the  Memoires 
de  Grammont,  whei*e  he  is  spoken  of  as  about  the  person  of  Charles 
the  Second,  and  said  to  be  "  confident  de  ses  menues  plaisirs."  He 
is  the  same  person  who,  with  five  other  Englishmen,  were  concerned 
in  the  foul  murder  at  Madrid  of  the  Envoy  from  the  English  Par- 
liament to  Spain  in  1650.  Proger  (or  Progers)  was  at  that  time  in 
the  service  of  Hyde's  Spanish  Embassy. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  123 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

Ma}^  it  please  yo''  most  excellent  Ma*''', 
I  sent  a  let'  this  morning  to  yo""  Ma*^^  by  Mr.  Jo:  ^^esterday. 
Digby,*  since  my  wrighting  whereof  I  receaved  yo'' 
Ma*'"  by  Mr.  Killegrew,  &  shall  carefully  obey  yo" 
Ma*'"  comaunds.    This  is  only  to  conuey  to  yo"" 
Royall  hands  a  Pardon  for  y'  13  B^P^f  p^pared  by 
y^  Bp  of  Lincolne,  who  (it  seemes)  thought  not  fitt  to 
trust  any  of  yo'"  Ma*'"  learned  Councell  w*^  y*"  drawing  The  return- 
of  it ;  his  Lop  sent  me  word  that  I  should  hasten  it     thf  ^'ue 
to  yo''  Ma*'^  (albeit  you  might  be  on  yo''  way  home)  ^postyUng 
as  I  tendred  y^  good  of  yo""  Ma*'"  service,  w''^  made  tws. 
me  send  it  now,  notw*^'standing  my  owne  humble 
opinion  is,  that  since  y''  hearing  of  y*"  busines  against 
these  13  B^^'  was  appointed  to  be  this  day,  &  in  all 
likelihoode  will  not  be  put  off  to  a  day  much  farther, 
that  it  were  better  to  deferre  y*"  passing  of  this 
Pardon  till  it  shalbe  scene  what  wilbe  determyned 
concerning  them,  for  if  they  shalbe  sentenced  by  y^ 
Parliam*,  this  pardon  coming  afterwards,  and  not  Butifptj 
menc^oning  their  being  sentenced,  will  not  be  suffi-  before*(& 
cyent,  &  if  they  shalbe  quitted  it  wilbe  needlesse ;  Jj^ue  nSt^ 
Nay  if  it  shall  not  be  kept  very  secreat,  it  may  be  to  fined  the 
their  p'^iudice ;  but  yo''  Ma*'''  com^aunding  me  in  this  pose^tSy 
busines  to  pursue  y''  direcc'ons  of  that  able  &  experi-  good!°"^^ 
enced  B^^,  I  held  it  my  duty  to  obey  w*''out  disputing: 
If  yo''  Ma*'"  shall  thinke  fitt  to  passe  this  pardon  att 
this  tyme,  you  may  be  pleased  to  signe  it,  as  vrell  on  ^ 
y''  back,  that  it  may  passe  by  imediat  warr*  as  on  y® 
fore  part  of  it,  &  to  send  it  sealed  up,  w*^  an  expresse 
com^aund  to  my  Lo.  Keeper  to  scale,  who  will  other- 
wise I  beleeve  make  some  scruple  to  put      Great  P^^  y^" 

T  •  r  c       V  m  my  name. 

Scale  to  it. 

*  Son  to  the  Earl  of  Bristol, 
f  In  a  subsequent  letter,  Nicholas  again  refers  to  the  case  of  the 
Bishops,  and  to  the  fact  of  their  demurring  to  the  impeachment 
before  the  Lords,  with  the  exception  of  Godfrey  Goodman,  Bishop  of 
Gloucester,  who  pleaded  Not  Guilty.  This  was  notified  to  the 
Commons  by  a  message  from  the  Lords  on  the  12th. 


124  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


Yo'  Ma*'^'  of  6th  of  this  moneth  giues  me  good 
hope  that  this  packet  will  meete  yo""  Ma*'*"  on  y^  way,  & 
therefore  I  have  addressed  it  (as  yo''  Ma*'^  coraanded) 
to  y^  D.  of  Richmonde.  God  of  his  mercy  p^serve  & 
protect  yo''  Ma*%  &  send  you  a  safe  and  happy 
returne,  w*=^  is  y^  prayer  of  all  yo""  Ma*'*"'  best  affected 
servaunts,  as  well  as  of 

Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

As  I  was  closing  this  let''  my  Lo:  of  Bristoll  sent 
me  word  that  his  sonne  Mr.  Jo:  Digby  goes  not  for 
Scotland,  and  therefore  I  have  sent  that  lef  w**"  this 
to  yo'  Ma*^^ 

Westminster,  120  jyo^ris  1641. 
Eden:  17: 


The  Queen  to  Si?'  Edward  Nicholas. 

Maistre  Nicholas,  I  have  receaued  your  lettre.  I 
am  sory  you  ar  not  well  for  I  would  haue  ben  glad  to 
speake  to  you  but  it  is  of  no  haste  therefore  donat 
hastend  your  selfe  for  feare  of  being  sick  ;  I  send  you 
a  lettre  for  Milord  Keeper  that  the  King  ded  send  to 
me  to  deliuer  it  if  I  though  it  fit.  the  subject  of  it  is 
to  make  a  Derclaration  against  the  ordres  of  Parli- 
amant  which  ar  made  withouct  the  King.  If  you 
beleue  a  fit  time  giue  it  him  if  not  you  may  keepet 
till  I  see  you. 

the  King  will  bee  here  sertaineleye  the  20  of  this 
monthe  therefore  you  may  aduertice  the  Maior  of 
London.  Your  lettre  that  you  did  writt  to  Car- 
naruen  is  comme  bak  to  mee  and  I  burnt  it.  he 
was  not  at  is  hows  it  should  be  vere  nessessairie 
that  you  should  inquaire  where  (he)  is  and  writt  to 
him  and  send  to  milord  Cotinton  for  is  proxies  for 
I  heer  he  as  to  (two)  and  is  owne.  and  send  to 
milord   Southampton  and  Dunsemoure*  to  send 

*  Francis  Leigh,  Lord  Dunsmore ;  afterwards  Earl  of  Chichester. 


1641.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


125 


their  proxies  till  the  comme  them  selues ;  the  are 
in  Warwicshier.  hauing  no  more  to  say  I  reste 
this  12  Novembre 

Your  assured  frend 

Henriette  Marie  R. 

«  For  your  selfe." 

12"  No^'''  1641.  .  The  Queene  to  me. 


Sir  Edivard  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo'  most  excellent  Ma*'% 
This  is  y*"  first  day  since  my  falling  sick^  that  I 
have  bene  able  to  sit  vp  to  write :  &  albeit  I 
shall  doe  it  w*^'  some  difficulty,  yet  my  duty  will 
not  suff*er  me  to  forbeare  any  longer  to  give  yo' 
Ma*'"  an  accompt,  that  by  Mr.  Barkley  I  receaved 
on  Sunday  night  last  yo'  Ma*'"^  comaunds  in  3 
apostiles  dated  y"  9'^  of  this  moneth :  All  w'^^  I 
have  alreddy  p'form'd,  excepting  that  conceruing 
giving  notice  to  my  Lord  Mayor  of  y"  day  of  yo"" 
Ma*'"'  entring  into  London,  whereof  (I  beleeve)  I 
shall  this  afternoone  have  certeynty  from  the 
Queene. 

Herew*^  yo'  Ma*'"  will  receave  a  proclamac'on  for 
y"  attendance  of  y"  Parliam*  men,  w"^  my  Lo:  Keeper 
&  Mr.  Attorney  conceaved  would  have  bene  better 
to  have  bene  forborne  to  be  published  till  yo''  Ma*'"^  re- 
turne,  w"^  is  now  so  neere  in  expectac^on.  The  House 
of  Commons  hastens  by  all  meanes  y"  finishing  of  y® 
Declarac^on  or  Remonstrance,  &  for  y"  more  speedy 
expediting  of  it,  they  have  att  y"  Committee  passed  by 
many  pHiclars  to  avoide  y"  delay  of  long  debate. 

The  order  of  y"  House  of  Commons  for  y"  number  of 
Scots  to  be  sent  into  Irland,  was  altered  from  1000. 
to  5000.  vpon  Saturday  last  in  y"  afternoone,  & 
thoughe  (wee  heare)  that  y"  imploym*  of  soe  many 
Scots  wilbe  very  acceptable  to  that  nac'on,  yet  it  is 
here  apprehended  by  wise  men,  that  y"  same  will 
exasperate  y"  Irishe,  &  make  them  buckle  more 
resolutely  to  a  warre  of  rebellion,  then  otherwise 
they  would  doe.    Since  y"'  plot  in  delivering  to 


126  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


Mr.  Pym-  a  le*'  w^^  a  plaster  and  a  threatening  in  it, 
there  was  on  Munday  last  in  evening,  another  as 
desperate  and  dangerous  a  conspiracy  against  him,  & 
diverse  members  of  both  Houses,  discovered  by  a 
poore  zealous  taylor,  vrho,  being  in  y"  fields  mending 
y''  notes  he  had  taken  of  a  sermon,  there  happened 
to  come  (as  he  relates  it)  2.  souldier-like  men,  soe 
neere  him,  as  he  overheard  them  telUng  each  other, 
how  many  of  their  acquaintance  were  to  be  forthw*^ 
imployed  to  murther  diverse  members  both  of  y*' 
Upper  and  Lower  House,  &  this  taylorf  had  y^ 
oportunity  to  take  from  those  2.  mens  mouthes  y*' 
names  both  of  y''  murtherers,  &  of  y^  p^sons  to  be 
murthered :  the  reward  to  him  that  kiFd  a  member 
of  y*"  Lower  House  was  to  be  40^.  &  to  him  that 
murthered  one  of  y^  Upper  House  lOZ.  This  dis- 
covery makes  a  great  noyse  in  &  about  y''  Parliam* 
House,  &  (however  many  wise  men  give  no  creddit 
at  all  to  it,  yet)  it  hath  produced  severall  orders  for 
securing  of  y*"  Parliam*,  &  Parliament-men,  the 
coppies  of  some  of  w*"^  I  have  here  inclosed  sent  yo"" 
Ma*^^  The  order  of  y"  16*^^  p'sent,^  w'^^  requires  that 
y^  rigour  of  y^  law  be  put  in  excuc'on  against  all 
Papists,  that  shalbe  founde  in  London  or  Westmins- 
ter after  this  night,  is  not  (I  heare)  thought  by  some 

*  Plots  against  the  life  of  Pym  were  rife  at  this  time.  Among 
the  parliamentary  chiefs  he  was  the  most  prominent  mark  for  such  at- 
tem{)ts,  and  many  appear  to  have  been  undertaken,  "  He  seemed  to  all 
men,"  says  Clarendon,  "to  have  the  greatest  influence  upon  the  House 
of  Commons  of  any  man  ;  and,  in  truth,  I  think  he  was  the  most  popular 
man,  and  the  most  able  to  do  hurt,  that  hath  lived  in  any  time."  The 
first  of  the  plots  referred  to  by  Nicholas  was  a  strange  one.  The  plague 
still  lingered  in  various  places  in  and  near  London  ;  and  it  would  seem 
that  as  the  popular  leader  entered  the  House  of  Commons  one  day,  the 
porter  of  the  House  delivered  to  him  a  letter  (received  from  "  a  gentle- 
man on  horseback,  in  a  grey  coat,  who  gave  him  twelvepence  for  the 
speedy  delivery  of  it"  ),  from  which,  on  his  opening  it,  there  dropped  a 
covering  which  had  come  from  a  plague  wound  ;  the  letter  itself  con- 
taining "  many  menaces  and  much  i-ailing  against  him." 

f  His  name  was  Beale  :  but  the  House  could  procure  no  further 
intelligence  of  a  satisfactoi'y  kind  upon  the  subject ;  and  whether  tlie 
alleged  conspiracy  may  not  have  been  a  piece  of  folly  or  of  roguery 
on  the  part  of  the  informer,  is  by  no  means  clear. 

X  Not  recorded  in  the  Parliamentary  History. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  127 


of  y''  Commons  to  be  severe  enouglie,,  soe  as  it  is  con- 
ceaved  there  wilbe  some  more  sbarpnes  added  to  that 
order  this  day:  all  y*" Papists  Lo''*"'  are  alreddy removing 
out  of  this  Towne  vpon  this  order.  ftViday  last  (w''^ 
was  y*"  first  day  of  my  falling  into  extremity)  the 
Venetian  AmbMor  complained  att  y*"  Councell 
Boorde,  that  his  Frs  had  bene  opened  by  y*"  Committees 
of  Parliam*,  &  he  was  soe  much  incensed  at  it^  as  he 
there  made  his  protest,  &  declared,  that  he  would 
treate  no  further,  &  thereupon  w^^'drew  himselfe  (as 
I  heare)  to  Greenew'^^,  till  such  tyme  as  he  shall 
advertise  that  Hepublique  w*^  that  affront  as  he 
termed  it.  The  agent  of  y*"  D.  of  Florence  is  as 
highly  distasted  w'^  some  violence  that  hath  been 
vsed  in  serching  his  house  by  some  officers  or  warr"' 
of  Parliam* :  these  distasts  given  to  those  Ministers 
will  (it  is  thought)  light  very  heavy  on  yo*"  Ma^'^^  su^*^ 
trading  [to]  those  partes,  and  will  proove  a  very 
great  p^iudice  &  interrupc^on  to  y*"  trade  of  this  yo"" 

I  heare  from  a  very  good  hand,  that  there  are 
diverse  principall  gen^  of  Hertfordsh:  who  are  desirous 
to  tender  their  duty  to  yo''  Ma''^  att  Ware,  &  to  wayte 
on  you  into  that  towne  if  yo""  Ma*'^  shall  make  any 
stop  there,  &  they  will  bring  w*^  them  diverse  of  their 
neighbours  &  friends,  who  are  desirous  to  shew  how 
welcome  yo''  Ma*'^^  returne  is  into  that  country, 
whereof  I  thought  good  to  give  yo""  Ma*'"  this  tymely 
notice,  for  that  I  humbly  conceaue  it  would  not  be 
amisse  for  yo''  Ma*""  in  these  tymes  to  accept 
graciously  y^  affecc^ons  of  yo'"  su^''^  in  that  kinde, 
whereby  you  will  have  opportunity  to  shew  yourself 
gracious  to  yo'^  people  as  yo""  Ma*'"  passeth,  &  to 
speake  a  few  good  words  to  them,  w"^  will  gaine  y" 
aff^ons  (especially  of  y"  vulgar)  more  then  any  thing 
that  hath  bene  donne  for  them  this  Parliam*.  This 
day  y"  examinac'ons  against  O'Neale  were  read  in  y" 
Commons  House,  wherein  were  menc'oned  some  Trs 
&  papers  signed  C.  R.,  the  effect  of  one  of  w"^  (sent 
to  Capt:  Leg  *)  was  (as  I  heare),  that  he  should 

*  Captain  Leg,  otherwise  Colonel ;  but  better  known  as  "  honest 
Will  Leg     and  ancestor  of  the  Earls  of  Dartmouth. 


128  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


speake  -with  S'  Ja:  Ashley  according  to  instmcc^ons 
he  had  from  yo'  Ma''",  &  let  none  see  that  let'  but 
only  S''  Ja:  Ashley,  who,  together  w*^  S""  Jo.  Conyers  * 
(as  I  am  tould,  but  I  beseech  yo''  Ma*'*"  to  take  noe 
notice  thereof  from  me)  have  bene  very  large  &  par- 
ticular in  their  examinac^ons,  w*"^'  (I  heare)  reflect 
vpon  yo'^  Ma*''''  person  :  it  is  thought  that  y''  Parliam* 
will  condempne  O^Neale,  but  they  are  not  yet 
resolved  where  or  how  to  trye  him :  they  doubte  y"* 
testimony  against  him  will  not  be  soe  full,  as  in  a 
legall  way  to  condempne  him  at  the  King's  Bench 
barre,  &  they  resolve  not  (as  yet)  whether  it  wilbe 
fit  to  doe  it  by  a  Bill,  according  to  their  legislative 
power. 

I  have  (as  yo""  Ma*^^  commanded)  given  war*  to  my 
Lo:  Keeper  to  renew  y^  Commission  of  Lieutenn'cy 
for  London,  &  to  put  in  y^  new  Lo:  Mayor,  who  is  a 
very  well  aff*^^  servaunt  of  yo''  Ma*'^'. 

There  is  a  Com'ittee  of  both  Houses  appointed  to 
p^'pare  instrucc'ons  for  y"  Lo:  Lieutenant  of  Irland, 
wherew*^  they  are  now  in  hand.  The  13  B^^'  did 
demurre  to  y^  busines  ag*  them,  but  y^  Commons 
have  in  their  House  overruled  y*"  demurrer  &  voted 
that  those  B^'  shall  answere  in  cheif.  I  dispatched 
y^  Bills  for  y^  new  B^^  w*^  all  expedic'on,  &  that 
busines  is  now  in  as  good  forwardnes  as  may  be.  I 
hope  by  that  tyme  yo'  Ma*'^  shall  returne  hither,  to 
be  able  to  goe  abroade,  in  y^  meane  tyme,  I  will  to 
y^  best  of  mv  strength  &  abillity  p'forme  y^  duty  of 
Yo'  sacred  Ma*^^^ 
Most  humble  &  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Westminster,  18:  iVo*''*  1641. 

*  This  Conyers  was  afterwards,  in  1643,  nominated  by  the  Par- 
liament to  the  Lieutenancy  of  the  Tower,  on  the  King  being  compelled 
to  dismiss  Sir  John  Byron  from  that  office. 


1641.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


129 


Sir  Edivard  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo'  most  excellent  Ma*''', 
Yesterday  I  wrote  to  yo'  Ma*'",  &  addressed  it 
by  packet  to  y*"  D.  of  Richmond,  as  yo""  Ma*'^  com- 
manded me  when  you  should  be  on  yo''  returne  : 
since  that,  I  have  receaved  from  y^  Queene  3  of  my 
rtrs,  all  of  them  apostiled  by  yo^  Ma*'^  y*'  13*''  of  this 
moneth,  &  I  humbly  acknowledge  myself  infinitely 
obliged  to  yo""  Ma*'*"  for  yo''  gracious  goodnes  in 
returning  and  burning  my  Ftrs.    I  shall  carefully 
obey  all  yo""  Ma*'^^  com^aunds  in  those  Ttrs.    I  have 
herew*''  sent  for  yo''  Ma*""'  signature  a  draught  for  yo" 
Roy  all  assent  for  y'  B^p  of  Lincolne*  to  be  Arch^^^  of 
Yorke  :  this  was  brought  to  me  this  day,  &  there  is 
noe  returne  as  yet  made  vpon  ye  Conge  d'eslires  for 
any  of  y""  other  B''^^    I  have  herew*^'  alsoe  sent  yo'" 
Ma*'''  a  Bill  conteyning  a  Commission  to  appoint  y"" 
Ea.  of  Holland  to  be  Lo:  G'rall  of  all  yo'^  Ma*'''^  forces 
beyonde  the  Trent,  w*"''  commission  yo'"  Ma*'''  gave  order 
for,  before  yo'"  iourney  into  Scotland,  but  it  seemes 
by   Mr.  Attorney  (who  now  brought  me  this  by 
direcc'on  from  y^  Parliam*  to  be  sent  w*''  speede  to 
jT-o"  Ma*'")  that  vpon  y^  mistake  of  some  name  in  y" 
former  draught  it  passed  not  y"  Greate  Scale :  I 
tould  Mr.  Attorney  I  did  beleeve  yo'  Ma*'"  would  not 
thinke  fitt  to  signe  it  now  before  yo'"  returne;  but 
howsoever  he  wished  me  to  send  it  away  to  yo'"  Ma*'" 
^,tii  ye  £j.g^^  because  he  had  promised  soe  much  to 
y"  Lo'^'^'  in  P'liam* :  this  is  all  I  know  of  this 
busines,  and  yo"  Ma*'"'  wisdome  can  best  direct  you 
what  to  doe  in  it. 

The  business  against  O'Neale  is  referred  to  a  select 
Committee  to  be  p"pared  reddy  for  y"  House  against 
Munday  next,  &  some  thinke  it  wilbe  hardly  heard 
then,  for  albeit  y"  Commons  haue  a  very  good  minde 
to  proceede  roundly  against  him,  yet  (I  heare)  y" 

*  John  Williams,  D.D.  Dean  of  Westminster,  and  formerly  Lord 
Keeper.    To  this  draught  the  royal  signature  was  given. 


VOL.  IV. 


K 


130  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


proofes  are  soe  broken,  as  they  will  not  make  a  full 
&  cleere  evidence  :  the  worst  in  all  that  busines  is, 
that  it  reflects  on  yo'  Ma*%  as  if  you  had  giuen  some 
instrucc^ons  concerning  y''  stirring  up  y^  army  to 
pet"''  y^  Parliam*:  I  hope  it  will  appeare  that  yo' 
j^j^ties  intenc^ons  were  only  to  reteyne  y*"  army  in 
their  duty  &  dependance  on  yo'"  Ma*'^  The  House  of 
Commons  hath  pressed  y''  Lo*^"'  very  earnestly  for 
removall  of  y''  Ea:  of  Portland  from  his  gov^ment  of 
y*"  Isle  of  AVeight,  but  y*"  Lo'^'''  yesterday,  upon  his 
Lo^"  profession  to  liue  &  dye  in  y*"  Protestant  religion, 
let  fall  that  busines  as  by  y*"  inclosed  yo'"  Ma*'''  will 
perceave.  There  hath  bene  nothing  donne  these  2. 
dayes  by  y*"  Commons  touching  y*"  Declarac^on  remon- 
strating y*"  bad  eff'ects  of  ill  councells,  but  it  is 
thought  that  y^  same  wilbe  finished  this  weeke :  there 
are  diverse  well  aff*'"^  servants  of  yo'  Ma*'"  in  that 
House,  that  oppose  that  remonstrance  w**'  vnanswer- 
able  argum*',  but  it  is  veryly  thought  that  it  will 
passe  notw*''standing,'''  &  that  it  wilbe  ordered  to  be 
printed  w**'out  transmission  to  y''  Lo*^"".  The  Com- 
■'ons  (I  heare)  haue  intercepted  some  let''  that  passed 
betweene  Mr.  Croftsf  &  y*"  Dutchess  of  Chevereux,J 
and  gotten  the  key  of  their  earaches,  whereupon 
Mr.  Crofts  hath  this  day  bene  exa^ied :  as  alsoe 
touching  his  soe  frequent  vissitting  of  Coll:  Goring  at 
Portsmouth,  and  y*"  Coll:  is  also  come  vp  by  command 

*  The  motion  was  carried  by  159  to  148,  on  the  22ncl  of  this 
month. 

f  Mr.  Crofts  and  Mr.  WilHam  Murray,  ah'eady  mentioned,  were 
two  of  those  whom  the  Committee  of  Pai-hament,  sitting  at  Grocers' 
Hall,  declared  to  be  persons  of  vile  character,  and  enemies  to  liberty; 
passing  at  the  same  time  a  resolution  that  the  King  should  be  called 
on  to  dismiss  them  from  his  service.  Crofts  had  married  the  aunt 
of  the  Earl  of  Warwick  ;  and  she  had  also  been  very  active  in  Court 
intrigue  previous  to  this,  as  appears  by  a  reference  to  Bromley's 
Royal  Letters,  page  85. 

X  This  Lady  was  at  the  Court  of  England  for  the  first  time,  in 
1638;  and  is  mentioned  by  Pennant,  in  his  Journey  to  the  Isle  of 
Wight,  as  having,  in  a  frolic,  swam  across  the  Thames;  somewhere, 
as  he  supposes,  in  the  vicinity  of  Windsor.  He  also  preserves 
an  extract  from  a  Copy  of  Verses  made  on  the  occasion  by  a  Sir 
J.  M.  (probably  Sir  John  Mennes,  author  of  the  Musarum  JDelicice), 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  COERESPONDENCE.  131 


of  y*'  Commons,  &  suspected,  for  that  it  hath  bene 
informed,  that  he  hath  fortifycd  that  garrison  to 
land,  &  put  forth  some  ould  souldiers  &  put  in  new ; 
whereby  yo'  Ma"^  may  see  that  euery  small  matter 
ministers  feare  here  amongst  us.  I  dare  not  as  yet 
stirre  out  of  my  chamber,  being  still  weake,  but  (if  I 
shalbe  able)  I  intend  (God  willing)  to  wayte  on  yo'" 
Ma*'*"  at  Theobalds  on  Wensday  next,  &  in  y^  meane 
tyme  I  humbly  rest 

Yo^  sacred  Ma*'^^ 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Westminster:  19°  No^"^  1641. 
"  For  yo""  sacred  Ma«e." 

The  Queen  to  Sir  E,  Nicholas. 

Maistre  Nicholas,  I  did  desire  you  not  to  acquainte 
mi  lord  of  essex  of  what  the  King  commanded  you 
touching  his  commin :  now  you  may  doe  it  and  tell 
him  that  the  King  will  be  at  Tibols  vendnesday  and 
shall  lye  there  and  upond  thursday  he  shall  dine  at 
my  lord  Maiors  and  lye  at  Whitthall  onlye  for  one 
nitgh  and  upon  friday  will  goe  to  hampton-court 
where  he  maenes  to  stay  this  vinter :  the  King  com- 
manded me  to  tell  this  to  my  lord  of  essex  but  you 
may  doe  it,  for  there  Lords  ships  are  to  great  prinses 
now  to  receaued  anye  direction  from  mee  :  beeng  all 
that  I  haue  to  say  I  shall  rest 

Your  assured  fraud, 

Henriette  Marie  R. 

"  For  Maistre  Nicholas." 
R:  20«  No^'-i^  1641. 

The  Q,:  for  me  to  signify  to  Lo:  Chamb'lan. 


whose  opinion  of  the  lady's  frigid  chastity  is  matter  of  vast  amuse- 
ment to  Pennant.    Sir  J.  M.  exclaims,  in  his  poetic  rapture, 

"  But  her  chaste  breast,  cold  as  the  cloyster'd  nun, 
Whose  frost  to  chrystal  might  congeal  the  sun, 
So  glaz'd  the  stream,  that  pilots,  there  afloat, 
Thought  they  might  safely  land  without  a  boat ; 
July  had  seen  the  Thames  in  ice  involved, 
Had  it  not  been  by  her  own  beams  dissolved." 

k2 


132 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1641. 


Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  j(f  most  excellent  Ma*'*", 
I  receaved  yo'  Ma*'^'  com^aunds  yesterday  by  S' 
Hen:  Hungate/'"  &  this  day  by  Mr.  Proger,  &  shalbe 
carefull  to  observe  y^  same^  as  I  hope  I  sbalbe  able 
on  Wensday  next  to  give  yo''  Ma*'""  an  accompt  att 
Theobalds. 

I  have  now  againe  receaved  assnraunce,  that  (as  I 
formerly  acquainted  jd"  Ma*''')  y*"  Gent:  &  diverse  of 
y"  best  of  y"  freeholders  of  Hertfordshire  will  wayte 
on  yo'*  Ma*'^  a  myle  before  you  come  to  Ware,  &  if 
yo'  Ma*'^  please  to  make  a  little  stop  in  that  towne, 
that  y''  better  sorte  may  there  kisse  yo'"  Royall  hand, 
&  y^  rest  be  spoken  to  by  yo'  Ma*''',  it  will  give  them 
very  great  contentm*.  If  yo'"  Ma*'^  please  to  come 
softly  from  Ware,  y^  most  of  those  will  wayte  on 
yo'  Ma''''  as  farre  as  Theobalds,  &  if  yo''  Ma*'^  thinke 
not  that  convenyent,  they  will  wayte  on  yo""  Ma*'^  only 
a  mile  or  two  out  of  Ware,  &  soe  receave  yo'  Ma*'"' 
gracious  dismission.  I  am  y"  more  dilligent  to  give 
yo'"  Ma*'"  this  advertisem*,  because  I  know  those 
gent:  will  not  fayle  in  this  manner  to  shew  their 
affecc'ons  &  duty  to  you,  &  that  county  being 
soe  neere  a  neighbour  to  London,  it  wilbe  a  good 
encouragenr  &  comfort  to  yo""  well  affected  people 
here,  to  vnderstand,  that  they  have  neighbours  that 
have  y"  like  dutifuU  affecc^ons  to  yo'"  Ma*'"'  person  and 
governm*,  as  these  Cittizens  here,  who  are  constantly 
resolved  to  giue  yo'  Ma*'"  a  magnificent  recepc^on, 
notw*^standing  (I  heare)  there  have  bene  some  prac- 
tises vnderhand  to  divert  them  from  that  their  setled 
purpose. 

By  y"  Queenes  direcc^ons  I  signifyed  to  my  Lo: 
Chamb'layne  on  Satterday  last,  that  yo""  Ma*'"  intends 
to  lye  at  Theobalds  Wensday  next,  to  dyne  Thursday 
att  y"  Guildhall,  &  that  night  to  lye  att  Whitehall,  & 
Friday  to  goe  to  Hampton  Court.  Coll.  Goring  gaue 
y"  House  of  Commons  good  satisfac^con  Satterday 


*  See  ante,  pp.  117,  118. 


1641.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  133 


last  touching  his  fidellity  &  good  afFec^cons,  and  was 
thereupon  dismissed:*  The  Commons  have  bene  in 
debate  about  their  Declarac'on  touching  ill  effects 
of  bad  councells  euer  since  12  at  noone,  &  are  at  it 
still,  it  being  now  neere  12  at  midnight. f  I  staid 
this  dispatch  in  hope  to  have  sent  yo''  Ma*'''  result  of 
that  debate,  but  it  is  soe  late,  as  I  dare  not  (after  my 
sicknes)  adventure  to  watch  any  longer  to  see  y*" 
issue  of  it ;  only  I  assure  yo''  Ma*'*"  there  are  diverse 
in  y^  Commons  House,  that  are  resolved  to  stand 
very  stiff  for  reiecting  that  Declarac'on,  and  if  they 
p'^vayle  not  then  to  protest  against  it.  That  yo' 
Ma*'*"  may  have  a  happy  &  safe  returnej  shalbe  euer 
y^  prayer  of 

Yo'^  sacred  Ma*^^^ 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt, 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

Westminster,  22o  No^'-'%  1641. 

*  Goring,  in  some  subsequent  transactions,  underwent  the  imputa- 
tion of  having  acted  a  double  part  with  the  King  and  the  Parliament. 
When  the  war  brolcc  out,  Goring,  as  Governor  of  Portsmouth, 
declared  for  the  King ;  but  that  town,  being  unable  to  sustain  a  siege, 
was  soon  lost  to  the  Royal  Cause.  Goring  then  went  to  France,  as 
Bulstrode  says,  with  the  money  he  had  received  on  both  sides, 
"  without  making  good  his  promises  to  either."  That  Author  adds, 
that  "  if  his  conscience  and  integrity  had  equalled  his  wit  and  courage, 
he  had  been  one  of  the  most  eminent  men  of  the  age  he  lived  in  ;  but 
he  could  not  resist  temptations,  and  was  a  man  without  scruple,  and 
loved  no  man  so  well,  but  he  would  cozen  him,  and  afterwards  laugh 
at  him."  Goring's  high  command  in  the  army,  and  subsequent 
court-favour,  are  supposed  to  have  been  occasioned  in  a  great  measure 
by  the  very  active  assistance  he  afforded  to  the  Queen,  whilst  in 
France,  in  procuring  both  money  and  arms. 

-f-  It  was  a  httle  after  twelve  when  the  "  Great  Remonstrance  "  was 
carried,  by  a  majority  of  eleven.  Hampden  then  moved  that  it 
should  be  printed,  which  Hyde  met  by  a  counter-motion,  in  which  he 
claimed  the  right  for  the  minority  to  be  allowed  to  enter  a  formal 
protest  against  the  decision  of  the  House.  It  appears  by  the  above 
letter  that  Nicholas  had  been  informed  of  Hyde's  intention  to  make 
this  attempt.  Hampden's  motion  was  not  carried  till  two  o'clock, 
and  after  a  scene  of  extraordinary  excitement  (in  which  bloodshed 
was  only  prevented,  according  to  Sir  Philip  Warwick,  by  the 
sagacity  and  great  calmness  of  Mr.  Hampden")  the  House  adjourned 
at  three  o'clock.  Sir  Benjamin  Rudyard  compared  the  result  to 
"  the  verdict  of  a  starved  jury." 

J  The  King  did  return  on  the  25th  ;  which  closed  this  portion  of 


134  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1644. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Oxford,  30  Jan.-  1644.* 

Nicholas,  I  sliall  ad  nothing  to  the  seuerall  good 
newes  you  will  receaue  by  your  fellow  Secre- 
tairs  letter,  but  the  surpryse  of  Compton  House  by 
S'  W.  Compton  if  &  to  bid  you  tell  your  fellow 
Comissioners,  J  that  if  there  be  any  Treaty  proposed 

the  Correspondence,  On  the  next  day,  the  26th  of  November,  1641, 
the  loyal  diligence  of  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas  was  acknowledged  and 
rewarded  by  the  honour  of  Knighthood  conferred  on  him  at  White- 
hall, as  appears  from  a  MS.  List  of  Knights  of  that  reign  in  the 
Harleian  Collection,  No.  6832.  In  some  old  Ti'acts  of  that  period  we 
find  also  recorded  "  Five  most  noble  Speeches"  spoken  to  his  Majesty 
by  the  mayors  of  several  cities  on  his  route  homeward.  The  Mayor 
of  York  assured  him  :  "  Our  well-tuned  bells  at  this  present  time,  to 
congratulate  the  welcome  of  so  great  a  Prince,  turne  themselves,  and 
doe  willingly  stand,  as  if  Time  commanded  them  soe  to  doe  ;"  to 
which  this  ultra-loyal  magistrate  added :  "  our  wives  conceive  with 
joye,  our  children's  tongues  are  untyed  with  alacrity,  and  each  one 
doth  strive  to  cry  welcome  home  to  so  indulgent  a  Soveraigne,  our 
fields  do  seeme  triumphing  in  their  gay  diapry  to  welcome  home  your 
Sacred  Majesty,  the  woods  doe  seeme  to  contemne  a  falling  Autumne 
or  a  nipping  Whiter,  and  assume  unto  themselves  their  Spring 
liveries,  and  all  to  welcome  home  your  most  Sacred  Majesty."  The 
Mayor  of  Stamford,  after  describing  himself  as  the  King's  "  abject 
Lieutenant,"  enlarged  upon  the  loyalty  of  his  fellow  citizens,  and  said 
that  "  each  would  have  bin  glad  to  have  entertained  the  place  of  a 
speaker  ; "  whilst  Huntingdon's  worshipful  magistrate  boasted,  "  that 
althougli  Rome's  Hens  should  daily  hatch  of  its  preposterous  eggs, 
crocodilicall  chickens,  yet  under  the  shield  of  Faith,  by  you  our  most 
Royal  Sovereigne  defended,  and  by  the  King  of  Heavens  as  I  stand 
and  your  most  medicable  councell,  would  we  not  be  fearful  to  with- 
stand them." 

*  A  long  interval  here  occurs  in  the  Correspondence,  arising  from 
the  King's  return.  Nicholas  appears  to  have  been  constantly 
attached  to  his  Majesty's  person,  until  his  appointment  as  one  of  the 
Commissioners  pending  this  well-known  Treaty.  The  "  good  news  " 
to  which  the  King  refers,  may  have  been  the  entrance  of  the  Scottish 
army  into  England,  which  took  place  on  the  16th. 

t  Sir  William  Compton  was  thu"d  son  of  the  Earl  of  Northampton. 
His  two  elder  brothers  were  also  active  in  the  King's  service. 

J  These  were,  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  the  Marquis  of  Hertford  ; 
the  Earls  of  Southampton,  Kingston,  Chichester;  Lords  Capel, 


1644.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


135 


concerning  Scotland  (of  w*"''  I  forgott  to  speake  to 
them  at  parting)  theire  answer  must  be,  to  demand 
a  passeport  for  a  gentleman  to  goe  from  me  to  see 
what  stat  the  Marquis  of  Muntrose"  is  in,  there 
being  no  reason,  that  I  should  treate  blyndefolde  in 
so  important  a  business,  nor  without  the  knowledg 
of  him  whom  I  haue  now  cheefiy  employed  in  that 
Kingdome  &  who  hath  undertaken  my  seruice  there, 
with  so  much  galantry,  when  no  boddy  else  would : 
so  I  rest 

Your  asseured  frend, 

Charles  R. 

R  31"  Jani.  1644. 

His  Ma''"^*  lef  to  me  by  Mr.  Skipw'th  f  concerning  Scotland  during 
Treaty  at  Uxbridge. 


Sir  Edivard  Nicholas  to  the  King. 

May  it  please  yo'  sacred  Ma*'*",  Oxford 
I  have  herew*^  sent  to  yo'"  Ma*'*"  coppiesj  of  such 
papers  as  passed  betweene  yo""  Ma*'*"*  Comission"  you^shaif 

Seymour,  Hatton,  Culpepper  ;  Sirs  Edward  Nicholas,  Edward  Hyde, 
Richard  Lane,  Thomas  Gardiner,  Orlando  Bridgman ;  and  Messrs. 
John  Ashburnhani,  Jeffery  Palmer,  and  Di".  Stewart. 

*  Montrose  is  represented  by  those  who  take  the  more  favourable 
view  of  his  character  to  have  been  secretly  attached  and  faithful  to 
the  King's  cause  some  time  before  he  so  declared  himself,  though  the 
King  had  been  kept  ignorant  of  it  by  the  artifices  of  the  Marquis  of 
Hamilton  ;  for  though  in  the  beginning  of  the  troubles  in  Scotland 
Monti'ose  had  joined  the  Presbyterian  party,  and  was  the  first  to  sign 
the  Covenant,  yet  seeing  reason  to  change  his  views,  and  ti'usting  to 
the  weight  of  his  family  alliances,  he  is  alleged  to  have  come  to 
England  with  the  intention  of  rendei'iug  all  the  service  in  his  power 
to  the  King.  On  his  arrival,  howevei',  Hamilton,  who  had  often  been 
accused  of  deceiving  Charles  with  respect  to  Scottish  affairs,  contrived 
so  artfully  to  throw  slights  upon  Montrose,  that  the  latter  returned  to 
the  Covenanters  ;  with  whom  being  again  disgusted,  he  wrote  shortly 
after  to  the  King,  expressing  his  loyalty  and  desire  of  serving  him 
in  the  strongest  terms;  which  letter,  it  is  asserted,  Hamilton  took 
out  of  his  Majesty's  pocket  in  the  night,  and  sent  it  secretly  to  the 
Covenanters. 

+  Perhaps  Fulmar  Skipwith,  of  Newbold  Hall,  afterwards  created 
a  Baronet  by  Chai'les  II. 

X  The  King's  military  affairs  at  this  moment  were  beginning  to 
decline  :  for  both  the  armies  of  Essex  and  Waller  had  now  been 


136 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1644. 


doe  well  to 
marke  their 
orders  to 
saue  us  the 
labor  to 
fynde  out, 
w'che  an- 
swers w'ch, 
as  wel  as  to 
send  the 
Papers 
themselfes. 

You  have 
done  well, 
but  they, 
barbarusly. 

Setle  thc! 
Weekely 
dispaches 
for  France 
with  the 
Portugall 
Agent,  & 
send  me 
word  how. 

I  haue. 


No  Bragges 
must  stager, 
much  less 
alter  you  in 
the  way  you 
ar,  in  con- 
stantly ad- 
hering to 
Concience, 
Justice,  & 
Honnor. 

In  this,  free 
dealing  is 
the  best. 
Conscience  is 
not  to  be 


here  yesterday,  &  Londoners  touching  y*'  Mihtia, 
^Y''^'  this  afternoone  yo*"  Ma*''^'  Commission"  are  to  make 
appeare  to  be  a  power  most  naturally  &  legally  in 
yo'  Ma*'^ :  this  morning  wee  are  to  observe  y"  fast 
according  to  yo*"  Ma*'"  Prociamac^on,*  but  it  must 
be  donne  here  in  y*"  Inne,  for  wee  cannot  be  per- 
mitted to  have  y*"  Booke  of  Common  Prayer  read  in  y^ 
church  here,  &  wee  resolve  not  to  goe  to  any  church 
where  the  Divine  service  established  by  law  may  not 
be  celebrated. 

I  have  made  reddy  the  dispatch  to  y*"  King  of  Por- 
tugall, w""^'  wilbe  tendred  to  yo'  Ma*'^  under  my  hand. 
I  hope  yo''  Ma*'^  upon  y^  advertisem^  I  sent  to  yo'' 
Ma*'"  &  P.  E/Upert  yesterday,  hath  before  this  taken 
order  to  p^vent  that  Woodstock  be  not  garrison^  as 
those  of  London  have  com'aunded.  The  Comission'^^ 
from  London  say,  that  S""  W""  Wallerf  is  marching 
westward  as  farre  as  Winchester,  &  those  partes,  w**' 
6000  men;  and  that  there  is  an  army  of  about 
26,000  Scots  to  come  into  England  att  the  opening 
of  y"  spring  :  They  vapour  much  att  London,  but  I 
heare  they  are  much  devided  amongst  themselves. 
276.  352.  574.  662.  hath  123.  63.  21.  25.  290.  657. 
116.  276.  352.  225.  276.  428.  offring  163.  300.  since 
173.  276.  340.  225.  276.  Militia,  soe  as  276.  10.  26. 
198.  166.  satisfac'on.  278.  225.  626.  but  I  know 
not  y*"  p^ticlars,  having  not  had  tyme  to  speake  w*'' 
them  concerning  their  discourse,  &  when  I  know  it, 


greatly  augmented  by  recruits  from  the  Metropolis  and  its  neigh- 
bourhood, as  well  as  from  the  associated  counties.  Thus  rein- 
forced, these  two  Parliamentary  Generals  carried  every  thing  before 
them.  They  had  recently  advanced  into  Oxfordshire,  where  they 
hovered  about  the  King's  head-quarters,  and  kept  the  Royal  Army 
in  constant  alarm. 

*  This  fast  was  appointed  by  the  King,  for  a  blessing  on  the 
Treaty  then  pending  at  Uxbridge.  In  the  Mercurius  Rusticus  is  a 
copy  of  the  pi-ayer  ordered  for  the  occasion  ;  but  as  it  spoke  of  the 
"  unnatural  War,"  and  pi-ayed  the  Almighty  to  "  let  the  truth  clearly 
appear,  who  those  are,  Avhich  under  pretence  of  the  public  good  do 
pursue  their  own  private  ends,"  it  is  not  surprizing  that  obstacles 
were  thrown  in  the  way  of  its  celebration, 

f  Waller  was  not  a  vei-y  fortunate  General.  Walker  says  of  him, 
in  the  History  of  Independency,  "  that  he  lost  two  armies,  yet  was 
a  gainer  by  the  employment." 


1644.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


137 


I  shall  not  rely  much  upon  it.  God  preserve  yo'"  rate'?buuf 
Ma*'^*  person  &  prosper  yo'  designes,  soe  prayes  theywui 

Yo'^  sacred  Ma*'*'*  theMiutiato 
Most  humble  &  most  obedient  servaunt,         wm  Ss^t 

Edw.  Nicholas.  tJ^^P^^^ 

theire 

UXBRIDGE,  b^fftb'-:  1644.  Arears. 
In  the  King's  hand  at  the  bottom  of  this  Letter  : 

"  I  should  thinke,  if  in  your  priuat  discourses,  (I  nowais  meane  in 
your  publique  meetings,)  with  the  London  Comissioners,  you  would 
put  them  in  mynde  that  they  were  arrant  Rebelles  &  that  their  end 
must  be  damnation,  ruine,  and  infamy,  except  they  repented,  & 
founde  some  way  to  free  themselfes  from  the  damnable  way  they 
ar  in  (this  Treaty  being  the  aptest)  it  might  doe  good  ;  &  cheefly,  if 
Hertford  or  Southampton  would  doe  it,  though  I  beliue  it  will  haue 
the  owen  operation  by  any  of  you,  well  strenthened  with  arguments  : 
but  the  more  of  you  that  speakes  in  this  dialect  the  better  :  This  is 
written  not  as  your  Maister  but  your  Frend, 

C.  R. 

Ovvld  Vulpone  is  not  of  my  opinion,  therfor  I  am  not  confident 
concerning  this  postcrip,  but  I'efer  niy  selfe  to  your 

the      Sh.      of      the  Exche:  Office. 
353:  116:  276:  352:  225:  276:  428:  560. 
For  yo"^  sacred  Ma^'^." 
"  Yours  apostyled." 

My  Le""  to  y«  King  apostyled  concerning  o"^  proceedings  in  y<^ 
Treaty  at  Uxbridge. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas^ 

Oxford  8.  Fel:  1644.* 

Nicholas^  as  I  haue  hitherto  approued  of  your 
proceedings,  so  I  will  nott  now  censure  them  :  since,, 
upon  the  place,  you  may  have  founde  such  reasons 
as  you  haue  not  fully  expressed  to  me  :  but,  to  deale 
freely,  I  could  haue  wished,  that  ye  had  used  more 
reseruation  concerning  the  Militia:  for  though  I 
could  be  content  to  buy  Peace  at  the  rate  ye  haue 
sett  downe,  yet  ye  might  haue  reserued  something  to 

*  The  points  referred  to  in  this  Letter  require  no  historical  illus- 
tration ;  but  the  Letter  itself  is  a  remarkable  document  in  regard  to 
the  private  history  of  the  Negotiations  at  Uxbridge,  and  is  an  impor- 
tant illustration  of  the  views  and  spirit  of  the  King  at  this  juncture. 


138 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1644. 


haue  beene  drawen  on  by  degrees  upon  debates, 
^ych  tliinkes  is  a  more  popular  way,  then  coming 
at  first  to  the  height  of  your  concessions,  to  leaue 
your  selfes  nothing  but  negatiues,  in  case  they 
should  make  any  aproaches  to  you:  And  for  the  tyme, 
I  should  thinke  a  much  shorter  tyme  than  three 
years  were  sufficient,  to  secure  the  performance  of 
conditions,  whereas  one  cannot  tell  how  any  men 
may  be  tempted,  being  so  long  setled  in  a  manner  in 
the  Hegall  Power,  to  fynde  excuses  &  delay es  for 
the  parting  with  it,  besydes  the  people  being  once 
inewred  to  that  way  of  gouernement  may  not  be  so 
willing  to  returne  to  the  owld  way,  as  beliuing  it  of 
less  subjection  then  Monarchical! :  So  I  rest 
Your  asseured  frend, 

Charles  R. 

If  you  be  pressed  to  giue  a  positiue  answer  con- 
cerning Scotland,  remember  to  follow  the  directions 
I  gaue  you  in  that  particular. 

Indorsed,  R.  9°  ffebr.  1644. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Oxford  11  Feb.  1644. 

Nicholas,  the  directions  I  gaue  you  concerning 
sending  to  Mmitrose,  I  meane  only  should  extend  to 
those  things  w*"^'  meerly  concerne  Scotland,  so  if  that 
wer  the  only  case,  it  would  be  no  hinderance  to  you 
for  what  concernes  the  Militia :  but  I  doe  not  yet 
conceaue,  how  I  can  giue  way,  that  ether  of  my 
Kingdomes  should  haue  a  hand  in  the  gouernement 
of  the  other,  without  breach e  of  trust  to  eather  :  yet 
in  this  I  doe  not  so  restraine  you  (so  that  ye  still 
keepe  the  number,  that  I  shall  nominat,  at  least 
equall  to  the  other,  &  enlarge  upon  no  other  points) 
but  leaue  it  to  your  discretions  what  to  doe,  in  case 
you  shall  fynde  a  Peace  may  be  gotten  by  it :  But  as 
for  those  things  w''^'  meerly  concerne  Scotland,  I 
sticke  close  to  my  former   order  of  sending  to 


1644.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  139 


Muntrosc,  not  being  ashamed  to  auow  that  I  shall 
be  much  guyded  by  what  I  shall  heare  from  him,  & 
should  be  much  more  ashamed  to  treate  in  those 
things,  without  at  least  comunicating  with  him,  who 
hath  hazarded  so  freely  and  generously  for  me. 
Your  asseured  frend, 

Charles  R. 

Indorsed, 

U\febr.  1644.    R.  12. 

His  Mat'^s  conc''ning  Scotland. 


The  King  to  Sir  Ediuard  Nicholas. 

Nicholas,  concerning  the  answers  to  the  King  of 
Denmarke  &  D:  of  Courland,  Digby  shall  giue  you 
my  directions.  As  for  the  draught  of  the  paper 
for  Mondayes  conference,  1  lyke  it  well,  &  for  the 
critesisme  I  haue  made  upon  it  for  the  change  of  the 
tence,  is  only  that  ye  should  seeme  to  agree  con- 
cerning the  Militia  of  Scotland,  before  that  of  Eng- 
land were  setled  :  lyking  so  well  what  ye  haue  alreddy 
done  touching  that  article,  that  I  command  you  not 
to  vary  a  jott  from  the  substance  of  it,  unlesse  it  (be) 
to  enlarge  my  power,  or  shorten  the  tyme  :  as  con- 
cerning a  safe-conduct  for  a  messenger  to  Scotland, 
I  meerly  intend  it  for  those  things,  w''^  only  con- 
cernes  that  kingdome :  to  w*"^  I  am  still  constant, 
leaning  you  to  your  Christian  liberty,  to  what  shall 
reciprocally  concerne  both ;  but,  by  your  fauors,  I 
understand  not,  how  any  demand  can  breake  off  a 
treaty,  indeed  insisting  upon  some,  may  doe  prittely 
that  way.  At  this  tyme  I  haue  no  more  to  say : 
but,  goe  not  a  title  lesse  concerning  Religion  & 
Chui'che-gouernement,  &  soe  I  rest 

Your  asseured  friend, 

Charles  R. 

Oxford  15  ffeb  :  1644. 
Indorsed, 
R:  16°/e&r.  1644. 

The  King  concerning  the  Scots  being  [included]  for  the  Militia 
of  England. 


140 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


[1644. 


(A  Fragment.) 

Oxford  17  Feb.  1644. 

Memoriall  for  Se:  Nicholas  concerning  the  Treaty 
at  Vxbridge. 

1.  First  for  Religion  &  Churclie  Gouernement,  I 
will  not  goe  one  jott  further,  than  what  is  offered  l3y 
you  alreddy. 

2.  And  so  for  the  Militia,  more  then  what  ye 
haue  alowed  by  me :  but,  euen  in  that,  ye  must 
obserue,  that  I  must  haue  free  nomination  of  the  full 
halfe ;  as,  if  the  totall  number  Scots  and  all,  bee 
Thirty,  I  name  Fiueteene ;  yet  if  they  (I  meane  the 
Englishe  Rebelles)  will  be  so  base  as  to  admitt  of 
Ten  Scots,  to  Twenty  Englishe,  I  am  content  to 
name  Fine  Scots  and  Tenn  Englishe  :  and  so  pro- 
portionably  to  any  nomber  that  shall  be  agreede  on. 

3.  As  for  gaining  of  particular  Persons :  besydes 
Securitie,  I  giue  you  power,  to  promis  them  Re- 
wards for  performed  seruices,  not  sparing  to  egage 
(engage)  for  places,  so  they  be  not  of  great  trust, 
or  to  be  taken  away  from  honnest  men  in  possession  : 
but  as  much  profitt  as  you  will :  with  this  last,  you 
ar  only  to  acquaint  Richemond,  Southampton, 
Culpeper,  &  Hyde. 

Indorsed,  "  R.       ffebr :  1644.    The  Kings  Memoriall  concerning 
Religion  and  Militia  during     Treaty  at  Uxbridge." 

The  King  to  Prince  Rupert. 

TiCKMLL^  14  June  1644. 

Nepueu, 

First  I  must  congratulate  with  you,  for  yo'  good 
successes,  assuring  you,  that  the  things  themselues 
are  no  more  welcom  to  me,  then  that  you  are  the 

*  Tickeuhall,  near  Bewdley.  Whilst  Charles  was  here,  he  paid  a 
formal  visit  to  Bewdley,  the  Corporation  having  previously  met  to 
detei'mine  upon  the  mode  of  receiving  the  Royal  visit.  The  charges 
are  entered  upon  the  Town  Books  ;  and  it  appears  that  the  sum  of 
two  shillings  was  expended  in  repairing  the  Corporation  Pew  in  the 


1644.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  141 


meanes.  I  know  the  importance  of  supplying  you 
with  powder,  for  wh*"^'  I  haue  taken  all  possible  wayes, 
have  sent  both  to  Ireland  &  Bristoll.  As  from 
Oxford  this  bearer  is  well  satisfyd  that  it  is  impossible 
to  haue  at  present^  but  if  he  tell  you  that  I  may 

Church,  and  sixpence  for  sweeping  out  that  sacred  edifice ;  making 
in  all  the  grand  total  of  two  shillings  and  sixpence  sterling. 

In  a  very  minute  account  of  the  King's  affairs  at  this  period^ 
written  by  Sir  Edward  Walker,  Garter  King  at  Arms,  and  preserved 
in  the  Harleian  Collection,  No.  4229,  it  is  stated  that  the  King  arrived 
at  Bewdley  on  the  r2th  ;  after  having  made  that  very  arduous  and 
judicious  retreat  from  Oxfordshire,  in  which  he  evaded  the  pursuit  of 
both  Essex  and  Waller,  by  forced  marches  over  the  country  between 
Witney  and  Worcester,  along  what  was  afterwards  the  Cheltenham 
road.  The  march  upon  Bewdley  is  said  by  Sir  Edward  to  have 
been  made  with  the  intent  of  saving  Worcester  from  a  siege,  of 
drawing  Waller  further  from  London,  and  also  of  enticing  him  into 
a  difficult  country,  where  the  King's  army,  then  without  artillery  or 
heavy  baggage,  might  obtain  considerable  advantage  over  him.  Waller, 
however,  avoided  the  western  side  of  the  Severn,  and  fixed  his  head- 
quarters at  Bromsgrove,  contenting  himself  with  advancing  a  small 
body  of  horse  to  Kidderminster,  the  "  Foreign  "  of  which  town,  as  it 
is  called,  reaches  to  the  eastern  end  of  Bewdley  Bridge.  The  King's 
foot  were  all  in  Bewdley  on  the  1 4th,  and  the  horse  quartered  along 
the  Severn  towards  Bridgenorth. 

The  King  was  so  much  aware  of  the  delicacy  of  his  situation  at  this 
moment,  that  on  the  day  preceding  the  date  of  the  letter  in  the  text, 
he  had  formed  a  Council  of  War,  directing  them  to  meet  every  day 
and  report  their  proceedings  in  respect  to  forming  a  plan  of  retreat, 
either  into  Wales  or  upon  Shrewsbury  ;  and  on  this  day  the  Council 
and  King  determined  to  retreat  back  to  Worcester,  and  so  on  to 
Evesham.  He  was  closely  followed  by  Waller  ;  but,  immediately 
after  this  date,  eluded  him  so  far  as  to  reach  Daventry  before  him, 
and  finally  he  defeated  Waller  at  Cropredy  bridge  on  the  29th  of  June. 

At  the  date  of  his  letter  the  King  had  got  intelhgence  that  York 
was  besieged  by  the  Scottish  army  (just  before  the  battle  of  Marston 
Moor),  and  that  the  Scots  had  been  also  joined  by  Fairfax  and  Lord 
Manchester.  This  fact  explains  the  military  orders  given  in  it,  which 
are  perfectly  in  consonance  with  the  existing  accounts  of  Prince  Rupert's 
conduct  previous  to  that  battle.  It  may  be  remarked,  however,  that 
Bulstrode,  as  well  as  others,  brings  an  accusation  against  Rupert  for 
fighting  the  Parliamentary  forces  after  raising  the  siege ;  but  the  express 
words  of  the  King  imply  a  desire  not  only  for  the  relief  of  York,  but 
also  for  a  battle  with  the  enemy ;  else  why  did  he  allude  to  "beating  the 
Rebel  armies  "  as  a  means  of  enabling  him  to  spin  out  time  ?  This  is  a 
most  important  fact  in  the  history  of  the  Civil  Wars ;  for  the  Marquis 
of  Newcastle,  and  other  general  officers,  were  so  disgusted  with  the 
Prince  for  fighting  against  or  without  orders,  as  they  supposed,  that 


142  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1644. 


spare  them  from  hence,  I  leaue  you  to  iudge,  hauing 
but  36  left :  but  what  I  can  get  from  Bristol!  (of 
w*^^'  there  is  not  much  certainty,  it  being  threatned 
to  be  besieged)  you  shall  haue. 

But  now  I  must  giue  you  the  trew  state  of  my 
affaires,  w'^^  if  their  condic'on  be  such  as  enforces 
me  to  giue  you  more  peremptory  commands  then  I 
would  willingly  doe,  you  must  not  take  it  ill.  If 
York  be  lost,  I  shall  esteeme  my  Crowne  little 
lesse,  vnless  supported  by  yo""  suddain  march  to  mee, 
&  a  miraculous  conquest  in  the  south,  before  the 
effects  of  the  northern  power  can  be  found  here  : 
but  if  York  be  relieved,  and  you  beat  the  Rebels 
armies  of  both  kingdomes  w""^  are  before  it ;  then, 
but  otherwise  not,  I  may  possibly  make  a  shift 
(vpon  the  defensive)  to  spin  out  time,  vntill  you 
come  to  assist  me :  Wherefore  I  command  and  con- 
iure  you  by  the  duety  &  affecc^on  w*'''  I  know  you 
beare  me,  that  (all  new  enterprises  layd  aside)  you 
immediatly  march  (according  to  yo''  first  intention) 
with  all  yo'  force  to  the  reliefe  of  York  :  but  if  that 
be  either  lost,  or  haue  freed  themselves  from  the 
besiegers,  or  that  for  want  of  powder  you  cannot 
vndertake  that  work :  that  you  immediately  march 
with  your  whole  strength  to  Worster,  to  assist  me 
and  my  army,  without  w''^,  or  yo""  having  releived 
York  by  beating  the  Scots,  all  the  successes  you  can 
afterwards  haue,  most  infallibly  wilbe  vselesse  vnto 
me.  You  may  beleive  that  nothing  but  an  extreme 
necessity  could  make  me  write  thus  vnto  you,  where- 
fore, in  this  case,  I  can  no  wayes  doubt  of  your 
punctuall  compliance  with 

Yo'  loving  Oncle  &  most  faithfull  friend, 

Charles  R. 

I  commanded  this  bearer  to  speake  to  you  con- 
cerning Vauasor. 
(Copy.) 

they  left  England  immediately,  going  to  Hamburgh,  and  thereby  the 
whole  of  the  north  was  lost  to  the  King's  cause.  The  letter  in  the 
text  is  a  copy,  but  it  presents  no  material  discrepancy  from  the 
original,  which  has  since  been  printed  in  Mr.  Foster's  Statesmen  of 
the  Commonwcalthf\o\.  iv.  pp.  129,  130. 


1644.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


143 


At  a  Councell  at  Oxford,  5^  December  1644.  Present 

The  Kings  most  excellent  Ma*'^, 
Prince  Rupert  Lo:  Chamberlaine 

Prince  Maurice  Ea:  of  Berks 

Lord  Keeper  Ea:  of  Sussex 

Lord  Treasurer  Ea:  of  Chichester 

Lo:  Duke  of  Kichmond  Lo:  Digby 
Lo:  Marq^  Hertford      Lo:  Seymour 
Lo:  Great  ChamVlaine  Lo:  Culpeper 
Ea:  of  South^ton  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas. 

Mr.  Chanc'^  of  y*^  Excheq'. 

A  Letter  being  then  read  written  by  y*"  Earle  of 
Essex  to  his  Highness  Prince  Rupert  Generall  of  his 
Ma^''  Armyes  in  these  words, 

There  being  a  message  sent  from  his  Ma*""  by  y"" 
Committess  of  both  kingdomes  that  were  lately  at 
Oxon  concerning  a  safe-conduct  for  y''  Duke  of 
Richmond  &.  E.  of  South^ton  Avithout  any  direc^con: 
I  am  commanded  by  both  Houses  of  Parliament  to 
give  yo""  Highnesse  notice,  That  if  y^  King  bee 
pleased  to  desire  a  safe  conduct  for  y^  Duke  of 
Richmond  &  y^  Ea:  of  South^ton  w*^'  their  attendants 
from  y^  Lords  and  Commons  assembled  in  y*"  Parliam* 
of  England  at  Westminster,  to  bring  to  y^  Lords  and 
Commons  assembled  in  y^  Parliament  of  England, 
and  y^  Commission''  of  y*'  kingdome  of  Scotland  now 
at  London,  an  answere  to  the  Propositions  presented 
to  his  Ma*'^  for  a  safe  and  well  grounded  peace,  it 
shalbee  graunted. — This  is  all  I  haue  at  present  to 
trouble  youre  Highnesse,  being 

Yo""  Highness  humble  Servant, 

ESSEX.^-" 

3°  Decemh.  1644. 

Which  Letter  and  y''  expressions  therein  being 
fully  considered  &  debated,  it  was  by  the  whole 
Councell  vnanimously  resolved,  That  his  Ma*'^"  desire 


144  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1644. 


of  a  safe -conduct  in  y*^  termes  expressed  in  that 
Letter,  would  not  bee  any  acknowledgment  or  con- 
cession of  y*"  members  of  y^  two  Houses  sitting  at 
Westminster  to  bee  a  Parliament,  nor  any  wayes 
prejudice  his  Majesties  cause, 

Whereupon  his  Ma*'"  declaring  openly  at  y^  Board, 
that  since  such  was  their  Lo^'  opinion,  that  hee  did 
therefore  and  [eo  animo)  consent  thereunto.  And 
accordingly  his  Ma*'''  desired  his  Highnesse  Prince 
Rupert,  as  his  Ma*'^'  Generall,  to  retorne  this 
answere : 

"  My  Lord, 

I  am  commanded  by  his  Ma*'^  to  desire  of  yo'  Lo" 
a  safe-conduct  for  the  Duke  of  Richmond  and  the 
Ea:  of  South^ton  w*^  their  attendants,  coaches  and 
horses,  and  other  accomodac^ons  for  their  journey  in 
their  coming  to  London,  during  their  stay,  and  in 
their  returne  when  they  shall  thinke  fit  from  y*" 
Lords  and  Commons  assembled  in  y^  Parliament  of 
England  at  Westminster,  to  bring  to  y*"  Lords  and 
Commons  assembled  in  y^  Parliament  of  England 
and  y^  Commission""^  of  y^  Parliament  of  Scotland 
now  at  London  an  answere  to  y''  propositions  pre- 
sented to  his  Ma*'''  for  a  safe  and  well-grounded  peace. 
Resting 

Yo^  Lqp^  Servant, 

RUPERT.^^ 

OxoN.  6th  Decemhr,  1644. 

Which  said  answer  was  accordingly  sent  to  London 
by  a  Trumpeter. 

Edw.  Nicholas. 

The  following  is  in  the  hand  of  Sir  E.  N. 

Memorandum :  that  the  King  and  myself  of  all 
the  Councell  Boorde  were  the  only  persons  that 
concurred  not  in  opinion ;  that  it  was  fitt  to  call 
those  sitting  at  Westm""  a  Parliam*.  P.  Rupert  thoughe 
he  were  p'^sent  did  not  vote,  because  he  was  to  execute 
what  should  be  resolved  on  by  this  Councell ;  but  by 
the  orderr  &  practice  of  the  Councell  Boorde,  if  the 


1645.]  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


145 


maior  part  agree  to  any  act  or  order,  all  the  Coun- 
cellors  that  were  p'^sent  att  the  debate,  albeit  they 
dissented  are  involved,  and  are  to  be  named  as  if  thcj' 
consented. — E.  N. 

The  King  to  Sir'  Edward  Nicholas. 

Hemly  II all,*  16  May,  164.3. 

Nicholas,  I  haue  receaued,  &  thanke  you  for  your 
seuerall  dispaches,  but  haue  no  newes  to  send  you  in 
recompence  to  yours,  nor  expect  to  sonde  you  any 

sum" on  Chester 

untill  we  shall  come  to  488  :  338 :  w'"^'  is  our  first 

designe 

361  :  being  not  yet  resolued  whether  to  goe  after- 
ward :  t  I         glad  you  goe  so  well  on  w*''  your 

provisions 

448  :  54 :  74  :  &  hope  you  will  take  as  great  care 
that  you  be  not  disturbed  by  mutinous  people  :  this 
is  all  at  this  tyme  from 

Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Charles  E. 

Croivn  L«:  c        o         n  t 

Let  hencefoorthe  337.   signefy  1:  40:  30:  70: 

rib  u         t  ion  Portia  nd 

33  :  23  :  50  :  71  :  24  :  40  :  31  :  73  :  &  447  :  74  : 

p       a       p        1         s  t 

47  :  10  :  48  :  25  :  53  :  72  :  75. 

Being  newly  come  hither  to  Bisberry,^  I  haue 
certaine  intelligence  that  S'  John  Pryce,  being 
Gouernor  &  in  Mungomery  Castell,  is  declared,  & 
houlds  it  for  me. 

16°  Malj  1645.    R:  21". 
The  King  to  me. 


*  In  Staffordshire,  the  seat  of  Lord  Dudley. 
On  the  day  following  the  date  of  this  Letter  measures  were 
taken  by  the  Parliament  for  the  siege  of  Oxford  ;  the  Commons,  on 
the  17th  of  May,  sending  a  message  to  the  Upper  House,  to  let  their 
Lordships  know  "  that  the  House  of  Commons,  out  of  a  desire  to  put 
an  end  to  this  miserable  war,  do  think  it  fit  that  siege  be  laid  to  the 
City  of  Oxford,  for  the  taking  it,  it  being  the  centre  of  our  troubles." 
i  Bibury  in  Oxfordshire, 


146 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1645. 


TJie  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas, 

Chetwin,  18  3fay  1645. 

Nicholas^ 

I  receaued  yours  of  tlie  16.  tliis  morning,  to  w^''  I 
liaue  litle  to  answer  but  to  tlianke  you  for  your  often 
aduerticements,*  &  to  tell  the  Marquis  Winchester 
that  he  recompence  his  woode  losse  out  of  Wallops  :t 
for  newes  I  refer  you  to  your  fellow  Secretair  &  frend, 
the  generall  being,  that  we  are  (God  be  thanked)  all  well 
&  in  hart,  the  Rebelles  hauing  twyce  oflPered  to  beate 
up  some  of  our  quarters,  but  w*^'  losse  to  themselues  : 
I  desyre  to  know  how  you  goe  on  in  your  recuting 
[recruiting]  &  fortefications,  as  well  as  you  haue 
satisfied  me  concerning  your  prouisions  :  So  desyring 
you  to  send  tliease  inclosed  to  454  :  I  rest 
Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Charles  R. 

(Address)  "  for  your  selfe." 

Indorsed ;  18°  Maij.  1G45.  R.  2 P.    The  King  to  me. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edivard  Nicholas. 

WisTON,^  4  June  1645. 

Nicholas,  I  haue  receaued  yours,  of  the  30  :  May, 
this  morning,  none  of  yours  hauing  yet  miscarried  : 

untill 

but  I  would  not  answer  any  of  them  myselfe  292  : 

*  It  would  seem  to  have  been  also  the  King's  intention  about 
this  time  to  have  done  more  for  his  secretai-y  than  mere  thanks  ; 
for  in  a  letter  to  the  Queen,  dated  on  the  27th  of  March,  intercepted 
and  published  by  the  Parliament,  he  says,  "  As  for  Jaclc  Barclay,  I 
do  not  remember  that  I  gave  thee  any  hope  of  making  him  Master 
of  the  Wards  ;  for  Cottington  had  it  long  before  thou  went  hence, 
and  I  intended  it  to  Seer.  Nich.  if  he  then  would  have  received  it ; 
and  I  am  deceived  if  I  did  not  tell  thee  of  it." 

t  Evidently  in  reference  to  the  sequestrations  inflicted  upon  that 
nobleman, 

X  There  are  several  places  of  this  name ;  but  it  seems  probable 
that  the  Wiston  here  meant  is  in  Nottinghamshire. 


1645.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  147 

I         were         marching  towards 

287  :  177  :  307  :  222  :  182  :  273  :  36  :  10  :  33  :  20 

yon  w'hoiit  any  thing 

53  :  73  :  313  :  75  :  298  :  232  :  tliinldng  of  92  :  285 

else  before  I  haue 

74  :  44  :  4  :  54  :  45  :  76  :  105  :  134  :  46  :  77  :  177 

ed  you        vet  I  must 

157  reliu  133  :  78  :  313  :  312  :  177  :  212  :  cleale 

freely  you       that  my  army 

376  :  203  :  79  : 298  :  313  :  283  :  17  :  84  :  83  :  325  :  is 

being  not  4000  foote 

SO  weake  (105  :  182  :  226  :  70  :  80  :  143  :  497  :  375  : 

&  scarce  horse 

93  :  81  :  55  :  112  :  53  :  45  :  82  :  350O  :  174  :  73  :) 

as  I  shall  vn 

95  :  177  :  74  :  54  :  14  :  11  :  4  :  6  :  73  :  292  : 

to  reliue 

willingly  hazard  273  :  33  :  46  :  5  :  23  :  60  :  57  : 

Oxon  before  Lo.  Goring*        or  Garrarde 

436  :  105  :  134  :  382  :  234  :  75  :  7  :  12  :  34  :  33  : 

be  joyned  to  me 

44  :  105  :  76  :  184  :  31  :  45  :  21  :  273  :  221  :  except 

an  absolute 

such  13  :  32  :  77  :  10  :  50  :  53  :  40  :  4  :  61  :  70  :  46 

necessity  that 

78  :  32  :  57  :  1  :  44  :  54  :  55  :  45  :  71  :  85  :  283 

Oxon  wilbe  lost  if  not 

436  :  305  :  105  :  79  :  4  :  42  :  53  :  72  :  183  :  226 

by        such        a      day,         wherfore  as 

70  : 78  :  reliued  106  :  267  :  11  :  123  :  302  :  134  : 97 

you  love  my 

313  :  5  :  43  :  63  :  44  :  80  :  18  :  86  :  81  :  243 

p«servation  use 

54  :  45  :  33  :  62  :  1 1  :  70  :  185  :  82  :  291  :  46  :  83 


*  Goring  at  this  time  was  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Taunton,  and 
had  been  ordered,  as  Bulstrode  asserts,  by  letters  from  the  King,  to 
quit  that  place  and  join  his  Majesty,  who  was  afraid,  shortly  before  the 
battle  of  Naseby,  that  the  enemy  might  prove  too  powerful  for  him, 
Bulstrode  says  that  he  wrote  the  General's  reply,  in  which  Charles 
was  urged  to  act  upon  the  defensive  until  Taunton  should  be  taken  ; 
but  he  hints  some  strong  suspicions  of  Goring  being  actuated 
by  sinister  views.  The  whole  passage  is  curious.  See  Bulstrode's 
Memoirs,  p.  124.    Edit.  1721. 

L  2 


148  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1645 

of  prolonging  vo' 

all  possible  meanes  233  ;  244  :  196  :  182  :  314 

provisions  though       it  be  bv  chasing 

448  :  55  :  77  :  286  :  178  :  105  :  lOG  :  78  :  2  :  14 

out        all  people 

13  :  54  :  182  :  232  :  90  :  unnecessary  47  :  44  :  40 

who  hane       not  prouision 

48  :  6  :  45  :  301  :  157  :  22^  :  71  :  79  :  448  :  134 

for         themselves  stinting 

281  :  19  :  53  :  4G  :  5  :  57  :  54  :  74  :  93  :  75  :  55 

D.  of 

70  :  24  :  30  :  71  :  182  :  euery  one  (117  :  233  :  512 

Yorke  not  ed         to  a  small 

226  :  72  :  except  133)  273  :  73  :  10  :  74  :  53  :  17 

proportion  of 

11:4:  41  :  77  :  244  :  47  :  40  :  33  :  70  :  185  :  78 

nicate  euerv  dav 

233  :  221  :  12  ":  71  :  45  :  79  :  129  :  86  :  80  :  123 

&       doe  not  me         to  you 

93  :  118  :  45  :  226  :  72  :  81  :  hasten  221  :  273  :  313 

•w'^'out  very  ^-ery 

298  :  232  :  294  :  74  :  CO  :  44  :  33  :  84  :  74  :  absolute 

necessity  for 

30  :  46  :  3  :  45  :  53  :  55  :  23  :  70  :  85  :  83  :  73 

npon  the  faith  of  a 

134  :  293  :  235  :  281  :  137  :  233  :  75  :  10  :  76  :  1 

Christian  noe  tyme 

14  :  33  :  23  :  53  :  70  :  24  :  11  :  30  :  77  :  226  :  498 

be  lost  for  a-o'  succour 

sliall  105  :  78  :  5  :  40  :  54  :  72  :  134  :  314  :  488  :  78 

how        soone  it  may  be 

16  :  41  :  36  :  266  :  235  :  45  :  79  :  178  :  209  :  105 

donne  w**  any  of  not 

121  :  298  :  92  :  probability  233  :  226  :  71  :  73 

hazarding  like 

16  :  12  :  56  :  13  :  34  :  20  :  182  :  199  :  77  :  mad 

I  stay  at 

men;  Avliicli  177  :  shall  55  :  72  :  10  :  86  :  94 

Ilarboro  (^v^h        is  my 

74  :  15  :  11  :  34  :  50  :  43  :  35  :  39  :  (299  :  178  :  17 

morrows  marclO  some      tyme  to 

84  :  216  :  41  :  38  :  55':  222  :)  262  :  498  :  273  :  75 


1645.]  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPOXDEXCE.  H-9 

atlicr  up  &  to  niako 

8  :  12  :  281  :  34  :  293  :  straglers  93  :  273  :  219  : 

provision  to       supply      yoii        for      this  service 

448  ;  273  :  48G  :  313  :  134  :  90  :  282  :  318  :  &  then 

march  faster  or 

wee  shall  222  :  7G  :  64  :  11  :  53  :  70  :  44  :  33  :  234  : 

slower 

77  :  54  :  5  :  42  :  307  :  according  to  intelligence.  So 
I  rest 

Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Charles  H. 

Indorsed,  4°  Junl)  1645,  "  the      to  me." 

*^^*  The  decyphering  is  iuthe  hand-writing  of  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edivard  Nicholas. 

Daintry,  0  June  1645. 

Nicholas, 

I  have  receaued  so  many  letters  from  you,  that  I 
beliue  none  of  them  ar  miscaried,  &  this  morning- 
one  from  yon  of  the  7.  &  w*^'  it  one  of  the  same  date 
from  all  my  Comissioners  except  Southampton  and 
Dorset  by  w"^'  I  perceaue  they  were  not  so  much 
stressed  by  the  siege  as  the  rest :  but  the  cheefe  end 
of  this  is,  by  you  to  send  this  inclosed  to  454  :  tell 

his 

394  :  that  I  have  receaued  165  of  the  -^4-  ^^''^y 
would  not  stay  this  messenger  untillit  was  desyfered  : 
I  will  say  no  more  now,  but  if  we  peripatetiques  get 
no  more  mischances  then  you  Oxfordians  f  fir  lyke 

*  The  fact  is,  however,  that  Charles's  general  correspondence  was, 
at  this  time,  much  interrupted  ;  for  the  letter  of  Goring,  already 
alluded  to,  was  intercepted  by  Fairfax,  and  it  was  this  which  induced 
the  pai'liamentary  commanders  to  bring  the  King  to  action  at  Naseby, 
before  he  could  be  joined  by  the  army  from  the  West. 

+  A  letter  written  by  Charles,  on  this  day,  to  the  Queen,  was 
intercepted  by  the  Parliament.  In  it  he  assured  her  that  the  rebels 
had  been  forced  to  raise  the  siege  of  Oxford,  in  consequence  of  his 
march  after  the  taking  of  Leicester  ;  and  that  quarrels  were  then 
very  frequent  between  Fairfax's  and  Cromwell's  soldiers.  He  also 
observed  that  his  affairs  never  were  in  so  hopeful  and  so  fair  a  way  ; 
adding,  that  all  he  wished  for,  in  case  of  ultimate  success,  was  tlie 
undisturbed  enjoyment  of  her  society. 


150  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1645. 

to  hauc  this  somer,  we  may  all  expect  probably  a 
merry  winter.    So  I  rest 

Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Charles  R. 

"  For  your  selfe." 

9°  JumJ.  1645.    R.  lO".    His  Ma'^^  I'f  to  nie. 


Tlie  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

DaintrYj  11  Jiaie  1645. 

Nicholas, 

As  I  thanke  you  for  aduerticing  me_,  so  I  much 

at       the  letter  &  message 

wonder  94  :  281  :  204  :  93  :  221  :  53  :  55  :  10  :  7 

the       Lords  bi'ought 

44  :  73  :  299  :  281  :  406  :  54  :  74 :  50  :  33  :  40  :  60 

me  that  the 

8  :  14  :  70  :  75  :  221  :  for  you  know  283  :  281  :  351 

Councell       vr&s  neuer  wont 

76  :  36  :  11  :  53  :  77  :  30  :  129  :  78  :  37  :  40  :  31 

to  (lebaitc 

71  :  79  :  273  :  80  :  20  :  45  :  51 :  12  :  23  :  72  :  46  :  upon 

not  propounded  to  them 

any  matter  :  226  :  70  :  81  :  244  :  249  :  133  :  273  :  281  : 

by  King  it  were 

17  :  82  : 1 06  :  y^  398  :  &  certainely  178  :  307  :  a  strange 

thing       if        mv  marching  Army 

285  :  183  :  83  :  18  :  84  :  222  : 182  :  325  (espetially 

at       the       head       of  them 

I  being  94  :  281  :  173  :  233  :  281  :  19  :  and)  should 

by  my  sitting 

be  gouerned  106  :  73  :  17  :  85  :  74 :  53  :  24  :  70  : 122  : 

Councell      at  Oxou  -sviien 

351  :  94  :  436  :  the  303  :  it  is  scarce  fitt  for  my  selfe 

at  such  a  distance 

94  :  267  :  11  :  124  :  71  :  12  :  31  :  1  :  45  :  to  give 

positiue  Order 

any  47  :  43  :  53  :  26  :  70  :  25  :  63  :  57  :  439  :  &  in- 

wonder  that 

deed  it  added  to  mv  39  : 42  :  30  :  20  :  44  :  33  :  283  i 


1645.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  151 

cuukl  not  hinder 

Vulpone  109  :  22G  :  72  :  73  :  14  :  23  :  30  :  21  :  45  : 

this 

34 :  282  :  as  the  Gouernor  tould  me  he  did  such  an 

indiscreete 

other  181  :  124  :  2  :  35  :  25  :  71  :  46  :  74  :  17  :  41  : 

motion 

72 :  185  :  but  few  dayes  agoe  :  howeuer  I  desyre  you 

the  like  of 

to  take  the  best  care  you  may  that  281  :  199  :  233  : 

this  be  not  done 

282  :  105  :  226  :  71  :  77  :  121  :  with  heerafter;  of 
J  ^-jj  gg^y      more,  hauing  freely  &  fully  spoken 

Lord  Hatton 

of  it  to  406  :  16  :  13  :  70  :  72  :  43  :  32  :  to  whom  I 
refer  you,  &  rest 

Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Charles  H. 

The  Gouernor  hathe  earnestly  desyred  me  to 
thank  Vulpone  and  your  selfe  for  the  great  assistance 
ye  haue  giuen  him  in  my  absence,  w'^^'  I  hartely  doe, 
desyring  you  to  continew  so ;  for  I  fynde  he  will 
haue  need  of  all  helpes. 

R:  14"  Junii.  1645.  The  King  to  me  concerning  the  I'tres  sent  his 
Ma^'fi  by  the  Councell  when  he  was  at  Daintree. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edtvard  Nicholas. 

Lubnam/"^  13  June  1645. 

Nicholas,  this  is  first  to  send  this  inclosed  by  your 

the  Queene 

meanes  to  70  :  454  :  240  :  then  to  lett  you  know 
you  ar  like  to  heare  of  me  tomorrow,  f    I  marche 

*  In  Leicestershire.  This  Letter,  as  noted  by  Nicholas,  was  written 
on  the  very  day  before  the  battle  of  Naseby. 

f  The  "inclosed"  Letter  is  not  preserved;  hwt,  on  a  comparison  of 
dates  and  facts,  it  appears  to  have  contained  the  news  of  the  captm'e 
of  Leicester.    It  was  at  midnight,  after  the  letter  in  the  text  was 


152  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1G45. 

T-and  Abav 

to  4  :   10   :   30   :  20  :  11  :  50  :  12'  :  84  :  82  : 

Melton 

after  that  to  17  :  44  :  5  :  70  :  40  :  31  :  &  so  to 

Bel  voir 

51  :  45  :  6  :  GO  :  42  :  23  :  33  :  but  I  asseure 
3^ou  tliat  I  shall  looke  before  I  leape  farther  32  : 

North 

43  :  34  :  72  :  14  :  73  :  but  I  am  going  to  supper, 
so  I  rest 

Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Charles  R. 

WOLUERHAMPTON,  17  JunC. 

This  was  written  befor  the  Bataile. 
"  For  your  selfe." 

17"  Jwiii  1645.    The  King  to  me  before     Battaile  of  Naisby. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edivard  Nicholas.  * 
Nicholas,  I  thanke  you  for  the  freedom  you  haue 

the  ill 

used  in  your  letters  to  me,  &  as  for  281  :  23  :  4  : 

intelligence  bet'wixt  my  Soldiers 

G  :  395  :  105  :  70  :  36  :  24  :  87  :  71  :  73  :  17  :  84  : 
484  :  53  :  I  beliue  I  haue  found  the  bottom  of  it, 
&  haue  put  such  a  remedy  to  it,  as  hope  heere- 
after  to  haue  little  troble  that  way  :  and  am  con- 
written,  that  a  Council  was  held  in  the  King's  tent,  and  a  resolution 
taken  to  give  battle  ;  but  it  also  appears,  by  this  remarkable  Letter, 
that  when  Charles  went  to  supper  on  that  memorable  night  he  had 
no  intention  of  adopting  the  coui'se  which,  so  recommended  by  his 
midnight  Council,  ended  in  his  entire  ruin.  So  little  had  he  been 
conscious  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  that  on  the  previous  day  he 
had  been  hunting,  and  what  he  designed  for  the  morrow  (the  fatal  day 
of  Naseby)  we  observe  by  the  letter  in  the  text. 

*  This  letter  is  without  date  of  place ;  but  by  means  of  it,  and 
several  of  the  subsequent  ones,  we  mark  the  King's  route  between  the 
battle  of  Naseby  and  his  arrival  at  Newark ;  a  space  of  time  during 
which  Bulstrode  describes  him  as  "  flying  from  place  to  place,  not 
well  knowing  which  way  to  turn  himself."  It  is  evident,  notwith- 
stanrling,  that  he  had  specific  plans  in  view  ;  on  account  of  which 
he  visited  Wales,  Shropshire,  and  afterwards  Huntingdon  and  York- 
shire, before  he  proceeded  to  Newark. 


1645.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


153 


fident,  tlmt  there  is  22G  :  288  :  118  :  233  :  487  : 
with  10  :  153  :  55  :  72  :  382  :  93  :  414  :  104  :  477  : 

fancies 

1G5  :  295  :  70  :  64  :  11  :  30  :  1  :  26  :  44  :  54  : 
for  this  I  haue  very  good  ground ;  but  now  I  desyre 
to  know  who  ar  the  melancoUy  men  amongst  you, 
that  is  to  say  if  any  dispare  of  our  business_,  (for  we 
heere  thinke  that  we  had  so  much  the  better,  as  we 
might  spare  them  thus  much  &  yet  be  upon  equall 

Southampton 

termes,)  &  in  particular  what  478  :  421  :  385  :  93  : 
406  :  54  :  45  :  18  :  46  :  34  :  thinkes  of  my  present 
affaires :  I  haue  so  good  hopes  of  my  Welshe  leauies 
that  I  dout  not  but  (by  the  grace  of  God)  to  be  in 
the  head  of  a  greater  Army  within  this  two  monthes, 
then  any  I  haue  scene  this  yeare,  &  so  I  rest 
Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Chahles  R. 

This  is  in  my  owld  cyfer  to  show  I  haue  not  lost 
it ;  send  this  inclosed  where  you  use  to  doe. 

"  For  your  selfe." 

R:  8"  July  1645.    The      to  me. 


Prince  Rupert  to  Sir  Edivard  Nicholas. 
Sir, 

I  sent  you  word  by  CoP  Terringham  that  I  had 
receaved  your  letter  by  this  woman,  so  alsoe  the  un- 
fortunat  losse  of  brige  Watter,  sence  w'^^'  1  heare  noe 
sertay^ty  of  the  Enemy^s  motions,  there  is  a  shippe 
landed  at  dartmouth  laden  w*^  200  bar*  of  powder 

If      Fairfax  advance 

and  store  of  arms.    209  :  474  :  53  :  76  :  33  :  99  : 

speedily  to  us  Wee  shall 

10  :  40  :  343  :  40  :  225  :  347  :  363  :  369  :  28  :  87  : 

bee  to        quit      Bath  want 

97  :  110  :  forced  76  :  347  :  308  :  437  :  for  13  :  54  :  81  : 

ot  men        and  victualls 

50  :  278  :  248  :  100  :  616  :  30  :  527  :  but  if  604  : 


154 


THE  NICHOLAS  COERESPONDENCE.  [1645. 


hee  fjive         us  time 

91  :  183  :  174  :  363  :  20  :  51  :  17  :  38  :  43  : 

Avee  doo  well 

369  shall  125  :  373  :  273  :  158  :  — I  heare  but 

Prince     Charles        is  at 

little  from       Goring.  ^'^     544  :  280  :  207  :  101  : 

Pendenuis  Castle  that 

4  :  140  :  40  :  79  :  207  :  96  :  452  :  it  is  reported  354. 

S'        Jo:      Berklyhatli    giuen     five    hundred     to  some 

431.  190.  174.  81.  153.  204.  158.  347.  328.  body 

I        know  for  to       stop  Prince  Charles  t 

205.   218.  — 148.  347.  30.  50.  27.   6.   40.  544. 

from  coming  to  Exeter. 

160.  119.    208.  66.  347.  470.    I  doubt  we  shall 

Sir       R.  Grenvileg 

shortly  see  the  inistery  of  this. J    482.  353.  282. 

*  Goring  had  been  defeated  by  Fairfax,  on  the  10th  of  this  month, 
at  Suttonfield,  near  Bridgewater,  which  town  surrendered  to  the 
Parhament  on  the  23rd.  Colonel  Windham,  the  Governor,  made  a 
gallant  defence.  It  was  he  who,  some  years  afterwards,  when  he 
assisted  Charles  the  Second  in  his  escape,  told  the  King  that  Sir  Thomas 
his  father,  in  the  year  1636,  a  few  days  before  his  death,  had  called 
to  him  his  five  sons,  and  thus  addressed  them :  "  My  children,  we  have 
seen  hitherto  serene  and  quiet  times  under  our  three  last  Sovereigns  ; 
but  I  must  now  warn  yox\  to  prepare  for  clouds  and  storms.  Factions 
arise  on  every  side,  and  threaten  the  tranquillity  of  your  native 
country.  But  whatever  happen,  do  you  faithfully  honour  and  obey 
your  Prince,  and  adhere  to  the  Crown.  I  charge  you  never  to  for- 
sake the  Crown,  though  it  should  hang  upon  a  bush." 

f  Charles  (the  Prince)  had  first  been  under  the  tuition  of  the 
Marquis  of  Newcastle,  afterwards  of  the  Marquis  of  Hertford  ; 
also  of  Dr.  Duppa,  Bishop  of  Salisbury.  His  education,  latterly, 
Avas  at  Oxford,  of  which  University  the  Jlarquis  of  Hertford  was 
Chancellor. 

J  Berkeley  was  high  ia  the  Prince  of  Wales's  confidence  about 
the  time  of  this  "  mystery  :  "  for  when  Goring  complained  of  the 
proceedings  of  the  Prince's  Council,  Berkeley  was  sent,  along  with 
Sir  Hugh  Pollard  and  Colonel  Ashbm*nham,  to  hold  a  private  con- 
ference with  him  on  the  subject. 

§  Sir  Richard  Grenville  was  soon  after  proposed  to  command 
the  foot  in  the  army  of  the  West,  when  the  insubordination  of  the 
troops,  through  the  misconduct  of  Lord  Wentworth,  rendered  new 
arrangements  absolutely  necessary.  But  Grenville,  contrary  to 
expectation,  refused  to  act ;  and  he  was  therefore  sent  prisoner  to 
the  Castle  in  ]\Iount's  Bay,  where  he  remained  until  the  successes 
of  the  Parliament  army  in  that  quarter  induced  the  Prince,  lest  he 


1645.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  155 

y«  only  souldicr  in  the      West  is 

225.  594.  208.  353.  371.  207.  76.  discontented  78. 

&        is  .it       his      owne  house 

40.  77.  90.  100.  207.  101.  184.  284.  85.  24.  33.  28. 

y«  King  will     doe    I  know 

43.  w^'^  lie  will  defend.    "What  499.  371.  125.  205. 

not.      Lo:    Digbv  s     word     (part  erased)        I  shall 

218.  267.  456.  send.  28.  13.  76.  40.  or  205.  30.  85. 

as  on  as  some 

97.  108.  102.  so  2.  82.  90.  102.  328.  speculation 

s  arc  brought  to 

30.  20.  31.  98.  71.  44.  24.  36.  66.  87.  50.  20.  347. 

proiection 

301.  16.  40.  10.  50.  211.  604.  341.  Pray  god  this 
prove  well.    Just  as  I  am  writing  I  heare  that  280. 

the      Scots    Army       is       past  betweene 

353.  592.  427.  207.  4.  102.  50.  20.  110.  50.  369. 

IMonmouth  & 

80.  40.  37.  24.  81.  39.  27.  36.  51.  87.  90.  97. 

Abergainy 

53.  61.  44. 177.  41.  94.  31.  this  inclosed  is  conserning 
the  commissioners  of  asseise^,  whoe  are  soe  bond  up 
by  the  members  att  Oxford  that  noe  thing  canbe 
issued  w^^out  their  consent ;  if  they  were  but  soe  farr 
trusted  as  that,  in  such  case  as  now  we  are  in,  (when 
we  need  powder  and  provisions)  monys  might  be 
issued  from  thence  to  such  uses  as  shall  be  most 
necessary  for  his  Ma*'""'  service  in  the  guarison,  I  shall 
be  accountable  that  none  shall  be  desired  by  me 
w^^out  there  be  a  great  necessity.  I  pray  lett  me 
have  a  speedy  answer,  w*"^'  will  infenetly  oblige 
Your  most  faithfuU  frend, 

Rupert 

Bristol,  27  of  Jidy. 

27"  July  1645.    Rec.  31.    Pr*^^  Rupert  to  me. 


should  fall  into  their  hands,  to  permit  him  to  transport  himself  to  the 
Continent. 


15t)  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1615. 


Prince  Rupert  to  Sir  Ediuard  Nicholas. 
Sir, 

As  I  told  you  our  resolution  in  my  last  by  the 

we       are  ced         to         quit     Bath.    The  King 

woman  869:  98.  for-13S.  347.  308.  437.    499.  in- 

for  desigiie: 

tends  148.  592.  a  fine  459.  you  may  be  sure  that 
I  have  hand  in  it,  for  I  have  this  from  others :  this 
is  alle  our  news :  pray  write  often  to  us ;  I  have 
receaved  but  one  expresse  from  you,  the  rest  were 
by  messengers  of  my  owne.    So  I  rest 

Yo'  most  faithfull  frend, 

EUPEKT. 

Bristoll  29'^  of  July, 


The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Cardife  4  Aug.  164.). 

Nicholas,  hauing  comanded  your  fellow  Secre- 
tary* to  giue  you  a  full  accont  as  well  of  our  pro- 
ceedings heere,  as  resolutions ;  I  will  nether  trouble 
you  nor  my  selfe  with  repetitions  :  only  for  my  selfe 
I  must  desyre  you  to  lett  euery  one  know,  that  no 
distresse  of  fortune  whatsoeuer  shall  euer  make  me 
(by  the  grace  of  God)  in  any  thing  receade  from 
those  grounds  I  layed  doune  to  you,  who  were  my 
Comissioners  at  Uxbridge;  &  w*"^  (I  thanke  them) 
the  Rebelles  haue  published  in  print :  &  though  I 
could  haue  wished  that  paines  had  beene  spaired,  yet 
I  will  nether  deny  that  those  things  ar  myne,  w*"^ 
they  haue  sett  out  in  my  name,  (only  some  words 
heere  &  there  mistaken,  &  some  commas  misplaced, 
but  not  much  materiall)  nor,  as  a  good  Protestant,  or 
honnest  man,  blushe  for  any  of  those  papers ;  indeed, 
as  a  discreet  man,  I  will  not  justefy  my  selfe  :  &  yet 
I  would  faine  know  him,  who  would  be  willing  that 
the  freedome  of  all  his  priuat  letters  were  publiquely 


*  Lord  Digby. 


1G45.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORKESPONDENCE. 


157 


seene,  as  myne  hauc  now  beene  ;  hoAvsoeucr,  so  that 
one  clause  he  rightly  understood,  I  care  not  much 
though  the  rest  take  theire  fortunes  ;  it  is,  concern- 
ing the  Mungrill  Parlament :  the  trewth  is,  that 
Sussex  *  factiousness,  at  that  tyme,  put  me  some- 
what out  of  patience,  v/'^  made  me  freely  vent  my 
displeasure  against  those  of  his  party  to  my  Wyfe, 
&  the  intention  of  that  phrase  was,  that  his  faction 
did  what  they  could  to  make  it  come  to  that,  by 
theire  raising  and  fomenting  of  basse  propositions: 
this  is  cleerely  euidenced  by  my  following  excuse  to 
her  for  sufFi'ing  those  people  to  trouble  her,  the 
reason  being,  to  eschcAV  those  greater  inconueniences 
w''^  they  had  &  wer  more  lykly  to  cause  heere,  then 
there.    I  am  going  to  supper,  so  I  rest 

Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Charles  R. 

I  have  reaued  (received)  your  new  cyfer  as  for 

my      (erased)  in  that 

example,  224:  302:  181:  17G  :  270:  14:  54:  11: 
808  :  216  :  17  :  1  :  181  :  72  :  232  :  IS  :  35  :  2  :  50  : 
151:   51:    60:    316:    110  :  108 :  Husbands  346: 

comaund  ■vv<^>»  you         are        to      use  to 

398 :  316  :  98 :  290  :  295  :  86  :  70  :  according  290  : 

the  nature  of         the  thing. 

277  :  225  :  19  :  43  :  3 :  37  :  SO  :  231  :  277  :  280  : 

Indorsed,  Cardiff  4°  Aitr;:  IGlo.  R.  10.  The  King  to  me  con- 
cerning the  Mungrill  P'liam't. 

The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Bridgenorthe,  9  Avff:  1645. 

Nicholas,  this  morning  I  receaued  yours  of  the 
30:  July,  w*^^'  requyres  no  answer  but  thankes  for  your 
often  aduertisments  :  &  particularly  for  those  w''^'  ar 
of  most  freedome,  in  answer  to  w"^^  I  shall  desyre  you, 

Dighy's 

(with  the  like  freeness)  to  take  heed  that  358  :  51  : 


*  Thomas  Lord  Saville,  recently  created  Earl  of  Sussex. 


158  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1645. 


friends      make  not         most  of  suspicion 

376  :  53  :  210  :  229  :  17  :  50  :  220  :  231  :  277  :  511  : 

(erased)     for  I       cannot  con 

against  401  :  147  :  174  :  111  :  229  :  18  :  115  :  ceale  : 

from      you      that     Digby  (erased) 

148  :  316  :  276  :  358  :  39  :  31  :  19  :  35  :  53  :  -  perfectly 

and     all       that  are  belceved  to  be 

453  :  96  :  94  :  276  :  98  :  104  :  202  :  83  :  290  :  104  : 

his  friends  that  there 

170  :  particular  376  :  52  :  &  I  asseur  you  276  :  277  : 

is       uo  dispatch 

1  :  36  :  60  :  181  :  229  :  124  :  72  :  32  :  17  :  61  :  41  : 

yet       come      to  me  from   

315  :  116  :  290  :  213  :  148  :  401  :  For  newes,  I  refer 
you  to  your  frends^  only  I  must  tell  you  that  to 

Lichfield    &       soe  to 

morrow  I  intend  to  march  to  403  :  96  :  266  :  290  : 

Newarke  y«        next      daj- ;       but        if  y*  Irish 

437  :  277  :  227  :  524  :  109  :  175  :  277  :  78  :  2  :  79  : 

be        come  then 

51  :  42  :  104  :  116  :  of      I  haue  good  hope  277  : 

I  tume         to  Chester 

27  :  174  :  shall  17  :  43  :  3  :  28  :  37  :  290  :  340.  My 
last  was  from  Cardife,  w''^'  was  written  in  such  haste 
that  I  forgot  to  bid  you  send  me  word  (w*"^  now  I 
earnestly  desyre  you  not  to  forget  to  doe)  how  my 
printed  letters  ar,  &  haue  been^  sensured  at  Oxford^ 
by  the  seuerall  sorts  of  people,  according  to  theire 
dyuerse  humors  ;  this  is  all  at  this  tyme  from 
Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Charles  R. 

In  the  Yoide  place  of  your  last  cyfer  at  the  end  of 
the  of  the  hindermost  alfabet  I  haue  filled  it, 
with  the  word  want :  lykewais  the  two  others  at  the 
end  of  the  Y'  with  yesternight  &  yonder, 

9"  Aug:  1645.  R.  16°.    The  King  to  me  from  Bridgenorth. 


*  These  figures  are  decyphered  by  Sir  Edward  Nicholas,  but 
erased  with  a  pen  ;  yet  may  iu  part  be  restored. 


1645.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


159 


The  King  to  Sir  Edivard  Nicholas. 

DoNCASTER,  18  Auf):  1645. 

Nicholas,  I  liaiie  sent  this  bearer  expressly  to  giue 
you  a  particular  account  of  my  present  condition,  w'^'' 
considering  what  it  was  at  the  beginning  of  this 
monthe,  is  now  (I  thanke  God)  miraculously  good ; 
and  indeed  the  gentlemen  in  thease  partes  showes 
themselfes  really  affectionat  &  harty  in  my  service : 
acting  cherfully  (without  any  grumbling)  what  I 
desyre.  Now  I  expect,  not  only  that  (lyke  ants)  you 
haue  plentifully  prouyded  your  selfes  for  winter,  but 
lykewais  that  you  so  recrute  your  selfes  in  men  & 
armes,  that  it  may  be  a  lusty  stocke  for  a  next  years 
army :  So  I  rest. 

Your  asseured  frend, 

Charles  R. 

As  I  haue  com'aded  my  Sone  to  comend  me  to  all 
the  Laydis,  so  you  must  to  all  the  Lords  my  frends, 
&  particularly  to  Vulpone,  &  tell  the  Gouernor  that 
he  has  forgotten  that  he  sent  me  a  cyfer. 

DoNCASTER  18°  Aug.  1645.    R.  23.    The  King  to  me. 


The  Ki7ig  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

HuNTiNGTOUNE  25  A  ug:  1645. 

Nicholas,  I  haue  this  morning  receaued  yours  of 
the  13:  Aug:  with  fower  printed  Oxford  Papers 
concerning  my  published  Letters,  &  am  glad  to 
fynde  that  you  there  make  so  faire  (indeed  just,  as 
concerning  my  religion,  kingdomes  &  frends)  an 
interpretation  of  them,  &  particularly  that  you 
haue  so  great  a  confidence  in  my  constancy  to  my 
just  cause  :  and  now  me  thinkes  I  wer  too  blame  if 


ICO  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [I(j45. 


I  did  not  justifie  tlie  trewtli  of  your  opinions  con- 
cerning  me,  by  my  owen  declaration,  w"^'  is  this, 
that  let  my  condition  be  neuer  so  low,  my  successes 
neuer  so  ill,  I  resolue  (by  the  grace  of  God)  neuer  to 
yeald  up  this  Church  to  the  gouernement  of  Papists, 
Presbiterians,  or  Independants,  nor  to  injure  my 
successors,  by  lessning  the  Crowen  of  that  ecclesias- 
tical! &  military  power  w*"''  my  predecessors  left  me, 
nor  forsake  my  frends,  much  lesse  to  lett  them  suffer 
when  I  doe  not,  for  theire  faithfulnesse  to  me, 
resoluing  sooner  to  line  as  miserable  as  the  violent 
rage  of  successfull  insulting  Rebells  can  make  me 
(w'^''  I  esteme  far  worse  than  death)  rather  then  not 
to  be  exactly  constant  to  thease  grounds ;  from  w''', 
whosoeuer,  upon  w^hatsoeuer  occasion,  shall  persuade 
me  to  receade  in  the  least  title,  I  shall  esteeme  him 
ether  a  foole  or  a  knaue ;  but  you  will  aske  me, 
Quorsum  hoc  ?  Yes,  for  without  this  warning,  the 
tender  person  all  affection  of  some  might  giue  me 
troblesome  aduyce,  &  yet  not  blameable,  consider- 
ing the  present  condition  of  my  affaires,  &  not 
knowing  this  my  resolution,  w"''  I  comand  you  to 
publishe  to  all  whom  their  quality  or  judgement 
makes  fitt  for  such  dicourses,  &  so  I  rest, 
Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Charles  R. 

You  may  say  confidently,  &  giue  me  for  author, 
that  the  peace  of  Irland  is  concluded,  not  yet  knowing 
the  particular  conditions. 

25  Avg:  1645.  The  King  to  me  from  Huntington,  containing  his 
resolue' on  never  to  quit  Church  Gouernement,  his  friends,  or  to 
diniinishe  the  Crowne  of  that  miHtary  or  eccrall  power  vas  left 
liim  by  his  p«deeessors. 


1645.]  THE  XICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


ICl. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Ragland*  9  Sep.  1645. 

Nicholas,  I  receaued  yesterday  bothe  of  your 
letters  (for  I  perceaue  by  their  markes,  that  you 
haue  yet  written  no  more)  with  the  advertisments 
from  London,  w'^''  as  you  say  is  worthy  my  notice, 
but  without  considering  make  this  answer,  that  the 
just  contrary,  concerning  the  new  discouery  of  my 
Commission  in  a  letter  to  the  two  Queenesf  about  the 
Irishe  Papists,  is  trew  :  for  indeed  that  roag  Hartogen 
made  such  a  foolishe  proposition,  but  it  was  flatly 
denyed  by  me,  &  (if  my  memory  much  faile  me  not) 
my  Wyfe  tooke  occasion  upon  some  clause  in  my 
answer,  wherby  it  semed  to  her  (in  w'^'  she  was 
mistaken)  as  if  I  thought  she  had  lyke  the  proposi- 
tion, to  disclaime  any  parte  in  it  (so  far  from 
aprobation)  but  only  the  transmitting  of  it  to  me, 
w*"^  certainly  was  not  fitt  for  her  to  refuse :  &  this 
(with  many  other  ansome  expressions  of  her  affection 
to  me,  euen  to  the  ventring  of  being  thought  a 
Protestant  in  condemning  the  Irish  proceedings)  was, 
as  I  beliue,  in  that  letter  w"^  Tom  Elliot  deliuered 
me  from  her,  as  I  was  marching  over  Broadway  Hills 
the  9  of  May  last ;  for  I  am  sure  the  most  of  that 
letter  was  concerning  the  Irish  business,  &  I  know 
the  reason  why  the  Rebelles  haue  not  printed  it  is, 
because  it  cleers  that  point  more  then  any  of  those 
betweene  vs,  w*=^  are  published :  That  all  this  is 
trew,  &  that  the  Rebelles  haue  all  this  under  my 
Wyfes  hand  &  myne,  I  comand  you  to  aflSrme 
positiuely  in  my  name  upon  all  occasions  of  this 
subject :  but  it  is  possible  that  all  I  mention  to  be, 
is  not  in  the  letter  Tom  Elliot  brought  me  (though  I 
am  sure  most  is),  but  then  it  is  in  some  other.  So 


*  The  King's  adventures  at  this  old  castle  are  too  well  known  to 
require  illustration. 

t  Queen  Henrietta  Maria,  and  her  mother  the  Queen  of  France 
the  widow  of  Henry  IV. 

VOL.  lY.  M 


1G2 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1645. 


you  see  clecrly  the  trewth  of  this  business,  by  w*''',  if 
it  be  brought  to  light,  (w'^^'  I  comand  you  to  endeuor, 
Avith  all  possible  industry)  I  must  haue  honnor ;  for 
■where  my  owen  justifies  me  (w'^''  I  am  sure  my  AVyfe 
can  produce,  lett  the  Rebells  doe  what  they  will) 
I  care  not  what  lyers  can  inuent  in  this  kynde.  For 
what  else  remaines  unanswered  in  your  two  letters  I 
refer  you  to  your  fellow  Secretary,  &  rest 
Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Charles  E. 

R.  24°  Sep''"»J6i5.    His  Ma'i"  le>-  to  me  that     Rebells  have  not 
printed  some  l""*  of  his  Ma''<^  &      Queens  w'^^  iustifie  tlieir  Ma^'^^  in 
ljusenes  conc'^ning  Ireland. 


TTie  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Bridgenorthe  1  Oci.  1645. 

Nicholas,  none  of  your  iecres  haue  hitherto 
miscarried,  this  day  having  receaued  the  12^  by 
Wytefoord,  &  shall  at  this  tyme,  more  insist  upon 
telling  you  of  my  desynes  &  giuing  you  directions, 
then  in  answers,  hauing  comanded  your  fellow 
Secretary  to  supply  that :  first  then,  (that  you  may 
know  whither  to  send  to  me)  I  intend  my  course 

Newarke 

towards  437  ;  where  I  shall  take  further  resolutions 

my 

according  to  occasion  :   Vnderstanding  that  224  : 

horse  under  Lo:  Goring 

173  :  293  :  83  :  36  :  3  :  380  :  is  lykely  to  be  eather 

beaten  or  starued 

14  :  37  :  32  :  17  :  38  :  27  :  242  :  53  :  19  :  32  :  2  : 43  : 

•where  they  are 

30  :  84  :  307  :  277  :  47  :  20  :  98  :  I  haue  command 

him       to         breake  throughe  to 

169  :  290  :  14  :  2  :  36  :  33  :  62  :  37  :  60  :  283  :  290  : 

nie  passe       by  or         neere  Oxon 

213  :  now  they  must  238  :  110  :  232  :  226  :  433  : 
wherfor  my  plasure  is,  that  you  take  that  oportunety 

to        send       D.  of      Yorke      to  me 

290  :  264  :  125  :  231  :  541  :  290  :  213  :  for  since  it 


1645.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  3  63 

yeelde       toT\-nes  basely  * 

is  the  fasliion  to  314  :  17  :  5-i  :  68  :  27  :  35  :  52  :  70  : 

venture 

14  :  33  :  52  :  36  :  207  :  none  can  blame  ine  to  43  :  35  : 

my  children 

27  :  19  :  4i  :  3  :  224  :  59  :  39  :  79  :  4  :  84  :  2  :  36  : 

in        nn      army  rather  tlieu 

27  :  176  :  95  :  323  :  47  :  90  :  2  :  33  :  277  :  3  :  18  :  39  : 

to         be  besieged 

36  :  27  :  290  :  101  :  60  :  16  :  36  :  52  :  38  :  78  :  24  : 
127  :  I  haue  no  more  to  say  but  that  1  approue  of 
all  your  aduyses  in  your  last,  &  meanes  to  follow 

the  Queene  of  England 

them  :  one  of  thease  inclosed  is  for  247  :  231  :  363  : 
the  other  speakes  it  selfe.    So  I  rest 

Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Charles  R. 

"  For  your  selfe." 

1"  Octo^''  1645.  His  Ma'  <=  to  me  concerning  sending  D.  of 
Yorke  to  him  by  Lo:  Goring. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 
Nicholas, 

When  you  shall  have  considered  the  strange  and 
most  inexcusable  deliverye  vpp  of  the  Castle  and 
Fort  of  Bristoll^t  and  compared  it  with  those  many 
precedinge  aduertisments  w'^''  have  been  giuen  mee, 
I  make  noe  doubt,  but  you  and  all  my  Counsell  there 
will  conclude  that  I  could  doe  noe  lesse,  then  what 
you  will  finde  heere  inclosed,  in  my  care  of  the  pre- 
seruation  of  my  Sonne,  of  all  you  my  faithfull 
servaunts  there,  and  of  that  importaunt  place,  my 
Citty  of  Oxford.  In  the  first  place  you  will  finde  a 
coppy  of  my  letter  to  my  nephew  ;  secondly,  a  reuo- 
cation  of  his  commission  of  Generall;  thirdlye,  a 
warrant  to  Lieutenant  ColF  Hamilton  to  exercise  the 

*  This  evidently  refers  to  the  King's  displeasure  against  Prince 
Rupert  for  the  loss  of  Bristol, 
t  Alluded  to  in  the  precedmg  letter. 

M  2 


104  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1645. 


charge  of  Lieutenant  Gouernor  of  Oxford  in  Sir 
Thomas  Glemhams*  absence;  fourthly,  a  Avarrant 
to  the  sayd  Lieutenant  Colonell  Hamilton  to  appre- 
hend the  person  of  Will:  Legge  f  present  Gouernour 
of  Oxford  ;  and  lastlye,  a  warrant  to  be  directed  to 
what  person  shall  bee  thought  fittest  for  the  appre- 
hendinge  my  Nephew  Rupert,   in   case   of  such 
extreamitye  as  shall  bee  hereafter  specifyed,  and  not 
otherwise.  As  for  the  circumstances  and  the  timinge 
of  the  execution  of  all  these  particulars,  as  farr  forth 
as  they  may  admitt  of  some  howres  delay  more  or 
lesse,  I  must  referr  it  to  my  Lord  Treasurers  J  care 
and  yours  to  aduise  of,  vpon  the  place,  how  it  may 
be  done  with  most  securitye,  and  accordinglye  to 
direct  the  manner  of  proceedinge.     But  yett  I 
shall  tell  you  my  opinion  as  farr  forth  as  I  can  judge 
at  this  distance,  w*"^  is,  that  you  should  beginne  with 
securing  the  person  of  Will:  Legge,  before  any  thing- 
be  declared  concerninge  my  Nephew.  But  that  once 
done,  then  the  sooner  you  declare  to  the  Lords  both 
the  revokinge  of  my  Nephews  commission,  and  my 
makinge  S""  Thomas  Glemham  Gouernour  of  Oxford, 
the  better.    As  for  the  deliuery  of  my  letter  to  my 
Nepheu,  if  hee  bee  at  Oxford,  I  take  the  proper  time 
for  that  to  be  as  soone  as  possiblye  may  bee  after 
the  securinge  of  Will:  Legge.    But  if  my  Nepheu 
be  not  there,  I  would  then  haue  you  hasten  my 
letter  unto  him,  and  in  the  meane  time  putt  the 
rest  in  execution. 

The  warrant  for  my  Nephews  commitment  is 
onlye  that  you  may  haue  the  power  to  doe  it,  if  in 

*  The  King  appears  to  have  reposed  great  confidence  in  Sir  Thomas 
Glemham,  notwithstanding  his  surrender  of  Carlisle  on  the  28th  of 
June  preceding  ;  which,  however,  had  not  taken  place  till  after  a  long 
siege,  and  when  he  had  reason  finally  to  despair  of  succour.  Indeed 
he  had  distinguished  himself,  from  the  first,  in  the  Royal  Cause  ; 
having  been  second  in  command  in  Yorkshire,  under  the  Eai'l  of 
Cumberland. 

f  This  is  a  piece  of  private  history  not  noticed  in  the  Peei'age ; 
but  it  is  right  to  add  that  the  King's  suspicions  of  his  old  and 
faithful  friend,  the  ancestor  of  the  present  family  of  Dartmouth, 
were  subsequently  ascertained  to  be  without  the  slightest  foundation. 

t  Sir  John  Culpepper. 


1645.J         THE  NICHOLAS  COKRESPONDENCE.  165 


stead  of  submittinge  to,  and  obeyinge  my  commaunds 
in  goinge  beyond  sea,  you  shall  tinde  that  hee  practise 
the  raysinge  of  nmtinye  or  any  other  disturbance 
in  that  place,  or  any  other,  in  w'^  case  the  sayd 
warrant  for  his  committment  is  to  bee  deliuered  unto 
whome  you  and  my  Lord  Treasurer  shall  thinke 
fittest  for  it  to  be  directed  unto,  and  by  that  person 
to  be  putt  in  execution.  Lastlye  I  enjoyne  you  the 
care  to  lett  all  the  Lords  know,  that  whateuer  is 
done  in  this  kinde,  is  out  of  my  tender  regard  of  their 
safetye  and  preseruation,  and  that  they  shall  speedilye 
receiue  for  their  satisfaction  a  particular  account  of 
the  reasons  of  this  necessarye  proceedinge.  I  rest 
Your  most  asseured  frend, 
Charles  R. 

Hereford,  Sept:  14'^  1G45. 

Tell  my  Sone  that  I  shall  lesse  greeue  to  lieere 
that  he  is  knoked  in  the  head  then  that  he  should 
doe  soe  meane  an  action  as  is  the  rendring  of 
Bristoll  Castell  &  Fort  *  upon  the  termes  it  was. 
C.  R. 

R:  17°  7'"'''  1645,  by  Mr.  North.    The  King  to  me. 


Copie  of  Pr:  Ruperts  ^c.  Petition  deliuered  at 
Newarke.f 

May  it  please  yo'  most  excellent  Ma*'^, 
"Whereas  in  all  humility  wee  came  to  present  our 
selues  this  day  unto  your  Ma*%  to  make  our  seuerall 

*  The  King's  anger  at  the  surrender  of  Bristol  is  not  surprising, 
when  it  is  recollected  that  Prince  Rupert  possessed  at  the  time  140 
pieces  of  mounted  cannon,  100  barrels  of  powder,  with  2500  foot, 
1000  horse,  and  1000  tx'ained  bands  and  auxiliai'ies  ;  on  the  other  hand,, 
he  had  not  more  than  sixteen  days'  provisions  for  such  a  force.  But 
the  King's  feelings  at  this  precise  period  must  have  been  very  bitter  ; 
since  the  immediate  and  consequent  loss  of  Devizes,  Winchester, 
Basing  House,  Berkeley  Castle,  and  Chepstowe,  had  reduced  his  affairs 
to  a  situation  almost  desperate. 

+  The  affair  that  gave  rise  to  this  Petition  deserves  notice.  The 
King  having  at  this  moment  gone  to  Newai-k,  as  a  place  of  the  best 


166  THE  NICHOLAS  COERESPONDENCE.  [1645. 


greevances  knowue,  Wee  find  we  liaue  drawne 
upon  us  some  misconstruction  by  the  manner  of 
that,  by  reason  your  Ma''''  thought  that  appeared  as 
a  mutiny,  Wee  shall  therefore  with  all  humblenes 
and  carefulnes  present  unto  your  Ma'^',  that  wee,  the 
persons  subscribed,  whom  from  the  beginning  of  this 
unhappy  warre  haue  giuen  such  testimony  to  your 
Ma"^  and  the  world  of  our  fidelity  and  zeale  to  your 
Tyj^ties  person  and  cause,  doe  thinke  our  selves 
unhappy  to  lye  under  that  censure ;  and  as  wee 
know  in  our  consciences  our  selues  innocent  and 
free  from  that,  wee  doe  in  all  humility  therefore 
(least  wee  should  hazard  our  selues  upon  a  second 
misinterpretation)  present  these  reasons  of  our 
humblest  desires  unto  your  sacred  Ma*''',  rather  in 
writing  than  personnally,  which  are  these  : 

That  many  of  us  trusted  in  high  c^^mmands  in 
your  Ma*'"  service,  haue  not  only  our  commission 
taken  away  without  any  reason  or  cause  expressed, 
whereby  our  honors  are  blemished  to  the  world, 
our  fortunes  ruined,  and  wee  rendred  incapable  of 
trust  or  command  from  any  forraigne  Prince ;  but 
many  others  (as  we  have  cause  to  feare)  designed  to 
suffer  in  the  same  manner. 

Our  intention  in  our  addressing  our  selues  to  your 
Ma*%  and  our  submissiue  desires,  now  are :  that  yo'' 
Ma*""  wilbee  graciously  pleased  that  such  of  us  as  now 
labour  under  the  opinion  of  unworthinesse  and  inca- 

security,  some  differences  of  opinion  arose  among  his  confidential 
officers  respecting  the  defeat  of  Lord  Digby  at  Sherborne,  which 
General  Gerard  asserted  to  be  the  result  of  treason.  Digby 's 
character,  however,  was  supported  by  Bellasis,  the  Governor,  and 
several  others  ;  but  the  Princes,  Rupert  and  Maurice,  sided  with 
Gerard,  At  length  swords  were  drawn,  and  the  King  rushed  in  to 
part  them  ;  but  when  it  was  found  that  his  opinion  was  in  favour 
of  Digby,  Prince  Rupert,  and  400  of  that  party,  actually  threw  up 
their  commissions,  as  Burton  declares  in  his  Civil  Wars.  This 
Petition  now  printed,  however,  seems  to  imply  positively  that  their 
commissions  were  taken  from  them.  There  appears  a  strange  incon- 
sistency in  the  accounts  given  of  these  affairs  by  the  various  contem- 
porary writers  of  the  period.  The  curious  reader  will  find  much 
amusement  in  referring  to  Bulstx'ode's  Memoirs,  page  127,  et  seq.  ; 
and  to  the  notices  by  Clarendon. 


1645.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


167 


pacityto  scrue  your  Ma^'^^may  at  a  Counccll  of  AVarre, 
receiue  knowledge  of  the  cause  of  your  Ma^'"  dis- 
pleasure,, and  haue  the  justice  and  libertie  of  our 
defence  against  what  can  be  alleaged  against  us,  and 
in  particular  concerning  this  Government ;  and  if 
upon  the  severest  examinac'on  our  integrity  and 
loyaltie  to  your  Ma^'^  shall  appeare,  that  then  your 
Ma*'*"  be  graciously  pleased  to  grant  us,  either  repa- 
ration in  honour,  against  the  of  our 
ennemys,  or  libertie  to  passe  into  other  partes,  which 
are  the  humblest  desires  of 

Your  Ma*'" 

most  obedient  and  loyall  subjects  and  servants. 
The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Newarke  10  Od:  1615. 

Nicholas, 

none  of  yours  haue  yet  miscarryed,  haueing  yes- 
ternight receaued  your  14*^  letter :  before  this,  I 
hope,  S'  Tho:  Glemham  will  be  come  to  you,  whom  I 
have  commanded  to  take  particular  care  of  purging 
Oxford  of  mutinus  &  disaffected  persons  ;  &  least  he 
should  not  be  bould  anufe,  hauing  yet  but  a  verball 
command,  I  thinke  fitt  now,  that  you  should  show 
him  this,  under  my  hand,  that  my  pleasure  heerein 
be  dewly  executed,  whomsoeuer  it  may  concerne : 
As  for  your  Ticket  of  Accommodation,  that  I  may 
understand  it  the  better  (for  it  yet  seemes  to  me  but 
an  insignificant  peece)  I  command  you  to  send  me  the 
two  Colonels  Fox  &  Murray;*  being  possible  that 
it  may  receaue  such  illumination,  by  the  illustration 
of  circumstances,  as  what  hitherto  seemes  but  a 
darke  chaos,  may  breake  foortli  into  a  lactea  via, 
leading  to  peace  : 

"Will:  Legge  no  suspiciou 

For  what  concernes  401  :  I  haue  229  :  511  :  231  : 

of         but         what      Lo:     Digbv  informed 

109  :  305  :  358  :  96  :  316  :  166  :  176  :  147  :  213  : 

*  The  whole  of  this  affair  is  curious,  aud  little  noticed  in  the 
histories. 


168  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1645. 

■what  I 

S3  :  me,  \\'^'  satisfies  me  as  to  305  :  174  :  166  : 

have        done         but         not  him  guilty 

122  :  109  :  229  :  17  :  beliue  169  :  24  :  43  :  78 

of        trickery  more 

4  :  18  :  79  :  35  :  231  :  521  :  before  I  see  221  : 

particular       proofs  * 

467  :  72  :  1  :  54  :  57  :  7  :  51  :  Our  North- 
erne  newes  t  we   hope   to  be   as  good  as  your 

but 

Westernc,  though  yet  not  so  fully  ratified,  109  : 

in      confidence  thereof  I 

176  :  350  :  29  :  58  :  35  :  277  :  2  :  231  :  174  : 

lit  to  advance 

thinke  143  :  290  :  87  :  43  :  31  :  27  :  61  :  36  : 

a  dave        or  t-v\o's  march 

10  :  32  :  20  :  118  :  51   :  232  :  568  :  212  :  60  ; 

and         if         Montrose      be  in         that  part  as 

96  :  175  :  417  :  104  :  176  :  276   :  118  :  99  : 

I  hope         he  is  there  I 

174  :  172  :  167  :  181  :  30  :  277  :  28  :  and  174  : 

intend  to  jovne 

176  :  19  :  38  :  27  :  85  :  10  :  290  :  179  :  28':  37  : 

-,Vth 

30  :  303  :  169  :  So  hoping  shortly  to  send  you 
more  certanty  of  our  good  newes,  &  how  I  shall 
dispose  of  my  selfe,  then  yet  I  can,  I  rest 

Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Charles  R. 

my  -wyfe 

This  inclosed  is  for  224  :  68  :  47  :  7  :  35. 

«  For  your  selfe."  J 

10O86'-'*  1645.  R:  17.  1645.  His  Ma'^e  to  me  concerning  Coll: 
Will:  Murrey.  The  \7'^  of  S*'"  Col:  W.  Murrey  was  sent  for  by 
the  Lo*'''',  &  his  Ma*'«^  pleasure  signified  to  him  to  attend  y^  King 
accordingly. 


*  It  is  a  certain  fact,  of  which  the  King  was  afterwards  well 
assured,  that  the  insinuations  against  Legge's  loyalty  were  founded 
on  false  statements. 

'j-  Alluding  evidently  to  the  victory  gained  by  Montrose  at  Kilsythe 
in  Scotland  ;  but  the  King's  hopes  were  soon  after  quashed,  when 
Leslie  defeated  Montrose  at  Philiphaugh, 


ie45.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORIIESPONDENCE. 


169 


The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas, 

Newarke  1G  Oct.  1G45.  ; 

Nicholas, 

I  haue  receaued  17  letters  from  you,  for  w'^''  I 
liartely  tlianke  yon,  wee  being  very  mucli  clieered  by 
your  frequent  dispacbes,  wherfor  I  dout  not  but  you 
will  continew  in  so  doeing  :  I  wrote  to  you  upon 

my  wyfe 

Fry  day  last,  wberin  there  was  a  letter  for  224  :  68  : 
49  :  7  :  35  :  30  :  300  :  and  lykewaise  in  that 
dispache  (I  will  not  say  that  all  was  in  myne)  you 
were  answerd  concerning  the  Gouernor  of  the 
Deuyses,  &  all  others  in  his  predicament,  as  lykewais 
the  L:  Hatton :   so  that  now  I  haue   but  fower 

the      Earle  of 

particulars  to  answer:  T  begin  with  277  :  126  :  231  : 

Norwich  * 

431  :  about  wliome  I  embrace  and  thanke  you  for 
your  motion,  &  comand  you  to  send  him  word 
accordingly ;  secondly  for  Mr.  Atturny,  t  tell  him 
if  the  Rebelles  neuer  did  but  justice  or  what  they 
had  lawfuU  power  to  doe,  then  his  answ^er  good, 
otherwais  it  is  not  w^orthe  a  button :  wherfor  if  he 
confesse  my  power,  lett  him  accept  my  offer,  other- 
wais 1  shall  know  what  I  haue  to  doe ;  as  for  Rains- 
ford,let  the  Judges  proceede  :  lastly  concerning  200  : 

the        Duke         of  York 

277  :  125  :  231  :  541  :  300  :  if  (as  I  hope)  380  : 
haue  156  :  271  :  176  :  277  :  525  :  then  276  : 
440  :  concerning  169  :  302  :  27  :  54  :  17  :  10  : 
163  :  72  :  35  :  28  :  20  :  109  :  175  :  380  :  104  : 
374  :  83  :  30  :  290  :  250  :  277  :  525  :  96  : 
116  :  290  :  213  :  303  :  170  :  173  :  in  that  case 
it  wer  a  folly  in  213  :  290  :  194  :  224  :  266  :  29  : 
36  :  40  :  101  :  443  :  in  the  meane  tyme  115  : 
58  :  37  :  31  :  4  :  38  :  50  :  305  :  I  haue  written 
in  this  293  :  17  :  78  :  5  :  6  :  60  :  279  :  447  :  79  : 
18  :  47  :  136  :  236  :  as  I  haue  sayed  109  :  277  : 


*  Previously  spol<en  of  as  General  Goring, 
t  Sir  Edward  Herbert.  Knt. 


170  THE  NICHOLAS  COKRESPOXDENCE.  [1645. 


27  :  70  :  83  :  38  :  59  :  6  :  98  :  35  :  90  :  224  : 
302  :  107  :  36  :  1  :  176  :  first  290  :  412  :  383  : 
(174  :  177  :  169  :  276  :  540  :  231  :  cvfer  211  :  36  : 
10  :  213  :  229  :  18  :  20  :  71  :  2  :  48  :  19  :  30  : 
279  :  290  :  169  :)  277  :  27  :  40  :  290  :  277  : 
50  :  3  :  37  :  51  :  19  :  90  :  this  is  all,  so  I  rest. 

Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Charles  R. 

settle        an  intelligence 

Methinksyou  miglit  51  :  35  :  17  :  4  :  36  :  10  :  31  : 

to  y       next       by  Loudon 

27  :  391  :  290  :  277  :  525  :  110  :  400  :  300  : 

I  send  YOU  lieerewith  the  trew  coppy  of  an  intelli- 
gence from  neere  Ferrebriges,  from  one  who  hath 
the  report  of  a  discreet  honnest  man  :  by  the  Army 
he  meanes  Digby  and  Landale,*  w'^''  part  I  beliue 
trew ;  but  for  the  former,  I  know  the  particular  of 
my  Wyfe,  false  :  &  for  the  rest_,  I  leaue  you  to  judge, 
not  yet  knowing  what  to  say. 

341  :  209  :  266  :  27  :  10  :  390  :  51  :  20  :  290  : 
151  :  436  :  391 :  148  :  400  :  307  :  147  :  174  :  1  :  35  : 
58  :  54  :  75  :  77  : 36  :  28  :  83  :  37  :  169  :  290  :  316  : 

16"  8*''«  1645.    R.  22°.     The  King  to  me  concerning  making 
Earl  of  Norw'cli  Capt:  of  the  Garde,  &  the  Atto"^  Herberts 
removall. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas 

my  intenc'ous  are 

Nicolas,  :  224  :  176  :  289  :  17  :  180  :  53  :  20  : 

by       God's  lielpe  to 

98  :  (110  :  157  :  29  :  60  :  39  :  36 :  4  :  74  :  37  :)  290  : 

breake  throughe  Rebelles 

14  :  3  :  37  :  34  :  64  :  38  :  283  :  277  :  475  :  18  : 

forces  and        get         to        Oxonj      to  -w^h 

374  :  53  :  600  :  96  :  152  :  290  :  443  :  290  :  308  : 

*  Sir  Marmaduke  Laugdale. 
t' To  this  plan,  Bulstrode  tells  us,  tlie  King  was  led  by  the  circum- 
stance of  the  parliamentary  army  being  now  in  force  on  the  North 
side  of  the  Trent.    The  whole  of  tlie  letter  being  in  cypher  is  an 


1645.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  '  171 

end  my  passage  may 

128  :  and  that  224  :  238  :  52  :  33  :  26  :  37  :  209  : 

be  more  ease  & 

104  :  303  :  221  :  38  :  32  :  52  :  35  :  40  :  96  :  70  : 

security 

53  :  37  :  59 :  43  :  3  :  79  :  29  :  49  :  I  would  haue  you 
acquaint  the  Gouernor  with  these  commands  from 

send         all       the      horse       that  mav 

me;  that  he  264  :  86  :  277  :  173  :  276  :  209  :  pos- 

be  spared  from  Oxon 

sibly  104  :  53  :  74  :  34  :  3  :  38  :  84  :  148  :  443 

to     Banbnry     on      Sunday     next  directions 

290  :  329  :  233  :  554  :  227  :  with  these  83  :  78  :  2 

to         the  Comander 

36  :  59  :  19  :  79  :  233  :  53  :  290  :  277  :  346  :  36 

in  Cheif  keepe 

3  :  176  :  59  :  39  :  36  :  82  :  7  :  38  :  that  he  183  :  53 

scouts  to  wards 

59  :  56  :  44  :  19  :  52  :  290  :  68  :  33  :  2  :  83  :  53 

Daventry  & 

70  :  84  :  37  :  43  :  38  :  27  :  17  :  3  :  47  :  90  :  96  :  300 

Harburrow 

39  :  34  :  3  :  14 :  46  :  1  :  2  :  56  :  46  :  26  :  42  :  200 

&  diligently  hould 

96  :  83  :  79  :  6  :  82  :  24  : 37  : 29  :  19  :  207  :  42  :  57 

intelligence    with        the  Gov'nor  of  Bel- 

43  :  4  :  84  :  391  :  303  :  277  :  379  :  232  :  231  :  16 

voir,  of       what     forces  ly 

36  :  4  :  46  :  57  :  79  :  3  :  231  :  305  :  374  :  53  :  207 

in  partes  my  resolution 

176  :  those  239  :  53  :  224  :  3  :  37  :  266  :  4  :  46 

to       goe  that  way 

19  :  180  :  being  290  :  24  :  56  :  38  :  276  :  69  :  34 

if         Av'i>      any      reasonable  hazard  I 

47  :  175  :  303  :  97  :  254  :  88  :  70  :  39  :  34  :  2  :  85 

may         passe :      but  if 

174  :  209  :  238  :  109  :  175  :  S""  Thom:  Glemham^ 

findes         I      come       not  to       Banbuiy      by  Thursda 

144  :  174  116  :  229  :  17  :  290  :  329  :  110  :  551 


evidence  of  the  King's  great  desire  for  secrecy,  and  is  also  in  agree- 
ment with  his  well-known  habit  of  imparting  his  resolutions  to  none, 
except  to  two  or  three  of  the  nearest  trust  about  him. 

*  Then  Governor^of  Oxford. 


17 'Z  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1645. 

next       come  senight  then 

227  :  116  :  263  :  27  :  78  :  24  :  42  :  19  :  277  :  29 

he       may  draw  back 

167  :  209  :  83  :  3  :  34  :  69  :  20  :  16  :  32  :  59  :  64 

the     liorse  secrecy 

277  :  173  :  you  must  remember  that  53  :  37  :  58 :  1 

in         this  particular 

38  :  61  :  49  :  176  :  279  :  239  :  79  :  59  :  43  :  4  :  34 

must       be  your  cheifest 

3  :  215  :  104  :  317  :  59  :  39  :  37  :  78  :  7  :  38  53 

care  tell       the  Gouemor 

19  ;  112  :  I  will  only  allow  you  to  274  :  277  :  379 

of  it         -who      must  be 

232  :  231  :  182  :  320  :  215  :  104  :  answerable  for  the 

discretion  & 

124  :  59  :  3  :  38  :  17  :  180  :  96  :  80  :  84  :  78  :  207 

dilligence  of  the  person 

24  :  38  :  27  :  58  :  38  :  231  :  277  :  73  :  37  :  3  :  53 

that  shall   comand  those 

233  :  276  :  52  :  39  :  94  :  346  :  17  :  39  :  54  :  53 

horse        in  cheif 

38:173:  176  :  58  :  39  :  37  :  78  :  7  :  38  :  so  I  rest 
Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Charles  Il» 

Newarke  29  Oct:  1645. 
Giue  me  an  account  of  this: 
29  8*'-'*  1645.    The  Khig  to  me  by  Parsons. 


Copy  of  a  Letter  from  Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to 
Sir  Henry  Vane  the  Younger/'' 

You  cannot  suppose  the  work  is  donn,  though  God 
should  suffer  you  to  destroy  the  King  :  the  miseryes 

*  This  and  the  letter  \vhich  follows  it  are  remarkable  illustrations 
of  the  secret  history  of  the  time.  The  royal  overtures  to  Vane 
came  to  the  knowledge  of  Essex,  who  complained  of  them  by  letter  to 
the  House  of  Lords.  On  inquiry,  however,  it  turned  out  that  Vane 
had  communicated  them  already  to  the  Speaker,  to  a  Committee  of  the 
House  of  Commons  of  which  he  was  a  member,  and  to  the  Scots 
Commissioners. 


1646.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


173 


Avliicli  will  ineuitably  follow  are  soe  plaine  in  view, 
that  it  is  more  then  necessary  some  speedy  expedient 
be  found  for  their  preuention.  Is  it  not  cleere  to  you 
(to  me  it  is)  that  Spaine  and  ffrance  will  instantly 
conclude  a  peace :  and  that  ffrance  makes  great  pre- 
parations to  ioyne  with  the  Scotts  (when  the  breach 
betweene  you  and  them  shall  liappen)  whilst  Spaine 
labours  to  be  Protector  of  Ireland,  and  will  vndoubt- 
cdly  carry  itt.  Consider  well,  whether  the  season  is 
not  proper  for  this  designe,  when  the  wealth  of  this 
nation  is  already  so  exhausted,  and  the  sufferings  of 
the  people  soe  great,  that  they  are  no  longer  to  be 
supported.  This  is  reason,  tis  not  to  cast  a  bone 
amongst  you  :  The  only  remedye  is  (and  it  is  a  safe 
and  honourable  one  for  you)  that  you  sett  your  selfe, 
the  gentleman  that  was  quartered  with  you,  and  all 
his  and  your  freinds  to  preuaile,  that  the  King  may 
come  to  London  vpon  the  termes  he  hath  offered ; 
where,  if  Presbitery  shall  be  soe  strongly  insisted 
vpon  as  that  there  can  be  noe  peace  without  itt,  you 
shall  certainely  haue  all  the  power  my  master  cann 
make  to  ioyne  with  you  in  rooting  out  of  this  king- 
dome  that  tyrannicall  Gouernment;  with  this 
condition,  that  my  master  may  not  haue  his  con- 
science disturbed  (yours  being  free)  w^ien  that  easy 
worke  is  finished.  Loose  not  this  faire  opertunity, 
the  like  was  never  offered,  nor  euer  will  be ;  for  itt 
brings  all  things  of  benifitt  and  aduantage  imagin- 
able, both  to  the  generall  and  to  your  particular ;  to 
him  that  was  quartered  with  you,  and  to  his  &  you 
freinds  :  and  shall  be  honestly  made  good.  Trust  to 
me  for  the  performance  of  itt ;  waigh  itt  sadty,  and 
againe  relye  upon  me.  Bee  confident,  that  neither 
he  that  carryes  this,  nor  he  that  deliuers  it  to  you, 
knowes  any  thing  of  itt.    {Not  signed.) 

Written  at  tlie  bottom  by  the  King. 

"  This  is  a  ti*ew  Coppie  of  what  was  sent'  to  Sir  Hen.  Vane  the 
Younger  by  niy  comand.  C.  R."    March  2,  1645-6. 
Indorsed, 

2°  Martij  1645.  By  his  Ma^'^s  comaund  these  are  to  S.  H.  Vane 
sign'd  w'''  y^  Kings  owne  hand. 


174  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [164G. 


Coj)y  of  another  Letter  from  the  King  to  Sir  Henrtj 
Vane  the  Younger, 

I  shall  only  add  this  word  to  what  was  said  in  my 
last :  that  you  hasten  my  business  all  that  possibly 
you  cann ;  the  occasion  lately  giuen  being  fairer 
than  euer,  and  donn  on  purpose.  Be  very  confident 
that  all  things  shall  be  performed  according  to  my 
promise.  By  all  that  is  good,  I  coniure  you,  to  dis- 
patch that  curtoysye  for  me  with  all  speed,  or  it  will 
be  too  late,  I  shall  perish  before  I  receiue  the  fruits 
of  itt.  I  may  not  tell  you  my  necessityes,  but  if  it 
were  necessary  soe  to  doe,  I  am  sure  you  would  lay 
all  other  considerations  aside,  and  fulfill  my  desires. 
This  is  all :  trust  me,  I  will  repay  your  fauour  to  the 
full.  I  have  donn.  If  I  haue  not  an  answeare 
within  foure  dayes  after  the  receipt  of  this,  I  shall  be 
necessitated  to  finde  some  other  expedient.  God 
direct  you,  I  haue  discharged  my  dutye.  [Not 
signed.) 

Written  at  the  bottom  of  this  letter  by  the  King. 
"  This  is  a  ti'ue  Copie  of  what  was  sent  by  Jack  Asheburnhara  & 
iny  comand  to  Sir  Henry  Vane  the  younger.  C.  R." 


The  King's  promise  to  Mons.  de  Montreuil  concerning 
those  that  should  come  loith  him  to  the  Scots 
Army. 

I  do  promise  to  Mounsieur  de  Montreuil,  that  none 
sliall  come  with  me  to  the  Scots  army,  or  meet  me 
there,  who  are  excepted  by  those  att  London,  but 
only  my  two  neplieues,  and  Jack  Ashburnham.* 

*  The  King's  confidence  in  Ashburnham  was  very  great  at  this 
crisis.  But  a  very  short  time  before,  he  was  obhged,  by  the  approach 
of  Fairfax,  to  escape  from  Oxford  in  disguise  ;  and  this  he  did  as  tlie 
servant  of  Ashburnham  :  after  which  he  joined  the  Scottish  army 
before  Newark.  Yet  Ashburnham  is  accused  of  having  misled  the 
King  when  he  was  taken  prisoner  in  1648,  either  through  treachery 


646.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


175 


Notwithstanding,  tlie  said  MontreuU  is  to  receaue 
this  my  protestation,  that  all  my  seraants,  and  all 
others  who  doe  adheare  to  me,  shalbe  saued  from 
mine,  or  any  publiqne  dishonour;  which  is  a  condi- 
tion that  my  wife  writt  to  me  that  not  only  she,  but 
likewise  Cardinall  Mazarine,*  were  absolutely  of 
opinion  that  I  was  sooner  to  dye,  than  not  to  haue. 
As  for  Cluirch  Gouernement,  as  I  haue  already,  soe  I 
now  againe  promise,  that  as-soone  as  I  come  into  the 
Scotts  army,  I  shall  ])e  very  willing  to  be  instructed 
concerning  the  presbiteriall  gouernement :  where- 
npon  they  shall  see,  that  I  shall  striue  to  content 
them  in  any  thing,  that  shall  not  be  against  my 
conscience. 

Charles  R. 

Indorsed  by  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

"  The  King's  promise  to  Monsieur  de  ^lonti'euil  f  concei'ning  those 
that  should  come  ay*''  him  to  Scots  army :  w'^^  promise  was 
written  by  Mr.  Jo:  Ashbournham,  and  signed  by  the  King;  but 
w'''out  date." 


or  folly.  Bulstrode  (in  his  Memoirs)  asserts  that  when  Charles 
arrived  in  great  privacy  at  the  house  of  Lady  Southampton,  and 
Ashburnham  went  up  stairs  to  the  King's  bed-chamber  to  announce 
to  him  that  Colonel  Hammond  was  below  at  supper,  and  had  given 
assurance  for  his  Majesty's  safety,  but  not  of  liberty  for  his  person, 
the  King  instantly,  with  much  emotion,  struck  his  hand  upon  his 
breast,  exclaiming,  "  And  is  this  all  !  Then  I  am  betrayed  !  " 

*  Mazarine  had  recently  become  Prime  Minister  of  France,  in 
consequence  of  the  death  of  Richelieu.  The  latter  bore  an  impla- 
cable malice  and  hatred  to  England  for  her  interference  respecting 
the  French  Protestants,  particularly  in  the  affairs  of  the  Isle  du  Rhe, 
and  Rochelle.  It  is  curious  to  compare  this  opinion  of  Mazarine 
with  the  well  authenticated  fact  that,  notwithstanding  his  outward 
appearance  of  friendship  for  the  King,  he  was  keeping  up  ii  good  cor- 
respondence with  the  Parliament  through  the  medium  of  Don 
Alonzo  de  Cardenas,  the  Spanish  Ambassador. 

t  Montreuil,  or  Montreville,  seems  in  this  affair  to  have  been  the 
tool  of  Mazarine  in  deceiving  the  King  ;  for  all  the  contemporary 
writers,  Warwick,  Bulstrode,  &c.,  assert  that  he  had  promised,  in  the 
name  of  the  King  of  France,  that  Charles  should  be  secure  under  the 
protection  of  the  Scottish  army. 


17G  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1616 


The  King  to  Sir  Edivard  Nicholas. 

New  Castle  16  Maij  1646. 

Nicholas,  since  my  last  I  had  neither  sufficient 
tyme  nor  matter  to  write  to  you,  but  now  I  haue 
enough  of  either,  yet  I  shall  to  ease  both  our 
paynes,  contract  my  thoughts,  merely  to  what  is  (for 
the  present)  necessary  for  you  att  Oxford.*  ffor 
directions  then,  know  that  you  are  not  to  expect 
releefe,  so  that  I  giue  you  leaue  to  treate  for  good 
condic'ons.  Let  those  of  Exeter  be  your  example : 
the  additions  must  be  the  taking  care  particularly 
of  the  University,  and  to  trye  if  you  can  gett  the 
Duke  of  Yorke  to  be  sent  hither  to  me,  as  alsoe  all 
my  seruaunts  who  wilbe  willing  to  come  (of  w'^''  num- 
ber I  am  sure  you  are  one)  but  feare  you  will  not 
get  leaue,  and  those  goods  w"^'  I  haue  there. 

These  directions  I  would  haue  you  keepe  very 

secreat,  that  you  may  make  better  conditions :  ffor 

the  number  and   choyce,  I  leave  to  the  Lordes 

discrec^ons  (the  gouernor  being  one),  but  you  must 

give  out  that  releefe  will  come.    Jack  Ashburnham 

is  this  day  gonne  for  ffraunce.    I  haue  no  more  to 

say,  so  I  rest  ,^  ,  i  ^  i 

Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Charles  E.^ 

Indorsed, 

"IG^iYaV/  1640.    R,  10"  Junii  &       next  day  read  to  y^  Lo'''. 
The  King  to  me  from  New  Castle  giving  leave  to  treate,  &c. 
This  If  &  that  of     2*^  of  June  were  read  to  all  y"^  Lo'*'*  and  gent, 
about  this  towne  (Oxford)  on  Sunday  ye  20"^  of  June  1646.'' 

Oxford  was  at  this  moment  nearly  reduced  ;  so  that  Sir  Thomas 
Glemhara,  the  Governor,  in  answer  to  a  summons,  asked  permission 
to  send  a  messenger  to  the  King  for  orders.  This,  however,  was 
refused  by  Fairfax,  and  the  city  was  delivered  up,  but  not  until  after 
a  treaty  of  some  weeks'  continuance.  The  actual  date  of  the  sur- 
render was  the  24th  of  June.  The  facts  contained  in  the  indorse- 
ments possess  considerable  interest  for  the  future  historian.  When 
this  letter  was  written,  the  King  was  ^with  the  Scottish  army,  who 
had  retreated  thus  far  after  the  surrender  of  Newark  to  the  Par- 
liament. In  Herbert's  Memoirs  of  the  Two  last  years  of  Charles  the 
First  there  is  an  allusion  to  the  King's  consent,  through  the  Lords 
of  the  Privy  Council  then  at  Oxford. 

*  This  letter  was  written  in  cypher,  but  the  figures  are  for  the 


1646.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


177 


The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

New  Castell,  2  June,  1646. 

Nicholas^  since  I  saw  you,  I  receaued  but  one 
letter  from  you,  w''^  was  of  the  5th  of  May ;  &  this  is 
but  the  3'"'^  that  I  haue  written  unto  you,  hauing  sent 
a  duphcatt  of  my  last  about  9  dayes  agoe.  For 
direc^cons,  I  shall  in  substance  repeate  what  I  last 
sent  you,  w*"''  is  that,  because  you  are  to  expect  noe 
releef,  I  giue  you  leaue  to  treate  for  good  condic'ons. 
Let  those  of  Exeter  be  your  guide,  w''''  I  beliue  wilbe 
graunted  you,  hauing  a  particular  care  that  my  sonne 
and  two  nephues  haue  permission  to  com  to  me 
whersoeuer  I  shalbe :  as  l^d^ewais  that  the  freedome 
of  y*"  University  be  preserued,  &  that  all  my  seruants, 
who  ar  willing,  may  come  to  me  with  the  few  goods 
that  I  haue  there.  I  omitt  news  att  this  tyme, 
because  it  will  doe  little  good  to  you,  &  troble  me ; 
soe  comanding  you  to  asseur  all  my  frends,  that  no 
change  of  place  shall  (make)  me  alter  my  affection 
to  them  j  I  rest 

Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Charles  R. 

I  aduise  excepted  persons  to  agree  for  Exeter  con- 
ditions, &  for  noe  better. 

When  my  goods  ar  sent,  forget  not  all  the  bookes 
w'^^  I  left  in  my  bedchamber. 

Indorsed, 

2°  Junii,  1646.  R:  11°,  read  to  L'le*  next  day.  The  King 
gives  leave  to  treate. 


most  part  blotted  or  run  through  Avith  the  pen,  but  are  decyphered 
and  filled  up  by  Nicholas. 


VOL.  IV. 


178 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1646. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas, 

New  Castell,  2i  Jime,  1G46. 

Nicholas^ 

I  haue  receaued  yours  of  the  6:  &  9:  of  this 
monthe  w''''  requyres  no  other  answer  but  thanke  you 
for  your  intelligence  &  to  comend  you  for  your 
resolution ;  only  I  tliinke  you  needed  not  to  burne 
my  cypher;  but  liowsoeuer  lett  me  heare  from  you 
as  often  as  you  can,  &  asseure  all  my  frends  that  I 
am  constant  to  all  them  who  will  not  forsake  them- 
selfes,  of  w  ""^  I  know  you  ar  none,  so  that  I  am 
Your  most  asseured  constant  frend, 

Charles  Pt. 

I  desire 

In  hope  my  cypher  is  not  sacrifised  209  :  141  :  56  : 

you         to  send         me  -word 

63  :  17  :  67  :  429  :  360  :  341  :  250  :  78  :  31  :  18  : 

where        my  Jewells  were       -w^^       I.  H. 

81  :  412  :  351  :  in  :  no  :  418  :  56  :  111  :  413  :  449  : 

had,       and         if         my  Cabinet* 

197  :  112  :  213  :  251  :  90  :  or  27  :  40  :  7  :  67  ;  p  : 

■w^''        I  left         -w''>         vou         be  burned 

413  :  209  :  234  :  409  :  429  :  121  :  at  :  ad  :  19  :  if  : 

or  not. 

147  :  281  :  270  : 
24°  Junii,  1646.    The  K.  to  me. 


The  Kliiy  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

New  Castell,  16  Aug: 

Nicholas,  I  receaued  yours  hy  the  last  post, 
whereby  I  understand  what  course  you  intend  to 
take,  w'^  I  approue  of,  yet  I  thinke  it  not  necessay 

■'^  The  King's  anxiety  about  his  Cabinet  is  not  surprising,  when  it 
is  remembered  what  use  had  formerly  been  made  of  letters  seized  by 
the  Parliamentary  forces. 


1646.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  179 


MTite       to         Marq:      IT.        nor  Earl 

[necessary]  to  122  :  360  :  550  :  520  :  269  :  17  :  503  : 

of        Southampton  f<>i*  liauiiif^ 

280  :  85G  :  84  :  107  :  43  :  282  :  102  :  200  :  216  : 

[erased] 

258  :  133  :  280  :  366  :  selfes  there  365  :  280  :  251  : 
84  :  282  :  7  :  281  :  122  :  431  :  216  :  383  :  251  :  56  : 
67  :  46  :  75  :  70  :  59  :  112  :  57  :  78  :  281  :  81  :  360  : 
361  :  319  :  27  :  148  :  58  : 

Commend  me  to  all  my  Trends,  &  asseure  them  of 
luy  constancy ;  and  I  asseure  you  that  I  haue  sent 
where  you  ar  goeing,  being  confident  that  you  will  be 
very  well  receaued  there,  so  I  rest 

Your  most  asseured  frend, 

Charles  R. 

This  inclosed  is  for  14  :  47  :  he  :  68  :  21  :  35  :  6  : 

16°  Aug.  1G46.    The  King  to  me.* 


In  the  handwriting  of  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

The  Reasons  why  his  Ma*'°  thought  good  to  send  his 
Proposition  of  y*"  ...  of  December,  1645,  to  London, 
were,  for  that 

His  Ma*'^  hath  noe  Army  att  all,  nor  any  forces 
but  what  are  in  his  garrisons. 

Noe  meanes  or  monny  either  to  satisfy  or  keepe 
together  his  officers,  or  to  supply  or  pay  his  garrisons, 
but  the  contribuc^ons  of  the  country,  w*"^'  being- 
wasted  by  y^  souldiors  of  both  sides,  &  extremly  dis- 
affected, are  reddy  every  day  to  rise  ag*  his  Ma*'^^ 
garrisons,  as  being  not  able  any  longer  to  undergoe 

*  This  part  of  the  correspoudenee  is  important,  as  it  took  place 
about  the  period  when  the  Scottish  army  were  engaged  in  the  nego- 
tiations for  the  surrender  of  the  King  to  the  English  Parhament.  In 
a  Glasgow  publication  of  Original  Letters  (176G)  there  is  one  from  a 
Scottish  Commissioner,  who  observes,  many  of  the  King's  greatest 
fi"iends  think  his  obstinacy  judicial,  as  if  in  God's  justice  he  were 
destroying  himself."  This  letter  was  written  on  the  7 th  of  August, 
1646,  at  the  time  when  Charles  refused  to  agree  to  the  Scottish  pro- 
positions. 

N  2 


180 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1646. 


tlie  heavy  pressures  ^y''^  necessity's  of  his  Ma^*^^ 
soukliors  &  y*"  absence  of  his  Ma^'^'  Governm^  dayly 
put  upon  them. 

That  his  Ma*'*"  having  lost  Bristol!,  hath  no  meanes 
to  be  supplyed  from  forraigne  parts  vt^^''  armes  or 
munition,  or  materialls  for  making  of  either,  of  w^^ 
he  begins  alreddy  to  be  in  want. 

There  is  noe  meanes  to  raise  any  considerable  forces 
for  an  army  ag*  y*"  next  Spring :  for  that  all  Wales 
was  lost  p^'sently  after  y*'  losse  of  Bristoll,  and  since 
that,  Munmouth  &  Hereford. 

Chester  is  in  imminent  danger  to  be  likewise  lost : 
Newark  &Belvoir  Castle*  are  besieged  &  in  danger. 

In  y''  west  there  are  about  5  or  6000  horse  &foote, 
but  there  are  there  soe  great  divisions  amongst  the 
cheif  officers,  and  the  Councell  that  attend  y^  Prince, 
as  for  want  of  condvct  these  forces  are  disunited,  and 
y*"  countr}^  soe  disaftected  to  them  by  reason  of  the 
soldiors  rapine  and  oppression,  as  y*"  country  rises 
against  them  whensoever  they  come  into  any  place 
not  in  a  body,  and  the  country  is  soe  wasted,  as  it 
cannot  feede  them  when  they  lye  together  in  a  body. 
Besides,  the  Cornishe  will  not  be  drawne  further 
than  Devonsh% 

Exeter  is  soe  close  besieged,  as  very  little  or  noe 
p'visions  can  passe  into  it,  &  it  is  not  supplyed  for 

many  monthes  is  possessed  by  S'  Tho. 

ffairfax  forces,  &  the  King  hath  in  Devon  now  noe 
poste  but  Dartmouth,  &  there  are  likewise  forces 
marched  thither  to  blocke  it  upp. 

The  Seige  of  Plymouth  is  soe  weekly  prosecuted 
for  want  of  force  as  they  have  lately  releeued  them- 
selves and  burnt  some  of  our  quarter  neere  it. 

S'  Tho.  Fairfax  &  Crumwell  haue  lately  sent  into 
these  pHes  neere  1500  of  their  best  horse,  w"^'  shewes 
that  they  are  much  too  strong  for  his  Ma^''''  forces  in 
those  partes. 

These  Western  horse  are  drawing  towards  Oxon 
&  are  to  ioyne  av*^  other  forces  w'^^  are  to  come  from 
London  under  Coll:  Bingingborrow,  &  all  that  can 

*  The  Earl  of  Rutland  had  sided  with  the  Parliament,  but  Belvoir 
was  garrisoned  by  the  King's  forces. 


1646-7.]       THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  181 


be  spared  from  Coventry,  Warwick,  Gloucester,  & 
Northampton,  &  out  of  Buckinghamshire  (w'''  it  is 
beleeued  will  in  all  make  noe  less  than  8000  foote 
and  4000  horse  &  dragoons)  &  ar  designd  p'^sently  to 
block  upp  Oxon  att  a  distance. 

Denington  Castle  is  blockt  upp  by  forces  that  lye 
in  Newberry  &  the  Country  thereabouts. 

This  being  his  Ma*'  p'^sent  condition  in  England, 
and  there  being  noe  peace  concluded  in  Ireland,  nor 
any  considerable  forces  possibly  to  be  drawne  from 
that  Kingdom  in  any  tyme  to  assist  his  Ma*''' : 

The  Mar:  of  Muntrosse  being  still  in  y^  highlands, 
or  noe  neerer  than  Glascoe,  &  in  what  condition  his 
Ma*'^  is  not  certejuly  assured,  soe  as  there  is  little 
hope  of  tymely  ayde  from  him  : 

From  Era.  or  Holland  there  was  nothing  but  faire 
&  fruitless  p^misses,  they  having  not  in  all  this  tyme 
afiPorded  his  Ma*'"  any  considerable  assistance,  nor 
soe  much  as  publickly  declared  ag*  those  att  London  : 

Upon  these  considerations  his  Ma*'"  resolved  to 
send  to  London  y"  .  .  .  .  Expositions,  w"""  being  as 
low  as  he  can  goe  w*^  p^serving  of  his  conscience  and 
hon''  he  doubts  not  but  God  will  give  a  blessing  to  y* 
his  intentions ;  And  that  if  his  s^*'  doe  not  barken 
to  y"  reason  he  offers,  his  Allies  will  consider  how 
farre  his  interest  may  worke  theirs. 

Indoi'sed,  Reasons  why  his  Ma*'«  sent  his  Proposic'ons  to  London, 
dated  Dec',  1646. 


The  King  to  the  S2:)eaker  of  the  House  ofPeers, 

HoLMBY  [Holdenby],  6  Mart  'ij .  1646-7. 

C.  E. 

It  being  now  17  dayes  since  I  wrote  to  you  from 
hence,  &  not  yet  receiuing  anj^  answer  to  what  I 
then  desired,  I  cannot  but  now  again  renew  the 
same  unto  you ;  and  indeed  concerning  any  thing 
but  the  necessary  duty  of  a  Christian,  I  would  not 
at  this  time  trouble  you  with  any  of  my  desires. 
But  my  being  attended  by  some  of  my  Chaplains,* 

*  This  letter  was  written  about  two  months  after  the  King  had 


182  THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1646-7. 


whom  I  esteem  &  reuerence,  is  that  w*"''  is  so  neces- 
sary for  me  (euen  considering  my  present  condic^on, 
whither  it  be  in  relation  to  my  conscience,  or  a 
happy  settlem*^  of  the  present  distracc^ons  in  Reli- 
gion) that  I  will  slight  diners  kinds  of  censures, 
rather  then  not  obtain  what  I  demand.  Nor  shall 
I  doe  you  the  wrong,  as  in  this  to  doubt  the 
obtaining  of  my  Avish,  it  being  grounded  upon 
reason.  For  I  desire  you  to  consider  (not  thinking 
it  needfull  to  menc'on)  the  diners  reasons  w'^^  no 
Christian  can  be  ignorant  of,  for  the  point  of  con- 
science. I  must  assure  you  that  I  cannot  as  I  ought 
take  into  consideration  those  alterac'ons  in  Religion 
w*"^'  haue,  &  wilbe  offred  unto  me,  w^^'out  such  helps 
as  I  desire,  because  I  can  neuer  iudge  rightly  of,  or 
be  altred  in  any  thing  of  my  opinion,  so  long  as  any 
ordinary  way  of  finding  out  the  truth  is  denyed  me. 
But  when  this  is  granted  me,  I  promise  you  faith- 
fully not  to  striue  for  victory  in  argum^,  but  to  seeke 
to  submit  to  truth,  according  to  that  judgem*  wh*"'' 
God  hath  giuen  me;  always  holding  it  my  best  & 
greatest  conquest,  to  giue  contentm*  to  my  two 
Houses  of  Pari*  in  all  things  w''^'  I  conceiue  not  to 
be  against  my  conscience  or  hon'.  Not  doubting 
likewise,  but  that  you  wilbe  ready  to  satisfy  me  in 
reasonable  things,  as  I  hope  to  find  in  this  parti- 
cular concerning  the  attendance  of  my  Chaplains 
upon  me. 

To  tlie  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Peers,  pro  tempore,  to  be  com- 
municated to  the  Lo:  &  Co'mons  in  the  Pari'  assembled  at  Westm'r, 

Indorsed, 

6°  Mar:  1647.  Coppy  of     King's  2d  If  for  some  of  his  Chaplaiues. 


been  given  up  to  the  Parliament,  and  three  months  previous  to  liis 
seizure  by  Cornet  Joyce,  on  the  part  of  Cromwell  and  the  army.  A 
very  minute  and  interesting  account  of  these  transactions  will  be 
found  in  Sir  Thomas  Herbert's  memoirs  of  the  two  last  years  of  the 
unhappy  monarch.  There  is  a  remarkable  passage  alluding  to  them 
in  a  letter  from  the  Earl  of  Panmure  to  Lord  Wariston,  dated  23rd 
January,  1647  ;  where  he  says,  "  His  Majesty  is  so  well  resolred  now 
for  his  going  to  Holmby  as  ever  I  saw  him  for  anything.  He  thinks 
that  the  Scots  have  sold  him  at  too  cheap  a  rate.  If  our  posterity  find 
not  the  smart  thereof,  it  is  well." 


1647.]         THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


183 


A  Memorandum  in  King  Charles  the  First's  own 
handivriting  : 

Freedome  in  Conscience  &  Honnor  and  Security 
for  all  those  that  shall  come  with  me^  &  in  case 
I  shall  not  agree  with  them,  that  I  may  be  set 
doune  at  such  of  my  Garisons  as  I  shall  name  to 
them :  w""^'  condition  I  hope  not  to  put  them  to,  for 
I  shall  no*  differ  with  them  about  Ecclesiasticall 
businesses,  w''^'  they  shall  make  apeare  to  me  not  to 
be  against  my  conscience ;  &  for  other  matters,  I 
expect  no  difference,  &  in  case  there  be,  I  am 
content  to  be  judged  by  the  two  Queenes.  And 
befor  I  take  my  jurny  I  must  send  to  the  Marquis 
of  Montrose  to  aduertice  him  upon  what  conditions 
I  come  to  the  Scots  Army,  that  he  may  be  admitted 
forthwith  into  our  conjunction,  &  instantly  march 
up  to  us. 

Indorsed  by  Sir  E.  Nicholas. 
"  A  Note  written  with      Kings  owne  pen  concerning  his  going  to  y« 
Scotts." 

The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Oatlands,  19  Aug.,  1647.* 

Nicholas  to  ease  my  paines,  1  haue  comanded 
Oudartt  to  answer  some  particulars  in  your  last 
letter:  this  being  only  to  thanke  you  for  your 
aduertisments  &  freedome :  desyring  you  still  to 
continue  the  same,  asseuring  you  that  I  haue  a 
particular  care  of  you,  w*"^  I  hope  shortly  shall  be 
visible  to  all  the  world :  so  I  rest 

Your  most  asseured  constant  frend, 

Charles  R. 

Oatlands,      A  ug.  1647. 
His  Ma''<=s  If  to  me. 


*  It  was  on  the  'drd  of  June  that  the  King  was  seized  by  Joyce, 
and  after  a  desultory  progress  arrived  at  Oatlands  on  the  14th  of 
August.    Soon  after  he  removed  to  Hampton  Court. 

f  Oudart  was  afterwards  one  of  the  King's  Commissioners  in  the 


184  THE  NICHOLAS  COKEESPONDENCE.  [1648. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 
Nicholas^ 

Yo"^  fidelitj^  &  industry  in  our  seruice  &  eminent 
affecc^ons  to  our  person^  liaue  made  in  us  too  great 
an  impression  to  be  forgotten ;  on  the  contrary  you 
must  continue  in  this  confidence,  that  we  very 
highly  retaine  you  in  our  value  &  remembrance, 
as  you  will  finde  if  it  please  God  to  restore  us  to 
a  condic^con  for  it.  As  an  earnest  whereof  at 
present  you  will  receive  herewith  a  direction  to  our 
dearest  Sonn  the  Prince  on  your  behalfe,  whom  as 
we  know  you  will  serue  with  the  same  duety  and 
zeale  as  you  haue  serued  us,  so  will  he  assuredly 
giue  you  that  reception  &  admission  to  his  con- 
fidence w*"^'  you  haue  had  with  us.  We  thanck  you 
for  yo'  severall  letters  &  aduises,  and  are  very  tenderly 
sensible  of  yo'"  pressures,  and  if  you  could  gett  them 
removed  by  the  help  of  friends,  we  thinck  you  would 
do  well  not  to  neglect  so  doing  in  respect  of  yo"" 
family,  there  being  no  certainty  yet  what  successe 
will  follow  this  Treaty.  That  Providence  w'^^'  per- 
mits these  afflictions  to  lye  upon  [Js,  We  trust  will 
yet  in  good  time  take  them  off.  Doe  you  continue  yo'" 
affections  towards  Us,  not  doubting  of  the  constant 
fauor  to  you  &  yo''  of 

Your  most  asseured  Frend, 

Charles  R. 

From  Newport  in  y  Isle  of  Wight,  24  Novemh:  1648.* 
To  Seer:  Nich'as. 


Conferences  at  Newport  with  the  Parliamentary  agents.  In  such 
confidence  was  he  with  the  King  as  to  be  employed  during  that  treaty 
in  writing  his  private  dispatches  to  the  Prince  of  Wales.  See 
Wai'mcFs  Memoirs,  p.  325. 

*  The  several  historical  facts,  to  which  this  letter  refers,  are  too 
well  known  to  require  comment ;  but  the  letter  itself  is  an  important 
testimony  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas's  claim  on  the  patronage  of 
Charles  II.  alluded  to  in  a  subsequent  communication  to  that  prince 
respecting  the  office  of  Secretary. 


1648.] 


THE  NICHOLAS  CORRESPONDENCE. 


185 


His  Ma^'"'  Farewell  Speech  unto  y"  Lords  Com'ssioners 
at  Newport  iyi  y'  Isle  of  Wight.^ 

My  Lords, 

You  are  come  to  take  your  leaue  of  mee,  and  I 
beleeue  wee  shall  scarce  euer  see  each  other  againe  : 
— but  Gods  will  be  done.  I  thank  God  I  haue  made 
my  peace  w*''  him,  &  shall  w*''out  feare  undergoe  what 
he  shall  please  to  suffer  men  to  doe  unto  mee. 

My  Lords,  you  cannot  but  knowe  that  in  my  fall 
and  ruine  you  see  yo'  owne,  and  that  also  neere  to 
you.  I  pray  God  send  you  better  frends  then  I 
haue  found. 

I  am  fully  informed  of  y""  whole  carriage  of  y" 
plott  against  me  &  myne,  and  nothing  soe  much 
afflicts  mee  as  the  sense  and  feelinge  I  haue  of  y^ 
sufferings  of  my  subjects,  and  y^  mischief  that  hangs 
ouer  my  three  Kingdomes,  drawne  upon  them  by 
those  who  (upon  pretences  of  good)  violently  pursue 
their  owne  interestes  and  ends.''^ 

These  words  his  Ma*'""  deliuered  w*^'  much  alacrity 
and  cheerefiillnes,  w^^  a  serene  countenance,  & 
carriage  free  from  all  disturbance. 

Thus  he  parted  w^''  y*"  Lords  leaning  many  tender 
impressions  (if  not  in  them)  yet  in  y"  other  hearers. f 

His  Ma''"  farewell  Speech  to  the  Lo''"  at  Newport,  1°  Dec.  1648. 


*  The  Commissioners  were  the  Earls  of  Northumberland,  Pem- 
broke, Salisbury,  and  Middlesex ;  Viscount  Say  and  Sele ;  Lord 
Wenman ;  Messrs.  Pierpoint,  HoUis,  Crew,  Bulkeley ;  Sirs  Henry- 
Vane,  juu.,  Harbottle  Grimstone,  and  John  Potts  ;  Serjeants  Glynne 
and  Browne,  and  some  others. 

-f-  This  conference  took  place  almost  immediately  before  the  King's 
death.  On  the  4th  of  December  took  place  the  third  day's  debate  in 
the  House  of  Commons  of  the  question  whether  the  royal  concessions 
in  the  Newport  treaty  Avere  a  ground  of  settlement ;  which,  at  five 
o'clock  next  morning,  was  resolved  in  the  affirmative  by  a  majority 
of  129  to  83.  The  day  following,  Wednesday  the  6th  of  December, 
was  the  day  of  Pride's  Purge.  Within  a  month  from  that  date  the 
King  was  brought  to  trial;  and  on  the  29th  January,  1648-9,  the 
death-warrant  was  signed. 


I 


COKRESPONDENCE  OF 


SIR  EDWARD  NICHOLAS 

AND 

VAEIOUS  MEMBEKS  OF  THE  EOYAL 
FAMILY ; 

DUKIXG  THK 

COMMONWEALTH  AND  PKOTECTORATE. 


CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

SIR  EDWAED  NICHOLAS  AND  THE  EOYAL 
FAMILY, 

AFTER  THE  DEATH  OF  CHARLES  L 


The  subjoined  letters,  in  continuation  of  the  preceding  corre- 
spondence, will  be  found  to  require  little  illustrative  comment.  They 
embrace  the  brief  and  unsuccessful  royalist  campaign  which  closed 
on  the  field  of  Worcester  ;  they  contain  illustrations  of  Charles 
the  Second's  distrust  and  dislike  of  his  Presbyteinan  friends  and 
supporters  ;  but  they  derive  perhaps  their  chief  interest  from  the 
gossiping  details  in  which  the  deceased  King's  sister,  Elizabeth  of 
Bohemia,  so  largely  indulges,  and  in  which  the  fears  and  jealousies, 
the  enjoyments  and  privations  of  the  Exiles,  the  fluctuation  of  her 
nephew's  hopes,  Cromwell's  assumption  of  power,  the  vagaries  of  the 
errant  Queen  of  Sweden,  the  attempts  of  the  Queen-mother  Hem-ietta 
to  make  Roman  Catholics  of  her  children,  and  the  childhood  of  that 
young  Prince  of  Orange  for  whom  those  attempts  were  preparing  a 
throne,  are  curiously  and  impartially  mixed  up.  The  letter  of 
earnest  remonstrance  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  concerning  his 
being  tempted  to  tui'ne  papist,"  bearing  the  signature  of  his  elder 
brother,  is  a  somewhat  strange  comment  on  the  faith  in  which 
Charles  the  Second  died. 


Paris,*  Nov.  6,  1649.    St.  No. 

Sir, 

To  giue  you  an  account  of  tlie  vastnesse  of  this 
packett,  give  me  leaue  to  tell  you,  that  together 
with  this  booke  w'^^'  I  send  you,  there  came  in  half  a 

*  Charles,  at  the  period  of  his  fathers  death,  was  at  the  Hague 
with  his  brother  in  law,  the  Prince  of  Orange  ;  after  which  he  went 
to  France  to  join  his  mother ;  but  having  been  proclaimed  King 
throughout  Ireland,  with  the  exception  of  Dublin  and  Londonderry, 
he  would  have  proceeded  there,  had  he  not  been  forewarned  that 


190 


CORRESPONDENCE  DURING  THE 


[1649. 


score  persons  of  consideration_,  who  with  very  much 
passion  desired  nie  to  represent  to  Jersey,  the  high 
indignity  l)y  this  base  edition*  offered  to  our  blessed 
Master,  and  the  great  injury  rendered  to  his  Majestj^ 
that  now  is. 

You  will  finde  a  preface  to  this  Booke,  w*"^  tends 
to  proue  that  our  blessed  Master  might  be^  nay 
perhaps  was,  a  Papist  in  his  heart,  notwithstanding 
this  I3ooke.  That  what  instructions  &  commands 
were  giuen  to  his  Sonne  for  his  firmenesse  to  the 
Protestant  religion,  were  giuen  out  of  politique  con- 
siderations meerely,  and  many  other  particulars,  w*"^' 
I  hope  will  bring  it  to  the  hands  of  tlie  common- 
hangman. 

This  Marsys  is  one  who  setting  out  the  tryall  of 
the  late  King,  and  y^  manner  of  his  murther,  stiles 
himselfe  "  Interprete  et  Maistre  pour  la  langue 
Francoise  du  Roy  d'Angleterre  regnant  a  present  et 
de  son  Altesse  Royale  le  Due  d^  Yorke  son  frere,^^  in 
w*"^  Booke  he  stiles  Queene  Elizabeth  (of  euer  blessed 
memory)  Jezabell.  He  setts  downe  a  false  and 
faigned  speech  of  the  King's  at  y"  time  of  his  being 
murthered;  &  being  charged  with  it,  he  said  he 
thought  fitt  to  make  that  speech  as  spoken  by  him, 
since  the  speech  he  did  make  was  poore  and  below  a 
King.  He  hath  sett  forth  diuers  other  things,  an 
extract  whereof  I  shall  shortly  send  you,  the  least  of 
w*'^  would  deserve  a  whipping  in  England  in  good 

such  a  procedure  -would  produce  mucli  alarm  among  the  Protestant 
friends  to  his  cause.  He  therefore  Avent  no  farther  than  Jersey, 
where  he  was  proclaimed  King,  a  short  time  previous  to  the  date  of 
this  Remonstrance.  To  what  Courtier  or  Minister  about  Charles's 
person  it  was  addressed,  does  not  appear  ;  but  it  was  written  by  Sir- 
Edward  Nicholas  during  his  retreat  from  England,  after  the  death  of 
his  royal  master.  He  appears  at  its  date  to  have  been  resident  with 
his  relative.  Sir  Richard  Browne,  who  still  remained  Charge'  d'Affaires 
at  the  French  Court. 

*  The  wish  here  expressed  was  not  fulfilled  specifically ;  though 
afterwards  in  some  measure  gratified  by  the  publication  of  "  Eikou 
Aklastos"  in  1651,  as  a  vindication  of  tlie  original  work  against  the 
attacks  of  "  Eikonoklastes."  The  reader  may  find  some  interest  in 
turning  from  this  letter  to  the  very  copious  essay  on  the  subject  by 
Mr.  Nichols  in  Literary  Anecdotes,  vol.  L,  p.  522. 


1649.]      COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATE.  191 


times  to  speake  moderately.  I  p^'sume  you  will  giue 
this  busines  a  thorough  sifting  there  in  couucell, 
and  send  some  directions  to  S""  Rich:  Browne  how  to 
proceede  here ;  that  it  may  appeare  who  sett  him  on 
worke  here,  and  who  giues  him  these  exact  coppies, 
w*'''  he  pretends  to  haue  under  y'^  King's  owne  hand, 
and  those  other  peeces  of  the  King^s,  w"^  he  so 
braggs  of,  and  promises  he  will  bring  them  to  light, 
so  soone  as  he  obtaines  leaue  to  publish  them.  I 
hope  some  course  wilbe  taken  that  he  may  be  dis- 
charged of  his  titles  of  relation  to  the  King,  and  that 
his  Ma^^'  will  hereupon  giue  order,  that  a  true  coppy 
may  be  printed  in  french  of  his  Father's  Booke, 
dechired  by  him  to  be  authentique,  waving  both  the 
editions  either  of  Huguenot  or  Papist,  and  that  this 
command  be  grounded  upon  the  ill  editions  of  both 
these  persons  and  partys. 

Indorsed,  "  6°  iVorm:  1649.    Concerning  Marseis  his  translac'on 
of  the  King's  booke." 


/Sir  Edward  Nicholas  to  King  Charles  the  Second, 

May  it  please  yo'  Ma^'^* 

I  came  to  yo'  Ma^'''  out  of  duty  to  serve  you  if  I 
could,  not  out  of  designe  to  gaine  preferment,  & 
thoughe  I  understood  well,  that  yo""  Ma*'^'  Pri^y 
Councell  here  was  neither  of  number  or  weight 
equall  to  y^  importaunce  of  yo"  Ma*'""^  affaires,  yet  yo'' 
Ma*'^  being  then  resolved  to  goe  for  Irland  (where  I 
conceaved  there  would  be  an  addition  of  Councellors 
answearable  to  y^  weight  of  yo""  aff^''^)  I  did  y"  more 
Avillingly  tender  my  humble  services  here. 

But  since  its  not  now  councellable  for  yo''  Ma**^ 
upon  y'  change  of  yo*"  busines  in  Irla:  to  goe  thither,  I 
held  it  my  duty  humbly  to  advise  you,  that  I  find  yo*^ 
affa''^'  of  soe  great  importaunce,  &  of  such  a  nature, 
as  (in  my  pcore  iudgem^)  it  will  not  be  possible  for 
you  to  man' age  y^  same  w'''out  a  steddy,  setled,  & 

*  Written  by  Sir  Edward  Nicholas,  and  alluded  to  in  a  note,  ante, 
p.  184. 


192 


CORRESPONDENCE  DURING  THE 


[1649. 


D.  Richmond 
Ea:  Arundell 
Ea:  Derby 
Ea:  Norwich 

E.  South'ton 
Sir  Art. 
Hopton,  Mr. 
Cha:  Exch. 
L'd  Hatton. 


more  full  Councell  of  able,  graue  &  experienced 
p^sons  of  unblemished  integrity,  whose  honor, 
esteeme,  fidellity,  &  prudence  may  raise  y^  reputa- 
c^on  of  yo""  Councell  from  that  greate  contempt  it  lyes 
under  both  at  home  and  abroade ;  &  whereby  for- 
raigne  Pr'"'"'  may  be  encouraged  to  assist  yo""  Ma^'^,  & 
yo*"  E/Oyall  party  in  Engl:  to  appeare  more  vigorously 
for  you. 

If  for  want  of  such  a  setled  &  ho^^^  Privy  Councell, 
yo""  Ma*'''  shalbe  necessitated  (as  lately)  to  call  (upon 
every  important  occasion)  such  to  Councell  who  are 
not  sworne,  it  will  not  much  satisfy  yo'  party  in 
Engla:  nor  advantage  yo""  aff""'.  Besides  yo""  Privy 
Councell  wilbe  att  a  great  disadvantage,  when  they 
are  to  give  their  advise  upon  oath,  &  are  by  y""  same 
obliged  to  be  secreat,  &  y*"  others  shalbe  att  liberty  & 
under  noe  tye  att  all. 

My  humble  advise  therefore  is,  that  yo''  Ma*'*" 
forthw*^  endeavour  by  all  meanes  possible  to  get  a 
Councell  composed  of  a  convenient  number  of  such 
ho^^^,  experienced,  &  faithfull  p'sons,  as  may  be 
equall  to  y''  great  importaunce  of  yo'"  p^'sent  aff & 
above  y^  contempt  that  yo""  now  Councell  lyes  under, 
aswell  in  yo''  owne  Court,  as  abroade,  w^^out  w''^  it 
will  not  be  possible  for  you  to  goe  throughe  yo"" 
greate  businesses. 

As  for  my  owne  particular,* 

I  humbly  beseech  yo''  Ma*'^  to  give  me  leave  to 
put  you  in  minde,  that  att  St.  Germains  y'  Ma*'^ 
comaunded  me  to  wayte  on  you  in  this  place,  where 
you  were  pleased  to  tell  me  you  should  have  occasion 
to  make  use  of  my  service  as  Secre^'^,  &  to  that  end 


*  De  Larrey,  a  French  contemporary  writer  formerly  quoted,  says 
of  Sir  Edward  Nicholas,  that  he  had  much  better  quahties  and  more 
zeal  for  the  late  Monarch,  than  the  preceding  Secretary  of  State, 
Windebanlc.  He  adds,  that  he  was  truly  devoted  to  the  Church  of 
England ;  and  having,  besides,  as  much  integrity  as  ability,  was  as 
faithful  to  the  son  as  to  the  father.  "  Charles  II.  recompensed  his 
fideUty,  and  restored  him,  in  1658,  to  the  post  that  his  father  had 
given  him  ;  if  this  employment  was  honourable  to  him,  all  the  profit 
redounded  to  the  King,  who  conferred  it  on  him  not  till  he  left 
France,  and  when  he  was  a  wanderer  from  Court  to  Court,  and  from 
country  to  country." 


1649.]     COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATE.  193 


j^o'  Ma^''  comaunded  me  to  gett  prepared  a  signet, 
and  other  provisions  fitting,  ^v'^'  accordingly  I  p'vided 
att  my  owne  cost.  I  was  tliere  further  tould  from 
yo'  ]\Ia*^  that  when  I  came  to  Jersey,  I  should  be 
sworne  Sec'rie.  And  since  I  came  hither,  yo'"  Ma*'° 
tould  me  I  should  be  sworne,  as  soon  as  I  came  into 
Irla:  Now  since  yo''  Ma*'''  goes  not  for  Irla:  I  humbly 
desire  that  I  may  be  sworne  before  yo'"  Ma"''  dep^ture 
from  hence  : 

1.  Because,  I  know  y'^  busines  belonging  to  a 
Sec'rie  of  State  ought  not  to  be  p^formed  by  one  that 
is  not  sworne  in  y^  place. 

2.  For  that  y^  busines  I  shall  doe  (not  being 
sworne),  will  not  have  that  creddit  &  esteeme,  as  is 
requisitt  for  y^  advantage  of  aflPaires  of  that  nature. 

3.  That  it  wilbe  a  great  disrepute  for  me  (who 
have  had  the  honor  to  serve  yo""  Royale  father  7 
yeares  in  that  office)  to  execute  any  considerable  pHe 
thereof,  &  not  be  established  in  it  by  oath,  w''^  only 
can  make  a  man  capable  of  p'formaunce  of  the  duty 
of  that  place,  as  it  ought  to  be. 

Yo""  Ma"*"'  obiection,  that  if  you  sweare  me,  you 
must  doe  y^  like  for  Mr.  Long,*  is  rather  a  dis- 
couragement then  a  satisfac^con  to  me,  who  did  hope 
my  soe  long  faithfull  service  to  yo'"  Royall  father 
would  have  mov'd  yo''  Ma*'®  to  make  more  difference 
betweene  us,  since  I  have  hitherto  (I  thanke  God) 
carryed  a  cleere  reputac^on  in  all  my  wayes. 

Wherefore  its  my  most  humble  suyte,  that  yo" 
Ma*'®  wilbe  pleased  either  to  give  order  that  I  may 
be  sworne  yo'  Ma*'®'  Sec^rie  (whereby  I  may  be 
enabled  to  doe  you  service),  or  else  that  I  may  have 
leave  w**"  yo"  Ma*'®^  gracious  favour,  to  retire  untill 
my  faithfull  &  disinterested  service  may  be  of  more 
use  in  yo"  Ma*'®'  affaires. 

«  For  yo"*  Ma'^e." 

Indorsed,  "  Je  lis  ce  papier  au  Roy  a  Jersey,  31  de  Janvier. 
St.  1649." 


*  Mr.  Long  appears  to  have  been  engaged  as  secretary  to  Charles 
in  a  quasi-private  capacity,  for  his  name  is  not  entered  upon  any  of  the 
official  lists.  The  King,  influenced  most  probably  by  his  mother, 
showed  much  favour  to  him.    It  is  perhaps  not  irrelevant  also  to 

VOL.  IV.  0 


194  CORRESPONDENCE  DURING  THE  [1650. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 
Charles  R. 

Ill  regard  of  our  many  great  &  weighty  businesses. 
Wee  are  resolved  &  promise  w*^  all  convenient  speede 
to  increase  the  number  of  Our  English  Privy  Coun- 
cellors  in  a  considerable  proporc'on  answerable  to 
y''  importauuce  of  our  affaires. 

Wee  are  alsoe  resolved  principally  to  make  use 
of  &  rely  on,  the  faithfull  advise  of  our  sworne 
Privy  Councell  in  y^  managem^  and  determinac'on 
of  our  important  affaires. 

Wee  likewise  resolve  &  promise,  to  sweare  and 
establishe  S'  Edw:  Nicholas  in  y^  ofiBce  and  place  of 
one  of  our  principall  Secrita,ries  of  State,  the  first 
man  Wee  admit  to  or  constitute  in  that  office,  and 
as  soone  as  Wee  shall  dismisse  RoV  Long  from  our 
service.  Given  at  our  Court  att  Castle  Elizabeth  in 
our  Island  of  Jersey  the  14-24th  of  ffebr:  1649-50. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

St.  Johnstons:  Sept.  3,  1650.* 

Mr.  Seer:  Nicholas,  I  haue  giuen  this  bearer  his 
dispatch,  and  haue  signed  all  the  Commissions,  with 
53  blankes  w*"^  I  desire  you  to  fill  up  as  you  shall  haue 

observe,  that  if  the  hand-writing  of  the  rival  Secretaries  had  been 
allowed  any  weight  in  the  discussion  of  the  question,  Mr.  Long  must 
have  proved  successful  against  Sir  Edward ;  his  mode  of  writing 
being  singularly  precise  and  clear,  whilst  that  of  Nicholas  is  often 
scarcely  intelligible. 

*  Written  during  Charles's  visit  to  Scotland,  when  the  Presby- 
terians crowned  him  King,  Cliarles  sailed  from  Schevling  in  Holland, 
in  the  preceding  June,  and  landed  at  Spey,  in  Scotland,  soon  after. 
On  the  loth  of  July  he  was  proclaimed  at  Edinburgh  Cross;  and 
afterwards  proceeded  to  St.  Johnstone's,  which  place  had  been 
appointed  for  the  meeting  of  the  Scottish  States.  It  was  on  the  day 
when  the  above  letter  was  written,  Cromwell's  "  fortunate  day,"  that 
the  Scots  were  defeated  at  Dunbar.  Charles  went  to  Scotland  in 
June  ;  and  towards  the  latter  end  of  July,  Cromwell  took  the  com- 
mand of  the  English  Army  in  that  Kingdom. 


1650.]     COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATP].  195 


Marq:  Hertford 

occasion,  there  are  two  commissions  for  445  :  388  :  that 
if  one  should  miscarey  the  other  might  serue.  I 
haue  sent  you  here  inclosed  a  letter  of  credance  to 
the  Prince  of  Orange,*  that  if  you  should  haue 
occasion  of  his  assistance  you  may  use  it ;  but  pray 
have  a  care  that  you  doe  not  press  him  about  money, 
for  I  haue  had  so  much  from  him  allready  that  it 
were  a  shame  to  seeke  more  of  him.  This  bearer 
^yill  acquaint  you  with  my  condition  much  better 
than  I  can  doe  in  a  letter,  I  shall  only  say  this  to 

the      vilaney  of  tlie 

you,  that  you  cannot  imaien  245  x3  :  160  :  m8  :  8  : 

(illegible)  &  their 

191   :  w5   :   175   :  m9   :  t6  :  p  :  64  :  49  :  v6  : 

party 

104  :  47  :  213  :  7  :  indeed  it  has  done  me  a  greate 

have  confirmed 

deale  of  good,  for  nothing  could  138  :  81  :  109  : 

me       more  to  the 

14  :  12  :  2  :  170  :  13  :  220  :  242  :   245   :  bb  : 

Church  of  England 

254  :  73  :  n8  :  349  :  153  :  then  being  x9  :  26  : 

here  seing  theire  hippocrisyf 

139  :  69  :  t3  :  151  :  w5  :  s3  :  c4  :  20  :  q6  :  75  : 

the  D:  of  Yorke's 

h  :  8  :  v2  :  I  shall  send  245  :  575  comission  and 

Lo:  Gen'ard's 

374  :  49  :  by  Oudart,  who  I  will  dispatch  within 
this  2  or  3  days.  I  had  allmost  forgot  a  bussines  of 
great  importance,  it  is  to  speke  to  the  Pr:  of  Orange 

a  smack  or 

to  send  hether  21S  :  30  :  4  :  169  :  44  :  38  :  n7  : 

a  herring  buss      w'''  five  or 

12   :  eS   :   gg  :  w  :   5  :  262  :  111  :  x2  :  190  : 

*  Father  of  William  the  Third, 
f  This  not  to  be  mistaken  allusion  to  the  men  who  had  just  placed 
the  crown  upon  the  writer's  head  is  sufficiently  illustrative  of  the 
character  of  Charles.  A  report  that  he  had  been  obliged  to  perform 
public  Kirk-penance  by  the  Presbyterians  is  mentioned  in  a  ludicrous 
manner  in  a  Letter  from  the  Elector  of  Bavaria  to  the  Queen  of 
Bohemia,  preserved  in  Bromley's  Royal  Letters^  p.  153. 

0  2 


196  CORRESPONDENCE  DURING  THE  [1650. 

six  men       to         lie  here  pre       te  n 

229  :  39  :  19  :  \\2  :  M  :  33  :  f5  :  r4  :  210  :  25  : 

di        n  g  it  is  to  carrey  oner 

VY  :  45  :  34  :  145  :  g5  :  242  :  80  :  s3  :  7  :  p7  : 

messenger  when 

64  :  30  :  170  ;  228  :  45  :  cl4   :   14   :   x7  :  aq  : 

there  is  occasion 

w5  :  220  :  147  :  477  :    I  being  at  the  charge  of 

I  would  have 

keeping  them  wlien  they  are  here.  141  :  z3  :  138  : 

the  vessel  come  to 

245  :  rS  :  x2  :  4  :  228  :  24  :  44  :  nn  :  47  :  w2  : 

Montrose 

171  :  m6  :  222  :  t3  :  3:20  I  would  haue  you 
and  Mr.  Atorney  to  stay  in  holland  as  being  the 
place  that  is  the  neerest  to  this  Kingdome  and 
where  I  sliall  haue  occasion  of  your  services :  I  have 
no  more  to  say  to  you  at  the  present  but  to  assure 
that  I  am  and  euer  will  be 

Your  most  affectionate  friend, 

Charles  R. 


The  King  to  Mrs.  Twisdeii.f 

M"^  Twisden, 
Hauing  assurance  of  your  readines  to  performe 
what  I  desired  of  you  by  my  Letter  of  the  7 th  of 
Februar}^  from  Jersey,  according  to  j^our  Brothers 
promise,  in  order  to  the  conveying  to  me  the  George 
and  Scales  left  me  by  my  blessed  Father,  I  haue 
againe  imployed  this  bearer  (in  whom  I  haue  very 
much  confidence)  to  desire  you  to  deliver  the  said 
George  and  Scales  into  his  hand  for  me,  assuring 
you,  that  as  I  shall  haue  great  reason  thereby  to  ac- 
knowledge your  owne  and  your  Brothers  civilitys 

*  This  of  course  is  a  plan  for  his  own  escape  if  necessary,  and 
another  proof  of  the  small  reliance  he  was  placing  upon  his  Northern 
friends.  "Whether  he  doubted  their  power  or  their  loyalty  is  not 
very  material ;  but  it  is  evident  that  he  wished  to  ensure  the  means 
of  his  own  safety,  independent  of  their  exertions. 

f  This  is  not  printed  from  the  original,  but  taken  from  a  copy. 


1650.]     COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATE.  197 


and  good  affections,  in  a  particular  soe  deerly  valued 
by  me,  soe  I  will  not  be  wanting,  when  by  Gods 
blessing  I  shall  be  enabled,  deseruedly  to  rccom- 
pence  you  both  for  soe  acceptable  a  service  don  to 
Your  louing  friend, 

Charles  R. 

St.  Johnston,  2  8&''',  1650. 


The  King  to  Mr.  William  Hinton.  ^ 

Mr.  William  Hinton, 
Your  many  faithfull  services  done  to  my  deere 
Father  of  blessed  memory  and  to  my  selfe,  &  the 
constant  continuance  in  your  loyall  affections  to  my 
just  cause,  are  soe  very  remarkable,  as  I  shalbe  euer 
mindfull  to  acknowledge  them,  and  to  gratify  and 
reward  you  for  them.  The  condition  of  my  affaires 
requiring  that  a  considerable  sum'e  of  money  be 
speedily  sent  into  Holland,  I  doe  at  present  desire 
you  by  such  private  meanes  as  you  shall  conceiue 
most  safe,  to  conveye  or  returne  thither  by  bills  of 
exchange  for  my  use,  such  sumes  of  money,  as  either 
you  haue  or  shalbe  able  to  procure  by  loane,  or 
otherwise,  of  my  well  affected  subjects,  towards  my 
supply  :  and  as  I  doubt  not  you  will  comply  with  all 
readines  &  industry  with  this  my  desire,  soe  I 
will  that  you  assure  all  those  who  shall  contribute  to 
y''  support  of  my  occasions,  y*  I  shall  willingly  repay 
them,  when  God  shall  enable  me,  and  also  further 
recompence  them  to  their  content :  and  will  particu- 
larly consider  you  for  the  paines  you  shall  imploy 
herein  as  a  service  very  acceptable  to 

Your  louing  friend, 

Charles  R. 

Sr.  Johnstons,  2.  S''^'",  1650. 


*  This  letter,  taken  from  a  copy,  contains  further  proof  how 
much  more  anxious  Charles  now  was  for  a  safe  escape  to  the  Con- 
tinent than  sanguine  of  success  from  the  state  of  his  affairs  in 
Scotland. 


198 


CORRESPONDENCE  DURING  THE  [1650, 


The  King  to  Sir  John  Greenville. 

S'  John  Greenvile/'  considering  how  important  it 
would  be  for  the  good  of  my  affaires  to  haue  a  body 
of  men  in  a  readines  to  countenance  any  attempt 
that  shall  be  made  by  my  good  subjects  in  the  West^f 
for  recovering  my  just  rights,  their  owne  libertys, 
and  suppressing  the  present  barbarous  and  bloody 
Vsurpers,  especially  in  a  place  soe  neere  and  op- 
portune for  the  seconding  any  such  enterprize 
as  that  under  your  charge;  I  haue  thought  good 
to  desire  and  require  you,  to  gather  &  entertaine 
as  many  souldiers,  and  to  prouide  what  store  of 
armes  &  munition  you  can  possibly,  and  as  may 
consist  with  the  necessary  subsistence  of  y*"  garrison 
under  your  command,  to  be  ready  to  be  seasonably 
transported  on  any  good  occasion :  In  w''*'  busines 
soe  highly  conducing  to  the  good  of  my  seruice,  as  I 
am  very  confident  your  particular  relation  and  affec- 
tion to  my  person  and  interests  will  prompt  you  to 
imploy  your  utmost  industry  and  assistance,  soe  you 
may  rest  assured,  that  w^  you  shall  therein  performe 
shall  ever  be  acknowledged  on  any  seasonable  occa- 
sion that  may  manifest  your  deserts  and  y^  esteeme 
and  kindnes  I  haue  for  you^  who  am 

Your  loving  friend, 

Charles  R. 

St.  Johnstons,  2  Oct.  \  650. 


The  King  to  Sir  Richard  Grenville. 

S*"  Rich:  Greenville,  though  it  be  not  seasonable 
for  me  to  giue  powers  to  any  to  appeare  for  me,  in 
regard  of  the  diverse  affecc^ons  and  dispositions  of 

*  He  was  afterwards  Earl  of  Bath, 
f  Thoroughly  weary  of  the  thraldom  of  obligation  to  the  Scotch 
Covenanters,  this  and  the  following  letter  (both  of  which  are  taken 
from  copies)  contain  evidence  of  the  writer's  anxiety  again  to  engage 
the  service  of  the  English  royalists-  See  also  a  letter  of  Abraham 
Cowley  to  Lord  Arlington,  iu  the  Miscellanea  Aulica,  p.  152. 


1650.]     COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATE.  199 

people  I  liauc  to  deale  with  in  the  present  con- 
juncture of  my  affaires,  yet  I  held  it  requisite  to 
cherishe  the  good  affecc^ons  of  those  who  haue  the 
like  kindnes  for  me  as  I  haue  observed  in  you, 
desiring  you  to  continue  constant  therein,  and  to 
keepe  your  selfe  in  readines  for  my  imployments 
when  it  shalbe  seasonable,  and  in  the  meane  time 
not  only  to  be  your  selfe  very  secret  and  circum- 
spect in  what  concernes  my  interests,  but  hy  all 
meanes  to  procure  that  all  others  be  soe  likewise, 
least  if  the  Rebells  shall  discerne  and  app^hend  any 
disposition  &  intention  in  any  of  my  good  subjects 
to  assist  me,  they  shall,  to  p^^ent  the  same,  use 
violence  on  those  that  are  best  inclined  to  my 
service.  I  haue  soe  great  confidence  in  your  affec- 
tion as  I  am  assured  of  your  readines,  and  when 
there  shalbe  a  fitt  opportunity  you  shall  be  sure  to 
heare  from 

Your  very  louing  friend, 

Charles  Pt. 

St.  Johnstons,  2'^  of  8  6^',  1650. 


The  Duke  of  York  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Sir  Edvr.  Nicolas,  though  I  haue  much  desired 
your  company  and  aduise,  yet  not  with  the  hinder- 
ance  of  the  Kings  seruise,  nor  your  one  incon- 
venince  :  but  that  now  vpon  the  death  of  the  Prince  of 
Orange,*  I  haue  more  neede  of  your  councell  then 
euer,  which  I  desir  you  to  comunicat  to  me  by  letter 
or  any  other  waye  as  you  shall  thinke  fitt.  I  desire 
you  also  to  moue  my  Lord  Culpeper  f  for  monye  to 
defray  the  charges  of  the  Kings  horses ;  as  well  for 
the  Kings  honor,  as  to  preserve  '6  of  the  best  of  them 
for  the  Kings  use.  I  desire  you  would  aduise  me 
wheither  I  may  not  presse  my  Lord  Culpeper  to 

*  Who  died  on  the  24th  of  this  month. 
The  first  peer  of  that  name.    He  joined  the  deceased  King's 
councils  at  the  same  time  with  Hyde  and  Falkland  ;  was  an  exile, 
for  twelve  years,  with  his  son;  and  on  the  Restoration  was  made 
Master  of  the  Rolls. 


200 


CORRESPONDENCE  DURING  THE  [1650. 


lend  me  1500  or  2000  Pounds,  to  be  repayd  if  tlie 
King  allow  it  not :  the  wanting  of  those  supplies 
which  I  expected  from  the  King  and  the  Prince  of 
Orange  enforces  me  to  this  councell,  wherein  I 
desire  your  assistance  witli  my  Lord  Culpeper  if  you 
aproue  of  it :  desiring  you  to  beleiue  that  I  shall 
euer  be 

Your  very  affectionat  friend, 

James. 

BiiuxELLS,  Nomm:  12.  1C50. 

Indorsed  by  Sir  E.  Nicholas. 
2-12°  iV^o*''«,  1 650.    R.  8-18°.    The  D.  of  Yorke  from  Bruxells 
to  me. 


Copie  of  y"  Dukes  Letter  to  my  Lord  Culpeper. 

My  Lord,  the  Kinges  horses  are  to  be  sold  for 
money  to  pay  for  their  meat.  Some  of  them  are 
much  prised  by  his  Ma*^',  and  cannot  be  sold  to  their 
worth  :  therefore  I  desire  that  you  would  laye  downe 
the  money  due  for  their  charges,  so  that  the  Kinges 
honor  may  be  preserued,  and  the  best  of  y"  horses 
still  kept  for  y''  Kings  use :  w*^  w*"^'  I  am  sure  his 
Ma*'^  wilbe  well  pleased. 

I  rest  your  louinge  friend, 

James. 

Bruxells,  Noveml.  12,  1650. 


The  Duke  of  York  to  Sir  Edivard  Nicholas."^ 

Sir  Edw.  Nicholas,  I  haue  receiued  yours  of  the  8. 
of  Nouember  from  the  Hage,  and  with  it  that  from 
Dicke  Fanshaw,  and  I  haue  as  you  desired  me  lett 
the  King  know  why  I  had  you  not  heare  with  me, 
which  he  knows  very  well  was  not  your  fault,  and  I 
am  sure  he  is  well  satisfy de  with  you,  and  has  the 
same  esteeme  he  always  had  for  you,  of  which  I  am 

*  This  letter  was  written  after  the  battle  of  Worcester,  fought  on 
the  same  day  as  that  of  Dunbar,  the  3rd  of  September.  It  was  on  the 
2nd  of  November  that  Charles  landed  in  Normandy. 


1653.]     COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATE.  201 


confident  before  this  tyme  you  liaue  knowledge  of 
in  his  hauing  sent  for  you  to  come  heither  to  him, 
which  makes  mee  now  that  I  shall  not  say  any  thing 
more  to  you,  because  I  hope  to  see  you  shortly,  till 
when  you  may  assure  your  selfe  that  I  shall  euer  be 
Your  most  assured  freind, 

James. 

Paris,  iVoM.  18,  1651. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edivard  Nicholas. 

Paris,  April  6,  1652. 

Mr.  Sec.  Nicholas,  I  haue  receaued  yours  of  the 
28  of  the  last  month,  and  doe  very  well  approue  of 
your  sending  me  intelligence  in  your  letters  to  the 
Chancelour,*  by  whom  you  shall  againe  receaue  my 
pleasure,  and  information  of  all  my  purposes  and 
resolutions,  and  directions  concerning  your  selfe,  w*"^ 
the  unsetlednesse  of  my  condition  heitherto  hath 
kept  me  from  sending  so  positiuely  to  you,  as  I  hope 
shortly  to  doe.  In  the  meane  time  assure  your  selfe 
I  rely  upon  noe  mans  fidelitie  and  affection  more  then 
on  yours,  and  you  shall  allwais  find  me  to  be 
Your  most  assured  frend, 

Charles  R. 


The  Princess  Dowager  of  Orange  to  Sir  Edward 
Nicholas. 

Breda,  21  July,  16o3.t 

Mr.  Secretarie,  I  haue  been  so  long  without  giuing 
you  thanks  for  all  y''  letters,  that  if  I  did  not  hope 
you  would  not  impute  it  to  neglect,  I  should  not 
know  which  way  now  to  desire  you  to  continu,  but 

*  Sir  Edward  Hyde  ;  but  he  is  not  marked  on  the  lists  as  Chan- 
cellor until  1658. 

+  This  letter  has  reference  to  the  Treaty  then  pending  between 
Holland  and  the  English  Commonwealth.  The  negotiations  were 
finally  settled  on  the  5th  May,  1654. 


202  COERESPONDENCE  DURING  THE  [1653. 

your  knowing  how  little  I  loue  this  exercise  will  (I 
dout  not)  justifie  niee  enough  in  y'  opinion.  I  am  very 
vnsertain  of  ray  stay  here,  because  it  depends  vpon 
his  Majestis  remoue/-!'-  who  I  wish  with  all  my  hart 
would  not  come  into  thesse  parts  till  hee  sees  what 
becoms  of  the  treatty,  for  I  do  much  aprehend  at 
last  thay  will  agree:  the  Hollanders  desiring  nothing 
more.  By  this  imagine  how  ill  his  Ma*'^'  receiption 
will  bee  :  Pray  let  mee  know  your  opinion  of  this,  and 
whether  3'ou  beleeue  ther  Avill  be  a  peace,  which  in 
doing  you  will  much  oblige 

Your  affectionate  friend, 

Marie. 


The  King  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Tauis,  Sept:  28,  1653.t 

Nicholas,  I  am  very  well  pleased  with  the  paines  I 
perceaue  by  your  letters  to  the  Chancelour  you  take 
in  my  seruice,  and  you  must  upon  all  occasions  lett 
those  good  men  know,  who  communicate  freely  with 
you,  that  I  am  very  sensible  of  their  affections  to 
me  w''^  I  will  requite  when  it  shall  be  in  my  power  : 
I  am  exceedingly  troubled  at  any  factions  and 
iealosyes  amongst  those  who  wish  me  well,  and  will 
use  all  my  power  to  compose  them,  and  if  you  meete 
with  any  who  have  hearetofore  bene  averse  to  those 
wayes,  w""^  haue  bene  most  conducinge  to  my  seruice, 
or  bene  opposite  to  that  party  w""^'  hath  bene  most 
tender  of  me,  you  may  confidently  assure  them,  if 
they  haue  now  changed  ther  mindes,  I  will  be  there 
harty  frind,  and  be  very  carfull  to  aduance  there 

*  Charles  was  then  at  Paris.  From  a  letter  written  by  Abraham 
Cowley  to  Lord  Arlington  very  soon  after  this  period,  it  appears  that 
the  King's  dependence  on  Dutch  friendship  was  greater  than  his 
sister's.  He  believed  that  the  eagerness  to  conclude  a  treaty  with 
Cromwell  was  not  the  wish  of  the  States,  but  merely  of  a  party  which 
then  was  predominant.    See  Miscellanea  Aulica,  p.  1.58. 

+  This  letter  was  written  only  a  few  weeks  previous  to  Cromwell's 
assumption  of  the  Protectorate.  The  initials  in  the  latter  part  refer 
evidently  to  Sir  Marmaduke  Langdale  and  Mens.  Befort. 


1654.]     COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATE.  203 

interest,  and  to  requite  there  good  will :  In  the  par- 
ticular you  and  S'  M.  L:  haue  consulted,  I  thinke 
best  to  acquiesse  in  that  generall,  untill  there  shall 
be  some  declaration  of  at  least  an  inclination  towards 
me,  and  you  shall  let  Mon""  Be:  (to  whom  you  are  to 
commende  me  kindly)  know  that  I  shall  then  make 
it  appeare,  that  it  is  in  my  power  to  add  more 
strenght  to  those  states  then  is  imaginable :  if  you 
haue  interest  in  any  discreete  person  who  is  a  con- 
fident of  Count  Williams,  I  would  be  glad  he  should 
know,  that  I  haue  great  kindnesse  for  him,  and  doe 
much  depend  upon  his  good  will  and  frindshipe  to 
me  in  all  my  concernements,  as  indeede  I  do ;  *  pro- 
ceede  as  you  haue  begun,  w*"^  is  very  acceptable  to 
Your  constant  louing  frind, 

Charles  R. 


Copie  of  the  Kings  [Charles  11.)  Letter  to  the  Duke 
of  GlocesteVy  concerning  his  being  tempted  to  turne 
Papist. 

CoLoiGNE,  i\^or;  10:  1654.t 

Deare  Brother, 
I  have  receaued  yo"""  without  a  date  in  w''^  you  tell 
me  that  Mr.  Montague  has  endeauord  to  pervert  you 
from  yo''  religion.  I  doe  not  doubt  but  you  remem- 
ber very  well  y""  commands  I  left  w*^'  you  at  my  going 
away  concerning  y*  point.  I  am  confident  yovl  will 
observe  them  :  yet  yo'"  letters  that  come  from  Paris 
say  that  it  is  y''  Queenes  purpose  to  do  all  shee  can 
to  change  yo""  religion,J  in  w'^^'  if  you  do  hearken  to 

*  Charles's  mode  of  expression  here  is  worth  remarking.  Policy 
obliged  him  so  often  to  express  favour  and  affection  to  those  for 
whom  he  had  a  very  different  feeling,  that  the  addition  of  "  as 
indeede  I  do  "  seems  necessary  on  occasion  as  a  guarantee  of  good 
faith. 

t  Charles  left  Paris  for  Cologne  on  the  18th  of  October,  and 
received  much  attention  and  kindness  from  the  Princes  of  Germany. 
This  letter  oddly  conti-asts  with  what  the  writer  afterwards  became. 

X  In  some  private  instructions  given  by  Charles  to  the  Duke  of 
York,  and  dated  the  13th  July,  1654,  there  is  a  passage  expressing 
the  same  anxiety  about  his  brother,  and  strongly  marking  the  Queen- 


204 


CORRESPONDENCE  DURING  THE  [1654. 


her  or  any  body  els  in  that  matter_,  you  must  never 
thinke  to  see  England  or  mee  againe,  &  w^soeuer 
mischiefe  shall  fall  on  mee  or  my  affaires  from  this 
time  I  must  lay  all  upon  you  as  being  y^  only  cause 
of  it.  Therefore  consider  well  what  it  is  to  bee  not 
onely  y^  cause  of  ruining  a  Brother  that  loves  you  so 
well,  but  also  of  yo'  King  &  Countr3^  Do  not  lett 
them  p'suade  you  either  by  force  or  faire  p^mises; 
for  the  first  they  neither  dare,  nor  will  use,  and  for 
the  second,  as  soone  as  they  have  perverted  you  they 
will  haue  their  end,  and  then  they  will  care  no  more 
for  you.  I  am  also  informed  y^  there  is  a  purpose  to 
putt  you  into  y^  Jesuits'  Colledge,  w*"^  I  command 
you  upon  y^  same  grounds  neuer  to  consent  unto. 
And  when  soever  any  body  shall  goe  to  dispute  w^^' 
you  in  religion  doo  not  answeare  them  at  all.  For 
though  you  haue  the  reaso'  on  yo'''  side,  yett  they 
being  prepared  will  haue  y^  aduantage  of  any  body 
y*  is  not  upon  y^  same  security  that  they  are.  If  you 
do  not  consider  what  I  say  unto  you,  Remember  the 
last  words  of  yo'^  dead  Father,  w""^  were  to  bee  con- 
stant to  yo'  religion  &  neuer  to  bee  shaken  in  it. 

if  you  doe  not  obserue,  this  shall  bee  y^  last 
time  you  will  heare  from 
(Deare  Brother) 

yo'  most  affectionate  brother, 

Charles  R. 

mother's  breach  of  promise  on  the  subject.  "I  have  told  you  that 
the  Queen  hath  promised  me  concerning  my  brother  Hariy  in  point 
of  rehgion,  and  I  have  given  him  charge  to  inform  you  if  any 
attempt  shall  be  made  upon  him  to  the  contrary  ;  in  which  case  you 
will  take  the  best  care  you  can  to  prevent  his  being  wrought  upon, 
since  you  cannot  but  know  how  much  you  and  I  are  concern'd  in  it." 
See  Miscellanea  Aulica,  p.  108.  The  "  Mr.  Montague "  alluded  to 
Avas  Walter  Montague,  who  had  lately  entered  into  Priest's  orders, 
and,  upon  the  death  of  Father  Philips,  became  the  Queen's  confessor. 
Carte,  in  his  Life  of  Ormond,  speaks  of  his  "  busy  temper,  spiritual 
pride,  and  furious  zeal."  Some  further  particulars  of  this  bigoted 
Abbot  of  Pontoise,  who  was  second  son  of  the  Eai-1  of  Manchester, 
may  be  found  in  p.  G76,  vol.  II.  of  the  Sidnoj  Papers.  And  see 
ante,  p.  75. 


1654.]     COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATE.  205 


The  Queen  of  Bohemia  *  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Mr.  Secretaries  I  ame  verie  glade  to  finde  by  your 
letter  that  you  are  safelie  arriued  and  all  your  com- 
panie  at  Aix^f  ^i^d  that  you  found  the  King  and  my 
Neece  %  so  well  in  health  and  so  kinde  one  to  the 
other,  which  has  euer  bene  so  since  I  haue  knowen 
them.  I  beleeue  indeed  the  seperation  will  be  hard, 
but  when  there  is  no  remedie  one  must  be  content. 
As  for  my  iourney  up  hill  I  cannot  tell  what  to  say 
to  it,  S'  Charles  Cottrell  §  shall  informe  you  how  it 
goes  but  slowlie  on,  and  which  is  stranger  that  it  is 
not  my  fault.  Dr.  Morley  has  made  a  verie  good 
description  of  the  Queene  of  Sweden :  ||  she 
gaue  an  assignation  to  the  French  Ambassadour 
to  meet  her  at  Breda,  whither  he  went,  and  so  did 
the  Prince  and  Princess  ^  of  Tarente  and  most 

*  Sister  to  Charles  the  First ;  a  woman  whose  beauty  and  spirit 
increased  the  sympathy  justly  due  to  her  misfortunes.  She  had  lost 
her  eldest  son  shortly  before  her  husband's  death.  Her  second  son 
was  Charles  Louis,  the  exiled  Elector  Palatine ;  her  third,  the  Pi'ince 
Rupert;  her  youngest,  the  Prince  Maurice.  Through  her  daughter 
Sophia,  afterwards  Electress  of  Hanover,  the  present  royal  family 
occupy  the  English  throne.  The  letters  now  printed  are  A^ery  interest- 
ing specimens  of  her  style  of  correspondence,  and  form  an  apt  and 
valuable  commentai'y  upon  the  graver  records  of  this  important  period. 

f  Aix-la-Chapelle. 

X  Henrietta,  Duchess  of  Orleans, 

§  Repeatedly  mentioned  in  letters  from  the  Elector  Palatine  to  his 
mother,  preserved  in  Bromley's  Collection,  He  appears  to  have  been 
attached  to  the  personal  service  of  the  Queen  of  Bohemia. 

II  The  far-famed  Christina.  It  was  in  this  year  that  she  abdicated 
the  throne.  There  were  several  personal  squabbles  between  the 
Ex-Queen  of  Sweden  and  the  Ex-Queen  of  Bohemia  ;  and  Christina 
was  not  a  little  jealous  of  Elizabeth's  distinguished  correspondents, 
among  whom  she  at  this  time  numbered  Des  Cartes  and  Admiral  Penn. 
Christina,  who  had  just  treated  and  negotiated  with  Cromwell,even  after 
her  abdication  still  attempted  to  mingle  in  politics.  She  also  offered  oc- 
casionally personal  slights  to  the  Queen  of  Bohemia;  which  may  account 
for  the  manner  in  which  she  is  spoken  of  in  passages  of  these  letters. 

•ff  The  writer's  spleen  against  Christina  seems  here  to  extend  itself 
even  to  her  own  relations  :  for  Emilia,  Princess  of  Tarente,  was 
daughter  of  William,  Landgrave  of  Hesse  Cassel ;  and  Charlotte, 


206  CORRESPONDENCE  DURING  THE  [1654. 


of  our  French  gallants,  who  came  all  sneaking 
home  againe,  for  her  greefe  was  so  great  for  the 
beating  of  the  Spanish  armie  before  Arras  *  as  she 
would  not  goe  to  Breda.  She  sent  another  account 
than  that  to  the  Ambassadour  as  you  may  imagin, 
but  the  Landgrave  writt  the  truth  to  his  neece  the 
Princess  of  Tarente.  We  haue  yet  heere  no  parti- 
cullars  of  this  defeat,  but  in  generall  it  is  a  verie 
great  one.  I  long  to  heare  what  part  my  godsonnef 
had  in  it,  for  I  still  thinke  of  him,  being  my  cheefest 
comfort  next  your  excellent  Master.  I  ame  verie  glad 
your  daughter  is  so  well,  I  doe  not  wonder  at  it,  she  is 
soe  well  vsed,  and  now  she  has  her  father  with  her 
she  is  the  more  content,  and  I  take  it  verie  well 
that  all  this  makes  her  not  forget  her  frends  heere. 
I  assure  you  I  long  to  haue  her  heere  againe.  I 
am  verie  sorie  for  poore  Killegrew,J  she  was  a  verie 
good  gentlewoman.  You  will  heare  by  M"'  Howards 
letter  howe  great  a  scape  my  little  Nephue  § 
escaped  yesterday  vpon  the  bridge  at  the  Princess 
of  Grangers  house,  but  God  be  thanked  there  was 
no  hurt  onelie  the  coache  broken :  I  tooke  him  into 
my  coache  and  brought  him  home.  The  Princess 
of  Grange  went  from  hence  vpon  Saterday,  and  you 
will  haue  our  Baron  shortlie  with  you  at  Aix,  he 
will  tell  you  the  second  part  of  the  Queene  of 
Sweden,  for  he  comes  from  her  to  your  Court,  to 

another  daughter  of  the  Hessian  Elector,  was  wife  to  her  son  Charles 
Louis.  The  Prince  was  Henry  Charles  de  la  Tremouille,  then  in  the 
service  of  the  States,  and  in  command  of  the  Hessian  cavalry.  His 
connexion  with  these  families  pi'ocured  him  to  be  chosen  a  Knight  of 
the  Garter  in  1653,  along  with  the  young  Duke  of  Gloucester, 

*  An  allusion  to  the  defeat  of  the  Spaniards  by  the  French  on  St. 
Louis's  day,  when  their  lines  were  forced,  whilst  besieging  Arras, 
with  great  slaughter. 

+  In  the  Queen's  letters  preserved  in  the  Bromley  Collection 
there  are  also  frequent  allusions  to  this  "  godsonne.''  In  one  place 
(p.  286)  she  speaks  of  him  under  the  name  of  "  Tint,"  playfully 
writing  to  a  familiar  friend. 

X  "  Kate  Killigrew,"  daughter  of  Lord  Stafford.  She  had  been 
Maid  of  Honour  to  the  Queen  upwards  of  eight  years.  A  curious 
letter,  introducing  this  lady  to  her  Majesty  in  1646,  may  be  referred 
to  in  Bromley's  Royal  Letters,  p.  1 35. 

§  Afterwards  William  the  Third. 


1654.]     COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATE.  207 


morrow  I  beleeve  I  shall  goe  a  shooting,  which  I 
haue  not  done  since  you  went.  I  am  verie  glade  to 
heere  that  you  are  established  in  your  place,  which 
you  desarve  so  well,  this  is  no  complement  but  the 
verie  truth  from 

Your  most  affectionat  frend, 

Elizabeth. 

Hage,  Aug.  31. 

I  am  verie  sorie  for  my  Lo:  Wentworths  sickness. 
I  pray  lett  him  know  so  from  me,  and  remember  me 
to  Mr.  Chancellour. 

I  pray  remember  my  humble  seruice  to  the  King : 
the  news  of  beating  the  Scotch  *  is  now  tolde  quite 
contrarie  by  a  ship  come  from  thence. 

"  For  Mr.  Secretarie," 

Indorsed  by  Sir  E.  N.    31°  Aug:  st:  No:  1654.    R.  3«.  7*"*. 
Queene  of  Bohemia  to  me. 


The  Queen  of  Bohemia  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas, 

Hagh,  Sep:  7  (1654). 

Mr.  Secretarie,  I  thanke  you  both  for  the  good 
news  you  writt  to  S''  Charles  Cottrell  out  of  Holland, 
and  for  your  letter  I  receaued  this  morning  with  the 
relation  of  the  defeat  before  Arras.  I  hope  you  will 
send  that  of  Holland  to  Curtiusf  that  the  beleef  of 
the  Scotch  defeat  may  not  be  continued  in  Germanic, 
but  none  pleaseth  me  better  then  what  you  write  of 
my  deere  Godsonne,  and  the  continuance  of  my 
Neeces  good  health.  The  Queen  of  Sweden  is  yett 
at  Anwerp,  wee  looke  euerie  day  to  see  the  Land- 
grave heere,  and  by  him  I  shall  know  what  she  will 
doe.    It  is  certaine  that  the  flux  is  much  in  Monkes 

*  This  was  a  trifling  affair ;  being  merely  a  check  given  tO' 
Lilburn,  the  Parliamentary  General,  who  commanded  during  Crom- 
welFs  absence. 

'h  Curtius  had  long  been  the  English  agent,  at  Frankfort,  to  the 
German  princes.  He  had  been  Secretary  to  the  King  of  Bohemia, 
and  in  1640  was  also  employed  by  Charles  the  First  in  Germanic 
diplomacy. 


208 


CORRESPONDENCE  DURING  THE 


[1654/ 


army/"  a  Scotchman  that  is  come  from  thence  reports 
it,  and  all  the  particulars  you  haue  written.  Dr. 
Morley  has  a  letter  from  Anwerp  of  some  trouble  by 
a  discouerie  of  a  new  treason  in  London  of  the 
levellers  against  his  pretious  highness,  but  I  beleeue 
you  will  haue  more  particullars  of  that  then  wee 
heere.t  Dr.  Earle  setts  forwards  to  morrow  to  Breda 
and  so  to  Aix.  I  doe  not  write  to  you  by  him 
because  this  will  be  sooner  with  you.  Our  Baron 
has  sent  for  his  man  Smith  to  meet  him  God  knows 
where,  for  I  doe  not,  I  beleeve  you  will  haue  him  at 
Aix :  he  is  the  direct  wandring  Jew.  My  Ladie 
Herbert  is  looked  for  heere  shortlie,  but  she  was  not 
come  from  Paris  the  last  week.  I  heare  M""'  HideJ 
is  to  come  to  my  Neece  in  M""'  Killegrews  place, 
which  I  am  verie  glad  of,  she  is  verie  fitt  for  itt  and 
a  great  fauorit  of  mine,  who  ame  euer 
Your  most  affectio 

nat  Trend, 


I  pray  lett  my  Lord  Went  worth  know  I  ame 
extreme  glade  he  is  of  the  kings  councell,  being  so 
much  his  frend  as  I  ame  I  cannot  but  wish  him 
much  ioye  of  it. 

Indorsed,  7*^  ^Sep^''*,  1 654.    The  Queene  of  Bohemia  to  me. 


*  Monk  commanded  in  Scotland  at  this  period  ;  having  superseded 
Lilburn,  Morgan,  and  other  Parhamentary  officers. 

f  This  was  immediately  after  Cromwell's  assumption  of  the  Pro- 
tectorate. It  was  on  the  3rd  of  the  present  month  that  he  called 
together  his  first  parliament;  and  eight  days  after  the  date  of  this 
letter,  the  members  swore  fealty  to  him. 

t  Afterwards  Duchess  of  York,  Though  not  yet  married  to  the 
Duke,  Mrs.  Hyde  appears  to  have  engaged  much  of  the  royal  atten- 
tion at  this  time.  Charles,  in  a  letter  to  Bennet,  afterwards  Earl  of 
Arlington,  in  1655,  says,  "  I  will  try  whether  Sir  S.  Compton  be  so 
much  in  love  as  you  say,  for  I  Avill  name  Mrs.  Hyde  before  him  so  by 
chance,  that  except  he  be  very  much  smitten  it  shall  not  at  all  move 
him."  Sir  Spencer  Compton,  son  of  the  Earl  of  Northampton,  was 
the  youth  of  whose  loyal  and  gallant  infancy  Sir  Philip  Warwick  relates, 
that  though  not  able  to  grasp  a  pistol,  yet  in  indignation  he  cried 
because  he  was  not  exposed  to  the  same  hazard  his  brothers  were. 


1654.]     COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATE.  209 


The  Queen  of  Bohemia  to  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas. 

Hagh,  ^Sep;  15.  (1654.) 

Mr.  Secretarie,  I  assure  you  your  letters  are  always 
verie  welcome  to  me.  I  hope  before  this  come  to 
you,  you  will  receaue  a  pacquet  from  Scotland  which 
came  to  Roterdam,  and  ould  Will.  Kepley  caries 
himself  to  Aix.  I  shall  be  verie  glad  to  know  what 
news  it  brings,  because  heere  is  againe  news  of 
Menkes  being  beaten,  which  a  man  of  Midletons 
writes  to  Straglien  from  Stranaven  or  such  a  name, 
and  from  my  Lo.  of  [illegible],  and  that  all  long  for 
the  King.  Stone  is  at  last  here,  he  saith  that 
Cromwell  will  be  now  either  King  or  Emperour,  I 
wish  him  the  latter,  he  has  heard  nothing  of 
Barafeild,  but  I  easilie  beleeue  he  is  honnest  enough 
to  be  well  used  by  Cromwell,  he  tells  the  Fleet  as 
you  hear,  but  it  will  not  be  beleeued  heere.  This 
day  the  assemblie  of  Hollande  begins,  theire  agent 
in  Sueden  writt  to  the  States  Generall,  that  S'  George 
Fleetwood,  brother  to  him  that  is  Leftenant  of  Irland, 
tolde  him  that  he  knew  Cromwell  had  saide  he  woulde 
keepe  the  peace  with  the  States  no  longer  then  he 
found  it  good  for  his  interests,  and  woulde  break  with 
the  first  occasion  that  he  can  for  the  good  of  his 
deseins.  Those  of  Hollande  are  verie  angrie  at  the 
agent  for  writing  this :  those  that  have  scene  the 
letter  tolde  it  me.  it  is  so  late  as  I  can  say  no  more, 
but  ame  euer 

Your  most  affectionat  frend.* 

I  pray  remember  me  to  my  lord  Wentworth,  I 
have  not  time  to  answer  his  letter  but  will  doe  it  by 
the  first  post. 

150  76r,>  1654^       _7_,    Qu-  of  Bohemia. 


*  The  letters  of  the  Queen  which  follow,  where  her  name  is  not 
subscribed,  are  signed  with  her  cipher,  as  in  the  letter  preceding  this, 
and  that,  post,  at  p.  226. 

VOL.  IV.  p 


210 


CORRESPONDENCE  DURING  THE  [1654. 


The  Queen  of  Bohemia  to  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas. 

Hage,  Sep:  21. 

Mr.  Secretarie,  I  thanke  you  for  yours  of  the  18  of 
Sept:  yesterday  I  was  tolde  that  all  the  people  at 
Bruxelles  were  sending  theire  goods  to  Antwerp  for 
feare  of  the  French.*  Some  in  a  ship  come  out  of 
England  say  that  the  mock  Parliament  beginn  to 
dispute  their  priuiledges  with  Cromwell,  but  I  feare 
they  will  but  too  well  agree.  I  ame  verie  glade  the 
King  used  Prince  Williame  and  his  ladief  so  well. 
BoswellJ  is  well  enough  serued,  but  I  pittie  him  for 
he  is  vtterlie  vndone.  there  is  heere  no  news  at  all_, 
onelie  Mons'"  de  Wimmenom  is  verie  sick.  the 
States  of  Holland  are  assembled,  but  Brederoke, 
Opdam,  and  Merode  are  not  yett  come,  it  is  now 
verie  faire  weather,  when  the  Princess  of  Tarents 
picture  is  ended  by  Louyr,  which  will  be  this  day, 
then  I  may  chance  goe  a  shooting, §  which  I  have  not 
done  since  you  went.  I  pray  deliuer  this  inclosed  to 
the  King  with  my  humble  service.    I  ame  euer 

Your  most  affectionat  frend. 

I  pray  lett  me  know  if  the  Queene  of  Sueden  did 
write  to  the  King  by  my  Lord  of  Norwich,  and  if 
she  did  it  cinilie  or  not.  Sure  Dick  Harding  is 
growen  a  fish  in  his  baths,  for  he  is  as  mute  as  one,  tell 
him  so  from  me.  I  think  the  King  had  better  stay 
where  he  is  then  to  goe  to  Coliein,  he  will  not  be  so 
much  at  his  leisure  there  as  at  Aix,  those  of  Coliein 
are  odd  people,  so  as  I  ame  of  your  opinion. 

^  7*''',  1654.  R.  if.  Queene  of  Bohemia  to  me. 


*  In  consequence  of  the  war  existing  in  Flanders,  between  France 
and  Spain. 

f  Sister  of  the  late  Stadthoider. 

X  Sir  William  Boswell,  already  noticed. 

§  Hunting  seems  also  to  have  been  a  vei'y  favourite  amusement  of 
her  Majesty  of  Bohemia.  It  is  frequently  alluded  to  in  these  letters; 
and  in  those  of  Bromley's  Collection,  sixteen  years  earlier,  there  are 
several  references  to  it. 


1654.]     COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATE.  211 


The  Queen  of  Bohemia  to  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas. 

Mr.  Secretarie,  I  ame  verie  glade  that  I  shall  see 
my  Neece  heere  so  soone,  and  I  thanke  you  for  all 
your  other  news.  I  beleeue  Dr.  Morley  will  write 
those  that  he  heares  out  of  England  of  Cromwells 
dessoluing  of  his  Parliament,*  for  being  so  ungratious 
as  not  to  doe  as  he  woulde  haue  them,  it  was  con- 
firmed to  me  the  last  night  by  one  of  the  States 
Generally  for  three  of  ther  Deputies  are  come  from 
London  that  were  sent  about  the  treatie  of  the 
^^l^;ors  ^Yie  other  disputes ;  they  confirme  all,  but 
it  was  so  late  that  I  coulde  not  heare  of  the  particuUars. 
the  same  State  tolde  me  there  was  a  speech  of  part 
of  the  orange  and  red  men  in  rebellion  against  his 
pretious  highness.  I  pray  tell  your  daughter  all 
this,  for  I  had  sealed  her  letter  before  I  had  the  cer- 
taintie  of  the  news.  I  ame  verie  glad  the  king 
resolues  to  stay  at  Aix,  it  is  much  better  than 
Collein.  I  heare  there  is  one  that  has  heeretofore 
served  my  Lo:  of  Brainfordf  paked  from  Scotland  to 
the  King  but  three  days  agone,  and  came  from 
thence  but  sixe  days  before,  he  would  tell  no  news 
but  made  hast  away.  Soone  as  he  went,  there 
reached  heere  one  Thomson,  one  I  haue  scene  before : 
he  tells  all  the  particuUars  of  the  defeat  that  is  so 
bragged  of.  he  saith  that  they  were  dispersed  vpon 
it,  but  it  is  aboue  fine  weekes  since  he  came  from 

*  An  allusion  to  the  transactions  of  the  3rd  of  September,  1654, 
when  Cromwell  summoned  that  Parliament  which  he  immediately 
afterwards  dissolved  for  their  opposition  to  his  assumption  of  the 
Protectorate.  The  speech  to  which  the  Queen  of  Bohemia  refers 
was  that  remarkable  one  on  the  first  sitting  of  the  House,  when  a 
member,  after  denying  the  authority  which  had  called  them  together, 
boldly  exclaimed,  "  that  as  God  had  made  him  instrumental  in 
cutting  down  tyranny  in  one  man,  so  now  he  could  not  endure  to  see 
the  nation's  liberties  shackled  by  another,  who  had  no  right  to  the 
government  but  by  the  length  of  his  swoi-d." 

f  Patrick  Ruthen,  Earl  of  Forth,  in  Scotland.  He  had  been 
General  of  Charles's  forces  during  the  Rebellion  ;  but  was  dead  at  the 
date  of  this  letter. 

p  2 


212 


CORRESPONDENCE  DURING  THE  [1654. 


thence,  being  come  tliouroiigli  England  by  his 
countrie^  the  borders,  ^vhere  in  his  passage  he  mett 
with  a  partie  where  he  was  hurt  and  lamed,  but  for 
all  that  he  is  gone  to  the  King,  he  much  com- 
plaines  of  diuisions  amongst  them,  and  not  of  Sir 
George  Monroe,  which  they  doe  also.  I  doe  admire 
how  people  could  tell  so  great  a  lye  as  the  pacquet, 
but  it  is  verie  common  amongst  my  countriemen. 
Phil:  Moliun  is  heere,  she  is  fled  from  England 
fearing  to  be  imprisoned  by  Cromwell,  shes  verie 
good  companie  and  talkes  verie  freelie  but  hand- 
somlie.  My  Ladie  Herbert  is  also  heere,  since 
Sunday  last ;  I  haue  had  yett  no  time  to  aske  her  anie 
thing,  hauing  not  scene  her  since  Sunday.  Thorn: 
Doleman"  is  heere  and  desires  leeue  to  see  me, 
which  I  haue  put  off  untill  I  know  the  Kings  plea- 
sure :  for  hauing  so  openlie  owned  the  setting  forward 
of  the  treatie  I  will  not  see  him  without  the  Kings 
approbation.  I  haue  writt  thus  to  your  daughter, 
and  desire  you  both  to  know  the  Kings  pleasure  in 
it.  I  entreat  you  besides  to  remember  my  humble 
seruice  to  him,  and  keepe  me  still  in  his  good 
opinion,  for  it  is  the  best  seruice  and  frendship  you 
can  doe  to 

Your  most  affectionat 
frend. 

Hagh,  Sep.  29. 

I  bragg'd  to  soone  of  shooting,  for  since  I  wrote 
the  weather  has  not  serued. 

"  For  Mr.  Secretarie." 

290  'jhris^  1654.    R:  8'^"^   The  Queene  to  me. 


*  Dolmau  had  suffered  much  in  the  royal  cause  during  the  civil 
wars.  He  was  a  Berkshire  gentleman;  and  his  house  at  Shaw,  just 
below  Donnington  Castle,  was  one  of  the  points  of  attack  during  the 
battle  of  Newbury,  from  which  a  good  defence  was  made  against 
Lord  Manchester. 


im.]     COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATE.  213 


The  Queen  of  Bohemia  to  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas. 

Hagii,  Oct.  2.  (1654.) 

Mr.  Secret arie,  I  send  you  heere  a  letter  for  the 
King,  it  is  about  a  match  betwixt  Prince  Adolphe 
the  King  of  Suedes  brother  and  Sophie ;  *  he  has 
desired  it  verie  handsomlie  :  my  sonne  has  con- 
sented to  it^  reseruing  the  King  of  Suedens  consent 
and  mine,  who  ame  to  acquaint  the  King  with  it. 
I  doe  it  now_,  and  send  you  the  copie  of  Prince 
Adolphes  letter,  I  pray  gett  an  answere  from  the 
King  as  soone  as  you  can.  I  haue  no  more  to  say, 
but  am  euer 

Your  most  affectionat  frend. 

I  pray  assure  me  to  my  Lo:  Wentworth,  I  write 
not  now  to  him,  I  haue  no  time,  for  the  poste  is 
readie  to  goe.  I  pray  say  the  same  to  reuerent 
Dick  Harding. 

«2°  8*'%  1654.  St.  No.  R.  4".    The  Queene  of  Bohemia  to  me  con- 
cerning    Kings  consent  for  Pr<=s^e  Sophia  to  mari-y  Pr<^'=  Adolph,  } 
King  of  Swedens  brother." 


The  Queen  of  Bohemia  to  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas. 

Hagh,  Oct.  19.  (1654.) 

Mr.  Secretarie,  hearing  that  you  may  chance  to 
stay  all  this  week  at  Collein,  I  send  you  this  inclosed 
for  the  King,  to  giue  him  humble  thankes  for  his 
aprobation  of  Sophies  mariage.  You  will  haue  vn- 
derstood  by  Curtius  all  the  newes  of  Germanic,  for 
his  going  to  waite  vpon  the  King.  You  will  finde 
by  the  English  prints  that  they  are  forbiden  to  write 
anie  thing  of  the  proceedings  of  their  mock  Parlia- 

*  Daughter  of  the  Queen  of  Bohemia,  afterwards  married  to  the 
Elector  of  Hanover,  and  thence  the  stem  of  descent  of  the  reigning 
family  of  England. 


214 


COERESPONDENCE  DURING  THE  [1654. 


ment.  I  v»as  at  Delft  to  sec  the  wrack  that  was 
made  by  the  blowing  up  of  the  powder  this  day 
seuenight,  it  is  a  sad  sights  whole  streets  quite 
razed ;  not  one  stone  vpon  another,  it  is  not  yett 
knowen  how  manic  persons  are  lost,  there  is  scarse 
anie  house  in  the  toune  but  the  tyles  are  off. 
— {A  great  blot  on  the  paper.)  Apollo  with  leaping 
into  my  lapp  has  made  this  blott.  Thom.  Killegrew 
is  heere,  who  makes  a  rare  relation  of  the  Queene 
of  Sueden.  It  is  verie  colde,  which  I  hope  will 
diminish  the  plague.  I  pray  be  confident  that  I  am 
euer  Your  most  aftectionat  frend, 

Elizabeth. 

I  ame  extreme  glade  to  heare  that  the  King  is 
satisfied  with  Huperts  letter,  and  that  he  has  an- 
swered him  so  kindlie.  I  pray  doe  poore  Curtius  all 
the  fauour  you  can,  that  he  haue  something  from  the 
King  to  incourage  him  the  more  to  serue  him. 


The  Queen  of  Bohemia  to  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas. 

Hagh  No:  16.  (1654.) 

Mr.  Secretarie,  iust  now  I  receaue  yours,  and  for 
a  cause  that  you  shall  know  heereafter  I  now  answer 
you,  this  is  a  riddle  which  none  but  your  daughter 
and  two  more  know.  I  was  Satterday  last  with  my 
best  Neece*  at  Speilng,  it  being  her  birth  day.  I 
ashure  you  she  is  [in]  much  trouble  for  her  deare 
Brother  the  D.  of  Glocester,  all  the  world  woulde 
looke  for  no  other  I  can  witness  for  you. — I  ame 
sorie  the  King  has  so  much  cause  of  greef,  I  beseech 
God  he  may  speedilie  remedie  it.  I  beleeue  my 
deare  Nephue  has  a  good  resolution,  but  there  is  no 
trusting  to  one  of  his  age.  I  confess  I  did  not  think 

Perhaps  the  Princess  Dowager  of  Orange,  pa7'  excellence  ;  espe- 
cially as  the  whole  passage  seems  to  refer  to  the  attempts  made  at 
Paris,  by  Queen  Henrietta  Maria  and  her  friends,  to  induce  the 
young  Prince  to  change  his  religion. 


1054.]     COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATE.  215 


the  Queene  woulde  haue  proceeded  thus  :  all  is  kept 
hcere  verie  secret  that  Prince  Will  :*  doth  in  Overizel, 
but  I  ame  tolde  that  all  goes  well,  and  that  Deventer 
which  toune  was  the  most  against  will  doe  well,  as 
also  Rupert  who  was  of  the  other  faction,t  not 
against  the  P.  of  Orange  but  Marshals.  I  pray 
beleeue  me  constantlie  for  I  ame  so 

Your  most  affectionat  frend. 

I  send  you  a  letter  for  the  best  of  Kings,  tis  about 
Thom.  Killegrew^s  business.  I  pray  remember  me 
to  Mr.  Chancelour,  and  tell  him  his  Ladie  and  my 
faourit  his  daughter  came  hither  upon  Saterday,  and 
are  gone  this  day  to  Teiling.  I  finde  my  faourit 
growen  euerie  way  to  her  aduantage. 

iVo'"  '%  1654.    R.  Yg".    The  Queene  of  Bohemia  to  me. 


The  Queen  of  Bohemia,  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Hagh,  Be:  3.  (1654.) 

Mr.  Secretarie,  I  receaued  yours  at  Berghen, 
whither  I  was  come  from  Anwerp  and  Bruxells.  I 
find  you  haue  vnridled  my  riddle  verie  right.  I  saw 
the  Queene  of  Sueden  at  the  play,  she  is  extrauagant 
in  her  fashion  and  aparell,  but  she  has  a  good  well 
fauoured  face,  and  a  milde  countenance.  One  of  the 
players  who  knew  me  tolde  her  who  I  was,  but  she 
made  no  shew  of  it.  I  went  the  next  day  to  Bruxelles, 
where  I  saw  the  Arch-due  at  mass,  and  I  saw  his 
pictures  and  lodgins.    I  lay  at  S'"  Harry  de  Vies,:]; 

*  Prince  of  Nassau  Dietz,  married  to  the  Stadtholder's  sister. 

f  Evidently  an  allusion  to  the  De  Wit  agitation,  which  at  this 
moment  was  disturbing  the  United  Provinces.  The  object  was  to 
deprive  the  infant  Stadtholder  of  his  official  power,  and  give  it 
solely  to  the  Assembly  of  the  States.  This,  in  fact,  had  been  one 
of  the  articles  which  Cromwell  urged  upon  the  States  as  a  sine 
qua  non. 

X  Sir  Henry  de  Vic  had  been  long  in  the  Enghsh  service.  He  was 
with  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  at  Rochelle  ;  and  there  are  several 
well-written  letters  from  him  to  Lord  Conway,  respecting  that  affair, 
in  Hardwicke's  Collection  of  State  Papers. 


216 


CORRESPONDENCE  DURING  THE 


[1654. 


who  was  verie  careful!  and  dilligent  to  doe  me  all 
the  service  he  coulde.  I  stayed  but  Sunday  at 
Bruxelles,  and  returned  to  Anwerp  vpon  Munday, 
and  heearing  from  Duart  how  the  Queene  of  Sueden 
had  desired  to  know  when  I  came  back  thither,  that 
she  might  meet  with  me  in  an  indiferent  place, 
I  made  the  more  hast  away  the  next  day  because  I 
had  no  minde  to  speak  with  her  since  I  heard  how 
unhandsomelie  she  had  spoken  of  the  King  my  deare 
Brother  and  of  the  King  my  deare  Nephue,  and 
indeed  of  all  our  nation,  so  I  auoided  it  and  went 
away  as  soone  as  I  had  dined.  Yett  she  sent  Donoy 
to  me  with  a  verie  civill  message  that  she  was  sorie 
she  coulde  not  use  that  ciuilitie  to  me  as  she  both 
should  doe  and  desired,  hoping  that  one  day  wee 
might  meet  together  with  more  freedome;  I  an- 
swered her  as  civillie  as  I  coulde,  and  now  when  I 
went  from  Berghen  I  gaue  S"*  Will:  Swann  charge  to 
make  her  a  complement  from  me.  I  came  hither 
vpon  Tewsday  from  Berghen,  where  I  was  extremelie 
well  intertained  by  the  Princess  of  Zolern  *  who  was 
with  me  and  was  my  guide  all  the  iourney,  and 
defrayed  me.  her  daughter  is  now  so  prettie  euerie 
way  that  you  would  like  her  yet  better  than  euer  you 
did  if  you  saw  her ;  she  is  much  growen  and  is 
still  of  a  verie  sweet  disposition,  and  she  doth 
become  her  :  she  has  a  great  deal  of  witt  and  loues 
our  nation  extreamlie,  it  makes  me  think  of  your 
wishe  t  which  I  ame  not  against  you  know,  by  this 
post  I  haue  had  verie  good  news  of  the  Duke  of 
Glocesters  constantie  in  his  religion  and  of  my  Lo: 
of  Ormonds  handsome  carriage  in  that  business,  J 
so  as  the  Queen  saith  she  will  press  him  no  further 

*  Francisca,  daughter  of  Frederick  the  Rhingrave,  and  wife  of 
John  George  Prince  of  Hohenzollern. 

+  A  plan  for  a  marriage  between  Charles  II.  and  this  young 
Princess,  one  of  the  daughters  of  the  Zollern  family,  appears  at  this 
time  to  have  been  under  discussion. 

X  This  alludes  to  the  attempt  made  to  force  the  young  Duke  of 
Gloucester  into  the  Jesuits'  College  ;  from  which,  and  other  designs 
upon  his  religion,  he  was  only  saved  by  the  Marquis  of  Ormond,  who 
voluntarily  offered  his  services  to  the  King  to  snatch  his  brother 


1654.]     COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATE.  217 


in  it,  but  I  hope  tlie  King  will  not  trust  to  it,  but 
gett  him  away  from  thence,  which  will  doe  the  King 
great  right :  it  is  so  colde  as  I  can  say  no  more,  but 
ame  euer 

Your  most  afFectionat  frend. 

I  pray  excuse  me  to  my  Lo.  Wentworth  and  reve- 
rent Dick  Harding  till  the  next. 

"  For  M'.  Secretarie." 

3  Dec:  St:  No:  1654.  R.  6°.  The  Queene  of  Bohemia  consr  her 
iourney  to  see  the  Qu.  of  Sweeden. 


The  Queene  of  Bohemia  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Hagh,  De:  21.  (1654.) 

M'  Secretarie,  I  haue  receaued  yours  of  the  18  of 
this  month.  I  long  to  heare  my  sweet  Nephue  *  is 
at  Bruxelles.  My  Neece  has  sent  Nick:  Armourer 
to  meet  him  there.  I  haue  written  to  him  by  him, 
if  the  King  woulde  permitt  him  to  take  this  place 
and  Teiiing  in  his  way  from  Bruxelles  he  woulde 
make  his  Sister  f  and  me  verie  glade  :  he  need  not 
make  such  hast  to  see  him,  it  is  but  the  other  day 
since  he  was  with  him,  but  it  is  much  longer  since  wee 
saw  him,  and  I  ame  sure  our  hoghen  Moghens  will 
take  no  notice  of  it  if  they  be  not  asked  the  question 
as  they  were  for  the  King^s  comming  to  Breda.  To 
be  with  his  Sister  some  time  can  doe  him  no  harme. 
I  haue  taken  the  boldness  to  write  the  same  by 
my  Lo:  Gerard  {  to  the  King,  who  I  beleeue  will 
be  with  you  as  soone  as  this  letter,  for  he  went 
from  hence  vpon  Saterday  last.    We  heere  nothing 

out  of  the  hands  of  the  Queen-mother  and  her  Confessor  Montague, 
Carte's  Life  of  Orniond,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  163 — 7,  contains  a  very  amusing 
account  of  the  whole  transaction,  telling  much  to  the  credit  of  the 
Marquis. 

*  The  Duke  of  Gloucester,  who  had  just  been  brought  from  Paris 
by  the  Marquis  of  Ormond. 

f  The  Princess  Dowager  of  Orange. 

+  Lord  Gerard  of  Bromley;  a  title  now  extinct. 


218 


CORRESPONDENCE  DURING  THE 


[1654. 


of  the  rebells  fleet  heerabouts,  but  they  say  that 
Blag  *  is  to  ioine  with  the  Spanish  fleet  against  the 
Duke  of  Guise.  The  French  Ambassadour  beleeues 
the  treatie  with  Cromwell  as  good  as  broken ;  he  is 
much  ioyed  that  the  meeting  betwixt  the  Queene 
of  Sueden  and  P.  of  Conde  f  was  to  neither  of  theire 
content,  for  he  desired  to  be  receaued  as  the  Queene 
receaued  the  Arcdduc,  Avhich  she  refused,  saying  she 
had  done  too  much  in  that  and  woulde  doe  so  no 
more,  yet  he  came  to  see  her  brusqucment  a  Vim- 
proiiist,  and  did  nothing  but  railler  her  in  his  talke, 
which  putt  her  so  out  as  she  said  almost  not  one 
worde.  This  was  in  the  morning ;  after  dinner  she 
sent  to  know  if  he  woulde  see  the  play  at  night, 
he  said  he  would  obey  her,  but  desired  to  know 
whither  he  shoulde  come  knowen  or  as  vnknowen, 
for  if  he  came  as  Prince  of  Conde  he  looked  tohaue 
a  chaise  a  bras  as  the  Archduc  had — she  saide  he  had 
better  come  unknowen,  so  he  came,  and  she  stood 
all  the  play,  railling  with  Mon""  Quito  the  Princes 
favourit.  the  next  day  the  P.  went  to  Bruxelles,  and 
neither  of  them  well  satisfied  with  the  other.  My 
La:  Swann  will  be  heere  within  a  few  days,  by  her  I 
shall  know  more  of  this :  I  haue  heard  the  reason 
of  Henry  de  Vies  iourney  to  Coloign :  J  since  it 
is  a  doting  time  for  the  kings  oulde  Ministers  of 

*  Admiral  Blake  is  the  pei'sonage  here  alluded  to.  The  Duke  of 
Guise  died  very  soon  after  this  letter  was  w  ritten,  in  consequence 
of  wounds  received  at  the  siege  of  Arras. 

+  Yet  the  Prince  de  Conde  was  a  great  admirer  of  Christina,  being 
recorded  to  have  exclaimed  of  her  abdication—"  How  great  is  the 
magnanimity  of  this  Princess,  who  could  so  easily  give  up  that  for 
which  mankind  are  continually  destroying  each  other,  and  which  so 
many  throughout  their  whole  lives  pursue  without  attaining  ! "  Conde, 
at  the  period  here  recorded,  was  in  exile  at  Brussels  ;  and  though  they 
had  their  differences  on  the  score  of  etiquette,  they  appear  to  have 
talked  famihai'ly  on  meeting.  Cousin  ! "  exclaimed  Cliristina,  "  who 
would  have  thought  ten  years  ago  that  we  should  have  met  at  this 
distance  from  our  countries  ?"  The  Prince  might  have  thanked  her 
for  his  exile,  as  it  arose  partly  from  her  intermeddling  in  the  affairs 
of  the  Fronde  in  France,  a  few  years  previous. 

X  It  was  an  affair  of  courtship.  Her  Majesty  again  alludes  to  it  in 
the  next  letter  but  one. 


1654.]     COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATE. 


219 


State,  I  thanke  God  your  wife  is  yet  aliue,  for  feare 
you  should  fall  in  loue  againe.  I  pray  lett  me  know 
when  that  wedding  will  be,  for  I  (will)  send  you  a 
letter  to  reverent  Dick  to  bespeak  him  for  bride- 
man.  I  thank  you  for  your  congratulation  of 
Apollos  *  returne,  you  know  how  great  a  favorit  he 
is  to 

Your  most  affectionat  frend. 

I  pray  tell  my  Ladie  Hide  I  ame  verie  glade  she 
is  so  well  come  to  Coloigne. 

"  For  Secretarie." 

Bee.  1654.  R.  ^.  The  Qu:  of  Bohemia  co?  the  Pr.  of  Condc 
ond  the  Q,u:  of  Sweedes  being  unsatisfied  w'^  each  other. 


The  Queen  of  Bohemia  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Hagh,  Dec:  27  (1654). 

Mr.  Secretarie,  since  you  wrote  yours,  I  under- 
stand that  that  arch  villaine  Manning  has  receaued 
his  iust  desert. t  I  wish  all  those  of  his  cabal  with  him. 
I  wish  I  might  know  whome  he  has  accused  on  this 
side  the  sea,  to  auoide  them,  but  this  is  onelie  in 
case  you  may  tell  it,  for  I  doe  not  desire  it  otherwise; 
I  haue  curiositie  enough  to  desire  to  know  the  rest, 
but  I  will  not  desire  but  as  you  think  fitt.    There  is 

*  The  Queen's  lap-dog,  already  noticed, 
'f'  The  assassination  of  this  Manning,  thus  referred  to  by  the  Queen, 
is  related  in  a  scarce  tract,  now  in  the  British  Museum,  which  pro- 
fesses to  give  a  memoir  of  Charles  during  his  exile.  "  Before  his 
Majesty's  departure  from  Colen,  there  happened  a  discovery  of  one 
of  those  persons  who,  under  pretence  of  waiting  upon  him  (Capt. 
Manning  by  name)  discovered  unto  the  Protector  all  his  designs  and 
counsels  ;  who  being  found  out,  was  by  his  Majesty's  command  sent 
to  a  strong  castle  adjacent  to  Colen,  there  to  be  kept  close  prisoner. 
But  all  the  Court  being  highly  incensed  against  him  for  his  per- 
fidiousnesse,  one  of  his  Majesty's  servants  (though  contrary  to  order) 
pistoled  him  as  he  was  lighting  out  of  the  coach  at  the  Castle  gate, 
giving  him  less  than  the  due  reward  of  his  so  abominable  treachery." 
It  was  by  Manning  that  Penruddock  had  been  betrayed.  He  corre- 
sponded with  Thurloe. 


220 


CORRESPONDENCE  DURING  THE  [1654. 


little  news  heere,  the  King  of  Sueden*  has  a  sonne 

born  to  him  and  has  and  prospers  exceed- 

inglie.  the  K.  of  Polandf  is  in  Silesia,  hunts  and 
passeth  his  time  with  little  care  of  anie  thing  else, 
this  I  haue  from  his  owne  resident,  but  I  feare  the 
Electour  of  BrandebourgJ  will  be  in  a  ill  condition 
if  he  doe  not  make  an  agreement  with  the  King  of 
Sueden.  it  is  beleeued  that  Prince  AVilliame  will 
be  shortlie  Marschall  of  the  Feelde  :  those  that  were 
so  much  against  him  are  not  now  so  fierce  :  else 
there  is  no  news,  onely  Scone  is  come,  and  I  hope 
all  will  be  well  ended  in  that  foolish  business.  I 
ame  euer 

Your  most  affectionat  frend. 

Mr.  Charles  Cottrell,  my  Lo:  Wentworth,§  and 
reverent  Dick  Harding,  I  cannot  write  to  them  now 
for  lack  of  time.  I  pray  say  the  same  to  Mons' 
Soiret  from  me. 


The  Queen  of  Bohemia  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

Hagh,  Jan:  4  (1654-5.) 

Mr.  Secretarie,  I  haue  receaued  yours  of  the  29th  at 
my  returne  vpon  Thursday  last  from  Teiling,  and  this 
morning  I  haue  letters  from  Bruxelles,  who  tell  me 
that  my  deare  nephue  the  D.  of  Gloucester  was  there 
vpon  new  years  cue  the  same  day  I  was  at  Telling,  but 

*  Charles  Gustavus.  Duke  of  Deux  Fonts,  who  had  recently  suc- 
ceeded the  abdicated  Christina. 

t  The  weli-known  John  Casimir.  The  Queen's  observations  seem 
almost  prophetic;  the  whole  of  Poland  having  been  conquered  by  the 
Swedes  in  less  than  two  years  after  the  date  of  this  letter. 

X  George  William,  grandfather  of  the  first  King  of  Prussia. 

§  Lord  Wentworth  had  been  high  in  command,  during  the  Civil 
Wars  ;  and  after  Goring  went  to  France,  a  second  time,  he  had  the 
command  of  the  Western  army.  Yet  Bulstrode  says  of  him  that  he 
was  a  very  lazy  and  unactive  man,  and  was  not  thought  either  of 
interest,  experience,  courage,  or  reputation  enough  for  that  trust 
which  was  devolved  upon  him."  There  ai'e  some  curious  anecdotes 
of  him  in  Bulstrode's  Memoirs,  p.  150,  &c. 


« 


1654.]     COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATE.  221 

when  he  came  thither  or  goes  from  thence  I  know  not. 
I  ame  extreme  glade  the  King  permitts  (him)  to  see 
his  sister  and  me.  I  hope  he  will  suffer  him  to  stay 
some  time  with  my  deare  Neece,  it  will  be  a  great 
contentment  to  her  and  no  hurt  to  him,  and  as  long 
as  there  is  nothing  tolde  to  the  States  of  him,  they 
will  take  no  notice  of  it,  this  I  know  is  true.  I  am 
sorrie  for  poore  S''  Henry  de  Vic,*  for  lett  the  match 
break  or  goe  on,  it  is  euerie  way  ill  for  him  :  We 
heare  no  certaintie  heere  how  the  French  treatie 
with  the  rebells  in  England  goes,  whither  it  breake 
or  peece.f  I  am  verie  sorrie  for  the  Countess  of 
Mortons  death,  J  I  pittie  Thom.  Berkle}^,  but  most 
her  children,  the  Queene  of  Sueden  is  now  at 
Bruxelles,  where  she  was  receaued  in  greate  state : 
I  beleeue  the  Arch-duke§  wisheth  her  at  Anwerp, 
for  she  persecutes  him  verie  close  with  her  companie, 
for  you  know  he  is  a  verie  modest  man.  I  haue 
written  to  the  King  some  particullars  of  it  which  are 
verie  rare  ons,  but  the  Prince  of  Conde  is  still  verie 
unsatisfied  with  her  and  will  not  come  at  her.  I 
haue  one  peece  of  news  which  it  may  be  you  haue 
not  heard  :  the  resident  of  Polande  tells  me  that 
there  is  a  treatie  betwixt  Sueden  and  Polande  and  a 
perpetual  peace,  and  to  assist  one  the  other  against  the 
Muscovits :  the  King  of  Poland  will  quit  his  preten- 
tion to  Sueden  vpon  condition  that  he  be  recompenced 
with  some  lande  or  Islande  for  his  heire,  that  if  they 
be  not  chosen  to  succeed  the  kingdome  of  Polande, 
they  may  haue  some  place  to  them  selfs  to  line  in, 
for  the  K.  of  Polande  has  no  patrimonie  of  his  owne 

*  Sir  Henry  de  Vie,  in  the  early  part  of  Charles  the  First's  reign, 
had  been  his  Majesty's  Secretary  for  the  French  mission,  and  also 
agent  to  the  King  of  Denmark. 

f  In  January  the  cavaliers  were  stirring,  but  in  vain  ;  and  in  the 
following  November,  Cromwell  made  peace  with  the  French.  The 
Ex-Queen  of  Sweden  and  the  Prince  of  Conde  appear  to  have  been 
meddling  with  these  affairs,  through  the  diplomatic  exertions  of  the 
Count  de  Tott ;  as  may  be  seen  by  reference  to  a  letter  in  Bromley's 
collection,  p.  186. 

X  Widow  of  William  Earl  of  Morton,  Lord  High  Treasurer  of 
Scotland,  and  long  in  great  personal  favour  with  Charles  the  First. 

§  Archduke  of  Austria. 


222 


CORRESPONDENCE  DURING  THE 


[1654-5. 


nor  can  buy  anie  lande  under  the  crouue  of 
Poland :  his  aj^ent  has  order  to  goe  for  England,  to 
see  if  Cromwell  woulde  send  some  ships  against  the 
Muscovits  to  make  a  diuersion.  the  good  agent  is 
verie  vnwilling  to  goe,  but  he  must  obey  his  master. 
Sure  Cromwell  is  the  beast  in  the  Revelations  that 
all  kings  and  nations  doe  worship ;  I  wish  him  the 
like  end  and  speedilie,  and  you  a  hapie  new  yeare 
as* 

your  most  affectionat  frend. 

"  For  Mr.  Secretarie." 
4°  Jan:  St.  No:  1654-5.    R:  7.  Qu:  Bo: 


The  Queen  of  Bohemia  to  Si7'  Edwm^d  Nicholas. 

Hagh,  Jan:  10  (1654-5). 

Mr.  Secretarie,  I  beleeue  you  will  heare  at  CoUein 
how  I  haue  beene  debauched  this  last  week  in  sitting 
up  late  to  see  dancing,  wee  made  Friday  out  and 
every  night,  which  lasted  till  Saterday  at  hue  a  clock 
in  the  morning,  and  j^esterday  was  the  christening 
of  P.  Wilht  childe  :  I  was  at  the  supper  :  my  Neece, 
the  P'  douager,  the  little  PrinceJ  and  P.  Maurice 
were  gossips :  the  States  generall,  I  meane  their 
Deputies,  and  the  Counsell  of  State,  and  myself  and 
Louyse  were  there  as  guests,  after  super  was 
dancing  this  (till)  three  a  clock,  my  little  Nephue 
was  at  the  super  and  sett  verie  still  all  the  time  : 
those  States  that  were  there  were  verie  much  taken 
with  him.  the  King  of  Sueden  with  his  army  is 
within  an  houres  going  from  Kunisberg  with  twenty 
thousand  men,  most  horse,    the  Elector  is  in  the 

*  The  proposed  peace  between  Polaud  and  Sweden  was  of  very- 
short  duration. 

t  This  evidently  refers  to  William  Frederick,  Count  and  Prince  of 
Nassau  Dietz,  who  had  married  Albertine  Agnes,  sister  of  the  late 
Pi'ince  of  Orange. 

Afterwards  WiUiam  the  Third  of  England,  now  only  four  years 
of  age. 


1654-5.]    COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATE.  223 


tounc  and  has  also  which  they  say  is  twentie  thousand 
also,  he  has  [torn  off]  foot  then  the  King  has  [also 
torji]  *  Ambassadour  goe  this  week  from  hence 
towards  Sueden  and  Dennemark,  one  of  those  that 
goes  for  Dennemarke  is  Mon*"  d^Ameron  a  gentleman 
of  Utrecht,  a  verie  honest  and  great  Royalist  and  so 
you  may  be  sure  my  great  frend,  but  I  beleeue  they 
will  doe  but  little  with  that  King,  for  I  am  tolde 
from  a  good  hande  that  he  and  the  K.  of  Sueden  are 
in  verie  good  intelligence  together,  which  I  am  not 
sorie  for  considering  how  little  these  States  assist 
there  allies.  My  deare  Neece  continues  her  resolu- 
tion of  going  from  hence  Thursday  next,  but  I  dout 
the  weather  will  hinder  for  it  thaughs  apace. 

I  ame  euer  your  most  affectionat  frend. 

I  have  not  time  to  write  to  Mons:  Soiret,  but  tell 
him  he  was  wished  here  vpon  Friday  last.  I  haue 
written  to  my  Nephue  all  the  particullars  of  what 
they  were  and  w^ho  was  best  dressed. 


TTie  Queen  of  Bohemia  to  Sii'  Edivard  Nicholas. 

Hagh,  Jaw.  11  (1654-5). 

Mr.  Secretarie,  I  hope  my  next  will  tell  you  of 
my  sweet  Nephues  being  wellcome  to  Teiling,  for 
Mr.  Lovell  assures  vs  all  heere  that  he  is  perfectlie 
well.  I  beleeue  Mr.  Fraiser  is  not  sorie  to  haue  a 
commission  to  waite  upon  him  this  way,  for  soe  he 
may  see  his  Mistris  though  she  will  not  confess  him 
so.    I  know  not  how  your  people  at  Colloigne  f  goe 

*  An  allusion  to  the  first  invasion  of  Poland  by  Gustavus,  who 
marched  from  Ponierania  into  that  Kingdom  after  the  irruption 
made,  in  obedience  to  his  order,  by  General  Wirtemberg. 

t  Charles  the  Second  now  kept  his  Court  at  Cologne,  but  in  great 
privacy.  Su:  Stephen  Fox  is  described  by  Bulstrode  as  having  the 
care,  management,  and  disposal  of  his  household,  which  he  kept  at 
an  expense  of  not  more  than  six  hundred  pistoles  per  month.  In 
fact,  such  was  the  economy  necessarily  imposed  by  the  condi- 
tion of  the  exiles  that  Charles  never  kept  a  coach  during  his  long 


224 


CORRESPONDENCE  DURING  THE  [1654. 


on  with  theire  business,  but  our  resident  Tliom.  was 
asked  yesterday  for  the  first  time,  and  so  was  Jack 
Sayers.  I  feare  resident  Halle  will  not  haue  by 
much  so  good  a  bargaine,  but  how  Bess  who  is  left 
at  Bruxelles  will  take  it,  for  she  has  written  a 
terrible  letter  to  S""  Charles  Cottrell  of  it,  and  how 
confident  she  is  of  her  Masters  honnestie  to  her,  so 
as  she  may  cliaunce  forbid  the  bains.  Vicfort  tolde 
me  yesterday  that  Bourdeaux  has  order  to  stay  yett  it 
England,  which  shews  what  you  beleeue  is  true, 
the  news  I  wTitt  to  you  of  Poland  and  Sweden  is 
most  true,  and  that  De  Bre  makes  still  his  monitions 
to  goe  for  England. 

Wee  had  a  Boyaltie,  though  not  vpon  twelf  night, 
at  Telling,  where  my  Neece  was  a  gipsie  and  became 

her  dress  extreame  well  was  a  Northolland 

boorine ;  Mrs.  Hide  *  a  shephardess  and  I  assure 
was  verie  handsome  in  it,  none  but  her  Mistress 
looked  better  than  she  did.  I  beleeue  my  Lady 
Hide  and  Mr.  Chancelour  will  not  be  sorie  to  heare 
it,  which  I  pray  tell  them  from  me.  the  queene  of 
Sueden  takes  a  house  at  Anwerp,  all  her  owne 
people  leaues  her  and  Italiens  and  Spaniards  comes 
in  theire  place.  Heere  is  little  news  stirring.  .1 
beleeue  you  heare  of  the  quarrelle  betwixt  my  soone 
and  the  Elector  of  Ments,  it  may  come  to  some  f  ill 
business,    it  is  so  colde  and  they  make  such  a  noise 

stay  in  that  city.  "In  the  time  of  the  King's  banishment,"  adds 
Bulstrode,  "he  spent  two  years  at  Cologne,  where  he  was  well 
received  by  a  widow,  at  whose  house  he  lodged."  In  a  letter  written 
by  the  King  to  Bennet,  afterwards  Earl  of  Arlington,  and  preserved  in 
the  Miscellanea  Aidica,  p.  109,  Charles  seems  to  imply  that  he  is 
living  a  rational  and  sober  lifQ  at  Cologne.  "I  hope  it  will  not  be 
many  days  before  you  see  how  we  pass  our  time  at  Collen,  which 
tho'  it  be  not  so  well  as  I  could  wish,  yet  I  think  it  is  as  well  as 
some  of  you  do  at  Paris ;  at  least  some  that  are  here  would  not  pass 
their  time  so  well  there  as  they  do  here."  In  another  letter,  Charles 
mentions  a  design  of  himself  and  the  Princess  Dowager  of  Orange  to 
go  to  the  Frankfort  Fair  incognito. 

*  Afterwards  Duchess  of  York;  but  then  in  the  household  of 
Princess  Dowager  of  Orange, 

+  A  trifling  dispute  about  boundaries. 


165 L]     COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTORATE.  225 

with  tlieire  bells  and  pleids  in  (the)  street  as  makes 
me  end,  but  am  euer 

your  most  afFectionat  frend. 

I  pray  remember  my  humble  seruise  to  the  King, 
and  in  my  name  make  an  humble  suit  to  him  in 
Thom:  Killegrews  *  behalf.  It  is  to  recommend  him 
to  Pr.  "William  for  Captaine  Morgans  companie  who 
is  dead,  the  companie  lyes  at  Orzo  and  is  under 
Eri ...  e,  it  will  make  him  to  subsist  untill  the  King 
be  able  to  doe  for  him,  and  his  wiues  frends  haue 
putt  him  upon  it.  I  woulde  not  trouble  his  Ma*''' 
with  a  letter  since  you  are  in  the  place.  Thom: 
writes  himself  to  the  King  about  it;  it  will  be  a 
great  honnour  for  him  the  Kings  writing  because 
his  wiues  frends  will  by  that  ....  his  Ma*^^^  favour 
to  him. 

"  For  ^Mr.  Secretarie." 
11"  Jan.  1654-5.    R,         Queeue  of  Bohemia  to  me. 


T/ie  Queen  of  Bohemia  to  Sir  Edivard  Nicholas. 

Mr.  Secretarie,  I  haue  receaued  yours.  My  sweet 
Nephue  is  not  yett  gone  from  Anwerp,  but  I  hope 
now  the  weather  is  better,  and  I  shall  see  him  I  hope 
shortlie,  for  as  soon  as  he  comes  to  Telling  I  will  be 
there.  I  hope  it  is  a  good  prophesie  of  the  Electrice 
of  Brandebourg  t  hauing  a  sonne,  but  she  doth  looke 
to  be  deliuered  before  the  end  of  this  month  or  the 

*  Killigrew,  so  well  known  in  the  private  histoi'y  of  Charles's  reign, 
was  groom  of  his  bedchamber  after  the  Restoration,  and  happened  to 
be  engaged  one  morning  Avitli  a  volume  of  his  own  plays,  which  he 
took  up  in  the  window,  Avhilst  his  Majesty  was  shaving.  "Ah  ! 
KilUgrew,"  asked  the  King,  "what  will  you  say  at  the  last  day,  in 
defence  of  all  the  idle  words  in  that  book?"  To  which  Killigi-ew 
replied,  that  he  would  give  a  better  account  of  his  "idle  words"  than 
the  King  would  be  able  to  give  respecting  "his  idle  promises"  and 
"more  idle  patents,"  Avhich  had  undone  moi'e  than  ever  his  books  did. 

t  The  Electress  Elizabeth  Charlotte  was  daughter  of  Frederick  V. 
Elector  Palatine,^and  therefore  sister-in-law  to  the  Queen  of  Bohemia. 

VOL.  IV.  Q 


226 


CORRESPONDENCE  DURING  THE 


[1654-5. 


beginning  of  the  next.  The  letters  out  of  England 
say  Cromwell  is  bringing  his  armie  to  London,  and 
doubles  his  gardes,  plants  cannon  in  manie  places  in 
London  and  at  the  Toure ;  it  is  saide  he  will  make 
himself  King  by  force  since  he  cannot  be  it  other- 
wise :  this  is  written  to  the  P.  of  Torente.  I  doe 
not  heare  that  Bariere  is  at  Bruxelles.  I  will  tell 
Thom.  Killegrew  what  the  King  answeres.  As  for 
the  Archduc  he  may  thanke  God  to  be  ridd  of  the 
Queen  of  Sueden,  who  is  lodged  at  the  Count  of 
Egmonts  house  in  Bruxelles,  where  she  stays  all 
winter.  My  Lord  Norwich  has  got  news  that  the 
Archduc  goes  for  Spaine,  and  Don  John  of  Austria 
comes  in  his  place  andmarrieth  theQueene  of  Sueden, 
and  to  haue  the  Low  Countries  as  the  Archduc 
Albert,  but  I  beleeue  it  not :  there  is  nothing  else 
that  I  have  to  say  to  you  but  ame  euer 

Your  most  affectionate  friend. 


Hagh,  Jan.  18. 
18= /a?i:  1654-5.    R:  11-12.    Queene  of  Bohemia. 


To  her  Rot/all  Highness  the  Lady  Princesse  Dowager 
of  Orange,  from  the  States  of  Holland  and  West- 
Vriesland. 

Most  excellent  Princesse, 
We  were  informed  by  some  that  the  Lord  King 
Charles  your  Royall  Highnesses  Brother  should  haue 
betaken  himselfe  within  the  limitts  of  this  State, 
and  particularly  that  he  should  at  this  present 
shelter  himselfe  in  the  house  at  Tylinge :  And 
although  we  cannot  by  any  meanes  belieue  or  expect 
from  the  wisdome  and  reason  of  the  said  mighty 
Lord  the  King  that  he  would  or  durst  vndertake 
contrary  to  the  Treaty  of  Peace  made  the  last  yeare 
with  the  Commonwealth  of  England  to  come  within 


1654-5.]    COMMONWEALTH  AND  PROTECTOKATE.  227 


the  limitts  of  this  State,  and  directly  against  our 
particular  orders  comprehended  in  our  Resolutions 
of  the  30^^  of  July,  2*^  and  4^^  of  August  all  in  the 
year  1653,  and  the  writing  made  by  the  vertue 
thereof  to  be  giuen  to  your  Royall  Highnes  within 
the  Province  of  Holland  and  West  Vriesland  :  So 
hauc  we  after  good  reasons,  and  for  settling  our 
selues  in  entire  rest,  found  meete  with  these  to  set 
before  the  eyes  of  your  Eoyall  Highnes  what  is  said 
before,  with  a  desire  and  demaund  that  you  will 
speedily  declare,  and  assure  vs  of  the  truth  hereof, 
nothing  doubting,  but  desiring  and  requiring  your 
Royall  Highnes  as  much  as  in  her  lyes  by  all  good 
offices  and  duties  to  be  willingly  helpefull  to  take 
heede  and  effect  that  the  said  mighty  Lord  the  King 
doe  not  cast  himselfe  within  the  limitts  of  their  high 
mightines  :  and  referring  our  selues  thereto 

Most  excellent  Princesse,  We  committ  your  Royall 
Highnes  to  Gods  protection.  Written  in  the 
Hague  the  8*^  of  March  1655.  Your  Royall 
Highnesses  good  friends 

The  States  of  Holland  and  West-yriesland. 
By  order  of  the  same, 

Herb't  Van  Beaumont. 

1655. 

The  superscription. 
"  To  her  Royall  Highnes  the  Lady  Princesse  Dowager  of  Orange."* 

Indorsed  by  Sir  Edw.  Nicholas. 
8°  Mariij,  1654-5.    Copy  of  the  translation  of  y«  let'  written  by  y^ 
States  of  Holl'd  to  y^  Pr^^e       cone?  y«      being  reported  to  be 
at  Tylinge. 


*  The  obscure  editor  of  Grebner,  in  his  astrological  guesses,  has 
the  following  curious  one.  Speaking  of  Charles  I.,  he  says,  "  The 
old  Prince  of  Aurange  [Orange]  he  almost  beggar'd,  and  yet  to  no 
purpose  ;  the  Parliament  one  time  or  other  getting  all  armes  and 
ammunition  which  ever  came  over  to  him.  It's  confidently  averred, 
if  the  King  had  become  absolute  here  in  England,  Aurange  had  been 
King,  &c."  In  the  margin  this  political  conjuror  adds — "  It's  pittie 
Aurange  lived  not  to  master  the  Jew  Hollander." 

Q  2 


PEIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE 

BETWEEX 

SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 

(AFTERWARDS  EARL  OF  CLARENDON), 

AND 

SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE, 

AMBASSADOR  TO  THE  COURT  OF  FRANCE,  IN  THE  TIME  OF  KINO  CHARLES  I. 


LETTERS  OF 


SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 

(AFTERWARDS    EARL  OF  CLARENDON), 

AND 

SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


The  letters  now  to  be  given,  also  from  the  papers  of  Sir  Richard 
Browne,  will  be  found  to  throw  additional  and  valuable  light  on  the 
condition  of  the  various  members  of  the  royal  family  and  their 
adherents  during  the  interval  between  the  death  of  Charles  the  First 
and  the  Restoration.  Only  the  first  two  letters  of  the  series  are  of 
earlier  date.  These  were  written  (in  1646)  from  Jersey,  whither 
Hyde  had  accompanied  the  Prince  of  Wales,  afterwards  Charles  the 
Second  ;  having  been  named  of  his  Council  in  the  preceding  year. 
His  object  at  this  time  was  to  counteract  the  intrigues  of  the  Queen 
to  get  possession  of  the  Prince  ;  and  the  desponding  tone  in  which 
these  letters  are  written  marks  the  failure  of  that  design.  The  first  is 
dated  but  a  few  days  after  the  Prince  had  left  Jersey  to  join  his 
mother  in  Paris.  Jersey  was  now  under  the  government  of  Lord 
Jermyn,  the  Queen's  favourite  ;  but  his  deputy.  Sir  George  Carteret, 
was  Hyde's  intimate  friend  ;  and  with  him  he  remained,  solaced  also 
by  the  friendly  intercourse  of  Lords  Hopton  and  Cape),  and  engaged 
in  the  composition  of  his  Hhtory  of  the  Rebellion,  •which,  he  had  begun 
at  Scilly  not  many  weeks  before.  He  did  not  quit  this  retreat  till 
1648.  During  the  same  period  Sir  Edward  Nicholas  was  at  Caen  in 
Normandy,  and  afterwards  in  Holland,  where,  on  being  obliged  to 
fly  from  England,  he  had  the  King's  permission  to  reside.  Lord 
Digby  also,  to  whom  frequent  reference  is  made,  had  been  in  Ireland 
at  the  time  of  the  Prince's  flight  to  Jersey,  but  joined  him  soon  after 
with  two  frigates  and  two  hundred  soldiers,  strenuously  to  advise  an 
attempt  upon  Ireland,  in  which  the  Prince  refused  to  engage.  On 
quitting  Jersey  in  1648,  Hyde  joined  Charles  in  Holland  {his  Life 
gives  an  interesting  notice  of  his  adventures  on  that  occasion),  and 
soon  after  the  King's  death  he  was  sent  Ambassador  to  Spain,  from 
which  country  he  rejoined  Charles  in  France,  and  was  appointed 
Resident  at  Antwerp,  where  he  remained  during  the  unsuccessful 
Scotch  campaign,  and  till  he  and  his  master  again  met  after  the  escape 


232 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1G46. 


from  the  field  of  Worcester.  In  the  later  passages  of  the  Corre- 
spondence, to  which  these  events  bring  us,  so  many  allusions  occur  to 
the  royal  fleet  that  it  may  be  desirable  to  describe  its  position  at  the 
time.  When  Charles  I.  perished  on  the  scaffold,  a  portion  of  the 
navy  revolted  from  the  Parliament,  and  sailed  to  Holland  in  aid  of 
the  Royal  exiles.  These  ships  were  put  under  the  command  of 
Prince  Rupert,  and  were  employed  by  him  in  a  predatory  warfare 
against  the  Commonwealth,  besides  making  several  attempts  on  the 
Eastern  coast  of  England  in  aid  of  the  small  Royal  party  still  existing 
there  ;  after  which  they  proceeded  to  the  Irish  coast,  where  they  took 
some  valuable  prizes.  The  Parliament  sent  Blake  after  them  ;  but 
in  1649,  Rupert,  having  forced  his  way  through  Blake's  fleet,  con- 
tinued to  capture  English  ships,  apparently  on  his  own  account,  and 
indeed  without  either  asking  for,  or  receiving,  any  orders  from  the 
young  exiled  King.  He  then  proceeded  for  Portugal,  but  was  foi'ced 
off  by  Blake,  so  that  he  was  obliged  to  fly  for  the  Mediterranean, 
where  he  commenced  aggressions  on  the  Spaniards,  and  having  aftei-- 
wards  repaired  and  refitted  at  Toulon,  from  whence  he  found  it  neces- 
sary to  retire,  sailed,  in  1650,  for  the  West  Indies.  At  this  period 
Scilly  and  Jersey  sent  out  swarms  of  privateers  ;  but  those  islands  being 
captured  by  the  Parliamentary  forces,  the  freebooters  were  obliged  to 
bring  their  prizes  into  the  ports  of  Britanny ;  and,  in  return  for  the 
sanction  of  Royal  Commissions,  were  called  upon  to  pay  certain 
droits  into  the  King's  Exchequer.  To  that  arrangement  many  of 
the  following  Letters  refer.  In  1 652,  Rupert  arrived  at  Nantes  on 
his  return  from  the  West  Indies,  after  suffering  heavy  losses  from 
storms ;  so  that,  in  fact,  he  only  brought  back  one  man  of  war,  and 
three  or  four  other  vessels,  being  the  sole  remains  of  twenty-five 
ships  of  force  of  which  his  squadron  originally  consisted  :  and  these 
he  was  compelled  to  sell  to  pay  his  seamen,  under  circumstances 
which  will  be  found  illustrated  in  the  ensuing  Correspondence, 
Finally,  it  may  be  convenient  to  bring  to  the  reader's  recollection 
that  the  young  King  staid  at  Paris  until  1654,  when  he  proceeded 
through  Flanders  to  Spa ;  thence  to  Aix-la-Chapelle,  and  ultimately 
to  Cologne;  and  that  in  January  1658,  he  was  at  Bruges,  where  he 
appointed  Sir  Edward  Hyde,  his  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  up  to 
that  period,  to  be  Lord  Chancellor  of  England.  It  is  of  course 
needless  to  add  that  the  men  among  whom  these  high-sounding  titles 
were  thus  exchanged  continued  still  to  be  as  powerless  as  they  were 
poor  ;  they  found  themselves  destitute  even  of  the  ordinary  comforts 
of  existence ;  yet,  as  the  letters  now  printed  show,  this  little  exiled 
Court  had  its  intrigues,  jealousies,  fears,  and  hopes,  in  quite  as 
great  an  abundance  as  when,  after  the  lapse  of  a  few  years,  it  was 
"restored"  to  Whitehall  and  St.  James's.  ^ 


1646.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


233 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne,^ 
S', 

That  you  receaued  not  an  answer  to  yonr  very 
kinde  letter  of  tlie  4  of  June^  by  some  of  the 
Princes  trayne,  you  must  impute  to  that  agony  of 
minde^  which  was  necessary  to  oppresse  me,  at  the 
partinge  fro^  so  pretious  a  ieweil,  and  with  so  many 
good  frends ;  I  hope  I  shall  be  agayne  restored  to 
them,  howeuer  that  all  happinesse  will  crowne  ther 
counsells;  whilst  I  with  some  very  good  frends  of 
yours  pray  for  them,  in  this  poore  islande;  you 
will  very  much  refresh  vs  with  your  correspond- 
ence, that  wee  may  vnderstande  the  hopes,  and  pro- 
gresse  of  that  prosperity  wee  pray  for.  I  doe  not 
in  the  least  degree  apprehend  a  possibility  of  a  peace 
betweene  the  Scotts  &  the  Independ^ts,  but  feare 
more  the  manner  of  the  warr,  least  in  opposicon  to 
the  nacon  all  the  English  turne  IndependHs ;  which 
sure  may  be  prseuented :  I  believe  the  crisis  is  at 
hande :  I  wish  you  all  happinesse,  beinge. 

Your  very  affectionate  Serv*, 

Edw.  Hyde. 

Jarsy,  this  12  of  July,  1646. 

I  beseech  you  remember  my  seruice  to  Mr. 
Nicolls,t  and  desyre  him,  if  Coll.  Murray  J  should 

■*  The  reasons  for  the  despondency  expressed  in  this  letter  are 
fully  detailed  in  Clarendon's  Life,  and  also  in  the  second  volume  of  his 
State  Papers,  p.  276.  The  justice  of  the  opinions  expressed  in  it 
received  speedy  and  full  verification.  See  also  the  Clarendon  State 
Papers,  vol.  ii.,  p.  239,  for  the  King's  reasons  respecting  the  Prince's 
visit  to  the  Court  of  France  ;  and  p.  307,  for  further  observations 
on  the  "  Scots  and  Independents." 

f  Who  this  Mr.  Nicolls  was,  does  not  appear;  for  though  Sir 
Edward  Nicholas's  name  is  sometimes  spelled  so  in  these  letters,  yet 
being  then  knighted  he  would  have  been  called  Mr.  Secretary,  as 
Sir  Edward  Herbert  is  often  called  Mr.  Attorney. 

X  Colonel  Charles  Murray,  a  companion  of  the  Prince  from  Jersey 
to  Paris.  There  is  a  humorous  letter  from  him  in  the  Clarendon 
State  Papers,  vol.  ii.,  p.  255,  describing  the  arrival  of  the  Prince  in 
the  French  capital,  and  subsequently  at  Fontainbleau. 


234 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1646. 


not  be  at  Courte,  that  he  keepe  my  letter  to  him, 
in  his  handes,  till  he  see  him ;  and  that  he  deliuer  it 
to  none  else.  Your  favour  (S')  for  this  to  H. 
Macke  worth.  * 

Sir  Ric.  Browne. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 

I  haue  this  day  receaued  yours  of  the  18.  of 
August,  t  Jiiid  by  your  leaue  continue  the  giuinge 
you  this  trouble  ;  by  this  tyme  I  hope  his  Highnesse 
hath  had  so  good  a  recepcon  at  ffountainebleau,  J 
that  hath  made  some  amends  for  the  former  wante 
of  ceremony  :  Methinkes  the  imaginacons  that  it  is 
possible  for  the  Kiuge  to  submitt  to  those  vyle 
proposicons,  §  is  the  next  treason  to  the  makinge 
them,  ther  beinge  in  them  no  seedes  left,  out  of 
which  Monarchy  may  agayne  possibly  springe : 
and  therfore  I  longe  to  heare  how  our  brethren 
of  Scotland  comporte  themselves  upon  his  refusall, 
which  yet  I  doe  not  exspecte  will  be  positive,  but 
such  a  one  as  they  at  London  will  vote  to  be  a 
refusall :  I  beseech  you  let  me  heare,  how  your 
intelligence  from  London  diposes  the  Catholiques 
ther,  I  suppose  that  party  cleaues  to  the  Inde- 
pend^ts,  and  I  am  sure  had  hearetofore  fayre  pro- 
mises from  them ;  and  can  have  no  hope  from  the 

*  The  first  Baronet  of  that  name,  of  Noimanton,  in  Rutlandshire  ; 
brother  to  the  "  brave  and  honest "  Sir  Francis,  who  distinguished 
himself  in  the  Civil  War,  as  Major  General  to  the  Marquis  of 
Newcastle,  and  who  afterwards  served  in  the  Low  Countries,  during 
Charles's  exile. 

This  is  perhaps  a  mistake  for  July  ;  or,  if  coi-rectly  written,  its 
apparent  anticipation  of  date  may  have  arisen  from  Sir  Richard  using 
the  Gregorian  style,  from  Paris,  whilst  Sir  Edward  preserved  the 
old  style,  in  conformity  with  English  custom. 

t  The  letter,  spoken  of  in  the  preceding  postscript,  for  Colonel 
Muri'ay,  appears  to  have  been  written  on  the  subject  of  the  Prince's 
reception  at  the  French  Court. 

§  The  propositions  here  alluded  to  are  mentioned  in  preceding 
letters  and  notes. 


1646.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


235 


Presbitery.  I  feare  the  ill  successe  of  the  ffrench  in 
Italy  and  fflanders,*  will  giue  them  an  excuse  for 
those  faylings  to  his  Highnesse,  which  they  meant 
to  committ  in  the  most  prosperous  condicon :  and  if 
this  indispoticon  in  the  Pr.  of  Conde  be  in  earnest, 
they  may  haue  ther  excuses  multiplied,  f  If  my 
brother  Aylesbury  J  be  come  to  you,  I  pray  let  him 
receaue  this  inclosed  letter,  otherwise  keepe  it  for 
him.  My  service  to  Mr.  Nicolls,§  to  whome  I  sent 
a  packet  by  Dr.  Jonson,  which  I  hope  came  safe  to 
him ;  My  LL'^^  heare,  and  our  very  good  Gouernour,|| 
are  your  seruants,  as  I  am  very  heartily, 
S', 

your  most  affectionate,  humble  seru*, 

Edw:  Hyde. 

Jarst,  this  14  of  Aug.  1646. 
S""  Ric.  Browne. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne.  % 
S", 

Yours  of  y^  24.  of  Jan:  from  yourselfe  and  S""  G. 
Carterett  came  [not]  to  my  hands  till  y^  post  was 
gone,  and  I  am  now  in  soe  great  torment  w*^  y^  gowte, 
that  I  am  not  able  to  keepe  off  my  bed,  and  soe  must 
use  another  hand,  w*"^  I  hope  you  will  pardon.  The 

*  During  the  war  with  Spain,  in  the  minority  of  Louis  XIII.; 
but  these  events  were  not  of  sufficient  importance  to  require  specific 
illustration. 

+  The  Prince  of  Conde  was  then  at  the  head  of  the  party  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  pohtics  of  Mazarin.  He  was  sometimes  a  courtier, 
sometimes  a  poHtician,  and  sometimes  a  rebel  in  arms. 

X  Son  of  Sir  Thomas  Aylesbury,  Bart,  and  brother  of  Sir 
Edward's  second  wife,  who  finally  became  heiress  to  her  father  and 
brother. 

§  See  note  to  preceding  letter. 

II  Lord  Jermyn. 

^  This  letter  relates  to  difficulties  respecting  the  reception  and 
sale  of  prizes.  Of  the  persons  referred  to,  Beunet,  afterwards  Earl 
of  Arlington,  was  then  Secretary  to  the  Duke,  of  whom  Berkeley- 
had  been  the  Governor;  Castelnau  was  Governor  of  Brest; 
Holder  was  agent  for  the  captors  ;  and  Carteret,  who  had  been 


236 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1646. 


Duke  of  Yorke*  is  now  here,  and  conceiues  all  ob- 
struccons  are  now  remoued,  w*"''  troubled  you  at  Brest, 
the  Marquis  of  Castelnoef  hauing  made  large  pro- 
mises to  bis  Highnes  :  I  would  aduice  you  hereafter 
(though  you  may  giue  me  an  account  apart)  to  send 
a  very  particular  state  of  all  the  buisinesse  and  mis- 
carriages there,  to  the  D.  of  Yorke  himselfe,  Sir  John 
Berkeley,  or  Mr.  Bennett;  since  all  redresse  must 
be  obteyned  by  y*"  sole  mediacon  of  his  R.  Highnes, 
and  you  shall  doe  very  well  to  expresse  at  large  the 
misdemean"^'  and  cheates  y""  Captaines,  J  whom  upon 
all  occasions  Mr.  Holder  hath  wonderfully  magni- 
f^^ed.    You  must  take  spetiall  care  for  y^  safe  and 

Deputy  Governor  of  Jersey,  was  then,  or  soon  after,  a  Rear  Admiral 
in  the  French  service,  though  still  attached  to  the  Royal  cause. 
Sir  Richard  Browne,  the  King's  resident  at  Paris,  had  been  dis- 
patched to  arrange  affairs  at  Bluest. 

*  The  Duke  of  York  had  much  personal  interest  at  this  crisis  at 
the  French  Court ;  having  very  recently  distinguished  himself  in 
the  French  King's  service,  under  the  command  of  General  Coimt 
Harcourt,  and  against  the  Prince  de  Conde's  forces,  especially  on  the 
preceding  Christmas  day,  when,  though  Conde  was  finally  victorious, 
the  Duke  had  charged  against  him  in  person,  being  in  command 
of  the  forlorn  hope,  consisting  of  the  English  cavalry.  In  this 
rencontre  the  Duke's  horse  was  shot  under  him  ;  but  he  himself 
received  little  hurt.  See  a  printed  pamphlet  in  the  British  Museum, 
A  bloody  fight  in  France,  Lond.  1651-2. 

f  The  hopes  of  Lord  Clarendon  from  the  promises  of  Castelnau 
were  but  indifferently  founded  ;  for  the  pamphlet  quoted  in  the  pre- 
ceding note  expressly  states  that  at  this  period  the  return  of  the 
Cardinal  Mazarininto  France  with  a  force  of  7000  men  had  produced 
great  jealousies  at  that  Court,  and  that  Castelnau  and  Villeroy,  having 
forwarded  his  return,  with  the  express  purpose  to  undo  him,  were 
suspected  of  that  design,  and  had  in  consequence  forsaken  the  Court. 
Castelnau's  deputy  had  pretended  an  order  from  his  Court  to  detain 
the  prizes,  in  the  hope  of  being  bribed  by  the  captors. 

X  This  little  squadron  had  been  recently  very  active,  particularly  in 
the  chops  of  the  Channel ;  but  the  republican  newspapers  of  the  day 
affected  to  treat  them  with  great  contempt.  In  one  of  these  Intelli- 
gencers, of  the  8th  of  the  preceding  month,  preserved  in  the  British 
Museum,  it  was  roundly  stated  that  Capt.  Chapman,  in  the  Recovery, 
convoying  a  small  vessel  for  Ireland,  had  met  with  the  Francis,  the 
Patrick,  and  the  Hunter,  and  maintained  a  gallant  fight  from  eleven 
at  noon  till  night  parted  them.  Prince  Rupert  is  also  stated  to  be  at 
this  period  at  sea,  "  with  six  or  seven  lusty  ships,"  and  to  have  taken 
several  Spanish  vessels. 


1652.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


237 


speedy  conueyance  of  this  inclosed  from  the  King  to 
the  Gouern''  of  Innisbofine,*,  and  I  pray  send  the 
other  to  Sir  George  Carterett,  if  he  be  gone,  and 
excuse  this  shortnesse,  w'^^'  my  extreame  payne  pro- 
duces.   I  am, 

S', 

your  very  affecconat  humble  seru*, 

Edw.  Hyde. 

Paris,  8ffeh:  1652. 
Sir  Rich.  Browne. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 

Within  2.  howers  after  my  last  to  you  of  the  17. 
were  sent  away,  I  receaued  both  yours  of  the  5  and 
9.  of  this  moneth.  I  am  entirely  vnacquainted  with 
the  person  or  the  purposes  of  your  Capt:  Anthonie,t 
nor  do  I  heare  that  he  is  in  these  partes.  I  should 
imagyne,  that  whateuer  else  he  does,  he  will  neuer 
putt  himselfe  in  the  power  of  the  Hollander,  whome 
he  hath  sufficiently  prouoked  and  damnify ed. J  I 
cannot  giue  you  any  good  accounte  of  the  transac- 
tions betweene  this  Crowne  and  the  English  Rebells, 
only  that  ther  is  notliinge  like  that  order,  of  vvhich 
you  say  you  are  aduertised  from  Rowen,  that  Pr: 
Euperte  §  is  requyred  to  go  away  with  his  shippes 

*  It  was  at  this  time  reported  in  the  London  papers  that  the 
King  intended  to  set  out  for  Rome,  professing  openly  the  Catholic 
religion,  on  which  terms  it  had  been  promised  to  him  that  the  Duke 
of  Lorraine  should  make  a  diversion  in  his  favour  in  Ireland, 
by  the  relief  of  Galway,  and  by  a  general  interference  in  affaii's  in 
that  quarter. 

+  Commander  of  one  of  the  privateers  attached  to  the  Royal 
cause. 

X  The  royal  fleet  and  the  privateers  were  now  in  great  distress  for 
a  port  to  shelter  them,  in  consequence  of  the  Parliament  having 
captured  the  Seilly  islands,  which  had  for  some  time  been  their  prin- 
cipal harbour  ;  Jersey  also  having  fallen. 

§  Though  the  fleet  under  Prince  Rupert  was,  strictly  speaking,  an 
English  one,  yet  it  appears  that  in  a  recent  attack  upon  the  Spaniards 
he  was  avenging  a  private  cause  ;  for  when,  in  the  spring  of  1652, 
he  sailed  from  Toulon  with  four  men-of-war  and  two  fire-ships,  and 


238 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1652. 


and  pryses,  his  Highnesse  liauinge  all  the  respecte 
hearC;,  and  I  thinke,  security,  he  can  desyre :  and 
I  heare  they  do  not  now  bragg  so  much  as  they 
haue  done,  of  ther  treaty  in  Englande,  and  are  not 
without  some  apprehension,  that  the  Rebells  of 
Westm.  may  fauour  ther  fellow  rebells  of  Burdeaux 
o""  letters  fro^  London  importe  no  new  notable  effecte 
of  ther  alteracon ;  ther  Councell  of  the  Army  still 
sittinge  at  Whitehall  to  forme  ther  new  modell  of 
gouerment.  I  know  not  what  to  say  to  the  com- 
plaint e  of  your  seru',  because  you  will  not  giue  me 
leaue  to  take  notice  of  it  to  the  partyes  who  are  most 
concerned,  but  I  believe  ther  may  be  some  errour  or 
malice  in  the  reporte,t  because  I  am  told  by  a  very 
true  frende  of  yours^  that  it  is  the  maydes  owne  fault 
that  shee  hath  not  her  dyett  ther,  and  that  because 
shee  might  not  be  trusted  with  the  gouerm*  of  the 
kitchen  and  the  buyinge  the  meate  (in  which  shee 
was  thought  to  lauish)  shee  absolutely  with  greate 
indignation  refuses  to  take  her  dyett,  with  which 
they  say  the  lady  is  much  troubled  :  but  I  tell  you 
agayne,  I  haue  this  only  from  a  frende,  and  not  any 
of  the  house.  I  doubte  your  mayde  is  apt  to  be 
angry,  and  when  shee  is,  shee  may  be  as  vnreason- 
able,  as  such  angry  people  vse  to  be.  Upon  my 
conscience  you  haue  not  the  least  reason  to 
suspecte  Geo.  Carterett^s  J  frendshipp  or  kindnesse 

instantly  commenced  hostilities  against  the^ Spaniards,  taking,  as  his 
first  prize,  a  ship  worth  100,000  crowns,  he  put  forth  a  declaration  in 
which  he  stated  one  of  his  reasons  for  this  aggression  to  be  in 
revenge  for  the  injuries  committed  by  the  Spaniards  against  the 
Palatinate. 

*  Alluding  to  the  Conde  party,  then  active  in  the  south  of 
Fi-ance. 

+  Nothing  can  more  whimsically  raark^the  great  change  in  the 
circumstances  of  the  English  courtiers  than  this  rapid  transition  from 
national  polities  to  kitchen  gossip. 

X  Sir  George  Carteret,  before  this  period,  had  been,  as  Deputy  to 
Lord  Jermyn,  Governor  of  Elizabeth  Castle,  in  Jersey,  besieged  by 
the  Parliamentary  forces  in  1651.  His  conduct  in  that  post  was  so 
admirable  as  to  exact  the  praise  even  of  his  enemies,  one  of  whom 
said  in  a  letter,  preserved  in  the  British  Museum,  "  I  hear  he  hath 
sent  to  the  Scots  King,  to  acquaint  him  with  the  state  of  affairs,  as 
touching  our  approach,  and  condition  of  the  Castle,  from  whom  he 


1662.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


239 


to  you,  but  you  must  not  make  his  frequent  writinge 
the  measure  of  it,  and  it  is  very  possible  (for  he 
hath  bene  out  of  all  roades)  he  may  haue  written, 
and  his  letters  miscarry,  as  yours  may  haue  done 
to  him. 

I  am  very  hartily, 
S', 

your  most  affectionate  humble  serv*, 

Edw:  Hyde. 

Paris,  this  20th  oi  May,  1652. 
Sir  Ric:  Browne. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 
S', 

I  giue  you  hearty  thankes  for  yours  of  the  17. 
which  came  safe,  and  I  distributed  the  inclosed 
accordinge  to  ther  directions;  and  the  Kinge  is 
resolued  to  obserue  this  order,  of  sendinge  twice  a 
weeke  to  Paris,  wherby  all  our  correspondencyes 
will  I  hope  be  preeserued :  I  send  you  a  pistole 
inclosed  that  you  may  keepe  an  euen  reckoninge 
with  your  man  for  the  portage  of  my  letters,*  which 
will  quickly  spende  such  a  summ,  so  that  I  conclude 
your  owne  charge  in  this  seruice  is  no  easy  burthen ; 
for  what  will  concerne  me,  I  will  be  carefull  to 
supply,  as  this  wastes.  Wee  haue  yett  taken  no 
further  resolucon,  then  to  sitt  still  some  tyme  heare, 
both  to  decerne  what  conclusion  your  distempers 
will  produce,t  and  what  our  frends  of  Hollande  will 

expects  a  letter  ;  and  if  he  with  it  signs  a  warrant  for  delivering  up 
the  Castle,  I  believe  the  Governor  (to  make  his  own  conditions  the 
better)  will  soon  yield  it  up  ;  yet,  without  it,  his  devout  allegiance  is 
such,  that  he  will  do  nothing." 

*  However  trifling  this  caution  appears  about  a  sum  so  insig- 
nificant, yet  it  will  be  found,  in  a  subsequent  note,  that  the  postage 
of  letters  was  a  most  important  article  of  expenditure  to  the  exiled 
Royalists. 

+  The  distempers  here  alluded  to  were  the  disputes  and  consequent 
civil  war,  between  the  Conde  and  Mazarin  partisans. 


240 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1652. 


do :  you  will  be  careful  to  receaue  all  information 
and  aduice  from  the  Dutch  Ambassadour  *  how 
afFayres  goe  ther,  and  transmitt  it  hither:  if  our 
letters  fro'  the  Hague  be  true,  they  looke  more  kindly 
towards  us  fro'  that  climate,  then  they  haue  done, 
and  the  Ambassadour  hath  receaued  some  derection 
to  communicate  with  his  Ma*^ ;  but  I  know  he  is  so 
iust  and  kinde,  that  he  will  gladly  imbrace  the 
orders,  and  therfore  I  doubte  our  information  may 
not  be  true.  The  wayes  I  hope  will  be  so  secure 
shortly  betweene  us  and  you,  that  wee  may  euen 
visit  each  other. f  God  preserue  you,  and  me  as  I 
am  with  my  whole  hearte, 

Your  most  affectionate  humble  Serv^, 

Euw:  Hyde. 

ffriday  night  this  19.  oi  July,  1652. 

Euery  body  sends  ther  letters  to  me,  &  I  cannot 
refuse  to  transmitt  them :  you  will  lett  your  man 
dispose  them  to  the  seuerall  posts.  If  the  Spanish 
Ordinary  be  not  speedily  exspected,  I  pray  putt  this 
under  youre  cover  to  Bryon.J 

Sir  Ri:  Browne. 


*  Mynheer  Borell.  One  of  the  journals  of  that  day  {Perfect 
Passages,  23  July,  1652,)  says  "  Charles  Stuart,  being  gone  from  the 
Louvre,  continues  yet  at  St.  German's,  where  he  hath  been  saluted 
by  a  messenger  from  the  Marquis  of  Brandenburg,  inviting  him  into 
Germany.  His  creature  Bx'owu,  and  the  Dutch  Ambassador  Borell, 
are  often  together."  Borell  had  been  Pensioner  of  Amsterdam,  and 
was  very  much  devoted  to  the  Royal  cause,  having  formerly  been 
Ambassador  at  the  English  Court.  He  was  also  of  the  Orange  party, 
and  on  that  ground  anxious  for  a  war  with  the  Commonwealth. 

f  The  road  between  St.  Germain's  and  Paris  was  at  that  period 
totally  unsafe,  on  account  of  the  military  marauders  of  both  armies. 

X  Count  de  Brienne,  first  Secretary  of  State  to  the  French  King. 


1652.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


241 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Broiune. 

Yours  of  the  20.  came  safe  to  me,  and  so  the 
inclosed  were  disposed  accordingly  :  I  am  sorry  ther 
should  be  any  hazard  of  hauinge  our  letters  inter- 
cepted,* which  I  thought  by  the  remooue  of  the 
Armyes  would  haue  been  now  Avithout  any  doubte, 
especially  since  the  Carry-all  of  this  place  trauelles 
dayly  &  securely  to  Paris  :  howeuer  I  will  obserue 
your  advice,  and  WTite  any  thinge  of  importance  in 

you        are         in         the  King's        name  to 

cypher :  731  .  405  .  532  .  668  .  220  . 13  .  596  .  667  . 

returne     his  Ma''"  very  to  the 

333  .  502  .  239  .  13  .  699  .hearty  thankes  667  . 668  . 

Dutch  Ambas""  his       Maty  is 

142  .  95  .  and  iudeede  502  .  239  .  529  .  exceedingly 

of         his        kind      n         e      s         s         e  and 

sensible  598  .  502  .  544  .  30  .  7  .  13  .  62  .  23  .  407  . 

freind  shipp 

488  .  651  .  and  if  God  blesses  him,  will  make  it 

his       Ma'y        d         e         s  i 

appeare  that  he  is  so.    502  .  239  .  15  .  23  .  13  .  27  . 

re  s         the     Ambas''      to  lett        him  know 

36  .  56  .  6.2  .  668  .  95  .  667  .  551  .  505  .  546  .  as 

the        warre        is  d 

soone  as  he  is  assured  that  668  .  723  .  529  .  25  . 

e         c         1         a         red  that  hee 

23  .  15  .  28  .  21  .  36  .  7  .  26  .  and  then  673  .  501  . 

*  The  disturbances  at  Paris  and  its  vicinity  were  now  of  such  a 
nature  as  to  justify  the  apprehensions  here  expressed.  The  scandal 
of  the  day  asserted  also  that  Cliarles  was  by  no  means  a  favourite 
with  many  of  the  highest  rank  in  France  ;  and  it  is  recorded  in  a 
Gazette,  or  Mercurius  Politicus,  of  the  1st  July,  1652,  in  the  British 
Museum,  that  "  Charles  Stuart  hath  secured  himself  by  showing 
them  a  pair  of  heels "  (after  the  victory  obtained  by  the  Prince 
of  Conde  close  to  Paris),  "  and  retreating  from  the  Louvre  to  Court, 
where  the  King  harbours  him,  being  highly  distasted  by  the  Duke 
of  Orleans,  ^Mademoiselle,  the  Princes,  and  all  the  people,  so  that 
they  have  made  several  books  and  songs  of  him." 


VOL.  IV. 


R 


242 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDAVARD  HYDE 


[1652. 


will                       his  5Ia7 

what 

he 

is  to 

do 

710  .  aduice  502  .  239  . 

717  . 

501 

.  529  .  667  . 

439 

the 

u 

n        i  t 

6 

both  with  reference  to 

668  . 

43  . 

30  .  27  .  12 

.  23 

d  Pro 

V 

1 

nee 

s 

25  .  41  .  34  .  3G  .  22 

.  43  . 

27  . 

30  .  15  .  56 

.  13 

and          to         this  C'rowne 

with 

which 

his  aia'y 

will 

407  .  667  .  671  .  437  . 

713  . 

722 

.  502  .  239  . 

710 

in  that 

manner 

as 

the 

interpose  532  .  673  .  573  .  30  .  23  .  36  .  401  .  668  . 


Ambass'  best 

95  .  shall  thinke  416  .  13  .  12.    I  shall  not  neede  to 

hira 

bespeake  your  diligence  in  calling  often  600  .  505  . 

for 

469  .  86. — You  will  do  me  the  fauour  to  send  this 
inclosed  to  S'  Jo.  Mennes^*  who  I  suppose  is  still  at 
Calice.  I  pray  do  me  the  fauour  to  desyre  Monsieur 
Paule  to  giue  you  the  title  of  the  Duke  of  Bauaria^ 
and  to  informe  you  how  longe  he  hath  bene  Duke  : — 
You  will  exspecte  no  newes  from  this  place  wher  wee 
haue  little  to  doe,  but  to  study  &  take  the  ayre,  and 
to  longe  for  good  newes  of  peace  in  this  kingdome. 
If  the  messengers  dispatched  from  hence  doe  not 
attende  you  at  those  howres  they  should,  it  is  not 
for  want  of  derection  heare.  I  haue  a  serious  quar- 
rell  with  you  for  somewhat  D""  Earles  f  hath  lately 
aduerticed  me  of,  which  in  good  earnest  I  take  un- 
kindly, and  doubte  you  haue  not  so  good  an  opinion  of 

*  Sir  Jolin  Menues  was  Rear-admiral  of  the  Fleet  iu  the  reign  of 
Chai'les  the  First ;  and  distinguished  as  one  of  the  most  loyal  of  the 
officers,  when  Parliament  took  those  steps  which  led  to  the  defection 
of  the  greatest  part  of  the  naval  force.  He  was  removed  from  his 
station  by  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  iu  1642,  after  the  unsuccessful  attempt 
of  the  King  to  regain  the  fleet  iu  the  Humber,  which  failed  through 
some  mismanagement  on  the  part  of  Sir  John  Pennington. 

+  Dr.  Earle,  afterwards  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  author  of  the 
3Iicrocosmograpky,  was  one  of  the  Loyalists  attached  to  the  exiled 
Court,  and  Chaplain  to  the  King.  He  was  in  habits  of  friendly 
intimacy  with  Hyde,  two  of  whose  letters  to  him  may  be  found  in 
vol.  ii.  of  the  Clarendon  State  Papers,  pp.  322,  329.  In  the  latter. 
Sir  Edward  [facetiously  arranges  employment  for  the  Doctor's 
leisure,  allowing  him  two  hours  to  eat  his  dinner,  and  "  two  hours  in 
the  projecting  where  to  get  one." 


1652.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


243 


my  friendship  as  I  wish  you  should,  and  for  which  I 
must  chyde  you  heartily  when  wee  meete. 

Let  me  know  particularly  what  you  receaue  from 
Englande,  and  lett  your  man  enquyre  for  letters 
derected  as  Edgman  ^  aduiced  you.    I  am, 

Your  most  affectionate  faythfull  Seru*, 

Edw.  Hyde. 

St.  Germain's.    Tuesday  morninge,  23.  oi  Jidyy  1652. 
Sir  Rich :  Bi'owne  at  Paris. 

Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 

I  haue  not  had  an  opportunity  till  now  to  acknow- 
ledge the  receipte  of  yours  of  the  24.  which  came 
safe  to  me,  and  the  contents  therof  were  imme- 
diateh^  by  me  imparted  to  his  Ma^'*",  who  had  not 
before  heard  of  many  of  the  particulars,  nor  do  wee 
yett  heare  from  the  Court  of  any  such  message  f 
sent  from  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  which  it  seemes 
they  thinke  fitt  to  conceale,  when  they  do  not  intende 
to  satisfy. 

I  am  very  sorry  for  the  good  DeanesJ  indispo- 
sicon,  though  I  am  gladd  it  is  nothinge  but  a  ffitt  of 

*  Edgman  was  Secretary  to  Sir  Edward  Hyde,  who  once  vindi- 
cated him  from  a  charge  of  having  violated  a  seal  by  declaring  he  knew 
him  to  be  so  honest  that  before  he  would  be  guilty  of  such  a  villainy 
he  would  starve. 

f  Comparing  this  letter  with  another  of  the  same  date  to  Sir  Edward 
Nicholas,  in  the  Clarendon  State  Papers,  vol.  iii.  p.  85,  it  appears 
that  the  whole  of  the  news,  here  alluded  to,  related  to  the  negotiations 
carrying  on  between  the  Court  aud  the  Condeans. 

J  This  was  Dr.  Stewart,  Dean  of  the  Chapel  Royal,  whom 
Clarendon,  in  another  place,  calls  "  a  very  honest  aud  learned  gen- 
tleman, and  most  conversant  in  the  learning  which  vindicated  the 
dignity  and  authority  of  the  Church."  He  had  been  long  about 
Charles's  person  ;  for,  as  early  as  1646,  in  a  letter  preserved  in  the 
Clarendon  StaAe  Papers,  vol.  ii.  p.  253,  aud  addressed  to  the  Prince, 
the  King  calls  him  an  honest  trusty  servant,  and  recommends  him  to 
his  Royal  Highness  as  Dean  of  his  Chapel,  telling  him  at  the  same 
time  to  take  the  Doctors  advice,  " giving  reverence  to  his  opinion 
in  all  things  concerning  conscience  and  church  affairs." 

r2 


244 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1652. 


the  stone,  whicli  I  am  very  farr  from  vnderualewinge, 
yett  it  seemes  lesse  daungerous  then  a  vyolent 
ffeauour  with  which  wee  heard  he  labored :  I  pray 
remember  my  seruice  very  heartily  to  him,  and  send 
me  worde  quickly  of  his  perfecte  recouery. 

The  wante  of  the  title  of  the  Duke  of  Bauaria 
keepes  us  from  making  a  congratulatory  dispatch  to 
him,  which  is  requisite  in  seuerall  respectes,  therfore 
I  pray  hasten  it  as  sooue  as  you  may  :  let  me  heare 
any  particulars  you  receaue  from  Englande,  especially 
how  our  frends  at  Detforde  doe*.  If  it  would  be 
any  comforte  to  you  to  haue  companyons  in  misery, 
you  will  heare  shortly  that  wee  are  in  greate  dis- 
tresses,t  for  I  cannot  imagyne  which  way  the  Kinge 
will  be  able  to  procure  mony  for  his  subsistance ;  nor 
indeed  how  the  ffrench  Courte  will  subsiste  it  selfe. 
Wee  know  nothinge  heare  of  the  Spanish  army: 
what  is  become  of  it  ? 

You  will  still  commende  the  King  to  your  neig- 
bour :  if  the  wayes  were  once  open,  I  would  make  a 
iourney  ouer  to  visitt  you,  and  to  be  merry  3  or  4 
howres  :  I  am  very  heartily, 
S', 

Your  most  affectionate  humble  Seru*^, 

E.  H. 

St.  Germ:  26  Jihhj,  1652,  ffryday  9  at  night. 

I  pray  send  me  the  copy  of  a  warrant  for  Barro- 
nett,  for  I  am  not  sure  that  myne  is  not  defectiue. 

Sir  Ric:  Browne. 

*  This  inquiry  refers  to  the  Evelyn  family  at  Says  Court. 

+  The  periodical  prints  of  that  day  thus  account  for  the  King  not 
wishing  to  remain  at  Paris.  "  The  Scots  King  is  still  in  Paris,  but 
now  upon  his  remove.  What  shall  he  do  then  ?  Trayl  a  pike  under  the 
young  Lady  of  Orleans :  "  (tliis  lady  had  recently  raised  a  regiment 
for  the  French  King's  service  against  the  Confederate  Lords  :)  an 
honour  too  large  for  the  late  Majesty  of  Scotland.  His  confidents 
have  satt  in  Council,  and  it  is  allowed  by  his  Mother,  that  during 
these  tumults  in  France,  it  is  neither  honourable  nor  expedient  for 
him  to  continue  in  Paris,  the  affections  of  the  citizens  for  the  most 
part  being  alienated  from  the  King,"  &c. 


1652.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


245 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Broione. 

The  messenger  who  brought  me  yours  of  the  27. 
is  so  positive  in  the  iustifyinge  himselfe,  that  I  can- 
not but  desyre  you  to  examine  his  allegations^  which 
if  not  true^  he  shall  be  no  more  sent  on  his  errancle, 
at  least  not  by  me :  he  sweares,  he  was  on  Saturday 
at  your  house,  by  11  of  the  clock e,  and  you  not  being 
at  home,  he  left  the  letters,  both  the  Kings  and 
myne  with  your  mayde :  this  is  so  contrary  to  what 
you  say,  of  his  not  appearinge  before  4  of  the  clocke, 
(which  putts  me  in  apprehension  that  our  packetts 
went  not  by  the  last  ordinary)  that  I  haue  a  greate 
minde  to  know  the  certainty,  and  whether  the  fellow 
hath  any  excuse  or  not :  I  told  the  Kinge  of  the 
expedient  you  proposed,  which  he  lyked  well,  only  it 
was  sayd  by  a  stander  by,  that  one  footeman  would 
not  be  alwayes  willinge  to  make  that  iourny,  and 
hauinge  so  little  encouragement,  it  is  no  wonder, 
that  euery  man  is  willinge  to  saue  his  labour :  I  am 
of  your  opinion  that  the  breach  is  already  too  wyde, 
betweene  the  two  Commonwealths,  to  be  easily  closed 
agayne.  I  pray  God  wee  may  make  good  use  of  it, 
which  will  most  depende  upon  your  neighbours 
aduice  and  derection :  I  pray  hasten  the  Duke  of 
Bauaria^s  titles,  &c.  I  wish  I  could  tell  you  of  a 
more  plentifull  condicon  heare,  because  I  am  confi- 
dent you  would  haue  a  share  of  it :  upon  my  worde, 
the  Kinge  hath  not  yett  receaued  a  penny  of  supply 
since  his  comminge  hither  :  he  hath  hope  of  300 
pistoles,  for  which  he  gott  an  order  at  his  beinge  at 
Grubyse,  but  payment  is  not  yett  made seriously 
I  cannot  be  more  troubled  at  any  thinge,  then  at 
your  distresses ;  which  I  had  rather  see  relieued  then 
my  owne :  I  will  not  surpryse  you  at  Paris,  and 

*  This  delay  is  easily  accounted  for,  by  a  reference  to  the  pre- 
ceding letter  respecting  the  pecuniary  difficulties  of  the  French 
Court. 


246 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1652. 


would  be  glad  that  the  communication  should  be 
with  more  freedome,  before  I  uenture  thither. — I 
will  by  Saturday  send  you  a  letter  for  George 
Carterett,*  from  whome  I  wonder  I  heare  not,  but 
more,  that  he  forgetts  his  promise  to  you  :  I  thought 
your  agent  ther  had  taken  the  dutyes  in  spetie 
accordinge  to  former  aduice.  The  defeate  of  Count 
Harcourtef  I  would  haue  bene  gladd  to  haue  receaued 
more  particularly :  wee  hauinge  heare  heard  nothinge 
of  it :  and  the  Court  needes  none  of  these  humilli- 
ations.    God  prseserue  vou,  and, 

\  our  very  affectionate  hu^'*"  serv^, 

E.  H. 

St.  Gerjiain's  this  29.  of  Jidy  : 
Munday  3  in  the  afternoone 

1652. 
Sir  Ri:  Browne. 


B'lr  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 

I  receaued  yours  of  the  30.  late  the  last  night,  and 
reade  euery  worde  of  it  this  morninge  to  the  Kinge. 

His        Ma''«  that        the  Amhass'' 

502  .  239  .  is  very  much  troubled  673  .  668.  95  . 

for         his       friend  s 

should  receaue  any  prseiudice  469.  502. 488.  13. 

h         1         p         p  to  him 

17  .  27  .  34  .  35  .  667  .  505  .  nor  can  imagyne  by 
what  hande  those  offices  are  done.  J    The  truth  is, 


*  Sir  George  Carteret  was  now  very  active  as  a  sea  officer  in  the 
King's  service  ;  and  in  the  month  of  July,  1652,  is  stated  to  have 
been  ou  the  coast  of  Flanders  with  thirteen  sail  under  the  royal 
colours,  making  prize  of  English  vessels.  Soon  after  this  he  joined 
Van  Trorap  ;  and  subsequently  sei'ved  as  Vice-admii'al  of  the  French 
fleet  under  the  Duke  of  Vendome. 

+  Harcourt  was  a  gallant  and  loyal  French  officer  ;  but  his 
laurels  faded  before  the  genius  of  the  great  Turenne. 

t  The  De  Wit  party  Avere  at  this  time  predominant  in  Holland, 
in  opposition  to  the  Orange  partisans,  who  were  of  course  fi-iendly 
to  the  King. 


1652.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


247 


ther  is  so  greate  a  licence  of  writinge  vnder  the 
nocon  of  gettinge  intelligence,  for  which  euery 
man  thinkes  himselfe  qualifyed,  that  men  care  not 
what  they  write/''  so  they  may  prsetende  to  know 
much,  and  I  have  seen  some  letters  from  Hollande, 

the         S        t  a 

wherein  it  hath  beene  sayd,  that  668.  13.  12. 4. 

t         e       s        had  giuen  Amhass''  to 

12  .  7  .  62 .  506  .  493  .  30  .  order  to  ther  95  .  667  . 

with       the  Kinge 

communicate  all  affayres  713  .  66(S  .  220  .  and  so  it 
seemes  others  who  belieued  that  true,  may  haue 
giuen  notice  of  his  resorte  to  the  Louer,  possibly 
without  any  ill  purpose,  and  yett  I  will  not  abso- 
lue  them  from  that  nether :  at  least,  folly  and  im- 
pertinency  does  the  same  mischieue  that  malice 

King  the 

does :  but  the  220  .  would  haue  you  assure  668  . 

Amb' 

95  .  that  he  will  be  as  carefull  hereafter  as  he  desyres, 

he  Avill 

and  for  the  two  papers,  501  .  780  .  examine  his 
cabinett,  wher  he  is  sure  they  are,  if  he  did  not 
burne  them,  and  deliuer  them  to  me,  and  I  will  then 

s 

send  them  to  you  by  some  sure  messenger  :  ffor  13  . 

t         a  r  k  y  and  Taylorj 

12  .  21  .  36  .  51  .  10  .  407  .  39  .  21  .  10  .  28  . 

53.    I  am  of  your  opinion  for  the  first,  that  he  is 

*  Sir  Richard  Browne  himself  had  many  enemies  at  this  moment 
among  the  English  exiles  ;  some  of  whom,  in  their  wish  to  drive 
him  from  the  King's  service,  were  busy  with  suggestions  at  Court  that 
"his  Majesty  being  present,  he  could  have  no  Resident."  This  is 
alluded  to  in  a  letter  from  Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Secretary  Nicholas, 
in  the  Clarendon  State  Papers,  iii.  112. 

f  This  Taylor,  adverted  to  in  former  notes,  was  the  King's  agent 
with  the  Emperor  of  Germany  and  the  Diet ;  as  appears  more  parti- 
cularly in  a  letter  to  him  from  Sir  Edward  Hyde  (Clarendon 
State  Papers,  vol.  iii.  p.  112),  in  reference  to  an  approaching  meeting 
of  that  body.  But  in  the  same  volume,  p.  121,  a  very  strong 
reason  is  given  for  Lord  Wilmot's  German  Embassy,  Hyde  remark- 
ing, "  I  am  sure  a  wise  man  is  wanting  there ;  for  Taylor  is  the 
most  absolute  fool  I  ever  heard  of." — See  further,  in  the  same  volume, 
pp.  113,  116. 


248  LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE  [1652. 

honest,  but  a  foole  :  The  other  is  more  a  foole,  and 
I  doubtc  not  so  honest,  though  yett  I  do  not  take 
liini  for  a  spy  :  nor  can  I  imagyne  it  possible  for 

to 

them  to  make  any  sober  vsefuU  proposicons  667  . 

the    Ambass'  and 

668  .  95.    The  Kinge  will  follow  the  aduice,  407  . 

s  i  t  t  the     Arnhnss"'    vr  is 

13  .  27  .  12  .  42  .  still,  till  668  .  05  .  20  .  529  . 

h       c        s        him        to  mono  Lord 

17  .  7  .  62  .  502  .  667  .  577.    The  sendinge  394  . 

Wihnott  into    Germany*  and         if  hee 

532  .  667  .  186  .  is  not  declared,  407  .  531  .  501  . 

^ne         s  hee 

491  .  13.  (which  will  not  be  yett)  501  .  shall  not 

goe        by      Holand,     the       King     Avould        nott       haue  the 

491  .  415  .  192  .  068  .  220  .  728  .  589  .  514  .  668  . 

Bishop  to         the  Ambass'' 

99  .  propose  any  such  thinge  667. 668. 95.  Though 

that       you      should      lett         the    Arahas'  know 

hebewillinge673  .  731  .  666  .  551  .  668  .  95  .  546  . 

hee        can       putt  such 

that  as  low  as  his  power  is,  501  .  429  .  615  .  654  . 

places  in         Irland       and  Scotland 

618  .  13  .  532  .  204  .  407  .  303  .  into  the  handes 

of  Iloland 

598  .192  .  as  would  inable  them  to  torment  their 
enimyes  :  t  Ther  is  no  opinion  of  the  good  nature 

Vr.  EI.  Pal.+    The  Earl  of        Br:  Avas 

and  gratitude  of  308  .  452  .  598  .  103  .  707  .  called 


*  How  well  the  King's  motions  were  now  watched  by  the  Parlia- 
ment, is  evident  from  the  fact  that  a  journal  of  the  5th  August,  1652, 
was  enabled  to  state — "  The  late  King  of  Scots  is  at  St.  German's, 
and  expects  daily  to  bee  sent  for  by  the  Hollanders.  The  Loi'd 
Wilmot  is  designed  to  go  Ambassador  from  him  into  Germany.'^ 

t  This  extraordinary  fact  receives  confirmation  from  another  of 
Sir  Edward's  letters  to  Secretary  Nicholas,  published  in  the  Clarendon 
State  Papers,  vol.  iii.  p.  86.  Fortunately  for  the  honour  and  credit 
of  all  concerned,  the  idea  was  finally  abandoned. 

Z  The  Elector  Palatine  abundantly  justified  this  opinion;  for,  when 
the  German  Princes  subsequently  made  up  a  sum  of  ten  thousand 
pounds  for  Charles,  the  Elector,  though  under  great  obligations  both 


1652.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


249 


to      counccl  Counsel!'  of 

667  .  121  .  as  an  old  121  .  599  liis  father:*  and 
it  would  haiie  bene  greatc  pitty  lie  should  not :  he  is 

Ld  Digby 

a  good  old  man,  and  much  my  frende.  155  .  intends 
his  owne  businesse  and  lookes  not  after  what  con- 
cernes  us  :  I  thinke  I  haue  answered  all  yours  :  and 
I  am  able  to  add  nothinge  of  this  place:  god  of 
heaven  preeserue  you,  and  me  as  I  am  heartily. 
Sir, 

Your  very  affectionate  hu^^°  Seru^, 

Edw.  Hyde. 

St.  GermaixNS,  Wensday  Jidy  31.  8  at  night.  1652, 
Sir  Ri.  Browne. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 

Since  I  writt  last  to  you  (though  it  was  but  on 
ffryday  night)  I  haue  receaued  5  letters  from  you, 
two  of  the  2d,  one  of  the  3.  of  the  4.  and  the  5.  of 
this  moneth,  all  which  are  now  before  me  to  be 
answered  in  order,  after  I  have  exceedingly  thanked 
you  for  your  diligent  and  very  punctuall  correspond- 
ence, Avhich  is  so  greate  a  virtue,  that  it  is  high 
iniustice  not  to  rewarde  and  gratify  it,  which  I  hope 
will  one  day  be  done. 

I  have  informed  the  Kinge  of  the  Venetian  Am- 
bassadors complainte  against  Mr.  Killegrew,  f  with 

to  his  father  and  grandfather,  did  not  conti'ibute  a  single  stiver. 
See  Clarendon's  History,  vol.  iii.  p.  418. 

*  In  tracing  the  conduct  of  the  Eai'l  of  Bristol  throughout  these 
letters  the  reader  will  derive  amusement  from  Walpole's  account 
of  him  as  a  Noble  Author. 

t  In  his  Life,  p.  116,  Hyde  says  that  Charles  had  been  at  first 
unwilling  to  send  Killigi'ew  to  Venice;  but  afterwards  was  prevailed 
upon  simply  to  gratify  him,  that  in  the  capacity  of  Envoy  "  he  might 
borrow  money  of  English  merchants  for  his  owne  subsistence,  which 
he  did,  and  nothing  to  the  honour  of  his  master."  The  letter  in  the 
text  contributes  some  interesting  detail  upon  an  incident  but  slightly 
noticed  in  history.  Francis  Erizzo  was  the  Doge  who  acted  thus 
cavaherly  to  the  representative  of  the  exiled  monarch. 


250 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1652. 


which  his  Ma^-  is  very  inuch  troubled,  and  resolues 
upon  his  returne  hither,  to  examyne  his  miscarriage, 
and  to  proceed  therin  in  such  a  manner  as  shall  be 
worthy  of  him,  and  as  may  manifest  his  respecte  to 
that  Commonwealth,  with  which  the  Crowne  of  Eng- 
lande  hath  alwayes  held  a  very  stricte  amity,  and  his 
Ma^^^  Ministers  haue  in  all  places  prreserued  a  uery 
good  correspondence  with  the  Ministers  of  that  State, 
and  therefore  his  Ma^^'  is  the  more  sensible  of  this 
misdemeanour  of  his  Resident :  However  his  Ma*^ 
wishes  that  the  Republic  had  proceeded  accordinge 
to  the  vsuall  custome,  and  first  acquainted  him  with 
ther  iust  exception  against  his  Minister,  that  ther- 
upon  his  Ma*^  might  haue  testify ed  his  respecte  to 
them  by  recallinge  and  punishinge  him,  and  that 
they  had  not  by  a  judgement  of  ther  owne  compelled 
him  to  retyre,  which  beinge  so  vnusuall  a  way,  his 
Ma*-  doubts  will  not  be  cleerely  and  generally  under- 
stoode,  but  may  be  interpreted  to  the  Kings  disad- 
uantage  as  a  declininge  in  this  tyme  of  tryall  that 
auntient  friendshipp  with  the  Crowne  of  Englande, 
which  his  Ma*^  is  gladd  to  finde  by  the  Ambassadour 
is  not  in  truth  the  purpose  or  intention  of  that  Com- 
monwealth, and  you  are  to  thanke  the  Ambassadour 
in  the  Kings  name  for  his  particular  affection  to  his 
Ma*=^,  which  he  desyres  him  to  continue. — After  I 
had  shewed  the  Kinge  your  letter,  he  appointed  me 

to  r         e        a       d       e         it  in  councell 

667  .  36  .  23  .  4  .  25  .  7  .  530  .  532  .  121  .  and  the 

resolucon  was  ther  taken  for  the  answer,  so  that  the 
very  wordes  which  I  haue  used  upon  this  argument, 
were  consider^  and.  perused  by  the  Kinge. — I  have 
bene  very  much  troubled  for  poore  Mr.  Douglasse^s 
beinge  sicke,  and  am  much  comforted  with  your  good 
newes  of  his  amendment :  If  ther  had  not  bene  3  or 
4  persons  of  quality  heare  very  sicke,  as  my  Lo: 
Wentworth,*  .  .  .  Schomburgh,  younge  Mr.  Jarmin,t 

*  Lord  Wentworth,  of  whom  some  particulars  may  be  found  in  a 
former  note,  was  shortly  after  this  sent  as  agent  to  Denmark,  where 
he  remained  until  the  ensuing  year. 

+  Son  of  Thomas,  elder  brother  of  Lord  Jermyn.  He  succeeded 
his  uncle,  after  the  Restoration,  in  the  Barony  of  Jermyn,  but  not  in 
the  Earldom  of  St.  Alban's,  and  died  without  issue  male. 


1652.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


251 


vfho  hath  the  small  pox^  and  others,  Avho  would  not 
indure  the  absence  of  ther  physicon,  Dr:  fFrayser  * 
had  gone  over  to  Paris  to  looke  to  him  :  I  pray  when 
you  go  next  remember  my  seruice  to  him,  and 
desyre  him  to  be  very  carefull  of  himselfe  that  he 
fall  not  into  relapse :  I  could  willingly  be  of  your 
minde  for  the  certainty  of  one  avowed  messenger, 
but  I  finde  it  harde  to  lay  the  worke  upon  one  man, 
which  your  passe  must  suppose ;  besydes  the  askinge 
such  a  warrant  might  possibly  shutt  the  doore  against 
all  others,  and  that  would  not  be  well,  for  betweene 
the  English  and  Dutch  Letters,  and  the  particular 
businesses  from  this  place,  ther  is  no  day  passes 
without  a  messenger  to  Paris,  and  an  authority 
graunted  to  one  might  cause  all  the  rest  to  be  in 
more  daunger ;  the  conclusion  is,  that  wee  will  euery 
Wensday  morninge,  or  Tuesday  night,  send  an  honest 
fellow  to  you,  and  agayne  on  Saturday  morninge, 
and  in  those  two  only  I  will  take  my  selfe  to  be  most 
concerned.  I  hope  the  Kinge  of  Spayne  f  is  not 
deade,  and  then  the  arry  vail  of  the  ffleete  will  indeede 
prooue  a  cordiall.  I  haue  the  same  reproaches  fro' 
the  Hague  for  not  writinge  things  which  I  doe  not 
know,  and  sometymes  that  are  not. — You  must  ex- 
playne  this ;  you  say,  I  have  not  yet  scene  95.  both 
he  and  I  haue  bene  to  [too]  busy.  What  do  you 
meane  by  that,  sure  you  haue  not  bene  so,  nor  does 

the 

any  wise  man  thinke  you  can  be  soe :  I  haue  668  . 

*  Fraser  was  a  Scotchman,  and  mingled  much  in  the  religious 
politics  of  that  country  ;  he  also  had  some  political  besides  his  medi- 
cal influence  at  the  exiled  Court.  In  another  letter  (State  Papers, 
iii.  119)  Clarendon  says  of  him,  "I  am  glad  you  have  so  good  a 
correspondent  as  Dr.  Frayser,  who  is  grown  (God  knows  why)  an 
absolute  stranger  with  me ;  he  is  great  with  Lord  Gerard  and  Mr. 
Attorney,  but  he  will  speedily  leave  us  and  go  for  England,  which 
truly  I  am  sorry  for,  for  the  King's  sake:  for  no  doubt  he  is  good  at 
his  business,  otherwise  the  maddest  fool  alive."  Elsewhere  also  he 
expresses  himself  very  kindly  as  to  Fraser;  yet  the  doctor  took 
great  offence  against  him  on  account  of  this  trip  to  Englaud, 
actually  asserting  that  it  was  Hyde's  wish  to  have  him  murdered  when 
there,  or  that  he  might  languish  in  prison  until  he  should  die  of  grief 
and  hunger. 

+  Philip  IV.    He  did  not  die  until  1665. 


252 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1652. 


t^vo  memorialls  liee 

670  .  569  .  29  .  2  .  36  .  27  .  400  .  13  .  501  .  sent  to 

the         K.  by         his      Soim  which  you 

668  .  216  .  415  .  502  .  13  .  43  .  30  .  59  .  722  .  731  . 

K.  me 

requyred  and  the  220  .  gaue  269  .  two  dayes  since  : 
I  will  keepe  them  till  you  order  me  to  dispose  them. 
As  I  was  much  startled  my  selfe  with  yours  of 
yesterday,  which  my  Lady  Harberte  *  sent  me  late 

that         the  K.  had 

in  the  night,  concearning  673  .  668  .  220  .  506  . 

given 

493  .  30  some  derections  quite  contrary  to  what  I 
understoode  to  be  his  minde,  so  I  gave  my  selfe  the 

his  Ma'y 

pleasure  of  perplexinge  502  .  239  .  by  readinge  only 
the  first  parte  of  your  letter :  and  when  he  was  in 
trouble,  and  protested  that  he  had  neuer  gaue  any  such 
order,  I  reade  him  that  which  was  in  cypher,  with 
which  he  was  wonderfully  pleased,  and  exceedingly 

the    Ambass'  in 

thankes  668  .  95  .  and  referres  the  proceedinge  532  . 

it  to  his         dis  c  r         e  t 

530  .  intirely  667  .  502  .  440  .  15  .  36  .  23  .  12  . 

ion 

437  .  and  frendshipp,  for  as  he  hath  hitherto  accord- 
inge  to  his  aduice  forborne  in  the  least  degree  to  stirr, 
or  moue  any  thinge,  for  feare  of  doinge  it  vnseason- 
ably,  so  he  very  well  knowes,  that  such  an  ouerture 

may       giue        his  frends  in 

as  this,  timely  made,  571  .  493  .  502  .  488  . 13  .  532  . 

Holland  to  say 

192  .  opportunity  .  667  .  13  .  21  .  10  .  somewhat  on 
his  behalfe,t  which  of  themselues  originally  they 

the        K.  the 

could  not  doe,  and  therefore  668  .  220  .  committs  668  . 

*  "Wife  of  the  Attorney-General,  afterwards  Lord  Keeper,  Sir 
Edward  Herbert. 

t  Comparing  a  letter  of  the  2nd' August  to  Secretary  Nicholas, 
now  residing  in  Holland,  it  is  evident  that  this  passage  refers  to  the 
former  proposals  for  the  delivery  of  certain  places,  both  in  Scotland 
and  Ireland,  to  the  Dutch. 


1652.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


253 


con         (I       IX        c        t         e         of  t  h 

428  .  25  .  43  .  15  .  42  .  23  .  598  .  wholy  to  12  .  17  . 

e   Ambas.  the      good  e 

23  .  95  .  and  will  acknowledge  alwayes  668  .  495  .  7  . 

f         f  e  t  s  to        him : 

18  .  24  .  56  .  12  .  13  .  667  .  505  .  and  ther  is  no 

to         t  r 

doubte,  if  ther  were  an  opportunity  667  .  12  .  36  . 

eat  e         on        the      Kings  be  h 

23  .  21  .  42  .  23  .  600  .  668  .  220  .  13  .  416  .  17  . 

a  1  f  e 

21  .  28  .  18  .  7  .  ther  would  be  founde  reall 
aduantages  yett  in  liis  power  (as  low  as  it  is) 

to  giue  witli  to  Irland  and 

667  .  493  .  713  .  reference  667  .  204  .  407. 

Scotland  * 

363  .  and  really  I  have  reason  to  belieue  that 

make     Jersey,  Guernsey,  and  Scilly 

wee  could  speedily  580  .  213  .  191  .  407  .  13  .  27  . 

at  our 

28  .  52  .  10  .  402  .  603  .  deuocon.    You  must  lett 

the    Ambass'  know  the  K. 

668  .  95  .  546  .  that  668  .  220  .  hath  this  day  dis- 

Lord  Taffj  to  the  Duke 

patched  549  .  12  .  21  .  18  .  24  .  667  .  668  .  446  . 


*  The  King's  supposed  wishes  at  this  period  are  recorded  in  one  of 
the  public  journals  (Several  Proceedings,  28th  October,  1652),  in  a 
letter  from  Paris.  "  Charles  Stuart,  the  Titular  Scots  King,lives  in  the 
Palace  Royall,  and  still  in  necessity  ;  his  Mother  went  to  Challeau 
on  Munday  last ;  he  impatiently  expects  this  peace  ;  he  could  wish 
to  be  now  in  Ireland,  so  he  told  some  of  his  own  Creatures  of  late  ; 
so  would  all  about  him  :  yet  Ormond  and  Inchiquin  tell  him  plainly 
that  those  who  most  oppose  the  Commonwealth,  are  but  Ulster  men, 
which  doe  not  much  care  for  him,  and  are  only  for  their  own  ends, 
which  if  they  could  obtain,  would  never  look  upon  a  King,  and  that 
if  they  promise  to  be  faithful  to  a  Parliament  they  would  be 
constant." 

-f-  Lord  Taafe  was  particularly  active  in  the  King's  Councils,  in  so 
far  as  related  to  Ireland.  A  Gazette  of  that  day,  alluding  to  the 
King's  Irish  afifairs,  remarks,  when  speaking  of  the  proposed  operations 
of  the  Duke  of  Lorraine :  "  Lord  Taafe  is  the  man  that  manageth  the 
business  with  the  King,  which  is  much  opposed  by  the  Lord  Wilmot, 
and  some  others,  as  a  course  very  improbable :  and  this  hath  occa- 
sioned a  quarrel,  and  afterwards  a  challenge,  betwixt  Taafe  and 
Wilmot,  which  with  much  ado  was  composed  by  the  Scots  King." 


254 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1652. 


of  Lorraiii 

598  .  231  .  (with  whome  lie  is  in  singular  creditt_,  and 

to         con        i       V  r 

is  indeede  a  very  honest  man)  661  .  428  .  27  . 1  .  36  . 

e       him        uot  Holland  hut 

23  .  505  .  589  .  in  any  degree  to  disturbe  192  .  417  . 

on  to  he  will 

600  .  the  other  hande  .  667  .  declare  that  501  .  710  . 

assist  them         against  England 

401  .  13  .  529  .  12  .  676  .  414  .13.12.  164 .  which 
I  doubte  not  he  will  doe  heartily.  I  conceaue  my 
L*^  Inchiquin  *  (though  I  haue  not  spoken  with  him 
of  it  this  day)  does  not  speedily  intende  to  make  use 
of  his  passe,  but  will  send  to  you  agayne  about  it, 
before  he  exspects  it  fro^  you. — It  is  very  true  ther 
was  such  a  summ  of  mony  lately  receaued  at  Paris 
for  the  Kinge  as  you  mention,  and  40.  pistoles  of  it 
disposed  to  that  Lady,  which  is  all  the  mony  he 
hath  receaued  since  he  came  hither,  and  in  some 
tyme  before,  and  he  hath  hope  to  receaue  iust  such  a 
summ  agayne  within  these  few  dayes,  but  alasse  it 
doth  not  inable  his  cooks  and  back-staj^es  t  nien  to 
goe  on  in  the  provydinge  his  dyett,  but  they  protest 
they  can  undertake  it  no  longer.  I  hope  ther  will 
be  shortly  another  manner  of  receipt,  and  then  if 
you  should  be  left  out,  I  should  mutiny  on  your 
behalfe  :  in  the  meane  tyme,  if  it  would  giue  you 

*  It  had  been  intended,  at  this  period,  that  Lord  Inchiquin, 
accompanied  by  Jermyn,  should  go  as  Ambassador  to  Holland,  to 
prepare  for  Charles's  reception  there, 

'j-  The  public  journals,  in  real  or  assumed  letters  from  Paris, 
now  asserted  loudly  that  the  "  quondam"  King,  as  they  desci'ibed  him, 
had  gi'own  hateful  to  the  people  of  that  city  "since  Loraigne's 
treason,  being  afx'aid  lest  he  might  find  such  entertainment  fi'om 
them  at  the  new  bridge  as  others  had  experimented,  and  beuig 
reduced  to  nothing  to  subsist  on,  and  having  beggared  a  multitude 
of  bakei's,  brewers,  butchers,  and  other  tradesmen,  on  Saturday  last 
departed  out  of  this  town  with  all  his  family  {radio  relicto).  The 
Pi'ince  of  Conde  and  Beauford  accompanied  him  about  a  league  off 
the  town ;  he  is  gone  to  St.  Jermin's,  and  from  thence  to  St.  Dennis, 
intending  for  Holland,  where  keeping  a  correspondence  with  the 
Duke  of  Loraine,  and  likewise  with  his  Mother  and  his  brother  Yorke, 
who  are  to  remain  yet  in  France,  he  hopes  to  worke  some  mischiefe 
to  the  State  of  England." 


1652.J 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


255 


ease,  I  could  assure  you,  my  L*^  .  .  .  .  nor  I  have  one 
cardicue  in  the  worlde,  yett  wee  keepe  up  our  spiritts  : 
fFor  gods  sake  do  j^ou  so  to,  and  he  will  carry  you 
through  this  terrible  storme. — My  L'^  Jermin  is  this 
day  gone  to  the  Courte,  how  longe  he  staves  I  know 
not.  We  haue  no  newes,  at  least  that  I  know.  I 
pray  tell  us  as  much  as  you  know  of  the  Armyes 
mouinge,  and  what  hope  ther  is  of  peace.    I  am, 

s% 

jovLT  very  affectionate  hu'''''  serv*, 

Edw  .  Hyde. 

S'  Germans  this 
Tuesday  the  6.  of  Au(/. 
6.  at  night.  1652. 

This  messenger  is  to  returne  as  soone  as  the  fflanders 
letters  are  arryved. 

S'^  Ri.  Browne. 


Sir  Edioard  Hyde  to       Richard  Browne. 

That  yours  of  the  10.  of  December  (which  came  to 
my  handes  the  same  day  that  I  dispatched  my  last  to 
you)  hath  yett  brought  you  no  answer,  is  not  my 
faulte,  for  as  I  was  takinge  penn  &  paper  to  do  it  on 
Sunday  last,  your  other  of  the  14.  arryued,  which 
derected  me  to  change  my  cource  of  w^itinge,  and  to 
send  no  more  to  Nantz,*  but  to  St.  Malos  :  and  in- 
deede  I  was  very  gladd  to  finde  that  you  were  bounde 
for  Brest,  wher  I  should  haue  wished  you,  notwith- 
standing any  discouragements  you  receaued  from 
thence,  except  you  could  bringe  a  recommendation 
from  this  Courte  :  for  Mr.  Holder  f  writes  me  worde, 
that  a  letter  from  Moun''  Castlenoe  would  signify 

"  Sir  Richard  Browne  was  at  this  moment  very  actively  endeavour- 
ing to  collect  the  King's  dues  on  the  prizes  brought  into  the  different 
ports  of  France, 

+  Holder  was  Secretary  to  Prince  Rupert.  He  was  loyal,  and  it 
appears  from  the  Clarendon  State  Papers  that  great  dependence  was 
placed  on  him  when  wanted :  yet  Sir  Edward  calls  him  "  the  pert, 
importunate  agent  of  the  Catholics."    See^o-*.',  p.  261. 


256 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1652. 


very  little.  I  am  confident  the  letter  you  haue  from 
our  Master,  will  prseserue  you  from  any  affronts,  and 
then  sure  your  beinge  ther  will  be  at  least  for  your 
owne  aduantage,  both  to  collecte  what  is  dew  to  his 
Ma*^  upon  accounts,*  which  must  be  worth  some- 
what, and  will  be  easily  discouer'd  by  what  Mr. 
Holder  hath  receaued  from  the  Duke,  and  to  receaue 
the  dewes  upon  ther  last  pryzes,  which  will,  they  say, 
amounte  to  a  rounde  summ. — Though  S'  Geo.  Car- 
terett  was  gone  out  of  the  towne,  when  I  receaued 
yours  of  the  10.  yett  very  contrary  to  my  expectation 
he  returned  hither  3  or  4^  dayes  after,  and  stayed  only 
one  night,  when  I  shewed  him  your  letter ;  sure  he 
will  do  all  the  good  offices  to  you  in  all  thinges  he  is 

able.    My  L'^  will  obserue  the  caution  you 

giue  him,  and  will  be  gladd  you  can  discouer  any 
monyes  to  be  dew  to  him,  and  he  will  gladly  giue 
you  authority  to  receaue  it ;  indeed  a  supply  will 
come  as  seasonable  to  him  as  to  any  body,  for  when 
I  haue  told  you,  that  none  of  us  haue  receaued  a 
penny  since  you  went,  you  will  belieue  our  necessi- 
tyes  to  be  importunate  enough,  which  would  be 
more  insupportable,  if  wee  did  not  see  the  King 
himselfe  reduced  to  greater  distresse  then  you  can 
beheve  or  imagyne.  I  perceaue  the  arrest  of  ffar- 
rande,  is  upon  some  pique  betweene  the  Duke  of 
Vandosme  and  the  Marshall  Melleray,t  betweene 
whom  the  contests  grew  very  high,  and  are  like  to 
breake  out  to  such  a  degree  that  the  Courte  is  not 
without  apprehension,  that  it  shall  not  conteyne 
them  both  to  its  seruice,  and  seemes  at  present,  to 
be  vnsatisfyed  with  the  Marshall,  and  I  heare  some 
letters  of  reprehension  are  sent  to  him ;  therefore 
this  arrest  is  not  like  to  produce  any  aduantage  to 
his  Ma%  besides  that  it  seemes  the  shipp  is  out  of  the 
power  of  the  Marshall.    I  haue  giuen  Choquex  the 

*  The  difficulty  which  Charles  experienced  in  raising  any  money 
upon  the  prizes,  is  alluded  to  in  Perfect  Passages  of  the  15th 
October,  1652:  "Pi-ince  Rupert  hath  lately  seized  on  some  good 
prizes;  he  keeps  himself  far  remote,  and  makes  his  kinsman,  Charles 
Stuart,  make  a  leg  for  some  callings  of  his  wmdfalls." 
,  +  Melleray  was  Governor  of  Nantes. 


1652.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


257 


papers,  and  will  conferr  with  liirn  what  is  to  be  done, 
for  it  is  I  perccaue  true  that  the  shipp  and  all  the 
furniture  was  really  putt  into  his  handes  by  Pr. 
Ruperte,*  so  that  besides  the  restitution  of  the 
vessell,  there  will  be  a  large  accounte  to  be  made  : 
A'VTien  any  thinge  is  resolued,  you  shall  haue  an 
accounte  of  it. 

I  am  very  gladd  you  haue  had  so  good  successe  in 
your  suite,  I  hope  it  is  but  an  instance  of  future  good 
fortune  at  Brest,  wher  ther  is  much  dew,  if  you  haue 
receaued  so  little,  as  I  haue  formerly  hearde  you  haue 
mentioned  : — I  prsesume  you  haue  kept  an  exacte 
accounte  of  all  you  haue  had  upon  those  assignations, 
which  I  putt  you  only  in  minde  of,  because  upon 
conference  with  S'  Geo.  Carterett,  he  could  not 
belieue  it  had  bene  possible,  that  upon  so  many 
pryzes  as  he  obserued  to  be  brought  in,  you  should 
touch  so  little,  as  I  assured  him  had  come  to  your 
handes.  When  you  went  from  hence,  and  A^pon 
occasyon  of  somewhat  I  writt  lately  in  a  letter  to 

Mr  of  the  no  profitt  accrewed  to  his  Ma*'^ 

upon  that  receipte,  he  answered  me  that  it  was 
impossible  much  could  come  to  his  Ma*^'  owne 
receipte,  when  he  granted  so  large  assignments  out 
of  it,  and  so  mentioned  in  the  first  place,  what  was 
allotted  to  you,  as  if  it  had  bene  payde. — Wee  know 
nothinge  of  Englande  more  than  that  your  fprench 
Minister  was  landed  at  Dover.  Wee  shall  shortly 
see  what  his  reception  hath  bene,  and  shall  then 
better  guess  at  the  effects :  in  the  meane  tyme,  we 
are  at  no  ease  heare.  My  Lo:  of  Rochester  (for  that 
is  my      Willmotts  title)  t  is  to  sett  out  from  hence 

*  Prince  Rupert,  just  before  this  date,  was  in  the  West  Indies, 
and  had  with  him  a  fleet  of  fifteen  sail,  to  which  eight  Dutch  ships 
were  joined  in  October.  He  is  stated  in  the  journals  to  have  cap- 
tured ten  rich  English  vessels,  whilst  cruising  off  St.  Kitts.  It  is  a 
remarkable  circumstance,  however,  that  another  journal,  the  Perfect 
Passages,  places  him  off  Cyprus,  and  describes  him  as  capturing  all 
vessels  that  pass  him  in  the  Levant. 

'f'  There  was  considerable  difficulty  in  finding  a  proper  title  for 
Lord  Wilmot,  his  first  proposed  one  of  Essex  being  claimed  by  Lord 
Capel,  and  that  of  Danby  by  the  Attorney-General ;  upon  which,  as 


VOL.  IV. 


s 


258 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1652. 


on  Thursday  morninge^  he  trauells  with  a  small 
trayne,  and  hath  it  in  his  power  to  assume  the  title 
of  Ambassadour, which  I  suppose  he  will  choose  to 
declyne,  and  do  his  businesse  in  a  priuate  way,  which 
will  procure  a  speedyer  dispatch. — God  prseserue  you. 
I  -am, 

your  very  aflPectionate  hu''^''  Serv^ 

E.  H. 

Pallais  Royale,  this 
24  o{  Decemb.  Christmasse  Euc,  1652. 

Commend  me  to  Mr.  Holder^  and  lett  him  know 
I  have  now  receaued  his  of  the  13. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 
S', 

I  haue  receaued  yours  of  the  22*^  from  Nantes, 
and  am  very  gladd  that  you  haue  passed  that  parte 
of  your  iourny  so  well ;  I  hope  the  rest  will  be  as 
successfully  though  I  do  not  exspecte  you  should 
finde  as  good  weather  to  bringe  you  home,  as  you 

stated  in  the  Clarendon  ^^ate  Papers,  hi.,  121,  "my  Lord  dedined 
that  title,  and  so  his  patent  is  drawn  up  for  the  Earl  of  Rochester." — 
See  also  iii.  57. 

*  It  was  hoped  that  he  might  succeed  in  inducing  the  German 
Princes  to  advance  money  for  the  King's  private  expenditure ;  and 
also  might  so  manage  with  the  Dutch  as  to  render  them  disposed  to 
undertake  some  decided  step  in  his  favour.  The  King  must>t  this  time 
have  been  in  sore  distress.  A  letter  from  Paris  in  the  Several  Pro- 
ceedings, of  1 3th  December,  asserts  that  "  the  titular  King  of  Scots 
is  reduced  to  so  low  a  condition  that  he  is  forced  to  eate  his  meals  in 
taverns  here  at  Paris,  having  not  the  commodity  of  dining  at  home." 
And  not  three  months  before  this  date,  even  Hyde  had  thus  ex- 
pressed himself  in  a  letter  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas :  "  It  is  no  wonder 
you  should  desire  to  be  eased,  as  much  as  may  be,  of  all  kinds  of 
charges,  I  am  sure  I  have  as  much  reason  as  any  man  living  to  join 
with  you  in  that  thrift  ;  yet  I  cannot  avoid  the  constant  expense  of 
seven  or  eight  livres  the  week  for  postage  of  letters,  which  I  borrow 
scandalously  out  of  my  friends  pockets,  or  else  my  letters  must  more 
,  scandalously  remain  still  at  the  post-house  ;  and  I  am  sure  all  those 
which  concern  my  own  private  affairs  would  be  received  for  ten  sous 
a  week,  so  that  all  the  rest  are  for  the  King,  from  whom  I  have  not 


1652.] 


AND  Sill  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


259 


haue  liad  to  carry  you  out :  The  Spanyard*  desyred 
me  to  giue  you  my  tliankes  for  your  care  of  him^ 
which  I  do  very  heartily,  and  conceaue  by  this  tyme 
he  is  gotten  into'  his  owne  Country,  and  I  do  not 
thinke  he  will  euer  visitt  ffrance  agayne,  which  he 
hath  no  reason  to  loue,  but  for  the  English  which  he 
founde  heare.  Ther  hath  beene  yett  no  letter  from 
the  Mareschall  de  Melieray,  Avhich  ther  was  no  reason 
to  exspecte,  if  you  had  not  mentioned  it,  as  some- 
what you  thought  intended;  I  am  exceedinge  gladd 
that  he  proceeded  so  roundly  with  the  English 
Rebells,  as  to  arrest  both  the  shipps  and  goods,t  I 
wish  they  did  so  in  all  other  partes  of  ffrance,  that 
they  might  proceede  a  little  more  briskely  towards 
ther  greate  worke,  then  yett  they  appeare  to  doe, 
but  if  I  am  not  deceaued,  the  English  will  quicken 
them  shortly,  if  they  haue  any  spiritts  left. 

You  must  not  suspecte  your  frends  kindnesse  and 
affection  to  you,  when  I  tell  you,  that  your  arrett  is 
not  yett  dispatched  :  you  know  how  little  seruice  I 
can  do  in  that  kinde  by  any  personall  sollicitation  of 
my  owne,  more  then  by  callinge  upon  Sir  Ri: 
Foster,!  which  I  haue  often  done,  and  in  truth  I 
thinke  him  to  be  as  carefull  in  all  that  concernes 
you,  and  in  this  particular,  as  a  frende  can  be  :  But 
the  truth  is,  he  hath  beene  ill  since  you  went,  and 
your  Aduocate  hath  bene  neuer  with  him,  not  at 

received  one  penny  since  I  came  hither,  and  am  put  to  all  this  charge; 
and  yet  it  is  to  no  pui'pose  to  complain,  though  I  have  not  been  master 
of  a  crown  these  many  months,  and  cold  for  want  of  clothes  and  fire 
and  owe  for  all  the  meate  which  I  have  eaten  these  three  months, 
and  to  a  poor  woman  who  is  not  longer  able  to  trust." 

*  A  part  of  the  private  history  of  the  time,  to  which  no  certain 
clue  remains.  Some  plans  had  been  put  in  agitation  on  the  part  of 
the  Condeans  to  persuade  both  England  and  Spain  to  aid  them  with 
their  arms;  and  as  at  this  period  there  were  two  powerful  political 
parties  at  Madrid,  the  man  alluded  to  may  have  been  a  secret  agent 
in  the  politics  of  the  day. 

'I'  An  event  not  elsewhere  recorded;  unless  it  refers  to  the  seizures 
of  some  ships  at  Dunkirk,  afterwards  restored  to  Cromwell  by  the 
French  Government. 

X  Sir  Richard  Foster  was  keeper  of  the  King's  privy  purse,  though 
lie  seldom  was  lucky  enough  to  have  anything  to  keep  in  it.  See  the 
Clarendon  State  Papers,  vol,  iii.  p.  46, 

s  2 


260 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1652. 


home  when  he  went  to  finde  him,  and  the  seth'nge 
the  kings  businesse  with  the  Surintend^t  (which  is 
yett  faiT  from  being  setled)  hath  so  worne  out  the 
good  okl  man,  that  he  hath  not  bene  yett  able  to 
settle  yours,  which  he  promises  me  to  dispatch  out 
of  hande :  I  forgott  likewise  to  tell  you,  that  this 
man  is  gone  from  him,  which  leaues  him  so  much 
the  worse. 

I  receaued  this  weeke  a  letter  from  S""  Ger.  Lucas, 
under  a  cover  to  you,  dated  from  a  place  called  I 

thinke  ,1  suppose  it  is  somewher  in  Bri- 

tany,  and  T  belieue  you  haue  some  addresse  to  him, 
therefore  I  trouble  you  with  the  inclosed. — All  heare 
are  your  Seru'' :  God  prseserue  you.  I  am  very 
heartily, 

S', 

Your  most  affectionate  humble  Serv*, 

Edw:  Hyde. 

Pallais  Royall  29     Novemh.  1652. 

The  Kinge  would  have  you  giue  Mr.  Richards  all 
assistance  in  executinge  the  orders  for  the  Patricke 
&  Francis,*  formerly  granted  to  S'  G'^  Carterett : 
the  10*^'  &  15*^'  are  to  be  payd  to  the  proper  receauers. 

Sir  Ri:  Browne. 


Sir  Ediuard  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 

I  haue  receaued  yours  of  the  26.  of  Decemb.  and 
am  very  gladd  that  you  were  then  upon  your  way  to 
Brest,  wher  sure  your  presence  will  be  more  neces- 
sary than  at  Nantes,  though  it  may  be,  your  com- 
pany was  not  much  desyred  ther :  you  will  I 
suppose  finde  the  seamen  and  Capt:  weary  of  that 
Porte,  and  therefore  you  are  like  to  be  the  more 
Wellcome  to  them,  with  the  proposicon  from  the 

*  Two  of  the  Jersey  privateers.  . 


1652.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


261 


Marecliall  de  Melleray,  *  and  if  they  were  once 
induced  to  goe  to  Porte  Lewes,  I  would  mooue  the 
Kinge  to  take  notice  of  it,  and  to  write  to  the 
Marechall :  I  hope  you  haue  founde  good  store  of 
mony  for  your  selfe  at  Brest,  from  the  pryzes  which 
haue  bene  brought  in,  &  that  you  finde  that  trybe  of 
Captayns  as  towardly  as  Mr.  Holder  reported  them 
to  be,  who  hath  a  wonderfull  esteeme  of  them  : 
Though  I  do  not  loue  to  infuse  any  iealosyes  or 
distrust  in  any  man,  of  his  frends,  and  those  of 
whome  he  hath  a  good  opinion,  yett  I  haue  reason 
to  warne  you,  to  be  a  little  upon  your  guarde, 
and  not  too  freely  to  imparte  all  you  know  or 

to  Mr.  H.        o         1  d  e  r 

thinke  667  .  568  .  17  .  2  .  28  .  15  .  23  .  36  . 

who  a         ...         weeke  mau 

704   :  trust  me  is  4  .  699  .  726  .  573  .  and  so 

in  his      llcligiou      that  hee 

sottishly  corrupted  534  .  502  .  337  .  673  .  501  . 

p  r  i  e  s 

belieues  whatsoeuer  an}^  34  .  36  .  27  .  7  .  13  . 
t 

12  .  sayes  to  him,  how  ridiculous  soeuer,  and  to 
all  these  virtues  he  tliinkes  himselfe  wiser  than 
Solomon.  Ther  are  some  other  reasons  for  this 
caution,  which  I  cannot  expresse  at  large,  which 

he         is  not         so  iust 

make  me  belieue  that  501  .  529  .  589  .  645  .  538  . 

to         you  he 

667  .  731  .  as  501  .  ought  to  be.  We  are  all  heare 
in  the  same  beggarly  condiconf  you  left  us,  which  I 

*  Melleray  was  at  this  moment  a  great  object  of  jealousy  to 
Cardinal  Mazarin,  who  caused  a  letter  to  be  sent  to  him  from  the 
King,  inviting  him  to  Court,  and  adding  an  offer  of  the  command  in 
Champagne;  but  the  Marshal,  knowing  well  tliat  this  was  an  intrigue 
to  get  him  and  his  son,  both  of  them  suspected  as  friendly  to  the 
Conde  party,  into  the  power  of  the  Court  faction,  excused  himself 
on  pi-etence  of  illness,  &c.    He  was  Governor  of  Nantes. 

'\'  Yet  the  subjoined  extract  is  taken  from  one  of  the  Intelligencers 
published  in  London,  of  the  date  of  November,  1652  :  "  The  King  of 
Scots  lies  yet  in  the  Palace  Royal,  whither  the  French  King  and 
Queen  came  to  give  him  a  visit,  and  in  abundance  of  ceremony,  to 
thank  him  for  that  great  pains  he  had  taken  in  laboui'ing  the  healing 


262  LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE  [1653. 

tliinke  by  longe  custome  will  grow  a  seconde  nature 
to  us :  I  should  be  glad  to  heare  that  S""  Geo. 
Carterett  were  come  to  Brest. — God  praeserue  you, 
and  bringe  lis  well  togither  agayne  : — I  am  very 
heartily, 

Your  most  affectionate  hu^'"  Serv^, 

EDW^  Hyde. 

Paris,  this  11  oi  January,  1653. 
Sir  Ri.  Browne. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Brovme. 

I  haue  yours  of  the  3*^  and  the  6.  of  this  moncth  : 
and  you  had  receaued  an  answer  to  the  first  before 
the  last  had  come  to  my  hands,  if  it  had  bene  in  my 
power  to  haue  returned  you  such  a  one  as  could 
haue  satisfyed  my  selfe.  I  was  as  full  of  the  sense 
of  the  iniury  and  indignity  that  is  offred  to  j'our 
Captaynes  at  Brest,  and  truly  so  is  the  Kinge,  as 
they  could  wish,  but  you  know  iniuryes  and  acts  of 
iniustice  are  not  as  soone  remedyed  and  repayred 
heare,  as  dicouered :  The  Kinge  wished  young 
Jermin,  Mr.  Atturny  and  my  selfe,  to  consider  what 
was  to  be  done,  and  w^ee  were  all  of  opinion,  know- 
inge  w^hat  Princes  all  Gouernors  are  at  present  in 
ffrance,  that  it  would  not  be  fit  to  mooue  the  Courte, 
which  no  doubte  knows  nothinge  of  this  arrest  and 

up  of  those  sad  breaches  between  his  Majesty  and  his  people  ;  which 
Christian  office  has  gained  him  at  Court  the  title  of  MagncB  Britannice 
et  Hibernice  Rex,  Fidei  Defensor,  Pericli  Dissipator  Gallici,  Pacisque 
Compositor  Generalissimo.  'Tis  rumoured  that  the  King  of  Denmark 
should  send  him  100,000/.  in  gold  for  a  present,  with  the  promised 
assistance  of  him  and  his  subjects  in  the  disputing  of  his  cause 
against  all  opposers.  The  Duke  of  Yorke  is  still  in  high  favour,  and 
is  cryed  up  for  the  most  accomplished  gentleman,  both  in  arms  and 
courtesie,  that  graces  the  French  Court.  The  English  begin  to  be 
admitted  dayly  into  places  of  high  trust  and  command  ;  and  those 
shaded  Cavaliers,  whom  the  world  thought  worthy  of  nothing  but 
exilement,  begin  to  be  looked  upon  according  to  their  worth  and 
laiown  gallantry." 


1653.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


263 


restrainte,  nor  it  may  be  of  the  bargayne  and  con- 
nivance for  the  admissyon  of  our  shipps  (for  you  know 
wee  haue  bene  Jonge  without  the  benefitt  of  the 
printed  Order  you  mention)  before  Mons.  Castlenoe 
(from  whome  the  orders  were  without  question  sent, 
for  his  owne  benefitt)  be  first  spoken  with,  and 
my  L*^  Jermin  "  promised  to  doe  that  presently,  and 
he  hoped  effectually ;  but  wee  finde  after  longe  en- 
quyry  that  Mons.  Castlenoe  is  gone  out  of  this  towne 
to  the  Cardinall,  nor  is  it  knowne  when  he  will 
returne,  and  yett  it  is  thought  as  necessary,  that  his 
minde  and  resolucon  be  first  vnderstoode  :  Therefore 
mj  Jermyn  hath  written  to  him,  and  inclosed 
the  state  of  the  case,  made  out  of  your  letters,  and 
Mr.  Atturny  hath  sent  the  same  to  the  Duke  of 
Yorke,  who  wee  presume  is  most  like  to  gett  a  full 
dispatch  in  it,  and  Avee  must  expecte  the  answer  from 
thence,  and  then  if  there  be  any  cause  to  complayne 

*  Jermyn's  influence  at  tlie  exiled  Covirt  had  foi'  some  time  been 
very  great  ;  and  is  thus  described  by  a  news-writer  of  the  time, 
writing  from  Paris,  in  a  volume  of  Tracts  in  the  British  Museum  : 
"  The  little  Queen  is  retired  to  the  nunnery  at  Chaliot,  there  to  spend 
her  time  a  Avhile  in  devotion,  for  the  advance  of  some  designes  that 
she  hath  on  foot.  She  left  her  son  the  fugitive  at  the  Louvre,  given 
up  to  the  bent  of  his  Common  Pi'ayer  Mongers,  and  of  Jermyn, 
whose  power  is  now  greater  with  him  than  any  ;  which  is  a  sure 
sign  that  his  Mother  rules  him  again,  and  that  he  hath  resigned  his 
judgment,  affection,  and  all  to  her  ;  because  heretofore  there  was  a 
sore  grudge  between  him  and  Jermyn,  in  regard  at  his  former  being 
here.      Jermyn  (who  then  commanded  and  still  keeps  the  purse) 

was  very  streight  handed  over  him  in  his  expenses  The  old 

Court  flies  begin  now  again  to  flock  about  him"  (30th  Dec.  1651) 
"  from  all  parts.  Crofts  is  returning  from  Poland,  where  he  called 
himselfe  a  Lorde  Ambassadour  ;  and  is  to  be  made  a  Lord  as  soon 
as  he  comes  (as  they  would  have  us  believe),  for  his  pains  in  that 
employment,  and  for  the  charitable  contribution  of  our  Polish  cousins 
that  (they  say)  he  brings  along  with  him.  Some  of  them  are  come 
to  the  Louvre  already  out  of  Flanders,  as  Hide,  a  man  of  dignity  too, 
that  calls  himself  the  Chequer  Chancellor  ;  here  is  also  Bramhall,  of 
London  Derry,  Dan  O'Neill,  Fraiser,  a  physitian,  and  one  Lloid,  a 
Chaplain.  These  bring  newes,  that  Buckingham  and  Seer.  Nicholas 
would  have  come  along  too,  but  that  they  -wanted  Ghelt  ;  and  the  rest 
of  his  Majesties  black  guard  and  retinue  that  wander  in  the  Low 
Countries,  if  they  were  sure  of  daily  bread  for  their  attendance." 


264 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE  [1653. 


at  Courte,  wee  will  take  the  best  care  wee  can,  that 
it  be  made  as  it  ought  to  be. 

ffor  the  other  bvisinesse  concerninge  the  Marq: 

of  ,  of  which  I  thinke  I  writt  somewhat  to 

you  in  my  last,  Mr.  Atturny  and  I  haue  spoken  with 
Choquy  of  it,  who  exspects  euery  day  an  answer  to 
what  he  hath  formerly  sent  to  the  Marq:  and  when 
that  comes,  or  that  it  appeares  he  desyres  not  to  make 
any  answer,  the  Kinge  will  conclude  what  he  should 
doe  as  to  the  revocation. 

ffor  your  Hamborough  pryse,  you  cannot  suppose 
that  I  will  returne  a  priuate  opinion  of  my  owne,  in 
a  businesse  of  that  nature,  for  many  reasons,  and 
the  Kinge  commanded  me  to  aduise  with  M""  At- 
turny, and  upon  both  our  consideringe  the  case,  as 
M""  Holder  sent  it  me,  wee  doe  not  see  it  so  cleerely 
stated,  as  to  be  able  to  giue  the  King  any  iudgement 
upon  it,  since  it  does  not  appeare  that  the  goods  do 
at  all  belonge  to  any  English  raarchant  or  ffactor, 
but  for  ought  appears  may  be  the  proper  estate  of 
the  Hamberghers. 

I  did  not  suppose  they  had  suffred  you  to  giue  any 
adiudications  ther,  and  that  the  former  arrest  had 
bene  made  at  Rhemes  upon  that  qup.rrell :  We  hope 
the  Duke  will  be  heare  within  2  or  3  dayes,  and  then 
it  will  be  necessary  to  receaue  his  derection  upon  all 
this  businesse.  My  L*^  Inchiquin  and  I  are  upon 
some  trouble  with  your  Landlord,  who  yesterday  was 
at  your  house,  and  expresses  some  purpose  to  seize 
upon  the  goods;  which  we  all  vnderstande  would 
not  only  be  very  mischieuous  to  you,  but  very  dis- 
honorable to  the  Kinge,  and  therefore  you  may  be 
confident  that  wee  omitt  nothing  that  is  in  our  power 
to  doe,  hauinge  not  a  penny  to  discharge  the  debte.* 

*  An  extract  from  the  Mercurius  Politicus  of  the  8th  July,  1652, 
may  help  to  illustrate  this  letter  :  "  Charles  Stuart,  who  was  said  to 
be  gone  in  our  last  [from  Paris]  went  not  till  some  few  days  after. 
He  made  the  more  haste,  because  a  servant  of  his  was  fallen  upon, 
pursued,  and  beaten,  even  in  his  master's  place  of  abode  at  the 
Louvre.  Hee  also  was  besieged  there  by  the  bakers,  butchers,  and 
other  tradesmen  of  all  sorts,  in  whose  books  he  is  fain  very  deep  ; 
and  they  feared,  if  they  lost  hira  they  should  lose  their  money.  But 


1653.]  AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE.  265 

This  day  S'  Ri:  ffoster  goes  vfith  my  L'^  Inchiquin  to 
him,  to  see  how  farr  good  wordes  and  promises  will 
prevayle  with  him,  and  all  other  conrses  shall  be 
really  taken  for  his  satisfaction,  that  are  in  the 
Kinges  power.  Will  ther  be  nothinge  dew  upon  the 
Kinges  owne  share  of  the  pryses  brought  in  by  the 
Patricke  &  Francis,  that  might  be  imployed  to 
that  purpose  ?  any  order  sliould  be  procured  from 
hence. 

I  pray  convay  this  inclosed  to  Ge:  Carterett,  who  I 
suppose  is  not  still  with  you.  God  prseserue  you.  I 
am  heartily. 

Your  most  affectionate  hu^^*'  Serv*, 

Edw.  Hyde. 

Pall:  Ro:  this  21  of  January  1653. 
Sir  R.  Browne. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne, 

I  haue  receaued  yours  of  the  7th  from  the  good 
Govern''  and  yourselfe,  and  this  must  serue  as  answer 
to  you  both,  for  I  am  still  in  my  old  posture,  not 
yet  able  to  stirr  from  my  bed.  I  have  not  heard 
these  many  weekes  from  Mr.  Holder,  but  I  suppose 
he  giues  the  same  informacon  to  the  Duke  and  his 
officers,  if  not,  what  he  sayes  is  likely  to  be  belieued 
more  then  what  I  shall  informe,  therefore  I  must 
still  renew  my  aduice  to  you,  that  you  write  very 
particularly  to  the  Duke  himselfe,  or  to  some  of  his 
officers,  of  all  the  obstruccons  you  meete  with,  and 
very  particularly  of  the  misdemeanours  of  the  Cap- 
taines,  *  and  of  any  such  proposicons  and  expedients 

to  pacify  them  they  were  told  his  intent  was  but  to  go  to  Rosney 
upon  the  way  to  Roan.  His  mother  marches  with  him.  The  small 
baggage  they  have  is  already  gone.  They  give  out  that  they  will 
returne  after  the  peace  is  made,  and  condemn  this  City  of  ingratitude; 
alledging  that  it  had  bin  blockt  up  by  the  King  before  this  time,  had  it 
not  bin  for  their  mediation  with  his  Majesty." 

*  The  Duke  of  York  was  actually  at  this  period  with  the  French 


266 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1653. 


which  you  thinke  fitt  to  offer  for  the  promoting  his 
seruice,  and  I  make  noe  doubt  but  his  Roy  all  High- 
nes  will  as  soone  hearken  to  you,  and  be  aduiced  by 
you,  as  by  any  persons.  I  can  giue  you  no  intelli- 
gence from  hence,  whilst  I  continue  thus  a  prysoner, 
but  trueh^  I  thinke  they  who  are  abroad  know  little 
of  moment,  the  Court  here  being  wholy  intent  upon 
battels  and  matters  of  pleasure,  and  our  owne  affaires 
being  in  a  dead  calme,  exspecting  some  gentle  gale 
from  some  of  our  neighbours  to  give  them  motion, 
and  really  I  doe  belieue  y"  good  spiritt  does  improve, 
since  no  body  can  doubt,  but  y*  the  people  in  Eng- 
land are  generally  well  prepared  for  it.  This  is  all 
I  can  say  to  you,  but  y*  I  am  to  you  both 

your  most  affectionate  humble  servant, 

EDw^  Hyde. 

Paris  18  Feb.  1653. 

The  King  hath  lately  bene  aduertised  by  the 
Gouernment  of  Innisboffine,  that  if  any  Marchant- 
men  will  bring  corne,  armes,  or  ammunicon  thither, 
they  shall  be  sure  to  receiue  ready  money  for  it,  and 
that  such  a  supply  would  enable  them  for  some  time 
to  exspect  greater,  and  not  to  submitt  to  the  rebells. 
If  it  were  possible  to  procure  any  of  your  Men  of 
War,  or  any  Marchants  to  resort  thither,  it  would  be 
a  wonderfuU  good  seruice,  therefore  I  pray  deuice 
all  wayes  possible  to  compasse  it,  and  let  me  know 
how  the  seuerall  letters  I  sent  to  you  directed  to  y* 
place  haue  bene  disposed  off.  * 

army  under  Turenne  ;  and  though  he  would  seem  from  this  letter  to 
have  been  personally  interested  in  the  affairs  of  the  little  squadron  of 
privateers,  yet  there  is  no  mention  of  it  whatever  in  the  Life  published 
from  his  own  Memoir. 

*  These  plans  and  hopes  Avere  soon  after  put  an  end  to  by  the 
capture  of  Innisboffin  by  the  Parliamentary  army,  it  being  then  the 
last  place  in  Ireland  that  held  out  for  the  King. 


1653.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


267 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 
S', 

I  am  sure  it  can  be  no  newes  to  you  that  Pr. 
Rupert  is  safe  at  Nantes,"  and  tlierfore  it  is  very 
probable  this  letter  may  not  finde  you  at  Brest^  but 
that  you  may  haue  thought  it  fitt  to  attende  his 
Highnesse,  and  offer  him  your  seruice.  The  Kinge 
hath  sent  Mr.  Holder  some  derection  concerninge  the 
Hamborough  shipp.  If  George  Carterettf  be  not 
with  you,  I  pray  send  this  letter  to  him  by  the  first 
safe  opportunity,  and  if  he  hath  not  a  coppy  of  your 
cypher,  send  it  to  him,  I  havinge  used  it  in  this 
letter  for  3  or  4  lynes,  wliich  it  is  necessary  for  him 
to  understande.  Excuse  me,  who  hauinge  no  letter 
of  yours  to  answer,  for  beinge  at  present  so  shorte, 
which  you  know  is  not  my  naturall  faulte.  Wee 
haue  reason  to  hope  the  Kings  affayres  are  upon  a 
mendinge  hande,  with  reference  to  Hollande. — God 
be  with  vou.  I  am  very  heartily, 
S', 

your  most  affectionate  Seru^, 

Edw\  Hyde. 

Paris  this  22  of  31arch  (1653). 
Sir  Ric:  Browne. 

*  This  was  the  last  of  Prince  Rupert's  maritime  expeditions 
during  the  Interregnum.  On  his  return  to  Europe  he  captured  a 
rich  prize  laden  with  tobacco,  and  having  carried  her  into  Kantz,  in 
March,  1653,  he  was  soon  after  seized  with  a  violent  illness,  recover- 
ing from  which  he  proceeded  to  Paris,  and  was  well  received  by  the 
French  King.  From  Paris  he  v/ent  to  the  Imperial  Court ;  but 
returned  to  England  at  the  Restoration.  The  small  fleet  now  under 
the  command  of  Prince  Rupert  had  been  originally  refitted  at 
Toulon  ;  but  having  met  with  losses  of  ships,  particularly  at  the 
Azores  (where  his  own  flag-ship,  the  Reformation,  had  been  sunk, 
and  the  whole  crew  of  360  men  perished,  with  the  exception  of 
Rupert,  his  brother  Maurice,  and  twelve  others),  it  was  found  neces- 
sary to  return  to  the  northern  parts  of  France;  particularly  as  Admiral 
Penn,  with  his  squadron,  was  waiting  for  them  in  the  Straits  of 
Gibraltar. 

t  Sir  George  Carteret,  a  little  before  this  time,  commanded  a 


268 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1653. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 
S', 

About  three  days  since  I  receaued  yours  of  the  24. 
of  the  last  moueth,  which  makes  me  still  wonder  how 
it  comes  to  passe,  that  yours  are  so  longe  upon  the 
way,  for  it  is  not  possible  that  the  post  can  be  12  or 
14  dayes  upon  the  way  from  Brest,  and  so  much  tyme 
ther  is  still  betweene  your  writinge  and  my  readinge. 
I  suppose  the  Governour  is  now  gone  to  Nantes,  or 
else  he  will  not  wayte  on  the  Prince,  which  I  should 
be  sorry  for.  the  Kinge  sent  his  coach  on  Wensday 
to  Orleans,  supposinge  it  will  meete  his  Highnesse  * 
ther,  or  that  he  will  be  ther  within  a  day  or  2  after, 
so  that  wee  exspecte  him  heare  on  Tuesday  or 
"Wensday,  and  till  his  returne  I  do  not  conceaue  that 
you  neede  putt  your  selfe  to  the  treble  of  a  iourny, 
and  if  ther  be  then  any  occasyon  for  it,  I  will  aduer- 
tise  you:  If  the  euidence  against  the  Captaynes  be 
so  pregnant  as  it  seemes  by  you  to  be,  of  seueral 
theftes  and  cozinages,  how  would  it  be  possible  for 
the  Judge  to  declare  them  innocent  ?  and  though  it 
may,  it  would  be  difficulte  to  obteyne  iustice  against 
them  in  that  jurisdiction,  yett  the  declininge  to  giue 
in  the  testimony  and  charge  against  them  before  the 
proper  officer  (though  it  is  possible  he  will  not  haue 
power  enough  to  cause  reparacon  to  be  made,  if  he 
had  the  will  to  do  it)  will  be  made  a  greate  counte- 
nance to  them,  as  if  the  allegations  were  not  waighty ; 
and  I  finde  (though  I  am  a  stranger  to  all  that  is  done 
on  that  syde  of  the  house)  that  the  Captaynes  are 
upon  all  occasyons  much  magnifyed,  as  excellent 
vsefull  ministers. — I  am  very  gladd  of  that  order  you 

small  squadron  of  the  Royal  ships,  with  which  he  cruised,  principally 
upon  the  coast  of  Ireland,  and  greatly  to  the  annoyance  of  the 
Republican  party,  if  we  may  judge  from  their  journals. 

*  Prince  Rupert.  This  event  is  much  noticed  in  the  London 
journals  of  the  time.  Those  journals  also  assert,  upon  the  autho- 
rity of  some  runaway  seamen  who  had  landed  at  Weymouth,  "  that 
all  the  plunder  he  hath  brought  is  not  worth  10,000^.,  and  the  Swallow 
is  hallen  up  altogether  unserviceable." 


1653.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


269 


mention,  against  the  transportinge  the  necessaryes 
for  shippinge,  which  I  wonder  the  more  at,  because 
wee  conceaue  the  ffrench  Minister  at  London  euery 
day  getts  grounde,  but  I  hope  they  will  deceaue  each 
other. — Innisboffin  was  poorly  giuen  up  aboute  the 
middle  of  ffebruary,  so  that  now  I  feare  the  poore 
Irish  haue  only  woods  and  boggs  for  shelter ;  I  pray 
keepe  all  those  dispatches  safe  by  you,  but  you  neede 
not  send  them  backe,  till  you  come  your  selfe.  Hath 
Carterett  a  good  opinion  of  Anthonio  ?  I  hope 
ther  will  be  some  parte  of  your  house-rent  payd  out 
of  hande,  but  I  know  not  what  to  say  to  your  assigne- 
ments  upon  the  Prince,  Avho  no  doubte  will  haue 
occasyon  to  vse  all  and  more  then  he  can  haue 
brought  home,  to  repayre  and  fitt  out  his  shipps.'f^ — 
It  is  a  good  and  conscientious  thinge  to  pay  off  any 
old  debts,  and  good  husbandry  to  discharge  those 
first,  for  which  interest  is  to  be  payd ;  but  if  I  were 
in  your  case,  I  should  satisfy  my  selfe,  in  keepinge 
mony  enough  in  my  purse  to  prseserue  me  a  yeere 
from  staruinge,  before  I  thought  of  paying  any 
debtes.  Wee  do  flatter  ourselves  with  an  opinion, 
that  our  affayres  will  mende,  and  that  wee  shall  not 
stay  long  heare,  indeede  I  belieue  our  Master  will 
putt  himselfe  into  some  action  this  summer,  and  that 
wee  shall  not  spende  it  in  ffrance.f  God  prseserue 
you  and, 

your  very  affectionate  hu''^^  Serv*, 

E.  H. 

Paris  this  12  oi  Ajml  (1653). 

Indorsed  by  Sir  R.  Browne: 
From  Mr.  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  12  Ap^  1653.  Received 
19  Api. 


*  These  were  the  shattered  ships  which  had  returned  to  Nantz 
from  the  West  Indian  cruise :  but  another  portion  of  the  Royal 
squadron  was  now  favourably  received  in  the  ports  of  Holland;  as 
we  find  asserted  in  the  Moderate  Publisher  of  the  15th  April,  1653. 
Indeed  it  was  generally  reported  that  the  States  had  now  resolved 
to  give  Charles  the  title  of  King  of  Great  Britain. 

t  This  was  a  vain  hope,  for  Charles  remained  in  France  until  the 
ensuing  year. 


270 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1653. 


Sir  Richard  Browne  to  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer. 

21  April  1653. 

Right  Hon^'^ 

Two  dayes  since  I  receiued  your  Hon"  of  12^^,  by 
which  it  appeares  that  it  made  better  speede  hither, 
then  it  seemes  mine  commonly  doe  to  Paris,  the 
cause  whereofif  is,  that  betweene  this  place  and 
Morlaix  there  is  noe  settled  convaiance,  only  the 
opportunity  of  such  carriers  who  come  uncertainly 
from  thence  hither  once  or  twice  a  weeke  to  fetch 
linnen  cloth.  I  haue  not  yett  heard  one  word  from  the 
Gouernour  since  his  goinge  hence  :  butt  Mr.  Holder 
(who  yesterday  returned  from  Nantes)  assures  mee 
that  hee  had  beene  with  the  Prince  some  dayes  before 
his  Highnesses  going  for  Paris  ;  and  that  His  H.  did 
also  acknowledge  to  him  to  haue  receiued  my  Tre  by 
Sir  G:  Carterett.* 

I  perceive  the  French  minister  is  nott  returned  (as 
wee  were  made  beleiue)  out  of  England,  which  I 
am  sorry  for,  butt  hope  God  in  his  due  time  will  doe 
our  worke  by  puttinge  his  Ma'^  into  some  successefuU 
action  worthy  his  Royall  undertakinge  :  and  shall 
with  impatience  exspect  to  heare  how 'in  case  our 
Maister  leaue  the  kingdome,  I  shall  bee  iuabled  to 
returne  to  Paris  (one  handsome  stepp  to  which  the 

*  How  very  little  chance  the  Privy  Purse  had  of  assistance  from 
the  assets  of  the  squadron,  may  be  judged  from  a  letter  of  Hyde's  to 
Nicholas,  where  he  says :  "  You  must  never  expect  information  from 
me  of  any  of  the  business  of  the  prize,  or  anything  that  is  managed 
by  Prince  Rupert,  who  consults  only  with  the  Lord  Keeper;  and  I 
much  doubt  very  little  of  that  money  will  come  to  the  King.  I  shall 
be  satisfied  if  what  is  raised  on  the  guns  and  ship  (for  all  is  to  be 
sold)  come  justly  to  his  hands."  See  the  Clarendon  State  Papers, 
vol,  iii.  p.  200. — And  again,  in  p.  222,  he  speaks  more  feelingly : 
"  The  truth  is,  Prince  Rupert  is  so  totally  governed  by  the  Lord 
Keeper  [Sir  Edward  Herbert],  that  the  King  knows  him  not.  You 
talk  of  money  the  King  should  have  upon  the  prizes  at  Nantz  ; 
alass  !  he  hath  not  only  not  had  one  penny  from  thence,  but  Prince 
Rupert  pretends  the  King  owes  him  more  money  than  ever  I  was 
worth." 


1663.]  AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


271 


discharge  of  my  house-rent  will  proue),  or  be  other- 
wayes  disposed  off  in  order  to  his  seruice.  If  wee 
had  faire  play  the  Kiuges  dues  here  would  rise  to 
somethinge,  butt  with  this  most  abominably  shock- 
inge  Gouvernour  there  is  such  an  unpreuentable 
tyranny  in  the  vpper  and  corruption  of  the  under 
officers  in  this  place  where  we  are  but  precario,  that 
it  is  a  shame  to  see  it. 

Captain  Antonio  hath  vppon  that  score  quite  left 
this  port,  and  will  yf  hee  may  be  beleiued  be  shortly 
with  you  at  Paris,  where  he  hath  a  proces.  S'  G. 
Carteret  will  giue  y"  Hon'  an  account  of  him ;  for 
since  the  receipt  of  your  last  I  haue  written  to  him 
soe  to  doe.  He  knowes  what  I  thinke  of  him,  and 
yf  his  owne  opinion  bee  not  better  then  mine,  I  doe 
assure  your  Hon'  it  is  nott  admirably  good  :  and  I  doe 
wish  the  Kinge  would  be  very  sparinge  how  hee  con- 
ferre  any  fauour  on  him  until  he  deserue  better  then 
hithertoo  I  can  say  hee  hath.  I  perceiue  you  haue 
new  councellors  sworne  &  a  grand  new  officer  with 
whom  I  am  obleeged  to  congratulate.  God  direct 
all  for  the  best :  soe  that  the  generall  of  our  affaires 
goe  well,  it  matters  not  much  what  becomes  of  him, 
who  is  unfaignedly  and  seternally  Yo'  Hon" 

Most  faithfuU,  most  obliged, 

and  most  humble  seruant, 

R:  Browne. 

Brest,  21.  April  1653. 
Mr.  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer. 


Bir  Richard  Browne  to  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer. 

Right  Hon^% 
My  last  to  your  Hon''  were  of  the  28th  Aprill, 
Munday  last;  the  day  foUowinge  in  the  eueninge 
came  priuatly  to  this  towne  the  Marquis  de  Neu- 
bourg,  youngest  brother  to  the  Marq:  de  Sourdiac, 
with  another  gentleman  in  his  company  ;  who  imme- 
diately went  to  the  Castle,  and  after  a  longe  consul- 
tation with  Mon'  de  Camper  concealed  themselues  as 


272 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1653. 


much  as  tliey  could.  Yesterday,  in  a  small  fregat* 
which  was  goinge  to  sea  with  his  Ma*'*"*  commission, 
this  Marquis,  with  a  Captain,  an  officer  of  the  Castle, 
&  150  men,  amongst  which  our  turbulent  Captain 
Smyth,  imbarqued  as  priuatly  as  they  could  with  in- 
tention to  goe  and  reduce  the  Isle  of  Ushant,  for 
which  enterprise  I  heare  this  Marquis  hath  brought 
the  French  Kinges  orders  and  Mon'"  de  Castlenau^s 
recommendations.  And  I  presume  the  island  yf 
taken,  will  as  formerly  bee  re-annexed f  to  this 
gouvernment  of  Brest.  Wee  are  in  hourly  expec- 
tation what  the  successe  will  bee,  wheroff  your 
Hon""  may  expect  account  in  my  next,  and  accord- 
ingly I  shall  gouverne  myselfe  in  the  demand  of  his 
Ma*'*"'  dues  out  of  the  tobacco  that  shall  be  there 
found,  which  is  nott  vppon  this  occasion  to  bee  ne- 
glected. Nott  yett  one  line  from  my  deare  George 
Carteret :  wee  lined  together  like  brothers ;  and  I 
hope  he  hath  nott  soe  soone  forgotten  mee. 
Prayinge,  &c.  From  your  Hon""'  &c. 

E.  B. 

Brest.  2  May.  1653. 

The  Hollanders  bringe  more  prizes  dayly  into  the 
ports  vppon  this  coast.  Captain  Swart,  who  com- 
manded The  Patricke  hath  this  weeke  lanched  a  small 
man  of  warre  under  the  Holland  colours ;  Agent 
Bameng  Coale  hauinge  undertaken  to  procure  for 
him  a  sea-  commission  from  the  States  of  Holland. 

*  The  Parliamentai'y  news-writers  of  the  day,  alluding  to  those 
parts  of  the  navy  which  still  remained  loyal  to  Charles,  inform  us  : 
"  The  King  of  Scots  Pickroones  play  their  cards  cunningly  upon  the 
coast  of  Jersey ;  no  less  then  two  delicate  prizes  have  they  taken  and 
carried  to  Shawsey  Island,"  (Isle  du  Choisi),  "  aniountinge  to  a  great 
value  ;  besides  Captain  Chamberlin  playes  his  pranks  notably,  and 
trusses  up  our  pore  fishermen,  even  as  a  falcon  doth  wild  ducks, 
forcing  them  to  pay  tribute  to  his  young  master  Charles,  and  exacts  a 
pistol  upon  all  such  boats  that  fetcheth  urack  [sea  wrack]  from  the 
said  island  of  Shawsey,  belonging  to  the  French  King." 

t  This  affair  is  rather  unintelligible,  unless  we  suppose  that  Ushant 
had  declared  for  the  Condean  party.  The  tobacco  alluded  to  may 
possibly  have  formed  the  cargoes  of  prizes  carried  in  there  by  the 
Royal  cruisers. 


lG53.j 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


273 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 
S', 

I  haue  receaued  yours  of  the  21.  of  tlie  last^  and 
had  one  little  letter  from  the  Gouernour  *  since  his 
departure  from  you^  after  he  had  wayted  on  the 
Prince :  I  belieue  he  is  now  busy  at  Burdeaux^  yett 
sure  he  will  sometymes  write  to  his  frends,  who  haue 
the  lesse  reason  to  be  angry  with  his  silence^  since 
his  wife  knowes  so  little  of  him,  that  shee  askes  me 
wher  he  is.  Our  reportes  of  the  proceedings  of  the 
fFrench  minister  in  Englande  are  so  different,  that 
I  know  not  what  to  thinke  of  it,  many  of  our  frends 
at  London  conceauinge  him  even  ready  to  come  away 
full  of  dissatisfaction,  &  on  the  contrary  the  Courte 
heare  belieue,  or  secme  to  belieue,  that  they  haue 
almost  finished  a  treaty  with  them  to  their  content : 
if  the  newes  which  came  to  the  towne  2  dayes 
since,  be  true,  that  Burdeaux  hath  declared  it  selfe 
a  common  wealth,  and  is  promised  protection  fro' 
Englande,  ther  will  be  a  quicke  end  of  that  negoti- 
acon  :  I  wish  wee  were  ready  to  be  gone  from 
hence,  though  you  were  not  so  amply  prouyded  for, 
as  I  wish,  yett  I  doubte  not  somewhat  would  be  done 
towards  it :  in  the  meane  tyme,  I  am  confident  S'' 
Bic:  ffoster  hath  payd  at  least  halfe  a  yeeres  rent,  but 
I  thinke  more  :  I  know  no  new  councellours  made 
but  the  Keeper  :t  and  wee  haue  now  another  new 
greate  ofiicer,  Pr.  Buperte,  Master  of  the  Horse :  J 


Sir  George  Carteret,  who  had  been  Deputy  Governor  of  Jersey. 
+  Sir  Edward  Herbert,  Lord  Keeper  since  1 652,  of  whom  Clarendon 
elsewhere  says,  that  he  "thought  himself  the  wisest  man  that  fol- 
lowed the  King's  fortune ;  and  was  always  angi'y  that  he  had  not 
more  to  do."  His  intrigues  are  humorously  depicted  in  Clarendon's 
autobiography. 

X  A  letter  from  Paris,  in  the  journals  of  the  day,  says:  "'Prince 
Rupert  is  in  some  measure  recovei'ed  of  his  bloody  flux,  but  goes 
little  abroad  out  of  the  Palace  Royal,  because  he  wants  a  princely 
retinue,  which  I  see  no  probability  for  him  to  have  in  France  yet  a 
while.    Charles  Stuart  is  at  a  non  plus  what  to  do ;  things  do  not 

VOL.  IV.  T 


274  LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE  [1653. 

God  praeseme  you_,  and  send  us  a  good  meetinge. 
T  am  uery  heartily,, 

Your  most  affectionate  hu^^^  Serv*, 

E.  H. 

Paris,  this  3  of  3IaTj  1653. 
Sir  R.  Browne. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne, 

I  receaued  yours  of  the  28.  of  the  last^  and  of 
the  2*^  of  this^  togither  3  dayes  since  :  I  thought 
all  the  dutyes  of  the  Marq^  pryzes  had  bene  already 
in  Mr.  Bullins  hande^  and  I  told  him  that  he  should, 
and  he  told  me  he  would  retayne  in  his  owne  hands 
the  for  you  :  I  will  not  so  much  as  enquyreinto 
what  concernes  or  may  relate  to  the  10*''^  nor  a 
worde  more  concerninge  the  commissyons,  for  which 
I  am  sure  Edgman  neuer  exspected  a  penny,  but 
Maffonett  did,  and  had  reason  to  doe,  which  I 
suppose  Mr.  Bennett  -  had  not :  but  no  more  of 
that :  nor  I  pray  take  any  more  notice  of  it. 

I  receaued  a  letter  from  the  good  Gouernour 
within  these  2  days  from  Brouages,  which  was  the 
first  I  had  from  him  since  his  beinge  at  Nantes, 
though  he  sayes  he  hath  writt  others.  It  is  no  easy 
matter  in  that  hurry  he  is  in  of  businesse  and 
remooues  to  write  frequent  letters,  nor  is  he  good 

answer  his  expectations :  his  designes  faile  him."  Another  observes : 
"  Prince  Rupert  flourishes  witli  his  blackmoors  and  new  liveries,  and 
so  doth  his  cousin  Charles,  they  having  shared  the  moneys  made  of  the 
prize  goods  at  Nantz ;  and  in  recompence  Rupert  is  made  Master  of 
the  Horse." 

*  This  is  that  Bennet  of  .whom  Clarendon  remarks,  that  he  was  a 
man  bred  from  his  cradle  in  the  Court,  and  had  no  other  business  in 
the  world  than  to  be  a  good  courtiex',  in  the  arts  whereof  he  suc- 
ceeded so  well,  that  he  might  well  be  reckoned  in  the  number  of  the 
finest  gentlemen  of  the  time  ;  and,  though  his  parts  of  nature  were 
very  mean,  and  never  improved  by  industry,  yet,  passing  his  time 
always  in  good  company,  and  well  acquainted  with  what  was  done  in 
all  businesses,  be  would  speak  well  and  reasonably  to  any  purpose. 


1653.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


275 


at  itt  at  any  tyme,  and  tlierfore  you  and  I  shall  be 
very  vnkinde  and  vniust  to  him,  if  wee  suspecte  his 
frendshipp  to  us,  for  those  omissyonS;,  which  all  men, 
but  those  of  the  penn,  are  alwayes  guilty  of :  he  is 
sure  a  very  worthy  person,  and  loues  wher  he 
professes  soe  to  do :  you  heare  what  a  noble  confu- 
sion Cromwell  hath  made,  by  dissoluinge  ther 
Parliam*  *  with  all  the  contempt  and  scorne  imagin- 
able, and  now  those  adored  members,  and  of  the 
Councell  of  State,  are  looked  upon  by  all,  as  they 
deserue  to  be  :  what  be  ther  next  acte,  is  our  great 
expectacon,  and  what  influence  that  which  is  done, 
must  haue  "upon  forraigne  nations,  who  were  treatinge 
with  them:  sure  some  notable  crisis  is  at  hande, 
worse  I  hope  wee  cannot  be.  All  thinges  are  heare 
as  they  were,  S""  Ric.  ffoster  hath  payed  500^'.  for 
your  rent,  and  hath  acquittance  only  for  so  much, 
but  no  information,  what  the  contracte  is,  or  how 
much  is  still  in  arreare.  God  send  us  a  good  meet- 
inge  in  England,  which  is  not  despavred  of  by, 

Your  very  affectionate  serv*, 

E.  H. 

Paris  3fay  19.  1653. 
Sir  R.  Browne. 


Si}'  Richard  Broivne  to  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer, 

20  May,  1653. 

Eight  Hon^'% 
Yesterday  I  gaue  yo''  Hon""  notice  of  my  being 
called  to  Nantes ;  this  morninge  as  I  am  ready  to 

*  An  allusion  to  the  memorable  event  of  the  20th  April,  1653, 
when  Cromwell  entered  the  House  of  Commons  at  the  head  of  a  party 
of  soldiers,  forcibly  dissolved  the  Parliament  then  sitting,  took  away 
the  mace,  and  ordered  the  doors  to  be  locked  up,  A  few  days  after- 
ward a  bill  was  stuck  upon  the  door  — "  This  House  to  be  let 
unfurnished."  One  of  the  Intelligencers  of  the  same  day  published 
an  alleged  letter  from  Paris,  stating  :  "  Charles  Stuart  pretends  to  be 
as  glad  at  the  dissolution  of  the  Parliament  of  England,  as  at  the 

T  2 


276 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1653. 


put  footc  in  stiiTop,  Captain  Sadlington's  *  fregat 
arriues  from  the  coast  of  Irland  with  the  bearer 
hearoff  O'Sullivane  Beirne,t  ^  person  Avhom  I  find 
noe  lesse  by  his  owne  discourse  then  by  the  testi- 
monye  of  all  his  countrymen  here,  very  well  afi'ected 
to  his  Ma^"'  seruice :  He  comes  deputed  from  such 
of  his  Ma*'"  faithfull  subjects  as  yett  remain e  in  the 
west  side  of  Munster  :  and  hastens  now  towards  Paris 
to  giue  his  Ma*'"  an  account  of  those  parts  :  which 
though  of  it  selfe  it  bee  recommendation  enough, 
yett  at  his  request,  I  take  the  boldnesse  by  these 
to  addresse  him  to  y''  Hon"  acquaintance,  and  by  y' 
fauour  to  his  Ma*^' :  The  state  of  whose  affaires,  I 
hope  hee  may  by  Gods  goodnesse  find  in  a  condition 
able  to  afford  such  releife  as  may  excite  and  ani- 
mate these  embers  of  loyalty  into  a  fire,  nay  flame, 
sufficient  to  destroy  and  consume  the  circumambient 
and  the  now  too  predominant  contrary  of  haynous 
treason  and  unparaleld  rebellion.  In  which  good 
omen  I  kisse  yo*"  Hon'"'  hands,  and  rest 
Y"  &c.  &c. 

R.  Browne. 

coming  of  his  brother  Henry  to  him,  but  I  think  they  are  both  but 
frohcs.  He  hath  received  intelhgence  from  Rome,  that  the  Pope  will 
have  nothing  to  do  with  him,  and  in  no  case  have  dealing  with  him, 
as  being  not  only  inconstant  and  unsettled  what  to  do,  but  unable  to 
do  anything." 

*  Captain  Sadlington  was  retained  in  the  royal  service  after  the 
Restoration,  and  fell  gallantly  fighting  in  the  year  1673,  on  the  4th  of 
June,  in  the  action  with  Van  Tromp.  He  then  commanded  the  Crown, 
under  the  orders  of  Prince  Rupert. 

+  O'SuUivan  Beirne  was  a  gentleman  of  some  landed  property  in 
Ireland,  living  near  Beerhaven,  and  was  of  such  consequence  in  that 
part  of  the  country,  where  the  clans  of  O'Sullivan  were  numerous, 
that  he  was  chosen  general  of  the  forces  raised  in  aid  of  the  Royal 
cause.  The  reason  of  this  visit  to  France  seems  to  be  accounted  for 
by  the  following  extract  from  the  Severall  Proceedings  of  the  30th 
June,  1653  :  "  From  Ireland  it  is  certified,  that  a  party  of  Irish,  of 
General  Bear's  men,  had  a  design  to  have  surprised  some  gari'isons  ; 
but,  having  notice,  a  party  fell  upon  them  in  their  march,  routed 
them,  and  killed  many ;  and  Bear  himself,  with  some  other  officers, 
got  into  a  boat,  and  fled  over  into  France." 


1653.] 


AJ^D  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


277 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne, 

I  receaued  yours  of  the  7.  3  dayes  since  and 
yesterday  your  other  of  the  10.  and  returne  this  by 
the  same  hande  which  brought  me  yours^  which 
seemes  to  be  very  sollicitous  and  confident  to 
returne  it  safely  and  speedily  to  you  :  I  haue  sent 
3^ou  such  a  letter  from  his  Ma*^  to  the  Marshall,  as 
in  my  vnderstandinge  is  necessary,  and  I  hope  if 
any  thinge  would,  will  prseuayle  with  him.  To  have 
inserted  the  memoire  it  selfe  would  not  haue  bene 
so  proper,  since  it  cannot  be  supposed  to  be  within 
his  Ma*^'  proper  cognisance.  Your  letters  concern- 
inge  O'Sullivan  Beare  are  not  come  to  my  hands. 

Upon  the  receipt  of  your  former  I  did  send  the 
inclosed  to  Mr.  Bennett,  who  hath  notwithstandinge 
not  vouchsafed  to  conferr  with  me  a  worde  about 
the  businesse,  and  when  I  sent  to  him  to  know 
whether  he  would  send  any  thinge  to  you,  and  lett 
him  know  what  his  Ma*^  had  directed,  he  returned 
me  answer  that  I  might  haue  spared  his  Ma^^  that 
labour,  for  the  Duke  had  done  the  same,  but  I  hope 
actes  of  supererogation  in  this  kinde  will  do  no 
harme :  it  may  be  he  will  send  his  letters  under  this 
cover. 

Ther  is  no  questyon  that  I  know  concerninge 
your  accounte,  it  is  fitt  you  should  alwayes  haue  it 
ready,  and  produce  it  when  it  is  called  for,  and  Idoubte 
not  you  will  receaue  all  iust  allowance,  and  truly  I  am 
heartily  glad  that  it  hath  brought  so  seasonable  a 
reliefe  to  you  :  *  our  Master  thinkes  of  remoouinge, 

*  It  was  made  matter  of  remark  in  the  public  journals  that  a  season- 
able supply  had  arrived  for  the  Royal  family  at  this  moment.  The 
Faithful  Post,  of  the  same  date  as  this  letter,  says,  in  a  communication 
fi'om  Amsterdam :  "  Here  is  arrived  the  adventurer  called  the  Spanish 
Bark ;  coming  from  Rochelle  :  he  hath  taken  three  prizes  about  the 
West,  which  he  hath  sold  in  France,  amounting  to  a  great  value, 
which  is  distributed  by  the  Commander  in  Chief,  Capt.  Gi'imes,  as 
followeth — to  the  poor  distressed  widow,  our  late  Q,ueen,  £1000  ; 


278 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1653. 


but  wlien  or  whither  is  not  yett  determined.  "Wee 
exspecte  euery  day  newes  of  an  engagement  at  sea 
betweene  the  two  ffleetes^  the  successe  of  which  may 
probably  alter  -  the  temper  in  both  Councells,  at 
London  and  at  the  Hague,  the  last  still  pressinge 
most  vnreasonably  ther  desyres  of  treaty.  I  am  very 
heartily, 

vour  most  affectionate  Serv*, 

E.  H. 

Paris  this  14  of  June  1653. 
Sii-  Ri:  Browue. 


Sir  Edivard  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 
S', 

I  haue  receaued  yours  of  the  30  of  June  by  Mr. 
Holmes,  &  a  duplicate  of  by  your  mayde,  to  nether 
of  which  ther  needes  any  answer,  my  last  which  you 
since  haue  had  satisfj'inge  the  contents  of  those. 
Since,  your  other  of  the  5.  of  July  are  come  to  my 
handes. 

To  what  concernes  the  Marshall  I  can  add  nothinge, 
till  I  knoAv  in  the  way  I  advised  what  his  prsetences 
are  ;  nor  haue  I  any  reason  to  imagyne  that  he  hath 

King  of  Scots,  £3000  ;  Duke  of  York,  £2000  ;  Duke  of  Gloucester, 
£1000." 

*  The  action  did  take  place,  and  the  Dutch  were  defeated.  The 
consequences,  if  we  ai*e  to  believe  a  letter  from  Paris  in  one  of  the 
weekly  Intelligencers,  were  very  hostile  to  Charles's  interests  at  the 
Court  of  France.  "  The  news  of  the  defeat  given  by  the  English  to 
the  Dutch,"  says  the  writer,  "  much  startled  the  Court,  and  indeed 
all  France ;  those  of  Charles  Stuart's  followers  gave  out  reports  at 
first  that  the  Dutch  had  beaten  the  English,  and  that  he  was  to  go  to 
Holland,  and  that  they  would  do  great  things  for  him,  and  the 
English  went  vapoui-ing  of  it  up  and  down  the  streets,  and  some  of 
them  were  soundly  foxtj  but  the  next  day  came  news  to  several 
merchants  of  this  city,  besides  letters  to  the  Courts  (which  were  kept 
more  private),  that  the  Dutch  were  beaten,  and  had  sustained  a  very 
great  losse  :  upon  this  there  was  a  great  meeting  of  the  Council  with 
the  King,  and  their  countenances  very  sad  all  about  the  French 
Court,  and  divers  of  the  English  going  through  the  streets  of  Paris 
were  so  mocked  and  jeered  that  they  have  been  ashamed  almost  to 
show  their  heads  abroad." 


1653.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


279 


taken  any  excepcons  to  your  person,  only  when  I 
asked,  wh}''  it  was  desyred  that  the  busynesse  might 
be  referred  to  Pr.  Rupert,  since  being  not  upon  the 
place,  his  Highnesse  could  not  so  easily  giue  direction 
upon  it,  answer  was  made  to  me,  that  it  might  be, 
that  the  Marshall  desyred  not  to  treate  with  S""  Ri. 
Browne :  and  truly  in  those  cases,  when  men  aske 
vnreasonable  thinges,  it  is  no  wonder  that  they  haue 
no  minde  to  be  pressed  by  publique  Ministers.* 

I  doubt  I  shall  not  be  able  to  finde  a  copy  of  your 
peticon  and  order  from  the  Kinge,  if  I  can  I  will, 
nor  will  I  do  any  thinge  upon  that  businesse,  till 
upon  your  view  of  the  whole  accounte  you  can  see  in 
what  state  you  are,  and  then  I  will  procure  such 
orders  as  are  necessary ;  till  then  it  is  to  no  purpose 
to  discourse  of  it :  nor  is  it  proper  for  me  to  send  to 
M'"  Windham  t  (with  whome  I  haue  no  correspond- 
ence) to  know  what  you  haue  receaued  from  him, 
you  will  state  all  that  upon  your  accounte.  The  course 
I  propose  to  my  selfe  to  obserue  is,  that  the  Kinge 
signe  a  warrant  to  you,  to  deducte  out  of  your  receipts 
satisfaction  for  all  such  warrants  which  he  hath 
formerly  signed  upon  others,  and  which  haue  prooued 
ineflPectuall  to  you ;  and  if  that  satisfyes  for  the  time 
past,  advise  what  will  bee  best,  to  order  for  the  future. 

Wee  are  full  of  exspectation  what  will  be  the  issue 
of  the  treaty  in  Englande  J  betweene  the  Dutch  and 

*  An  allusion  to  the  rapacious  conduct  of  the  Marshal  with  regard 
to  the  prizes,  and  the  stores  of  the  ships  that  were  sold. 

f  Mr.  Windham,  as  early  as  1G52,  had  been  appointed  the  receiver 
of  the  King's  fifth  in  all  prizes;  and  this  by  the  King's  special 
appointment,  in  opposition  to  the  Duke  of  York's  recommendation  of 
the  Bishop  of  Derry.  The  situation  was  one  which  Sir  Edward  Hyde 
had  been  very  anxious  to  obtain  for  his  godson,  son  to  Sir  Edward 
Nicholas.    See  the  Clarendon  State  Papers,  vol.  iii.  pp.  112,  118. 

X  The  London  Intehigencers  were  at  this  time  giving  a  very 
different  view  of  the  feelings  of  Charles's  little  exiled  Court,  assert- 
ing that  they  were  constantly  engaged  "  in  forms  of  Common  Prayer" 
for  the  success  of  the  Dutch  fleet  over  that  of  England !  Nor  were 
the  Puritan  party  at  home  particularly  anxious  for  peace,  protesting 
that  the  "  work  of  the  Lord  is  not  yet  done  ;  that  the  sword  must  not 
be  sheathed  uutill  they  had  brought  down  the  tyranny  of  Rome,  and 
restored  poor  ignorant  captives  to  a  gospel  enjoyment  of  the  universal 
freedom." 


280 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1653. 


the  Rebells,  which  our  frends  ther  do  not  belieue 
like  to  produce  any  reconciliation  :  and  then  I  hope 
wee  shall  quickly  leave  this  place,  the  which  our 
poore  Master  prouydes  to  doe.  The  same  day 
brought  the  newes  of  the  takinge  Bourgue  by  the 
Duke  of  Vendosme  and  Rhetell  by  Marshall  Turgu, 
and  yett  the  Prince  of  Conde  is  confident  the  Eoglish 
will  relieue  Burdeaux.^i'^ 

I  am,  S-", 

Your  very  affectionate  humble  Serv*, 

Edw.  Hyde. 

Paris  this  12     July  (1653). 
S'^  Ri.  Browne. 


A^ir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 

Paris  this  30'^  oi  July  (1653).  ' 

S', 

I  haue  receaued  yours  of  the  23.  of  July,  as  I  had 
before  your  other  of  the  16.  I  deliuered  your  other 
to  Pr:  Ruperte,  and  he  hath  promised  mee  to  write 
to  the  Marshall,  who  he  sayes  he  knowes  will  make 
no  scruple  to  deliuer  those  parcells  to  you  and  the 
Dukes  officers,  which  concernes  the  10*^'  &  15*^',  which 
beinge  done,  you  are  not  to  make  anj^  instances  in 
the  Kings  name,  for  the  rest,  till  his  Ma'^  shall  be 
better  informed,  and  you  receaue  other  orders :  so 
that  you  are  only  to  looke  for  the  15.  and  lOths.f  I 
desyred  the  Prince  to  send  his  letter  for  the  Marshall 
inclosed  to  jom,  but  he  was  not  willinge  to  do  that, 
because  ther  is  an  agent  heare  of  the  Marshalls  with 
w^home  he  transactes  all,  and  by  whome  he  promises 
such  directions  shall  be  giuen,  that  upon  your  repayr- 

inge  to  the  Gouernour  (which  is  all  you 

neede  to  do)  that  shall  be  done  which  wee  exspecte  : 

*  The  Prince  of  Cond^  was  mistaken, 
t  This  necessity  of  temporising  with  the  avaricious  detainer  of 
their  captured  property,  to  which  the  exiled  Court  was  obliged  to 
submit,  is  not  only  a  convincing  proof  of  the  inhospitable  conduct  of 
the  French  Government,  but  also  (if  they  did  not  participate  in  the- 
plunder)  of  their  want  of  authority  over  their  own  officers. 


1653.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


281 


it  is  now  tlie  tyme  that  tlie  businesse  of  the  pryze  is 
transactinge^  and  therfore  the  Prince  desyres  that  all 
complyance  be  vsed  towards  the  Marshall^  and  that 
wee  do  nothinge  to  anger  him  : — I  finde  the  Mar: 
pretends  the  stoppinge  the  other  goods  npon  pre- 
tence of  much  money  dewe  to  him  as  Admirall  of 
Britany,  npon  many  pryzes  brought  into  those  portes 
by  the  owners  of  those  goods.  I  yett  heare  nothing 
of  Anthonio. 

I  know  not  what  to  say  to  your  mayd^  nor  the 
information  shee  hath  receaiied,  but  I  assure  you,  the 
King  takes  all  possible  care  that  the  house  receaues 
no  afironte,  and  to  that  purpose  hath  had  a  con- 
sideracon  of  it  in  Councell  within  these  3  dayes,  in 
which,  particular  order  is  taken,  that  his  former 
directions  to  you,  and  to  Dr.  Cozens,  be  reuiued  and 
renewed,  for  the  keepinge  up  the  seruice*  carefully 
when  he  shall  leue  this  place  :  and  I  had  order  to 
sende  for  your  landlord,  and  together  with  S""  Pti: 
ffoster,  to  renew  to  him  his  Ma*-'  gracious  promises 
that  he  shall  not  be  any  looser :  I  intende  this  day  to 
send  to  him  to  come  hither:  ther  are  yett  only 
500"',  payde  of  the  rent  by  S""  Ri:  ffoster :  when 
mony  can  be  gotten,  more  shall :  in  the  meane  tyme, 
the  Kinge  himselfe  commanded  me  to  write  to  you; 
that  you  should  if  possible  returne  some  mony  to  the 
landlorde,  in  parte  of  the  rent,  out  of  your  receipts 
ther,  with  such  a  letter  for  his  encouragement  that 
he  may  vnderstande  it  to  be  his  Ma*-'  mony,  and 
sent  by  his  order,  and  I  thinke  joii  will  be  no  looser 
by  it,  for  heareby  I  shall  be  able  to  keepe  off  all 
prsetences  and  importunities  for  other  orders,  w''^  his 
]Ma*='  hath  promised  to  me.  I  have  no  more  to  say, 
but  that  I  am, 

S', 

your  very  affectionate  hu^'^''  Serv*, 

E.  H. 

*  Dr.  Cosins  (afterwards  Bishop  of  Durham)  was  one  of  the  King's 
Chaplains.  He  is  often  mentioned  by  Evelyn  in  his  diary  and  letters; 
and  the  allusion  in  the  text  is  to  his  having  the  service  of  the  Church 
of  England  regularly  performed  at  Sir  Richard  Browne's  house, 
which  Evelyn  tells  us  was  always  done. 


282  LETTERS  OF  Sill  EDWARD  HYDE  [1653. 


Sir  Ediuard  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 
S', 

I  haue  receaued  yours  of  the  26.  of  the  last  moneth, 
and  by  this  tyme  I  suppose  Pr:  Ptuperte*  is  with  you 
at  Nantes,  so  that  you  can  iudge  what  is  like  to 
become  of  your  businesse  better  then  I,  but  his 
Highnesse  seemes  to  me  to  be  confident  that  the 
Marshall  will  make  no  question  of  deliueringe  the 
10*''  and  the  15*^.  but  it  seemes  he  claymes  accounts 
for  the  rights  of  his  Admiralty  at  Britany^f  upon 
which  he  thinkes  ther  is  a  greate  arreare  dew  to  him 
from  all  those  who  haue  carryed  pryzes  into  Brest : 
And  to  this  pointe  you  shall  do  well  to  instructe  your 
selfe  as  well  as  may  be,  and  whether  his  Officers  at 
Brest  ever  demanded  any  thinge  before  he  made  this 
seizure  at  Nantes,  for  in  truth  I  know  not  how  to 
answer  this  ;  if  he  hath  the  rights  of  Admirall  due  to 
him  in  all  the  portes  of  Britany,  and  none  of  our 
shipps  haue  euer  payd  him  any,  by  virtue  of  ther 
deere-bought  protection  at  Brest,  I  do  not  wonder  he 

*  The  Prince  had  nearly  lost  his  life  a  few  days  before  this  date, 
as  a  journal  of  the  period  records:  "Paris. — We  have  not  much  of 
newes  here  ;  but  the  river  Seine  had  like  to  have  made  an  end  of 
your  black  Prince  Rupert  ;  for  some  nights  since  hee  woulde  needes 
coole  himselfe  in  the  river,  where  he  was  in  danger  of  drowning,  but 
by  the  help  of  one  of  his  blackmores  escaped.  His  Highnesse  (it 
seems)  has  learnt  some  magic  amongst  the  remote  islands ;  since  his 
coming  hither  he  hath  cured  the  Lord  Jermin  of  a  feaver,  with  a 
charme  ;  but  I  am  confident  England  is  without  the  jurisdiction  of 
his  conjuring  faculty." 

t  There  were  also  other  difficulties  respecting  the  prizes :  the 
French  Court  at  this  period,  or  at  least  Mazarin,  being  so  anxious  to 
conciliate  the  favour  of  Cromwell,  that  an  arrest  was  even  permitted  to 
be  made  upon  them.  Indeed  all  the  affairs  connected  with  these  prizes 
were  very  badly  managed,  as  Sir  Edward  Hyde  observes  in  another 
place,  by  Sir  Edward  Herbert,  whom  he  describes  as  despising  all 
men,  and  looked  upon  by  Prince  Rupert  as  an  oracle.  See  the 
Clai-endon  State  PaperSy  vol.  iii.  p.  177.  The  shabby  conduct  of 
Mazarin — surpassed  even  by  that  of  Marshal  Melleray  at  Nantes — in 
these  matters,  may  be  further  seen  by  reference  to  Clai'endon's 
History,  vol.  iii.  pp.  405-6,  where  Melleray  is  also  spoken  of  with 
justly  merited  severity. 


1653.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


283 


takes  the  best  way  he  can  to  recouver  his  dewes_,  when 
wee  fall  into  his  dominions :  Ther  is  not  the  least 
thought  of  Ostende  in  the  pointe :  My  opinion  is, 
that  you  should  do  the  best  you  can  to  gett  the  10*^' 
and  15*^.  and  you  are  to  Tse  his  Ma*^^  name  to  no 
other  purpose^  and  then  lett  the  rest  petition  the 
Prince  (since  his  Ma*^  hath  referred  the  matter  to 
him)  to  mediate  for  fauour  to  the  Marshall,  for  it  is 
playne  he  will  haue  somewhat  out  of  it,  if  not  the 
whole  :  God  blesse  me  from  your  ffrench  Governours  : 
Concerninge  your  house  I  can  add  nothinge  to  my 
last :  nor  will  any  care  be  omitted  to  keepe  up  the 
seruice.  God  prseserue  you.  I  am, 
S', 

vour  affectionate  Im'^''  Serv^ 

E.  H. 

Paris  this  2''.  of  Aug.  (1653). 
Sir  Ri:  Browne. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 
S', 

Yours  of  the  31.  of  the  last  (which  is  the  last  I  haue 
receaued  from  you)  gaue  me  so  much  ioy,  that  as  soon 
as  I  receaued  it,  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  imparte  the 
good  newes  to  the  Kinge,  who  upon  reading  that 
clause,  made  not  the  least  scruple  that  Mr.  Morrice* 

*  From  this  mention  of  Mr.  Morriee's  escape,  it  would  seem  as  if 
some  report  now  prevailed  that  a  Royahst  of  that  name,  who  was 
supposed  to  have  been  (and  in  fact  was)  put  to  death  in  1649,  had 
made  his  escape,  and  remained  in  Ireland.  This  Morrice  had  in  the 
latter  year  got  possession  of  Pomfret  Castle,  and  held  it  some  time 
for  the  King,  till  it  was  besieged  and  taken  by  Lambert.  Morrice, 
who  was  excepted  from  the  terms  of  surrender,  managed  to  make 
his  escape  at  the  time ;  but  he  was  afterwards  seized  and  executed 
at  Lancaster,  as  Whitelock  tells  us.  His  story,  as  given  by  Lord 
Clarendon,  is  a  curious  episode  of  the  civil  war,  and  sufficiently  brief 
to  be  worth  repeating  here  : 

A  young  man,  in  the  beginning  of  the  war,  had  been  an  oflficer  in  the  King's 
army,  but  engaged  in  the  Parliament  army  with  some  circumstances  not  veiy 
commendable.  By  his  courage  and  pleasant  humour  he  made  himself  very 
acceptable,  and  obtained  a  commission  as  Colonel ;  but  being  a  free  speaker,  and 
living  licentiously,  he  was  left  out  in  new  modelling  the  army,  but  not  without 


284 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1653. 


was  in  safety,  of  which  since  wee  see  no  euidence,  I 
pray  send  me  worde,  how  it  was  possible  for  you  to 
be  deceaued,  and  how  the  reporte  came  to  you  :  I  told 
you  in  my  last,  that  it  is  too  manifest,  that  Innis- 
boffin  is  deliuered  up,  so  that  there  is  nothinge  to  be 

comjtliments.  He  had  a  competent  estate  in  Yorkshire,  to  wliich  he  went,  and 
resided  tliere.  As  he  grew  older,  he  repented  of  having  left  the  King's  service, 
and  meant  to  take  an  opportunity  of  returning  to  it.  His  humour  was  so  cheer- 
ful and  pleasant,  and  he  mixed  so  much  with  men  of  all  parties,  that  he  had 
great  weight  with  all  of  them.  The  Governor  of  Porafret  Castle  was  his  most 
intimate  and  particular  friend,  and  was  so  fond  of  him  that  he  was  never  easy 
without  him ;  he  was  continually  at  the  Castle,  and  the  same  bed  served 
him.  He  now  concerted  with  the  King's  party  to  surprise  the  Castle,  and  he  so 
artfully  managed  with  the  Governor,  telling  him  that  there  was  such  a  design, 
that  he  mixed  with  those  concerned,  in  order  to  communicate  eveiything  to  the 
Governor,  that  he  completely  lulled  that  gentleman  to  sleep,  and  made  him  inat- 
tentive to  notices  which  he  received  from  other  quarters.  He  also  ingratiated 
himself  with  many  of  the  soldiers,  and  at  length  effected  his  pui-pose.  Cromwell 
was  then  gone  for  Scotland,  so  that  they  had  time  to  repair  the  fortifications,  and 
collect  a  good  garrison.  Cromwell  ordered  Rainsborough  to  go  with  a  few 
troops  to  keep  them  in  check ;  and  whilst  he  lay  at  Doncaster,  10  miles  from 
Pomfret,  they  sent  20  picked  men,  who  by  the  most  dexterous  management 
actually  surprized  Rainsborough  in  his  bed,  and  mounted  him  on  a  horse;  but 
when  he  found  how  few  there  were  who  had  surprized  him,  he  called  to  his 
soldiers,  and  then  the  captors,  finding  they  could  not  carry  him  off,  actually  killed 
him,  and  then  all  made  their  way  back  to  the  Castle. 

At  length  Lambert  was  sent  to  besiege  the  Castle  ;  the  garrison  made  a  most 
gallant  defence,  but  finding  no  hopes  of  relief,  they  at  length  offered  to  surrender, 
if  they  might  have  honourable  conditions.  Lambert  said,  they  were  gallant 
men,  and  he  would  do  all  he  could  to  preserve  them  ;  but  Col.  Morrice  and  five 
more  of  those  who  had  destroyed  Rainsborough,  must  be  given  np,  and  he  could 
not  save  their  lives.  The  garrison  said  they  never  would  deliver  up  any  of 
their  companions,  and  desired  six  days,  that  these  six  might  deliver  themselves 
as  well  as  they  could,  the  rest  being  at  liberty  to  assist  them.  Lambert  gene- 
rously consented.  The  garrison  made  several  sallies  to  effect  the  desired  escape, 
in  one  of  which  Morrice  and  another  escaped ;  in  another  sally  two  more  got 
away ;  and  when  the  six  days  were  expired,  and  the  other  two  remained  in  the 
castle,  their  friends  concealed  them  so  effectually,  with  a  stock  of  provisions  for 
a  month,  that  rendering  the  castle,  and  assuring  Lambert  that  the  six  were  all 
gone,  and  he  was  unable  to  find  them  after  the  most  diligent  search,  and  had 
dismantled  the  castle,  they  at  length  got  off  also. 

The  subjoined  notices  are  from  Whitelocke's  Memorials : 

April,  1649.  Col.  Moms,  late  Governor  of  Pomfret  Castle,  and  one  Cornet 
Blackburn,  Avho  had  a  hand  in  the  death  of  Col.  Rainsborough,  and  who 
were  excepted  persons  on  the  surrender  of  the  Castle,  were  taken  at  Lancaster 
in  disguise.* 

Aug.,  1649.  They  were  arraigned  at  York  before  Baron  Thorp  and  Judge 
Puleston,  for  levying  war  against  the  kingdom.  They  made  a  stout  defence 
on  points  of  law,  all  of  which  Avere  over-ruled,  were  found  guilty,  and  Morrice 
being  manacled  with  irons,  complained  of  a  soldier  being  so  treated,  but  got  no 
relief.t 

Before  the  end  of  the  month  Morrice  was  executed.]:  It  is  not  said  whether 
Blackburn  suffered. 


f  P.  3S2.  t  i*-  405.  X  P.  407. 


1653.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


2S5 


done  -^vitli  those  dispatches,  but  to  keepe  them.  I 
can  add  little  of  newes,  only  that  the  Court  hath 
new  argument  of  tryumph,  upon  a  late  victory  of 
some  considerable  party  of  the  Pr:  of  Conde  "  wher 
they  tooke  many  prisoners  and  some  officers  of  emi- 
nent quality  :  The  Dutch  yett  proceede  very  slowly, 
as  well  in  order  to  ther  allyance  with  tliis  Crowne,  as 
in  any  declaracon  for  our  Master,  notwithstandinge 
which  my  hopes  are  not  abated,  nor  do  I  thinke  a 
peace  almost  possible  to  be  made  betweene  the  two 
Commonwealths,  and  all  this  addresse  which  is  so 
much  spoken  of,  is  only  a  letter  from  a  priuate  man, 
without  any  knowledge  of  the  Pro:  of  Hollande, 
much  lesse  of  the  States  Generall,  who  resent  the 
prsesumption.  Lett  me  know,  whether  Mr.  Bennett 
did  euer  requyre  the  ffees  from  you  upon  any  of  the 
Commissyons  which  I  deliuered  to  you,  or  how  he 
comes  to  prsetende  to  them :  howeuer  you  shall  by 
no  meanes  take  the  least  notice  of  this  question,  nor 
declyne  the  course  you  intended,  for  I  am  sure  I 
neuer  intended  to  receaue  penny  fro^  them,  but  would 
gladly  know  how  he  claymes  such  ffees.  I  wish  you 
all  happynesse,  and  am, 

S', 

Your  very  affectionate  Serv*, 

E.  H. 

Paris  this  19.     Aug.  1653. 
Sir  Ri:  Browue. 

*  The  conduct  of  the  Condean  army  at  this  period  was  of  a  most 
discreditable  kind,  if  we  are  to  believe  the  following  statement  in  a 
letter  from  Paris  of  the  oth  of  August,  1653,  in  the  Faithful  Scout. 
"  The  Prince  of  Conde  is  become  very  considerable  and  exceeds  the 
K.  in  number  of  forces,  being  7000  foot  and  1000  horse,  besides  the 
Spanish  auxiliary  army  under  the  command  of  Gen.  Fuensaldague, 
which  makes  13,000  horse  and  foot.  His  Highness  hath  sent  several 
challenges  to  Marshall  Turein  to  fight;  but  he  declines  ;  so  that  he 
hath  given  Conde  an  opportunity  to  get  within  eight  leagues  of  Paris, 
plundering  all,  his  Germans  ravishing  the  nuns,  and  ransacking 
all  religious  houses,  firing  suburbs  of  towns,  and  enforcing  contri- 
butions from  others.  He  made  way  so  far  as  to  come  and  dine  at 
his  own  house,  where  he  and  his  commanders  were  as  merry  as  so 
many  Princes." 


28G 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1653. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 

I  haue  receaued  yours  of  the  15.  of  Octo:  but 
nether  know  nor  can  iraagyne  *  the  reason  of  your 
longe  silence,  but  conceaue  it  proceedes  from  some 
such  cause  as  made  you  wish  that  it  might  not  be 
interrupted  by  any  provocation  from  me  :  and  yett 
it  was  not  possible  for  me  to  do  you  any  seruice 
without  beinge  instructed  by  you  in  the  way,  the 
businesse  standinge  as  it  did.  I  heare  nothinge  of 
Choquez,  and  what  his  undertakinge  is  I  know  not. 
I  asked  the  Kinge  whether  he  knew  any  thing  of 
the  businesse,  and  I  haue  reason  to  believe  that  he 
nether  hath  nor  will  giue  any  order  in  that  affaire 
without  askinge  me  how  the  case  standes ;  but  if  you 
give  me  no  cause  to  move  publiquely  in  it,  it  is  no 
wonder  if  I  say  nothinge  of  it,  and  if  you  do  write 
upon  the  argument,  you  will  write  so  that  the  letter 
may  be  reade  at  Councell,  any  other  advertisements 
you  Trill  put  in  a  paper  aparte.  I  hear  nothinge  of 
the  wyne,  nor  know  not  any  thinge  of  Nantes, 
vrhen  they  come  away,  who  are  ther,  or  what  they 
do  ther. 

The  Kinge  hath  spent  the  last  fortnight  in  the 
country  at  Chantillj^,  and  returned  hither  on  Wens- 
day  last :  and  proposes  to  goe  backe  thither  agayne 
tomorrov/,  and  I  suppose  will  spende  his  tyme  ther, 
till  the  fayre  weather  be  done  :  I  can  tell  you  little 
of  newes,  the  distractions  I  thinke  are  so  high  in 
Englande,  that  ther  must  be  some  suddayne  altera- 
tion :  and  I  depende  more  on  that,  then  any  thinge 
that  can  happen  abroade,  wher  ther  is  little  care  of 

*  Though  Hyde  was  too  sanguine  in  the  hopes  expressed  in  this 
letter,  yet  the  plain  good  sense  it  shows,  and  indeed  his  general  con- 
duct in  exile,  where  we  have  neither  to  mark  the  listless  apathy 
which  deadens  entei'prise,  nor  the  hasty  enthusiasm  which  mars  it, 
admirably  justify  that  place  in  Charles's  councils  which  his  talents 
and  services  continued  to  secure  to  him,  notwithstanding  many 
counter  intrigues. 


1653.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


287 


honour^  or  any  thinge  but  tlier  owne  present  conveni- 
ences. It  may  be^,  all  the  pause  in  your  busi- 
nesse  is  in  contemplation  of  the  greate  pryze,  and 
I  would  not  interrupt  that,  by  any  meddlinge  in  a 
matter  so  particular  and  inferior  as  the  other ;  but 
if  that  were  at  an  end,  or  I  knew  what  were  like  to 
come  of  it,  I  would  be  very  importunate  to  knowe 
what  the  grounde  of  the  proceedinge  is.  If  ther  be 
no  reason  to  the  contrary,  I  shall  be  gladd  to  heare 
from  you,  and  as  particularly  as  you  please ;  but  if 
3^ou  thinke  it  in  any  consideration  inconvenient,  I 
referr  it  wholly  to  you,  and  am  very  heartily. 

Your  very  affectionate  hu^^®  Serv*, 

E:  H. 

Paris  this  26:  of  Oct:  (1653). 
S"^  Ri.  Browne. 


Sir  Richard  Broivne  to  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer. 

Right  Hon^^^, 
With  humble  acknowledgments  of  j^our  last  favour 
of  26.  Octob''  I  can  now  give  your  Hon''  this  brief 
account  of  my  businesse  here  on  which  I  haue  soe 
longe  and  with  much  charge  and  trouble  attended. 
Captain  Anthonio  hath  without  any  consent  of  mine, 
nor  doe  I  know  with  what  power  from  the  rest  of 
the  witnesses,  payed  the  Mar^  fifteen  thousand  livres, 
and  by  this  means  obtained  mainlevee  [removal  of 
the  arrest]  of  all  the  goods  arrested,  and  consequently 
gotten  them  all  into  his  hands.*  By  H.  H.  Prince 
Rupert's  order  I  haue  now  commenced  a  sute  in  law 
for  recoverie  of  the  fifteenths,  and  the  Duke  of  Yorkes 
interest  (both  which  the  Mar^  allways  intended  to 
restore  without  diminution)  and  his  highnesse  doth 
soe  nobly  support  and  countenance  me  therin,  that  I 
hope  eyther  by  decree  of  justice,  or  by  the  Captains 
volontary  rendition,  to  have  a  speedy  end,  &  therby 
be  soon  able  to  remit  to  Paris  that  money  his  Ma*^ 
hath  ordered  towards  satisfaction  of  my  Landlord 


288 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


I  liaue  (togetlier  with  monej'-  for  tlie  charges  of 
the  carriage)  committed  to  Mr.  Killigrews  care,  a 
butt  of  Canary  wine  divided  into  three  barrells. 
The  one  wheroff  I  Immbly  present  to  his  Ma*=^,  the 
other  to  his  K.  H.  and  the  third  to  the  Lords  at 
Court.- 

Soe  praysinge  God  for  liis  Ma*'*"'  happy  recovery  of 
health,  and  dayly  pray  in  ge  for  the  same. 

Nantes  first  Nor  1653. 
Mr.  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer. 


Si7'  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 

I  haue  yesterday  receaued  yours  of  the  1.  and  the  4. 
of  this  month  together,  &  this  day  gave  the  Bill  of 
Exchange  to  JNIr.  Deane,  who  wdll  be  very  glad  that 
he  is  provyded  to  comply  with  some  parte  of  your 
landlordes  importunity,  and  we  shall  all  have  the 
more  ease  by  it.  I  heare  the  Canary  vryne  is  come 
to  Paris,  but  no  men^con  of  the  delivery  of  it,  being 
conceaved  to  be  M""  Killigrews  owne  wyne,  so  that  I 
expecte  a  very  small  share  of  it,  but  have  acquainted 
his  Ma^'^  and  my  LL"^'  with  that  parte  of  your  letter, 
and  my  L*^  Chamberlyne  will  enquyre  after  it :  You 
cannot  imagyne  I  can  misinterprett  any  acte  of 
yours,  which  I  know  can  not  w^ant  kindness  to  me ; 
your  silence  was  very  fitt,  and  I  guessed  so  much  at 
the  reason  of  it,  that  I  complyed  wdth  it,  and  yet  (as 
you  say)  all  is  little  enough,  and  iealous  natures  will 
alwayes  finde  somewhat  to  worke  upon,  to  disquyett 
themselves  and  others,  and  I  know  no  cure  to  apply 
to  those,  who  are  not  pleased  with  fayre  and  open 
dealinge.t 

*  The  politic  attention  of  Sir  Richard  in  this  instance  shows  how 
fit  he  was  for  a  courtier,  even  upon  the  smallest  scale  ;  though  his 
worldly  prudence  in  trusting  Killigrew  with  the  wine  may  be  open  to 
some  doubt.  It  will  be  observed  in  the  next  letter,  that  suspicions 
of  Killigrew,  by  no  means  sui'prising,  appear  to  have  occun'ed  to 
Mr,  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer. 

t  It  has  already  been  hinted  that  Sir  Richard  Browne  had  many 


1G53.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


289 


I  hope  you  liaue  not  suffered  your  selfe  to  be  too 
mucli  a  loser  by  Capt:  Anthonio,  with  whom  you 
know  how  to  deale  well  enough :  at  least  if  he 
intends  to  haue  any  more  to  do  with  us :  I  hope 
ther  is  care  taken  to  giue  Geo:  Carterett  satisfaction, 
who  over  apprehends  discourtesy  from  hence,  and 
that  he  was  putt  out  of  the  Kinges  protection,  when 
God  knowes  the  Kinge  resolved  to  do  all  he  could  for 
him  and  the  other  adventurers,  as  soon  as  the  case 
should  be  so  stated  that  he  knew  what  to  presse,  but 
it  seemes  all  is  now  composed,  and  it  is  a  notable 
ffyne  you  have  payd  to  the  Marshall,  if  the  commo- 
dityes  were  not  of  a  huge  value  :  God  preserve  me 
from  such  governours. — Wee  are  yett  in  the  country, 
which  the  Kinge  is  better  pleased  with  then  with 
Paris,  and  truly  he  hath  recovered  his  health  most 
miraculously  :  But  if  the  w^eather  changes,  as  it  is 
like  to  doe,  I  suppose  we  shall  looke  backe  to  Paris : 
and  then  any  good  newes  will  carry  us  away.  I  wish 
you  all  happynesse,  and  am  very  heartily, 

lour  most  affectionate  hu^^""  Serv*, 

Edw.  Hyde. 

Chantilly  this  10:  oi  Novemh:  (1653.) 


Sir  Richard  Broivne  to  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer. 

Right  Hon^^^, 
I  have  here  received  your  Hon"^'  of  the  10^^  Nov.  for 
which  I  sende  humble  thankes^  as  bringinge  with  it 
the  assurance  of  my  standinge  upright  in  your 
opinion  :  your  friendship  being  one  of  the  greatest 
consolations  I  have  in  the  midst  of  all  my  sufleringes. 
I  humbly  submitt  the  adjoyned  for  yowv  manage- 
ment :  yf  you  approve  not  theroff,  and  had  rather 

enemies  at  the  exiled  Court.  Hyde  had  many  also  :  aud  no  doubt 
all  this  caution  in  the  correspondence  of  the  two  friends  was  for  the 
purpose  of  guarding  against  the  Court  sycophants  opposed  to  tliem. 
See  Hyde's  pi'eceding  letter  of  the  26th  October. 

VOL,  IV.  .  u 


290 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1653. 


convert  the  summ  mentioned  to  your  own  iise^,  order 
it  how  you  please  and  to  whom  you  would  have  the 
bill  made :  perhaps  you  may  think  Mr.  Edgman  a 
fitt  person  to  be  trusted  with  the  secret^  that  soe 
little  notice  may  be  taken.  The  three  barrells  of 
Sacke  are  yett  here ;  in  company  Avith  them  goes  a 
fourth  vnder  Sir  Gervais  Lucas  *  his  name^  which  is 
a  present  I  make  to  y""  Hon'"  wherewith  to  rejoyce 
yourselfe  and  friends  :  Only  I  intreat  you  that  the 
good  Lady  Lucas  may  have  her  physicall  proportion 

out  of  it  warmed  keepes  her  alive  as  shee 

herselfe  sayth.  That  you  will  not  give  Dr.  Earles 
half  a  dozen  of  bottles  I  cannot  doubt.  The  person 
I  last  mentioned  in  cipher  will  tell  you  notable 
stories  when  he  comes  to  you.  To  him  I  refer  all. 
You  may  beleeve  him,  for  hee  is  much  a  man  of 
honour.  Being  ready  to  goe  from  hence  I  expect 
to  find  your  answer  hereto  in  Mr.  Richards  his 
hands  at  St.  Malo's.  This  is  all  at  present  from, 
y""  hon"  most  faithfull  and  most  obliged 

humble  servant, 

R.  Br. 

The  following  is  the  Paper  adjoined : 
I  have  formerly  acquainted  you  that  I  cannot 
make  up  my  accounts  untill  I  returne  to  Brest, 
which  I  am  now  hastening:  In  the  interim,  finding 
that  some  monyes  of  his  Ma*'"  will  remaine  with  me, 
I  humbly  submitt  it  to  your  Hon"  consideration 
whether  a  hundred  Lewises  in  gold  will  not  be 
acceptable  to  his  Ma*^  to  be  by  your  Hon'"  privately 
delivered  into  his  owne  Boyall  hands,  towards  his 
merry  playing,t  wherwith  to  passe  his  time  at  cards 

*  The  whole  of  this  is  confirmation  of  the  remark  made  in  the 
foregoing  note.  Sir  Gervais  Lucas  had  been  a  cavah-y  officer  in  the 
Royal  cause  during  the  Civil  Wars. 

t  See  post,  p.  295.  Of  Lord  Jermyn's  conduct  generally  as 
cashier  for  the  Royal  expenses,  Clarendon  roundly  asserts  in  his 
History  that  while  Jermyu  kept  a  coach  of  his  own,  and  an  excellent 
table  for  those  who  courted  him,  yet  the  King,  even  when  under 
the  most  urgent  want  of  twenty  pistoles,  could  not  find  credit  to 
borrow  them. 


1653.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


291 


this  approaching  Christmasse.    This  I  shall  be  able 
to  performe  from  St.  Maloes,  if  I  may  there  meet 
with  encouragement.    This  is  all  at  present  from, 
y'  Ron'' 

most  faithfull  and  most 
obliged  humble  servant, 

R.  Br: 

Nantes  18.  Nov.  1653. 
Mr,  Chan:  of  the  Excheq"". 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 

I  haue  receaued  yours  of  the  18.  and  since  you  are 
so  well  provyded,  I  cannot  but  commende  your 
designe,  and  as  I  believe  the  Kinge  does  not  expecte 
such  a  present,  so  I  am  sure  it  will  be  most  wellcome 
to  him,  and  I  will  promise  you  to  present  it  to  him, 
in  so  secrett  a  manner,  as  nobody  shall  know  it  but 
himselfe ;  and  be  confident  I  will  never  converte  one 
penny  that  belonges  to  him,  to  my  owne  use,  in  what 
straights  soever  I  should  be. 

I  like  very  well  your  distribution  of  the  sacke,  and 
I  will  not  bragge  of  my  share,  nor  fayle  of  delivering 
the  proportion  you  assigne,  and  if  the  good  lady 
comes  hither,  (as  by  yours  I  guesse  she  intendes  to 
do,  though  Paris  at  present  is  a  place  of  prodigious 
exspense,  every  t  hinge  double  the  pryse  of  what 
it  was  when  you  left  it)  the  vessell  shall  stay  with 
her ;  and  I  there  shall  be  sure  of  iustice,  and  I  will 
fetch  my  allowance  in  bottles  :  Lett  me  only  giue 
you  this  warninge,  that  the  carriage  be  payd  for,  as 
I  thinke  you  told  me  in  your  former  that  it  was,  and 
I  am  sure  I  cannot  do  it,  and  then,  the  sooner  it 
comes  the  better.*  Wee  are  full  of  exspectac^on  of 
good  newes  ivom.  all  quarters,  and  I  hope  some  of  it 
will  be  of  such  a  nature  that  will  call  us  from  hence, 

The  whole  of  this  letter  is  a  curious  illustration  of  the  distresses 
of  a  man  who  was  afterwards  Lord  Chancellor  of  England,  and  father- 
in-law  to  a  King. 

U2 


2D2  LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE  [1653. 

Avliicli  I  Avill  be  sure  to  giue  you  an  accounte  of  as 
soone  as  I  can  :  I  wish  you  all  happynesse,  and  am 
very  heartily, 

Your  most  affectionate  hu^^^  Serv*^ 

ED^y:  Hyde. 

Paris  this  24     Novcmh:  (1653.) 
S""  Ki:  Browne. 

Sir  Richard  Broivne  to  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer. 

Right  hon. 

Mons''  de  Yarennes,  Intendant  of  Marqu.  de 
Castlenau's  affairs  at  Brest,  havinge  beene  from  that 
towne  deputed  to  the  States  of  Bretany,  Mars^  de 
Milleray  did  there  declare  unto  him  that  he  pre- 
tended nott  to  abate  any  part  of  ^Yhat  belonged  unto 
him  in  the  loading  of  the  fleete  which  hee  had  seased, 
and  for  malnlevee  wheroff  hee  had  receaved  15000 
livres.  AYheruppon  this  gentleman  came  hither  to 
demand  his  right,  &  after  a  weekes  digladiation  at 
law  with  Captain  Antonio,  the  Captain  yeelded  up 
the  cudgells  and  gaye  him  satisfaction.  'My  desire 
to  see  the  issue  of  this  suite  in  law  causeing  my  stay 
here  longer  then  I  intended,  hath  brought  me  hither 
your  Honours  favour  of  15  Noy.  which  containinge 
an  intimation  of  something  of  complaint  against  (as 
they  call  it)  the  King  of  En  glands  A  dmiralty  at 
Brest,  I  considered  myselfe  whether  it  will  be  fitt 
for  mee  to  goe  now  into  Low  Bretany  before  I 
haue  once  again  shewed  myself  to  the  Mar  and 
receiyed  his  commands  (who  they  say  will  bee  here 
shortly)  least  he  againe  come  uppon  us  with  a 
second  costly  after-reckoninge,  grounded  uppon 
pretence  of  not  beinge  suflSciently  applied  unto,  or 
of  being  neglected  in  his  goyernment ;  at  least  not 
untill  I  haye  your  Hon"  sence  heruppon,  which  I 
humbly  beseech  you  to  youchsafe  me,  sending  y"" 
letters  as  you  please,  eyther  directly  hither,  or  by 
the  way  of  Richards,  thorough  whose  hands  I 
expect  answers  of  my  last  of  18^^  currant. 


1G53.]  AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE.  293 

I  render  hurablo  tliankes  to  your  Hon'"  for  the 
sanguine  part  of  3'our  letter,  resultinge  out  of  the 
good  newes  from  Germany  and  Enghmd.  God  of 
his  mercy  improve  these  comforts  to  us;  and  pre- 
serue  his  Ma'''*  sacred  person,  and  vouchsaef  him  a 
speedy  establishment  uppon  the  throne  of  his  Royal 
progenitors.    Soe  prayes  dayly  and  heartily, 

y'  Hon'',  &c. 

Nantes  29  No''  1G53. 


The  same  to  the  same,  accompanying  the  precedinc/ 
letter. 

Eight  lion^'^'^ 
I  am  told  that  the  Prince  [Rupert]  hath  now 
totally  settled  his  businesse  with  the  merchant,  and 
stayes  only  to  see  performance.  [Meane  time  S'' 
Gervais  Lucas  hopes  to  be  goinge  Avith  his  lady  some 
time  the  next  Aveeke  for  Paris,  and  takes  along 
with  him  that  commodity  for  joviv  Hon'"  w'^^'  I  thought 
would  have  accompanied  the  other  3  which  are 
now  upon  their  way.  Mr.  de  Varennes  carries  a 
letter  recommendatory  from  mee  to  y"  Hon^  Yi  hee 
uppon  his  maisters  the  Marqu.  de  Castlenau^s  recom- 
mendation hath  thus  enjoyed  the  benefit  of  favour 
and  protection  in  his  part,  how  much  more  might 
wee  (had  not  an  imhandsome  eclipse  happened)  his 
INIa*'^'  subjects  and  servants  uppon  our  Royal  Maisters 
gracious  owning  of  us?  beleeve  me  the  Captain  doth 
now  sufficiently  repent  his  unprofitable,  unadvised, 
nay  precipitate  performance  of  Mons""  Choquere  his 
bargaine. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Broivne. 

I  haue  receaued  both  yours  of  the  29.  of  the  last, 
&  cannot  imagyne,  how  any  thinge  I  sayd  to  you  in 
my  former  letter  could  make  you  deferr  your  iourney, 
nor  can  I  add  any  thinge  to  what  I  then  sayd,  havinge 


294 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1653. 


not  heard  since  of  the  complayntes,  and  you  must 
indeed  know  the  temper  of  those  places  much  better 
than  I  can  doe  :  I  perceave  by  what  you  say  of  Mons*" 
Varrennes  that  wee  are  nothing  beholdinge  to  the 
Marshall^  who  it  may  be  without  our  frends  helpe 
would  not  have  beene  able  to  have  done  us  so  much 
prejudice.  Lett  me  know  Avhen  you  goe  from  thence, 
and  wher  my  letters  may  finde  you.  The  Capt.  doth 
well  to  quitt  his  old  frends,  and  betake  himselfe  to 
new  who  know  better  how  to  use  him.    Wee  lieare 
not  yett  of  Pr:  Rupertes  comminge  hither,  but  mee- 
thinkes  he  hath  bene  longe  absent.    Hath  S'  Ge: 
Lucas  absolutely  quitt  his  ffarme  in  Britany,  or  doth 
he  only  repayre  hither  for  health.    Meethinkes  the 
comodity  you  mencon  should  not  be  worth  the  charge 
of  so  longe  a  voyage  by  lande.    The  Duke  of  Yorke  is 
returned  hither,  full  of  reputac^on  &  honour,*  and  the 
fFrench  Courte  is  expected  on  Sunday  or  Munday.  I 
can  tell  you  little  newes  :  our  frends  in  Hollande  do 
not  believe  the  treaty  will  produce  a  peace,  and  for 
an  instance  that  the  States  do  not  so  much  depende 
upon  it,  they  have  given  a  licence  this  last  weeke 
to  ...  .  Ge:  Middleton,t  to  transporte  armes  and 
aramunicon  for  Scotlande,  which  is  a  good  signe :  I 
suppose  you  heare  frequently  from  Englande,  where 
sure  the  confusion  is  very  high,  and  it  is  exspected 
that  they  will  declare  Crumwell  Protector  of  the  3 
kingedomes,  that  his  single  influence  may  compose 
those  distractions,  which  the  multitude  cannot  doe, 
for  Mr.  Peters  himselfe  now  professes  that  Monarchy 
is  the  best  government.    God  send  us  well  under  it. 
I  am, 

S'- 

Your  most  affectionate  Serv*, 

E.  H. 

Paris  this  6.     Decemb:  (1G53.) 


*  The  Duke  had  been  serving  under  Turenne,  and  had  just  before 
the  date  of  this  letter  distinguished  himself  at  the  siege  of  Mousson. 
Being  disappointed  in  his  wishes  to  be  present  at  the  siege  of  St. 
Menehoud,  he  had  repaired  to  his  brother's  Court,  in  order  to  accom- 
pany him  during  part  of  his  route  from  France  to  Germany. 

t  Middleton  bore  the  rank  of  lieutenant-general,  and  was  very 


1653.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


295 


Sir  Richard  Browne  to  Sir  Edward  Hyde, 

Right  lion^^ 
This  being  onely  to  give  course  to  a  bill  of  ex- 
change for  one  hundred  Lewises  of  gold  in  specie 
payable  at  sight  unto  Mr.  William  Edgman^  which 
I  haue  desired  Mr.  E/ichards  to  inclose  herin  at 
St.  Males. 

j  Nantes  10  Dec.  1653. 


The  Same  to  the  Same. 

Nantes  20  Dec.  1653. 

Right  Hon^'^ 
My  last  unto  your  Hon*'  were  of  10.  Dec.  with  an 
inclosed  bill,  which  Mr.  Richards  assures  me  will  be 
punctually  payed  this  very  day  (20  Dec.')  at  Paris. 
My  desire  now  is  (in  case  you  approve  theroff  and 
will  at  my  humble  request  vouchsafe  to  accept  this 
poore  tender  of  my  seruice)  to  transmitt  to  your  Hon*' 
a  supply  of  money  for  your  owne  occasions  in  that 
now  extraordinary  deare  place,  which  I  am  the  more 
apt  to  beleive  in  regard  that  the  price  of  all  thinges 
here  raysed  a  third  since  my  cumminge  into  this  pro- 
vince. I  doe  nott  dessigne  lesse  than  a  thousand 
livres,  and  am  very  sorry  I  cannot  performe  it  untill 
I  draw  a  somme  from  Brest,  in  which  I  find  great 
difficulty  at  present,  noe  man  being  willinge  to  meddle 
with  money,  in  regard  of  the  approachinge  fall  at  the 
end  of  this  month.  By  this  abatment  in  the  species 
T  am  like  to  sustaine  not  an  inconsiderable  losse,  for 
I  heare  they  have  this  good  while  payed  the  Kings 
dues  at  Brest  according  to  the  rate  the  money  went 
many  monthes  since,  when  the  commoditis  were 
sold  {viz.)  Lewises  of  gold  at  12  livres  and  of  silver 
at  3/.  9s.  And  I  am  told  the  Duke  of  Yorkes  re- 
ceivers can  gett  noe  better  quarter.  I  know  not  why 

active  in  Scottish  affairs,  as  Charles's  agent  with  the  Highlander 
and  other  Royalist  adherents  in  that  country. 


296 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1C53. 


I  should  nott  make  tlie  just  reparation  of  this  losse 
as  an  article  in  my  account;  as  well  as  the  Treasurer 
of  the  States  of  Bretany_,  ^vho  hath  on  this  consider- 
ation lately  had  seven  thousand  crownes  indemni- 
fication adjudged  him  by  Act  of  the  States.  By  way 
of  S'  Malos  your  Hon"  next  commands  will  find 
mee,  and  you  may  well  imagine  your  presence,  tho 
not  possible,  will  be  most  heartily  wished,  and  your 
health  noe  lesse  cordially  celebrated. 

I  am  now  to  acknowledge  your  Hon''  favour  of 
the  24.  Nov.  &  6  Dec^  The  three  first  vessells  of 
sacke  are  doubtlesse  long  since  arrived  by  water  at 
Orleans,  there  expectinge  Mr.  Killigrew^s  order,  who 
is  desirous  to  present  them  himselfe.  I  have  allready 
furnished  him  with  some  money  towards  the  charges, 
and  have  taken  care  to  defray  at  Paris  the  whole 
port  of  them  and  of  the  4^^' which  went  hence  inboate 
the  beginninge  of  this  weeke  with  noble  Sir  G.  L. 
[Gerv.  Lucas]  and  his  lady,  who  have  quite  aban- 
doned this  province,  the  Ladies  intention  being  to  goe 
^ere  longe  into  the  greater  Bretany.  I  desire  your 
Hon'  to  give  credit  to  him  in  many  thinges  with 
which  hee  will  acquaint  you,  for  hee  is  much  a  man 
of  honour  and  integrity.  Hee  will  tell  you  to  what 
degree  wee  have  (as  you  well  call  it)  had  our  freinds 
healp  and  furtherance  in  the  payment  of  the  15 
thousand  livres  fine,  &c.  I  did  not  till  uery  lately 
know  that  my  Lord  Percy  now  Lord  Chamberlin 
was  come  to  the  Kinge,  and  I  am  likewise  told  that 
he  is  much  in  3^our  intimacy,  of  which,  if  true,  I  am 
uery  glad,  for  hee  hath  beene  my  noble  freind  of  a 
date  little  lesse  than  30  yeares  old.  I  pray  if  your 
Hon''  thinke  it  fitt  be  pleased  to  present  my  humble 
seruice  and  congratulations  to  his  L''pp. 

Prince  Kupert  hath  now  quite  finished  his  busi- 
nesse  with  the  marchant  that  lost  the  sugar  prize, 
and  speakes  of  goinge  hence  for  Paris  within  few 
dayes. 


1653.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


297 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 
S', 

I  have  yours  of  the  20.  as  I  had  before  your 
former  with  the  bill,  which  was  punctually  payd,^ 
and  delivered  to  the  Kinge,  for  which  you  shall  have 
his  acquittance,  and  I  must  tell  you,  it  came  very 
seasonably  to  him,  and  most  acceptably,  of  which 
you  shall  heare  more  hereafter.  Ifor  your  new  noble 
offer,  I  am  not  in  a  condic'on  so  plentifull  to  refuse, 
for  I  must  tell  you  that  I  have  not  had  a  Lewes  of 
my  owne  these  o  moneths ;  therfore  when  you  send 
the  bill,  lett  me  know  whether  you  lend  me  so  much 
out  of  your  owne  little  stocke,  or  whether  it  be  the 
Kings  money,  for  in  that  case,  his  Ma*-  shall  be  the 
disposer, — since  my  office  hath  never  yett  uor  shall 
intitle  me  to  take  his  mony  without  his  derection.f 
Ther  is  no  question  any  fall  of  money es  is  a  just 

*  See  ante,  p.  290,  Paper  adjoined  to  Sir  Richard  BroAvne's 
letter. 

f  The  charges  to  which  Hyde  alludes  in  this  letter  were  those 
brought  against  him  by  intriguers  of  the  Queen-mother's  party, 
who  were  unwilling  that  he  should  execute  the  office  which 
Lord  Jermyn  had  formerly  discharged,  the  disposal  of  tlie  King's 
private  funds.  !Mr.  Long,  the  Ex-Secretary,  was  therefore  brought 
forward  to  concoct  this  story  of  the  conference  with  Cromwell  on 
the  evidence  of  one  Massonet,  or  rather  on  his  second-liand  hearsay 
evidence  from  a  maid-servant  in  London,  who  assured  him  that  she 
had  seen  Sir  Edward  go  into  Cromwell's  chamber  at  Whitehall. 
Charles  of  course  had  the  sense  to  laugh  at  it,  being  himself  in  fact  a 
competent  witness  to  prove  an  alibi.  See  Clarendon's  Histonjj 
vol.  iii.  p.  402.  When  Charles  the  First  appointed  a  Council  for  the 
Prince  of  Wales  in  1644,  Mr.  Long  was  their  Secretary  ;  but  after 
this  was  suspected  of  holdmg  a  correspondence  with  the  Earl  of 
Essex,  on  which  he  went  into  France,  and  made  great  complaint  to 
the  Queen- ]\Iother,  who  always  strongly  supported  his  interests. 
After  the  death  of  Charles  the  First  he  became  Secretary  to  the 
young  King  in  his  exile,  was  ci'eated  a  Baronet  shortly  after  the 
Restoration,  was  Auditor  of  the  Exchequer,  and  a  Privy  Councillor. 
Suspicion  attached  to  him  of  having  been  secretly  a  Roman  Catholic, 
and  this  is  partly  borne  out  by  a  legacy  in  his  will.  See  Manning  and 
Bray's  History  of  Surrey, ^yo\.n.  p.  606.  ^ 


298 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1653. 


grounde  for  demaunde  of  allowaunce  upon  accounte. 
If  you  are  at  Ducy,  wish  me  with  you,  as  I  do 
heartily.  I  write  to  the  Governour  the  way  he 
derected,  and  must  be  informed  when  he  returnes 
to  his  dominion. 

I  hope  you  thinke  it  strange  to  heare  that  I  have 
bene  in  Englande,  and  have  had  private  conference 
with  CrumAvell,  and  [that  you]  are  not  sorry  that 
my  enimyes  can  frame  no  wiser  calumny  against  me  : 
Pr:  Rupert  is  not  yet  arryued,  nor  is  ther  any  newes 
of  the  sacke  :  I  shall  be  gladd  to  see  S"^  Ge:  and  his 
lady  heare.  Though  my  L'^  Chamberlyne  *  and  I 
lyue  ciuilly  togither,  and  I  can  menc'on  you  to  him, 
yet  it  is  fitt  you  write  a  congratulatory  letter  to  him, 
which  if  you  thinke  fitt,  I  will  deliver.  God  send 
you  a  merry  Christmasse.  I  am, 
S', 

your  most  affectionate  hu^^*"  serv*, 

Edw:  Hyde. 

Paris  this  27  of  Decemh.  (1653.) 


>S'ir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 

Yours  of  the  30.  of  January  came  not  to  my  hands 
till  within  these  2  dayes ;  and  you  haue  before 
this  tyme  I  conceaue  receaued  some  of  myne  since 
that  date,  which  have  informed  you  how  much  wee 
have  bene  all  deceaued  in  the  imaginac^on  of  the 
breach  of  the  treaty  betweene  the  Dutch  and  the 
Rebells.  It  is  now  looked  upon  as  concluded  in 
a  peace,  and  though  the  other  Prouinces  are  not 
yett  reconciled  to  the  condic''ons,  wee  have  very  fainte 
hopes,  that  ther  opposic'ons  will  be  able  longe  to 
deferr  what  the  Province  of  Hollande  so  importu- 

*  This  was  Lord  Percy,  to  whom  the  office  had  been  granted  in 
lieu  of  that  of  Master  of  the  Horse,  to  which  he  had  some  claim,  but 
which  had  been  reserved  by  the  King  for  Prince  Rupert,  who  after- 
wards very  ungraciously  threw  it  up.  The  whole  affair,  as  related  in 
Lord  Clarendon's  History,  vol.  iii.  p.  411,  is  illustrative  of  many  of 
these  letters. 


1654.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


299 


nately  and  vehemently  pursues :  and  I  do  belieue 
that  this  Crowne  will  labour  all  they  can  (and  I 
thinke  Avith  successe)  to  gett  it  selfe  into  the 
allyance,*  for  the  facilitatinge  wherof  I  suppose 
they  wish  our  Master  gone  from  hence,  and  wee 
shall  gratify  them  in  it,  the  Kinge  resoluinge  to 
goe  as  soone  as  he  can  gett  away  :  you  shall  do 
well  to  hasten  all  accounts  with  your  Capt'  as  soone 
as  may  be,  least  they  grow  lesse  respectfull  of  the 
Kings  authority,  and  what  they  owe  to  him,  when 
they  finde  that  they  are  like  to  finde  little  protec- 
tion heare.  I  am  in  greate  payne,  therfore  you 
must  excuse  me,  that  I  say  no  more,  but  that  I  am, 

your  very  affectionate  hu^^''  Serv*, 

E.  H. 

Par:  this  17.     Feb.  1654. 


Sir  Richard  Browne  to  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer. 

Eight  Hon^^ 
Captain  W"'  Arundell  the  bearer  hearoff  being 
dispatched  f  by  CoP  O'Sulleuan  Beirne  to  giue 
his  Ma^''  a  particular  account  of  his  proceedinges 
hitherto,  and  to  receiue  our  royall  and  gracious 
Maister's  farther  directions  and  orders  for  the 
future,  in  case  he  may  be  soe  happy  as  (in  the 
present  conjuncture)  to  be  found  any  way  vsefull  & 

*  So  certain  were  the  politicians  of  that  time  of  a  treaty  between 
the  French  King  and  the  Protector,  that  in  a  letter  from  Paris,  of 
the  20th  January,  in  one  of  the  pubHc  Intelligencers,  it  was  expressly 
stated,  "  Here  is  much  talk,  as  if  the  Peace  were  concluded  between 
France  and  England."  It  did  not  take  place  so  rapidly,  however  ; 
for,  notwithstanding  Mazarin's  overtures  to  Cromwell,  the  Protector 
showed  no  extraordinai'y  eagerness  to  meet  them.  In  writing  to 
Cromwell,  about  this  time,  Mazarin  concluded  with,  "Votre  tres 
humble  serviteur,"  which  obtained  nothing  more  from  Oliver  than 
"  Your  affectionate  friend  to  do  you  service." 

+  There  are  no  historical  records  of  the  specific  events  in  Irish 
affairs  to  which  this  letter  alludes  ;  the  letter  therefore  itself  sup- 
plies matter  for  history. 


300 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1654. 


serviceable  to  his  owne  Souueraigne,  in  whose  just 
quarrell  he  much  rather  chuseth  accordinge  to  duty 
and  alleageance  to  loose  his  life  as  he  hath  allready 
donne  his  estate  and  fortune,  than  to  drawe  his  sword 
in  the  service  of  any  forraigne  Potentate  :  I  am 
desired  to  giue  your  Hon'  this  summary  account  of 
what  hath  beene  here  transacted  since  his  arriuall 
in  these  partes  some  few  weekes  since,  with  divers 
persons  of  quality,  leading  men  of  the  severall 
cheife  provinces  of  Irlaud,-  about  30  barrills  of 
powder  and  some  other  amies;  for  transportation 
of  which  whole  equipage  into  the  south-west  part 
of  !Munster,  O'Sullevans  country,  there  to  make 
an  impression,  ]\P  Holder  and  myselfe  had  here 
prevailed  with  M""  Griffin,  Captain  Smyth,t  and 
Captain  Dillon,  (whose  readinesse  to  serue  his 
Ma'-  on  this  occasion  hath  beene  very  laudable,  and 
ought  soe  to  be  represented  unto  his  Ma^-  as  nott 
unworthy  of  his  particular  taking  notice  thereoff) 
who  in  their  three  fregats  had  undertaken  to  passe 
them  ouer  &  by  Gods*  goodnesse  to  haue  giuen  a 
happy  beginning  to  this  generous  and  loyall  enter- 
prize  :  offering  further  in  case  they  could  at  ther 
landinge  gett  possession  of  any  fortifiable  place, 
fitt  and  considerable,  to  furnish  them  with  2  or  8 
peeces  of  canon  out  of  each  vessel :  and  to  afford 
them  what  other  assistance  might  lye  in  their 
power.  But  just  as  they  were  ready  to  sett  sayle, 
comes  the  certain  advice  that  Mortagli  O' Brian  (to 
whom  O'Sullevan  chiefiy  intended  to  joj'ue  himself, 
and  whose  party  was  it  seemes  the  principall 
foundation  of  his  hopes)  had  layd  downe  armes; 
by  which  unexpected  newes,  this  soe  probable 
dessigne  auertinge  for  the  present,  O^Sullevan  hath 

*  A  Mercurius  Politicus  of  the  '22nd  Februaiy  gives  expi-ession  to 
the  hopes  and  fears  that  agitated  the  opposite  parties  at  this  time  : 
"  The  Irish  are  much  troubled  to  hear  of  'clie  dissolution  of  the  late 
Parliament,  in  ^hom  they  had  great  hopes,  but,  blessed  be  God  ! 
their  hopes  are  prevented."' 

j-  How  very  trifling  this  naval  force  was,  may  be  surmised  from 
the  fact  that  Capt.  Smith's  vessel  only  mounted  eight  guns  ;  whilst 
another,  commanded  by_]\Ieldrum,  carried  two. 


1654.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


301 


neuer  tlie  lesse  tliouglit  fitt  to  aduenture  a  kinds- 
man  of  his  owne  name^  an  experienced  soldier,  w  ith 
some  few  others,  and  some  powder,  to  goe  in 
Captain  Dillon^s  fregat,  tanquam  explorator,  at  whose 
returne  hee  hopes  Avithin  2.  or  3.  weekes  to  be  able 
to  giue  a  fall  account  of  the  state  of  affaires  in  that 
kingdome,  and  what  likelvhood  there  may  bee  of 
attemptinge  any  thinge  there  for  his  Ma*''''  service 
and  adnantage,  which  failinge,  this  noble  person 
and  his  company  are  ready  to  transport  themselves 
into  Schottland,  or  what  other  part  of  his  INIa*'"' 
dominions  may  be  thought  expedient. 

Brest  30  A  prill  1654. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 

The  last  weeke  I  receaued  yours  of  the  23.  of  the 
last  moneth,  &  by  this  post  your  other  of  the  1  of 
this  moneth,  to  both  which  I  shall  neede  reply  no 
more,  then  to  assure  you  that  what  I  wrote  to  you  was 
not  out  of  the  least  unkinde  purpose  towards  you,  or 
doubte  of  your  punctuallity  in  accounte,  or  opinion 
that  you  had  receaued  so  much  as  people  give  out 
(yett,  as  you  say  the  Duke  of  Yorkes  officers  can 
make  a  shrew  computac^on,  and  are  not  very  nice  of 
publishing  what  they  conceave  may  aduance  his  Ma*-  ^ 
service)  :  but  I  was  willinge  to  be  ready  to  answer 
any  questions  the  Kinge  himselfe  might  be  induced 
to  aske ;  and  the  truth  is  his  necessityes  are  so 
greate,  and  so  like  to  encrease,  that  all  wayes  must 
be  thought  on  to  draw  supply  to  him,  and  therfore 
make  what  you  can  ready,  and  I  had  rather  you 
should  prevent  him  by  sendinge  Bills  before  he 
expectes  them,  then  that  I  should  be  required  to 

*  Between  this  and  the  preceding  letter  there  is  an  interval  of  twelve 
months  ;  during  which  time  the  King  and  his  friends,  having  left  Paris 
in  June,  1654,  had  been  resident  in  Flanders  and  Germany.  The 
reader  will  find  a  curious  anecdote  relating  to  these  changes  in  their  place 
of  exile  in  Clarendons  Histonj^  vol.  iii.  p.  413,  and  another  at  p.  422. 


302 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1655. 


call  upon  j^ou :  if  you  procure  Bills  upon  any  honest 
able  marchant  at  Antweipe,  payable  to  Patrick 
Garlancle,*  or  his  order,  and  send  them  to  me,  I  can 
easily  draw  it  from  thence  to  CuUen,  or  to  any  place 
wher  the  Kinge  will  neede  it.  I  can  make  no  other 
conclusyon  by  the  discourses  of  peace  or  warr 
betweene  Crumwell  and  that  Crowne,  but  that  the 
Cardinall  f  will  do  all  that  is  in  his  power  to  prevent 
a  warr,  which  very  many  believe  he  will  not  be  able 
longe  to  doe,  and  the  Spanyard  is  ver}^  much  abused, 
if  he  be  not  sure  of  a  firme  coniunction  with  him. 
I  doubte  the  tyme  of  our  deliverance  is  not  so  neere 
at  hande,  as  was  expected.  God  will  send  it  at  last : 
you  may  be  ver}^  confident  that  I  will  never  cease  to  be, 

lour  very  affectionate  Serv*, 

Edw.  Hyde. 

Br:  22:  ^p-:  (1655). 

Si?'  Edward  Hyde  to  Si?'  Richard  Browne. 

I  haue  receaued  yours  of  the  10.  of  the  last  moneth, 
and  shcAved  it  to  the  Kinge,  who  hath  sent  derection 
to  S""  Geo.  Ratcliffe  J  to  returne  the  2000^  to  him 

*  Sir  Patrick  Garland,  who  was  long  in  confidence  with  Sir  Edward 
Hyde. 

f  Mazarin  personally  admired  Cromwell,  and  was  therefore  the 
more  likely  to  be  averse  to  a  war  between  France  and  England. 

J  RatclifFe,  instead  of  Lord  Byron,  had  once  been  thought  of  by 
Charles  the  First  as  Governor  to  the  Duke  of  York  in  his  infancy. 
He  was  a  Privy  Counsellor,  and  lived  at  Oxford  during  the  siege, 
before  which  the  Queen  had  desired  him  either  to  bring  the  Duke  to 
her  at  Paris,  or  carry  him  to  Ireland  ;  but  this  Ratcliffe  refused,  on 
the  plea  that  he  dared  not  to  convey  any  of  the  King's  sons  out  of  the 
kingdom  without  an  express  order  from  the  King.  In  the  "  Life  of 
James  the  Second,"  evidently  written  with  authority  from  that 
Prince,  speaking  of  this  affair  it  is  remarked,  "which  nicety,  or  I 
may  rather  call  it  indiscretion  of  his,  might  have  cost  his  Highness 
dear,  as  being  the  occasion  of  his  being  put  into  the  Rebells'  hands." 
When  the  Duke  of  York  was  taken  prisoner  at  Oxford  by  the 
Parliamentary  army,  Fau-fax  ordered  Ratchffe  to  continue  with  him, 
until  the  pleasure  of  the  Parliament  should  be  known ;  and  he  was 


lGo5.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


303 


as  soone  as  Le  receaues  it,  and  1  assure  you  it  will 
come  very  seasonably  hither,  -wher  ther  is  as  much 
pouerty  as  you  haue  knowne  at  Paris.    I  doubte  Mr. 
Crumwell  hath  putt  a  periodd  to  your  receipts,  but 
it  is  not  impossible  that  Dunkirke^  and  Ostende 
muy  prooue  as  hospitable  to  our  shippinge  as  Brest 
hath  bene,  for  they  say,  upon  closinge  with  ffrance, 
the  Rebells  will  have  a  briske  warr  with  the  Span- 
yard,  and  looke  euery  day  to  heare  that  they  are 
possessed  of  some  considerable  place  in  the  Indyes, 
which  is  at  last  believed  at  Bruxells;   wher  they 
finde  how  they  haue  beene  fooled.     I  am  newly 
returned  hither,  hauinge  beene  kept  in  my  way 
hither  at  the  Hague  by  a  greate  sicknesse,  for  above 
a  moneth,  but  God  be  thanked  I  am  now  well 
recovered,  beyonde  the  hope  of  many  of  my  frends, 
and  contrary  to  the  wishes  of  those  who  are  not  so : 
I  hope  I  may  live  to  see  better  dayes :  I  haue  not 
heard   from   George  Carterett   these   very  many 
monthes,  though  I  am  sure  he  hath  many  letters  of 
myne  upon  his  handes,  so  that  you  may  tell  him,  I 
thinke  he  despayres,  and  hath  given  me  ouer  :  God 
send  us  a  good  meetinge,  wher  you  shall  receaue  all 
seruice  from 

Your  most  ajffectionate  hu^^^  Serv*, 

Edav.  Hyde. 

Coll:  this  8  of  June  (1655). 
S"^  Ri:  Browne, 

only  discharged  from  his  attendance  on  the  Earl  of  Northumberland 
being  appointed  Parliamentary  Governor  to  the  Duke.  In  conse- 
quence of  this  early  acquamtance,  Ratcliffe  retained  much  influence 
over  James,  to  the  great  disUke  of  the  Queen,  and  also  in  opposition 
to  Lord  Byron.  He  was  at  Jersey  with  Charles,  and  afterwards 
joined  him  in  Flanders.  He  was  also  very  active  in  caring  for  the 
Duke's  interests,  when  it  was  reported  that  the  King  was  dead  in 
Scotland,  three  years  before  this  period.  See  Clarendon's  Life 
p.  124. 

*  Many  prizes  had  already  been  carried  into  Dunkirk  by  the  Jersey 
privateers;  and  in  1650  the  Duke  of  York  had  been  supported  solely 
by  the  tenths  which  the  captors  paid  him.  See  further  a  letter  on 
this  subject  to  the  Spanish  minister,  in  the  Clarendon  State  Papers, 
vol.  iii.  p.  276. 


SOi 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1G55. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  RicJtard  Browne. 

Though  it  be  now  many  moneths  since  I  heard 
from  you,  I  had  not  at  this  tyrae  troubled  you,  if  by 
letters  which  I  receaved  the  last  weeke,  I  had  not 
cause  to  believe  that  one  which  I  writt  above  a 
moneth  since  to  you,  is  miscarryed  :  I  then  told  you 
how  seasonable  your  200  pistolls  would  come  to  the 
Kinge,  who  hath  bene  and  is  still  in  straight  enough, 
since  which  tyme  it  is  receaued,  but  not  till  within 
these  3  dayes,  it  being  returned  very  unskilfully  to 
be  payd  at  Amsterdam  upon  double  usance. 

I  told  you  likewise  in  that,  that  his  Ma*-  would 
haue  you  giue  a  deputac^on  to  Mons''  Marces*  to 
collecte  and  receaue  the  dutyes  dew  to  him  in  2  or 
3  of  the  lesser  and  more  obscure  portes  in  Britanny_, 
untill  he  should  haue  receaued  the  summ  of  200 
pistolls  which  are  owinge  to  him,  and  he  was  well 
content  to  receave  them  this  way  :  I  thought  it  more 
proper  that  the  deputac'on  should  be  given  by  you, 
then  an  immediate  grante  of  it  from  his  Ma*-  to  him, 
therfore  I  pray  (if  my  former  letter  miscarryed)  Ictt 
him  know  that  you  haue  receaued  such  derections, 
and  lett  him  have  a  proper  instrument  accordingly. 
I  doubte  it  will  be  very  longe  before  he  will  out  of 
those  portes  receaue  that  summ,  but  the  request  is 
the  more  modest,  and  could  not  well  be  denyed,  his 
Ma*^  lookinge  upon  the  man  as  one  who  hath  done 
him  many  services.  You  can  exspecte  little  newes 
from  us,  who  have  only  courage  enough  to  looke  for 
better  tyme ;  the  apprehensions  the  whole  Empyre 
hath  that  it  shall  not  longe  inioy  ther  peace,  and 
the  terrour  the  Kinge  of  Sweade  f  gives  them  by 
his  inroade  into  Polande,  wher  he  carry es  all  before 
him,  proove  of  no  small  pra^iudice  to  our  master, 

*  Vide  p.  308. 

t  Gustavus,  the  successor  of  Christina,  whose  disputes  with  the 
King  of  Poland  were  a  source  of  great  confusion  and  disturbance  to 
Germany. 


1655.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNK 


305 


who  is  therby  mucli  disappointed  of  the  mony  he 
was  promised  from  those  Princes,  so  that  the  truth 
is  wee  are  no  richer  then  you  haue  knowen  us  at 
Paris  :  yett  trust  me  wee  are  farr  from  despayre,  and 
do  promise  our  selves  with  reason  enough,  that  wee 
shall  shortly  have  good  frendes,  and  see  a  good  turne 
in  our  fortune,  especially  if  the  newes  with  strange 
confidence  repeated  at  present  heare  be  true,  of 
Cromwells  death  :  which  I  doubte  is  not  upon  ground 
enough.    The  Kinge  and  his  sister  are  in  a  private 

 at  ffrankeforte,*  from  whence  wee  ex- 

pecte  them  in  4  or  5  dayes  :  the  Qu:  of  Sweden  is 
this  very  minute  passinge  through  the  towne,  wher 
shee  stayes  not,  but  lodges  this  night  at  Bone,  the 
house  of  the  Elector  of  CuUen  [Cologne] . 

If  you  are  very  rich,  and  can  lend  me  20.  or  30. 
pistolls,  or  such  a  summ,  and  returne  it  to  honest 
Church,  he  will  transmitt  it  to  me,  and  it  will  come 
very  seasonably  to  supply, 

Your  very  affectionate  humble  serv*, 

Edw:  Hyde. 

CuLLEN  this  28     Sejyt.  (1655.) 
S""  Ri.  Browne. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 
S', 

I  write  now  to  you  rather  to  lett  you  know  that 
yours  of  the  16.  of  the  last  moneth  is  come  to  my 
hands,  then  to  returne  a  full  answer  to  it,  which  I 
cannot  do  till  the  next,  and  then  I  shall  not  fayle  to 
do  it,  except  by  our  intelligence  out  of  ffrance  I 

*  This  journey  to  Frankfort  has  been  ah*eady  noticed.  It  excited 
some  attention  both  in  England  and  upon  the  Continent :  for,  in  one 
of  the  papers  of  the  day,  a  letter  from  Paris  observes,  after  alluding 
to  the  newly-signed  treaty  with  Cromwell,  "  In  the  mean  time,  it 
seems,  the  Pi'incess  Royall  of  Oi-ange  is  expected  here  in  January, 
she  intending  to  bestow  a  visit  upon  the  little  Queen,  her  mother,  and 
bring  her  all  news  from  Frankfort  fair ;  what  further  end  there  may 
be  in  the  voyage  is  not  known." 

VOL.  IV.  X 


306 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


conclude  that  it  is  for  the  present  to  no  purpose  to 
do  it  in  the  way  you  propose ;  as  I  suppose  it  will 
not  be,  if  the  peace  betweene  Crumwell  and  ffrance 
be  published,  which  I  doubte  it  is,  and  then  all  your 
armado  at  Brest  will  be  quickly  discharged  those 
harbours,  and  I  heartily  wish  they  may  gett  off  fayrely, 
without  any  preiudice  or  even  violence  offred  to  them 
to  obliege  Mr.  Crumwell.  If  this  falls  out  to  be  the 
case,  and  that  you  see  ther  is  no  more  worke  to  be 
done  ther,  you  will  not  be  the  lesse  intent,  sollicitous, 
and  dextrous,  to  obliege  the  seamen  to  continue  ther 
affection  to  his  Ma*^'  service,  and  to  continue  ther 
commissyons,  since  ther  is  no  greate  doubte  wee 
shall  prepare  a  better  recepcon  for  them  at  Dunkirke 
and  Ostende,  then  they  have  found  at  Brest,*  and 
your  owne  particular  ivill  not  be  neglected :  I  hope  to 
be  speedily  able  to  say  more  to  you  upon  this  subiecte, 
and  to  tell  you  that  wee  shall  not  be  longa  confined  to 
Cullen,  and  I  pray  dispatch  such  advises  to  me  as 
soone  as  may  be,  as  may  be  necessary  to  be  consi- 
dered in  that  traffique  wee  are  like  to  have  with 
seamen,  how  wee  may  give  them  encouragements 
enough  and  yett  retayne  a  competency  for  our  Masters 
supporte. 

I  haue  not  time  to  add  more,  having  very  much  to 
doe,  upon  those  greate  alterac^ons  which  fall  out,  which 
truly  I  believe  will  carry  us  all  wher  wee  desyre  to 
be  :t  Grod  send  it,  and  you  shall  then  have  cause  to 
believe  me  to  be, 

Your  most  affectionate  Im^^^  Serv*^, 

Edw.  Hyde. 

Cull:  this  9  of  Novemler  (16.55). 
Ri.  Browne. 


*  The  facts  here  mentioned  are  of  importance  to  the  naval  histo- 
rian, should  he  desire  to  illustrate  a  period  of  which  very  little,  at 
least  with  regard  to  the  part  of  the  service  which  remained  attached 
to  the  King,  has  yet  been  recorded. 

f  It  took  five  years  more  to  make  these  hopes  and  anticipations 
real. 


1655.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


307 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Broivne. 

Since  my  last  to  you_,  which  was  of  the  9.  of  thie 
moneth,  I  have  receaued  yours  of  the  23.  of  the  last 
moneth,  and  yesterday  another  of  the  8  8^",  which 
it  may  be  ought  to  be  of  this  moneth  :  you  will  not 
wonder  that  I  make  no  hast  in  sendinge  these  dis- 
patches which  concerne  your  Admiralty,  which  no 
doubte  is  now  at  an  end  by  virtue  of  this  peace,  so 
that  if  you  parte  faj^re,  and  they  suffer  all  the  vessells 
to  get  out  of  ther  portes,  it  is  as  much  as  I  looke  for  : 
and  if  ther  had  been  any  more  to  be  done  ther,  I 
should  not  haue  moued  the  Kinge  for  such  a  letter  to 
the  Duke  of  York  as  you  advise,  till  wee  had  knowne 
his  Highn^  pleasure,  ffor  for  the  Kinge  to  declare 
that  he  would  abate  as  much  of  his  fifteenths  as  the 
Duke  would  abate  of  his  tenths,  before  wee  know 
that  he  thinkes  fitt  to  abate  any  thinge,  were  to  putt 
him  upon  some  disaduantage,  and  ther  wante  not 
those  who  would  be  gladd  upon  any  occasyon  to 
infuse  an  opinion  of  the  disrespectes  of  many  heare 
towards  his  Highn^  Therfore  you  should  adiust  all 
those  thinges  with  his  ministers,  before  any  thinge 
be  moued  to  come  from  hence  :  But  at  present  all 
that  designe  is  at  an  end,  and  wee  must  consider 
what  conclusj^ons  wee  are  to  make  to  aduance  our 
marityme  afPayres  in  filanders,  wher  I  hope  wee  shall 
finde  all  encouragement.  AVhateuer  concessyons  are 
to  be  granted,  they  must  be  to  all  alike,  and  not  with 
distinction  betweene  rich  and  poore,  which  will  inter- 
rupt all  payment  of  dewes.  I  writt  to  you  to  send 
us  any  advise  that  upon  your  obseruance  of  those 
people,  you  thinke  necessary  to  be  obserued. 

That  which  wee  are  soUicitous  for  is,  to  gett  into 
filanders,*  which  I  hope  wee  shall  do  shortly,  and  not 

*  The  necessity  of  this  step  was  rendered  imperative  by  the  second 
article  of  the  new  treaty  between  Cromwell  and  the  French  Court 
providing  against  any  aid  to  the  enemies  of  either ;  and  also  "  that 

X  2 


308 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1656. 


he  without  such  a  henefitt  from  tliis  "vvarr  betweene 
Spayne  and  Crumwell,  that  may  ^'me  our  frends  new 
courap:e.  I  shall  add  no  more,  but  that  I  wish  you 
your  heartes  desyre,  and  shall  alwayes  be  ready  to 
serue  you,  as, 

Your  most  affectionate  hu''^"  Serv*, 

Edw\  Hyde. 

Cull:  this  23.  of  Nouemh:  (1655). 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 

The  Kinge  is  so  desyrous  to  pay  Moun'  de  Marces 
some  parte  of  the  debt  that  is  dew  to  him,*  that 
understandinge  that  ther  is  dew  to  his  Ma*''  frome  a 
frende  of  his  the  sayd  Mo""  de  Marces  nine  hundred 
livres,  and  from  another  twoo  hundred  livres,  both 
which  summes  are  payable  to  you  from  them  for  the 
fifteenths  dew  to  his  Ma*^' :  since  the  former  order 
£:iven  on  his  behalfe  hath  prooued  ineffectual!  to  him, 
his  Ma*''  pleasure  is  that  you  authorize  him  to  receaue 
the  sayd  two  summes  of  900.  &  200^''  and  that  you 
appointe  the  sayd  persons  to  pay  the  same  to  him. 
I  shall  neede  to  add  no  more,  but  that  you  may  see, 
the  Kinge  both  a  very  good  opinion  of  Mo'  de 
Marces,  and  a  sense  of  some  seruice  he  hath  done 
him,  otherwise  vou  would  not  haue  receaued  this 
commande  from  him,  by  the  hande  of. 

Your  very  affectionate  hu^'^^  Serv*, 

Edw.  Hyde. 

Coll.  this  15.  of  ffehb.  1656". 


neither  of  the  Confederates  shall  harbor,  or  permit  their  people  to 
harbor,  any  pirates  or  robbers  " — terms  lavishly  applied  to  Charles's 
cruizers.  ^ 

*  See  ante,  p.  304.  This  extraordinary  anxiety  on  the  part  o 
Charles  to  pay  a  particular  debt  makes  one  wish  to  ascertain  its 
cause.  Unfortunately  there  is  no  means  of  satisfying  so  reasonable  a 
curiosity. 


1656.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


309 


CuLLEN  this  29.  oiffcbr:  (1G56). 

I  liaue  yours  of  the  31.  of  January  -which  came 
not  to  ray  handes  till  the  last  weeke,  and  I  forbore 
to  answer  it  till  now^  supposinge  you  would  not  be 
sooner  come  to  Paris,  ttbr  your  men  of  warr,  I 
know  not  what  to  say,  they  are  so  fantasticall  and 
humorous,  that  till  wee  can  exercize  such  a  iuris- 
diction  ouer  them  as  to  compell  them  to  keepe  good 
order,  I  care  not  how  little  we  haue  to  do  with  them. 
In  Spayne  I  heare  they  haue  sent  up  an  agent  to 
Madrid,  to  offer  to  engage  in  that  Kings  seruice, 
and  Capt.  Martin  at  Dunkirke  hath  desyred  a  com- 
missyon  from  that  Admiralty :  But  I  doubt  not, 
when  the  Kinge  himselfe  shall  be  in  fflanders,  which 
I  hope  will  be  very  speedily,  and  that  by  the  next 
post  I  may  send  you  newes  to  that  purpose  :  those 
Ifrygates  which  are  manned  ^vith.  his  owne  subiects, 
wdll  choose  to  come  into  his  Ma^^^  seruice,  &  take 
commissyons  from  him,  and  for  the  rest  lett  them  do 
as  they  see  cause :  you  shall  do  well  to  encourage 
Capt:  Smith  *  and  Capt:  Beart  to  gett  up  as  many 
seamen  English  as  they  can,  and  to  come  to 
Dunkirke  or  Ostende,  wher  they  will  be  wellcome. 

For  your  owne  condicon,  I  am  very  sorry  it  is  no 
better,  yett  in  one  respecte  1  did  not  thinke  it  so 
good,  for  I  neuer  imagined  your  receipte  would  have 
inabled  you  vpon  the  assignements  the  Kinge  had 
given  you  to  haue  discharged  all  your  debts  at  Paris, 
and  thought  it  w^ould  haue  prooued  well  if  you  were 
inabled  to  pay  those  which  were  most  crying  and 
importunate,  which  God  knowes  the  poore  Resident 

*  Captaia  Smith  was  taken  prisoner  about  a  year  afterwards,  as 
related  in  the  weekly  journals.  "  Letters  come  from  Plymouth  which 
give  an  account  of  a  good  prize  newly  taken,  and  brought  in  thither 
by  the  Sapphire  frigat.  It  bears  the  name  of  a  Brest  man-of-warr, 
new  built,  of  30  guns.  He  was  met  with  about  the  Land's  End,  and 
had  aboard  two  captains,  the  one  named  Meldrum,  a  famous  pirate  ; 
the  other  named  Smith,  who  sailed  by  virtue  of  a  commission  from 
Charles  Stuart.'* 


310 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDV\"ARD  HYDE 


[1656. 


at  Bruxells  is  not  able  to  doe,  but  is  euery  day  in 
daunger  of  an  afFronte.  I  am  sure  you  doe  not 
belieue  I  envy  you  any  aduantage  you  haue  reaped : 
I  ^ish  it  greater  with  all  my  heart,  and  shall  alwayes 
contribute  towards  it  with  all  my  creditt ;  but  trust 
me  I  am  often  putt  to  answ^ers  &  replyes  that  I  know- 
not  how  to  go  through  with,  when  they  who  know 
the  Duke  of  Yorke's  receipts  as  Admiral!,  confidently 
averr  that  the  King^s  haue  not  bene  so  little  as  5000 
pistolls,  and  enquyre  how  much  hath  bene  payd  to 
his  vse.  Therefore  as  soone  as  you  can,  send  me 
such  an  accounte  (which  neede  not  be  uoluminous) 
as  I  may  vpon  occasyon  satisfy  his  Ma'''  in  that 
alfayre,  that  I  may  the  more  confidently  propose 
any  thiuge  on  your  behalf e,  which  I  shall  doe  very 
heartily  as, 

S',  Your  most  aff'ectionate  serv*, 

EDw^  Hyde. 

Sir  Ri.  Browne. 


Sir  Richard  Broicne  to  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer, 

Right  Hon^^^ 
I  returned  hither  on  Sunday  night ;  and  Munday 
morninge  M'  Locker  from  M""  Crumwel  came  into 
this  towne,  and  had  yesterday  eueninge  publick 
solemme  audience  of  K.  Q.  and  Card^  Hee  hath 
bought  a  coach  and  talks  of  hyreinge  a  house,  and 
though  he  thus  insinuates  himselfe  as  Envoye,  yett  it 
is  belieued  hee  will  within  few  weekes  produce  a 
latent  Commission,  and  take  vppon  him  the  title  of 
Ambass' :  Monsieur  le  Comte  de  Briene  f  sayd  thus 
much  to  668  :  192  :  95  ;  whom  I  was  faine  to  visit 
en  particulier  by  reason  of  some  thinges  I  left  in  his 
hands.    Yf  this  should  cause  any  alteration  in  his 

*  Lockhart  soon  became  a  great  favourite  witli  iMazarin.  He  did 
remain  at  Paris,  and  was  very  active  there  in  1659.  See  the 
Clarendon  State  Papers,  vol.  iii.  p.  547. 

t  The  French  Secretary  of  State. 


1656.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


311 


Ma*^'  intentions  of  continuinge  a  publike  Minister 
here  (as  perhaps  much  may  be  sayd  pro  and  con),  I 
beseech  your  Hon''  to  giue  me  timely  notice  :  that  yf 
I  remoue,  I  may  dismiss  my  house  and  forbeare  to 
make  a  new  household  :  and  I  pray  your  Hon'  to  giue 
mee  instructions  how  to  carray  myselfe  towards  668  : 
192  :  95  :  whether  I  shall  uisit  him  in  quality  of  his 
Ma*'"  Minister  or  not  ?  The  French  Court  will  some 
time  the  next  weeke  remove  towards  the  Frontier. 

Paris  19'*  May  1656. 

I  haue  as  yett  beene  onely  once  at  our  Court, 
wher  by  misfortune  I  could  nott  kisse  y^  hands  of 
your  faire  daughter. 

Mr.  Chancellor  of  the  Exchecker. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne, 
S', 

I  am  gladd  to  finde  by  yours  of  the  19.  that  you 
are  returned  to  Paris,  and  cannot  write  at  large  to 
you  upon  what  you  propose  to  me  in  this  concerning 
your  selfe,  and  in  some  former,  till  wee  are  returned 
to  Bruges,  which  I  conceaue  may  be  by  the  end  of 
the  next  weeke :  nothing  being  possible  to  be 
maturely  weighed  and  considered  in  the  moc'on  we 
are  in.  I  thinke  wee  shall  be  at  Bruxells  to-morrow 
or  Munday,  only  priuately,  to  uisitt  Don-Juan,"^' 
nothinge  being  to  be  publiquely  declared  on  our 
behalfe  till  the  returne  of  the  Enuoy  fro^  Spayne, 
but  wee  haue  no  cause  but  to  hope  very  well. 

Ther  can  be  no  reason  for  you  to  discontinue  your 
old  frendshipp  and  neighborwoode  with  668  :  192  : 
95  :  who  truly  I  believe  wishes  us  uery  well,  and  can 
do  no  other  then  he  does :  when  you  see  him, 
remember  my  service  to  him,  and  tell  him  I  doubte 

*  Don  John  of  Austria ;  formei'Iy  Viceroy  of  Catalonia,  and  recently 
appointed  Governor  of  Flanders.  Lord  Clarendon,  in  his  History, 
vol.  iii.  p.  478,  mentions  some  anecdotes  respecting  him  and  the  Eai'l 
of  Bristol,  his  belief  in  astrology,  i5:c. 


312 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1656. 


not  but  I  shall  yett  lyue  to  meete  him  at  Whitehall. 
I  shall  now  heare  from  you  euery  weeke,  and  shall 
not  neede  to  put  you  in  minde  not  to  omitt  to  write 
constantly  to  M"^  Secretary :  *  I  shall  be  gladd  to 
know  how  your  frends  do  in  Englande,  who  I  doubte 
not  continue  ther  kindnesse  to  you  :  If  nothinge  be 
done  by  the  ffrench  Courte  to  discountenance  you, 
you  will  not  putt  off  your  house,  till  the  Kinge 
giues  you  full  order.  I  pray  informe  your  selfe  who  of 
either  Nac'on  performe  most  respects  to  M""  Lockyer. 
I  wish  you  all  happinesse,  &  am  uery  heartily, 

Your  most  affectionate  hu^^^  Serv*, 

Edw.  Hyde. 

Antwerpe  this  26:  May  (1656). 

The  letter  which  included  the  examinac^ons  of 
the  Spy  t  is  not  yett  arriued  heare,  so  that  wee  haue 
a  very  obscure  informac'on  of  that  affayre,  nor  can 
I  imagyne  what  seruice  the  rogue  (whome  I  know 
well)  could  do  in  these  partes,  to  deserve  the  charge 
he  hath  beene  to  them.  I  heare  the  Life  of  Car- 
dinall  Richelieu  is  newly  come  out,  or  in  the  presse, 
I  wish  you  could  send  it  to  me.  J 

Sir  Richard  Browne  to  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer.^ 

Right  Hon^^ 
I  did  nott  vntill  now  know  of  your  Hon''  beinge 

*  Sir  Edward  Nicholas.  +  See  po5<,  p.  315. 

X  The  Cardinal  seems  to  have  been  reckoned  a  conjuror  or  prophet 
by  some  folks  at  this  period.  One  of  the  London  newspapers  called 
the  French  Intelligencer  says,  "  There  hath  been  lately  a  prophesie 
found  in  the  Priory  of  Cardinal  Richelieu  at  Paris,  written  by  his  own 
hand,  wherein  he  foretells  the  wofuU  calamities  of  the  family  of 
Stuarts,  descending  from  the  Lyon,  that  is,  King  James,  for  so  he  was 
called,  by  reason  that  he  brought  the  rampant  Lyon  figured  upon  his 
breast,  in  the  world  with  him.  He  likewise  predicts  three  changes  of 
Government,  and  domestic  divisions,"  &c. 

§  Though  without  signature  or  address,  this  letter  is  evidently  from 
Sir  Richard  Browne  to  Sir  Edward  Hyde. 


1G5G.]  AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE.  313 

ill  personall  attendance  on  his  Ma*-'.  This  ignorance 
of  mine  nott  onely  depriued  me  the  contentment  of 
beinge  assured  that  I  had  soe  worthy  a  friend  soe 
neere  my  Royal  Maister,  butt  also  made  me  guilty 
of  an  omission  of  nott  sooner  giuing  notice  accord- 
inge  to  my  duty  of  m}'  returne  unto  this  my  former 
station  :  for  which  I  humbly  crave  your  Hon"^'  pardon. 

The  French  Court  parted  hence  a  weeke  since,  and 
remaines  yett  at  Compeigne.  Yesterday  came  newes 
that  the  MarP:  de  Turene  had  defeated  4  Regiments 
of  horse,  and  taken  a  small  place :  yf  true,  a  good 
beginninge  of  this  Campaigne. 

M""  Locker,  Crumwells  Envoye,  followes  the 
Court :  before  his  going  hence  he  declared  to  a 
person  of  quality,  that  he  had  by  him,  and  would 
ere  long  produce,  a  Commission  to  be  Ambassador ; 
nottwithstandinge  that  I  haue  publiquely  (since  my 
returne  hither)  appeared  in  the  Erench  Court  in 
presence  both  of  this  K.  &  Queene,  and  twice  beene 
with  the  Count  of  Brienne,  yett  I  find  nothinge  at 
all  of  any  the  least  intimation  to  retire  :  *  And  the 
other  day  in  conference  with  my  Lord  Jermyn,  his 
opinion  Avas  that  this  State  would  permitt  me  to 
remaine  here  as  long  as  his  Ma*^'  thought  good  :  soe 
that  I  expect  to  heare  what  his  Ma*^*"'  pleasure  will 
bee,  in  this  particular :  forbeareinge  in  the  meane 
time  to  engage  for  the  continuance  of  my  house,  or 
to  make  a  new  family :  humbly  intreating  your 
Hon',  that  yf  his  Ma*^  thinke  fitt  to  continue  mee 
here,  you  will  please  to  move  for  a  settlement  of  my 
subsistence  uppon  some  good  and  well  assured  funds, 
without  which  I  shall  soone  lapse  into  a  very  sad 
condition. 

In  the  conuersation  I  have  had  abroad  in  my 
trauail,  as  well  as  here  in  Paris  since  my  returne  had 
with  the  French  Protestants,  I  find  them  generally 
much  inuolved  in  Crumwells  interests,  he  hauinge 

*  The  temporising  policy  of  the  French  Court,  still  unwilling 
openly  to  concede  all  that  Cromwell  demanded,  yet  fearful  to  offend 
the  Protector  by  abrupt  dismissal  of  his  Envoy,  appears  in  these 
allusions. 


314 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE  [1656. 


dexterously  insinuated  into  their  belief  tliat  he  will 
maintaine  them  in  the  enjoyment  of  ther  preuiledges  : 
a  more  manifest  demonstration  of  their  good  inclina- 
tions to  him  may  also  doubtlesse  bee,  their  hauinge 
since  Lockers  arriuall  effaced  the  name  of  Kinge  out 
of  the  inscription  of  the  Seate  for  the  Inglish 
Ambassad"  at  Charanton,  and  left  only  "pour  les 
Ambassad'"  de  la  Grand  Bretaigne.'' 

Olini  tempus  erit  magno  cum  opiavcrit  emptum 
Intactum  EpigrapUen. 

And  in  their  discourse  uppon  all  occasions,  they 
fervently  declare  their  great  good  wishes  of  the 
prosperity  of  the  army  of  the  Kinge  of  Sweden  as 
abettinge  uppon  that  hand  in  order  to  the  mine 
of  Antichrist,  vnder  that  Kinge  and  Crumwells 
banners.* 

I  humbly  beseech  your  Hon''  to  direct  mee  how  I 
shall  henceforwards  addresse  my  letters  unto  you 
Soe  praying  for  &c. 

Pahis  2^^tJune  1656. 


Sir  Edivard  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Broivne. 

I  had  not  tyme  the  last  weeke  to  acknowledge 
yours  of  the  23.  (whiche  I  hope  you  excuse)  and  I 
have  since  receaued  your  other  of  the  30.  in  answer 
to  both  which  I  can  say  no  more,  then  that  you 
shall  be  sure  of  all  the  seruice  I  can  do  you  upon  all 
opportunityes,  and  I  hope  any  improvement  of  our 
fortune  Avill  administer  these  opportunityes  : — you 
shall  doe  well  seasonably  and  naturally  to  pursue 
that  discourse  to  Ld.  Jermin  concerninge  your  stay 
ther,  and  draw  an  advise  from  him  hither  for  your 

*  Of  all  this  private  history  of  pohtical  chicane  the  French  Court 
could  not  have  been  ignorant.  In  some  respects  it  may  explain  the 
course  they  found  it  expedient  to  hold  between  the  cause  of  Chai'les 
and  the  demands  of  CromAvell.  Certainly  the  Protestants  had  no 
reason  to  wish  well  to  Charles. 


1656.]  AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE.  315 


reuocac'on,  and  then  wee  shall  know  what  is  next  to 
be  done.  All  the  papers  concerninge  Martin  wee 
have,  and  would  be  gladd  to  know  what  is  become  of 
the  fellow,  and  whether  he  be  yett  hanged,  and  what 
goodly  confessyon  he  made  in  that  season.^ — God 
send  us  once  a  good  turne,  w*"^  it  may  be  may  not  be 
farr  off :  and  then  wee  shall  have  more  frends  and  I 
hope  lesse  neede  of  them.  I  perceave  your  spiritts 
in  Paris  are  not  so  composed,  but  that  ill  accidents 
may  cause  some  disorders  amongst  you,  and  those 
people  do  belieue  that  your  designe  before  Valen- 
ciennes may  be  frustrated  ;  it  is  a  greate  stake,  and 
these  as  much  concerned  to  preserve  and  you  to 
possesse  it.  Wee  exspecte  howrely  newes  of  some 
action  before  it :  I  have  beene  misinformed  if 
Cardinal  Richelieu's  life  be  not  in  the  presse. — I 
wish  YOU  all  happinesse,  and  am  very  heartilj^, 

your  most  affectionate  Serv'^ 

E.  H. 

Bruges  this  7     July  (1656). 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Fdchard  Broivne. 

Bruges  this  ]  1.  of  Aug. 

It  is  uery  true,  I  haue  besydes  your  last  of  the  4: 
of  this  moneth,  your  other  of  the  21.  and  28.  of  the 
last  upon  my  hands,  the  subiecte  of  both  which 
beinge  such,  as  I  could  not  discourse  upon,  before 
my  L*^  of  Bristolls  arriuall,t  to  whom  you  referred 
me,  I  forbore  to  say  any  thinge  till  I  could  speake 
to  the  purpose,  and  he  arrived  not  till  Sunday  last  : 

*  See  ante,  p.  312. 
f  The  hopes  and  designs  of  the  Royal  partisans,  now  carrying  on  a 
rapid  intercourse  with  their  friends  in  England,  and  seeing  happy 
omens  for  themselves  in  the  distrust  manifested  by  Cromwell  in 
regard  to  his  own  personal  security,  account  for  the  tone  and  manner 
of  this  letter.  Soon  after  its  date  Lord  Bristol  was  left  as  the  King's 
Agent  at  Brussels,  whilst  the  King  and  his  Court  went  to  Bruges,  &c. 
See  the  Clarendon  State  Papers,  vol.  iii.  pp.  308—10. 


316  LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE  [1656. 

jind  you  will  easily  believe  that  in  this  little  tjme 
wee  have  not  bene  able  to  conferr  of  halfe  the  matters 
of  importance  which  are  necessary  for  present  consul- 
tac^on :  yett  wee  have  spoken  of  your  businesse, 
w^herein  I  perceive  he  is  farr  from  hauinge  any 
positive  opinion,  nor  have  either  of  us  yett  spoken 
with  the  Kinge  of  it :  Wee  haue  many  thinges  under 
debate,  which  must  be  prseliminary  to  any  deter- 
minac'on  in  that  pointe,  therfore  you  must  haue  a 
little  patience,  and  be  confident  if  you  are  designed 
to  continue  that  imployment,  prouisj-on  must  be 
made  for  your  reasonable  supporte,  and  it  cannot  be 
most  [more]  secure  then  upon  that  pension,  but 
whether  you  are  to  be  continued  ther  I  cannot  yett 
tell;  shortly  wee  may.  I  do  not  finde  that  the 
Queene  or  my  L*^  Jermin  haue  W'ritt  or  sent  any 
opinion  upon  it :  I  am  of  your  opinion  in  the  matter 
of  Mon'  Lyon,  nor  can  I  discover  the  least  foote- 
stepps  of  a  treaty  betweene  the  2  Crownes,  nor  is 
Madrid  a  place  of  that  secrecy,  but  the  Venetian 
Ambassadour  in  that  Courte  would  discover  it.  I 
pray  informe  your  selfe  as  particularly  as  you  can 
of  Mo""  Orleanes,  whose  visitt  in  this  season  is  not 
merely  upon  complement.  It  is  not  possible  to  give 
such  an  accounte  of  our  affayres  heare,  as  may 
satisfy  the  curiosity  of  our  frends,  since  if  what  is 
intended  be  not  kept  secrett,  wee  shall  have  little 
fruites  of  it :  trust  me,  so  farr,  as  to  be  confident, 
our  condic^on  is  very  hopefull,  and  I  am  as  confident 
that  I  shall  lyue  to  see  you  at  Whitehall,  and  serve 
you  ther  as, 

S', 

your  very  affectionate  hu^*^  Serv*, 

Edw:  Hyde. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne, 

Hauinge  replyed  as  particularly  as  I  can  in  my 
last  to  what  concernes  your  owne  particular,  I  should 
not  at  this  tyme  (when  1  have  very  much  to  do) 


1656.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


317 


acknowledge  yours  of  the  11.  were  it  not  to  desyre 
your  fauour  in  transmittinge  the  inclosed.  I  receaved 
a  letter  from  Mr.  Bourdon,  whom  I  well  knew  at  my 
beinge  at  S'  Sebastians,  and  I  am  gladd  that  tlier  is 
such  a  distinction  made  ther,  for  he  writes  me  worde, 
that  since  the  Edicte  for  the  turninge  out  of  towne 
all  the  English,  Irish,  and  Scotts,  ther  is  a  seconde 
order,  that  excepts  all  those  that  can  make  it  evident 
that  they  are  good  subiectes  to  his  Ma*^,  and  there- 
fore he  hath  desyred  such  a  certificate,  havinge  as  he 
sayes  hitherto  preserved  himselfe  by  producinge  some 
letters  which  I  writt  to  him  at  my  beinge  at  Madrid  : 
I  have  in  the  inclosed  sent  him  what  I  conceave  may 
do  him  good,  and  have  derected  it  as  he  aduised,  to 
Bourdeaux.- 

We  exspecte  the  Duke  of  Yorke  here  very  speedily, 
and  then  wee  shall  come  the  sooner  to  a  resolution 
in  that  pointe  which  concernes  you.  I  pray  lett 
us  know  more  of  Don  Michel  de  Castile,  and  of 
Mr.  Locker :  I  would  be  gladd  you  would  send  me 
(if  you  have  it  by  you)  the  life  of  the  Connestable 
De  Desguynes,  which  they  say  is  well  written.  I 
wish  you  all  happinesse,  and  am  very  heartily, 

your  most  affectionate  hu^^^  Serv*, 

Edw.  Hyde. 

Bruges  this  18:  oi  Aug:  (1656). 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 

Bruges  this  25.  of  Aug.  (1656). 

S',t 

I  have  yours  of  the  18.  and  as  you  have  greate 
reason  in  this  perplexed  and  unsteady  condic'on  wee 
are  all  in,  to  desyre  to  know  as  soone  as  may  be 
what  your  owne  lott  will  be,  so,  you  must  not 
wonder  that  your  frends  cannot  give  you  so  speedy 

*  This  transaction  seems  to  have  had  reference  to  the  expected 
war  between  Spain  and  the  Enghsh  Commonwealth. 

"f*  The  hopes  of  the  Royal  partisans  were  now  reviving  rapidiy,  as 
the  whole  tenor  of  this  letter  makes  clear. 


318 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1656. 


satisfaction  ia  it,  as  they  wish ;  wee  shall  shortly  I 
hope  see  the  Duke  of  Yorke  heare,  and  then  that 
matter  will  be  most  properly  and  seasonably  consulted; 
besydes,  the  case  is  now  very  different  from  what  it  was 
understoode  to  be,  when  you  returned  to  Paris,  for 
the  Romance  of  Don  Miguell  will  prove  authentique 
History,  and  it  may  be  Mr.  Lockier  may  retyre  with 
lesse  glory  then  he  entred,  and  S""  Ri:  Browne  stay 
ther  with  more  respecte:  ther  is  one  thinge  no 
doubte  you  may  depend  upon,  which  is,  if  you  are 
continued  ther,  some  fitt  assignac'on  will  be  made  for 
your  supporte,  and  if  you  are  called  away,  no  doubte 
your  Master  will  thinke  of  some  other  prouisyon  and 
imployment  for  you.  Our  businesse  does  not  goe  so 
ill,  but  that  wee  may  reasonably  hope  that  wee  shall 
all  have  somewhat  to  doe.  The  Declarac'on  of  the 
freedome  of  the  Portes  is  now  published  accordinge 
to  our  heartes  desyre,  and  many  other  e\idences 
given  us,  of  a  full  affection  from  Spayne,  and  if  they 
do  not  do  all  for  us  that  wee  desyre,  it  is  only  because 
they  are  not  able  :  nor  are  they  so  weake,  and  unable 
to  helpe  us,  nor  Mr.  CruVell  at  so  much  ease  or  so 
confident  of  his  new  parliam*  that  wee  have  reason  to 
dispayre  of  better  dayes,  or  that  we  may  not  eate 
cherry es  at  Deptforde  agayne. 

I  returned  you  by  the  last  post  an  answer  to  what 
was  desyred  from  Sebastians,  which  I  prsesume 
you  receaved  and  have  sent  forwarde.  I  do  belieue 
ther  will  be  occasyon  for  me  the  beginninge  of  the 
next  weeke  to  repayre  to  Bruxells  and  Antwerpe, 
and  therefore  if  you  please  lett  your  letters  be  putt 
under  couer  to  S''  H.  De  Vic,  or  Mr.  John  Shaw 
at  Antwerpe :  S'  H.  De  Vic  complaynes  he  knew 
not  of  your  returne  to  Paris,  till  some  letters  from 
you  came  into  his  handes  to  be  sent  to  a  3^.  person. 
Corresponding  with  each  other  may  be  usefuU  to  you 
both.    I  am 

your  most  affectionate  Serv^, 

E.  H. 


1656.] 


AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


319 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 

I  hau8  yours  of  the  8.  upon  my  hands,,  and  this  last 
nyght  at  my  comminge  I  founde  your  other  of  the 
22.  and  how  longe  I  shall  stay  heare  I  knew  not,  my 
businesse  dependinge  upon  the  pleasure  of  others, 
who  will  mooue  faster  or  slower  as  they  haue  a  minde 
to  it,  and  the  ill  newes  of  the  losse  of  Valenza,  and 
the  march  you  haue  putt  this  army  to  make,  by  your 
attempt  upon  la  Chappelle,*  makes  the  season  lesse 
fitt  for  those  kinde  of  negotiac^ons,  then  I  belieue 
otherwise  it  would  haue  prooved ;  howeuer  I  hope 
sometyme  the  next  weeke  to  be  agayne  at  Bruges, 
and  then  after  the  Kinge  hath  conferred  with  the 
Duke  of  Yorke,  I  conceaue  some  resoluc^ons  will  be 
taken  concerninge  your  owne  particular,  and  it  may 
be  the  Cardinallf  v/ill  finde  wee  can  be  as  angry 
as  hee,  and  with  more  reason  :  I  will  enquyre  of  the 
letter  you  say  was  writt  to  the  Jesuite,  and  I  pray 
haue  as  stricte  an  eye  upon  the  Knight,  and  informe 
your  selfe  of  him,  as  you  can:  and  likewise  of  the 
moc^ons  of  the  Cardinall  de  Retz  .1:  w^hich  is  an 
intriegue  I  do  not  understande :  you  must  excuse 
me  for  writinge  so  impertinently  at  this  tyme,  when 
the  truth  is,  I  haue  so  much  to  doe,  that  1  hardly 

*  An  allusion  to  the  events  of  the  Low  Country  wars,  and  the 
campaign  in  Italy.    The  Valenza  here  mentioned  is  in  the  Milanese, 
and  was  taken,  at  this  period,  by  the  Duke  of  Modena  and  the 
Duke  of  Mercoaur. 
Mazarin. 

J  De  Retz  had  always  been  extremely  active  during  the  contest 
between  the  King  and  Princes.  He  was  the  bitter  enemy  of  Mazai'in, 
and  also  of  Conde,  playing  a  double  part,  and  ruling  the  Duke  of 
Orleans  in  all  things.  De  Retz  also,  before  this  period,  had  been 
joined  in  an  accusation  brought  against  Charles,  as  the  mere 
creature  of  Cardinal  Mazarin.  We  quote  the  Mercuvius  Poliiims  of 
July  1,  1652  :  "In  the  mean  time  the  Cardinal,  by  his  creatures, 
the  pretended  King  of  Scotland,  the  Cardinal  Retz,  ]\Iadame 
Chevreuse,  Monsieur  le  Chasteauneuf,  and  Montagu,  have  plaied 
their  game  so  well  that  they  have  di'awu  the  Duke  of  Lorrain  to 
declare  for  the  King,  and  to  forsake  the  cause  of  the  Princes," 


320 


LETTERS  OF  Sill  EDWAED  HYDE 


[1656. 


gett  this  tyme  to  write  at  all :  and  I  pray  lett  me 
heare  from  you  of  any  tliinp^e  you  thinke  fitt  to  im- 
parte,  I  mean  when  I  am  fro'  Bruges,  for  whilst  I  am 
ther,  your  letters  to  the  good  Secretary  will  serue  us 
both  :  God  send  us  good  newes  fro'  England,  which 
is  exspected  by 

S', 

Your  very  affectionate  Serv*, 

Edw.  Hyde. 

An'Twerpe  tills  29:  Sept:  (1656). 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne, 

I  had  not  tyme  the  last  post  to  acknowledge  yours 
of  the  29.  of  the  last  moneth,  and  I  haue  since,  by 
your  to  reasonable  guesse  of  the  slownesse  of  all 
dispatches  heare,  receaued  your  other  by  the  last  post 
without  a  date,  which  was  the  only  one  I  receaued 
fro'  Paris,  all  my  other  frends  conceauinge  as  they 
had  reason  that  I  would  be  at  Bruges,  and  therby 
they  are  all  now  without  any  letter  fro'  me.  The 
truth  is,  my  stay  heare  hath  beene  beyonde  all 
possible  exspectac'on,  and  hath  so  tyred  my  patience, 
that  though  this  day  be  not  like  to  giue  so  good  an 
ende  to  my  businesse  as  I  desyre,  yett  I  resolue  (God 
willing)  to  be  gone  to  morrow  towards  the  Kinge, 
from  whom  I  haue  been  now  aboue  a  fortnight : 
Wee  are  willing  to  belieue  that  these  seasonable 
raynes  will  dispose  both  armyes  to  enter  into  ther 
winter  quarters,  and  then  wee  shall  do  our  businesse 
the  better  :     Ther  is  a  discourse  of  the  Marq:  of 

H  court  goinge  this  winter  into  Spayne, 

which  meethinkes  yett  he  should  not  haue  leaue  to 
doe :  you  menc'n  your  neighbour  the  Venetian  Am- 
bassadour,  but  you  neuer  speake  of  your  next  neigh- 
bour my  old  friend  the  Holl:  Ambassadour,*  I 
would  gladly  know  what  he,  thinkes  of  these  altera- 
c'ons,  and  whether  his  eld  affections  continue  to  us  : 

*  My  nheer  Borcll,  before  I'eferred  to. 


1C58.]  AND  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 

I  haue  notliiugc  to  add  but  licarty  wislies  of  your 
happinesse  fro^ 

Your  most  affectionate  Serv*_, 

Edw:  Hyde. 

Antwerpe  this  13.  of  Octob:  (1C56.) 
Sir  Ri:  Browne. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Browne. 
S', 

I  must  give  you  many  thanks  for  your  fauour  of 
the  25.  And  the  greate  ciuilhty  you  expresse  to  me, 
which  I  assure  you  you  will  finde  returned  to  you,  by 
all  the  seruices  I  can  doe  :  it  is  indeede  to  melan- 
cholique  a  tyme,  to  feele  any  prseferment  *  with  that 
gusto  that  it  hath  vsed  to  carry  with  it,  and  I  wish 
that  considerac'on  would  abate  somewhat  of  the 
enuy  that  will  attende  it,  but  wee  must  submitt  to  the 
burthen  and  uneasinesse  of  the  last,  without  any 
refreshment  from  the  former  :  I  hope  the  tyme  is  not 
far  of,  that  God  Almighty  will  give  some  change  to 
the  sadd  condic^on  of  ojir  poore  Master,  and  then 
wee  his  seruants  shall  haue  aboundant  matter  to 
reioyce  in,  be  our  condic^on  what  it  will :  myne,  trust 
me,  will  be  much  the  more  pleasant  to  me,  if  it  shall 
giue  me  any  power  to  lett  you  see  how  heartily  I  am, 
S', 

Your  most  affectionate  Serv*, 

Edw.  Hyde. 

Bru:  this  5.  of/c6:  1658. 
Sir  Ri.  Browne. 

*  An  allusion  to  his  own  appointment  as  Lord  High  Chancellor  of 
England,  shortly  after  the  Great  Seal  had  been  surrendered  by  Lord 
Keeper  Sir  Edward  Herbert.  Curious  anecdotes  respecting  its 
surrender  may  be  found  in  Clarendon's  History,  vol.  iii.  pp.  411, 
412.  It  "was  not  very  long  after  this  that  the  Duke  of  York  was 
px'ivately ,  married  to  the  Chancellor's  daughter.  A  serious  mis- 
understanding had  for  some  time  existed  between  Charles  and  the 
Duke,  and  a  separation  between  them  had  actually  taken  place  whilst 
the  former,  during  great  part  of  1657,  resided  at  Bruges. 


VOL.  IV. 


T 


323 


LETTERS  OF  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE 


[1659. 


Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Sir  Richard  Broivne:^- 

I  doe  very  seldoniG  trouble  you  with  my  letters, 
knowing  very  well  that  the  good  Secretary  t  informes 
you  of  all  things  that  passe  here :  But  I  write  now 
vpon  a  particular  occasion,  in  which  his  Majesties 
honour  is  concerned :  and  iustice  and  charitie  obliges 
vs  to  doe  all  wee  can  :  and  though  you  are  not  in 
your  publique  capacit}^,  and  soe  cannot  move  any 
thing  in  the  Kings  name,  I  doe  beseech  you  for 
charities  sake,  to  take  a  little  paynes  to  informe  your 
selfe  and  therevpon  to  apply  your  selfe  to  my  Lord 
Jermyn,  or  Mr.  Montague  %  on  the  poore  mans 
behalfe  :  and  I  cannot  but  presume  but  they  will  so 
farre  interpose,  and  vse  their  credit,  that  there  may 
be  no  further  proceeding  vpon  so  foul  an  arrest,  but 
y*  the  man  may  be  sett  at  liberty ;  and  if  it  be  pos- 
sible, with  some  repairation.  You  cannot  but  re- 
member that  scandallous  arrest  of  the  Parliament 
of  Rennes,  Avhilst  the  King  was  at  Paris,  of  which 
the  Court  being  informed  was  so  ashamed,  that  they 
gaue  present  order  in  it,  which  I  thought  had  beene 
so  effectuall,  that  there  would  have  beene  no  record 
left  of  it :  nor  did  I  since  heare  any  thing  of  it,  till 
within  those  last  fourteen  dayes  Mr.  Crowther  told 
mee  that  Mr.  Bullen  was  in  prison  vpon  the  same 
arrest.  I  presume  y''  Duke  of  Yorke  Lath,  vpon  the 
addresses  about  that  time  made  to  him,  recommended 
it  to  some  sollicitation ;  howeuer  the  enclosed  letter 
combing  to  my  hands  within  these  two  dayes,  and  the 
King  being  absent  at  this  time  from  hence,  I  cannot 
but  recommend  the  matter  to  you,  and  doe  desire 

*  This  letter  only  bears  the  signature  and  postscript  of  Lord 
Clarendon. 

t  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

X  Alter  diligent  search  it  has  been  found  impossible  to  ascertain  to 
whom  this  letter  alludes.  Lord  Jermyn  and  the  Abbe  Montague 
were  at  this  time  in  active  confidence  with  the  Queen  at  Paris,  as 
appears  from  a  letter  of  the  Marquis  of  Ormond  to  the  Chancellor 
written  in  1659.    Clarendon  State  PaiKrs,  vol.  iii.  p.  547. 


1659.] 


AND  Sill  EICHARD  BllOWNE. 


3£3 


you  upon  perusall  of  liis  letter,  and  tlic  processc, 
whicli  will  informe  you  of  all  that  I  can  say,  that 
you  will  likewise  take  the  paynes,  if  it  be  necessary, 
to  call  vpon  the  Superiour  of  the  Benedictines  for  the 
other  papers,  and  therevpon  to  take  such  course, 
that  such  letters  of  evocation  may  bee  sent,  as  arc 
necessary ;  &  that  the  poore  man  may  bee  sett  at 
liberty,  and  out  of  danger  of  future  vexation :  and  I 
hope  the  conjunction  may  not  be  vnfavourable 
towards  the  advancement  of  such  acts  of  justice.  I 
wish  vou  all  happiness,  and  am, 

your  very  affectionate  serv*, 

Edw.  Hyde. 

Brux:  IGtJt  Aur/ust  1659. 

If  S""  George  Carterett  be  in  towne,  desyre  him 
from  me  to  do  all  the  good  offices  lie  can  in  this 
alFayre. 


SELECTION  FEOM  THE  COKEESPONDENCB 


SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE, 


AMBASSADOR  AT  PARIS 


A  SELECTION  FEOM  THE  COEEESPONDENCE 


OF 

SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE. 


The  subjoined  extracts  are  taken  exclusively  from  the  letters  and 
papers  of  Sir  Richard  Browne,  Evelyn  s  father-in-law,  of  whom  such 
frequent  mention  is  made  in  the  Diary  and  Coi-respondence  now 
brought  to  a  close.    They  will  be  found  to  refer  chiefly  to  matters 
strictly  historical,  having  been  selected  for  the  occasional  new  facts 
they  contribute  to  that  series  of  remarkable  events  which  form  the 
subjects  of  the  various  correspondences  contained  in  this  volume. 
They  require  little  illustration,  beyond  what  has  incidentally  been 
supplied  in  notes  already  given.  The  first  paper  contains  instructions 
for  Browne's  special  embassy  to  Holland  ;  but,  with  this  exception, 
all  the  extracts  given  relate  to  his  official  residence  in  Paris,  in  the 
interval  between  1642  and  1651.    What  followed  the  latter  year  has 
been  the  subject  of  the  correspondence  just  given  between  himself 
and  Clarendon.    If  the  reader  refers  to  the  Diary,  vol.  i.,  p.  276, 
he  will  observe  that  it  was  shortly  after  the  date  when  the  last  of 
these  letters  was  written,  the  result  of  the  fight  of  Worcester 
having  put  a  decided  close  to  all  further  Royahst  effort  for  the 
time,  that  Sir  Richard  Browne  sent  his  son-in-law  Eveljnti  over  to 
"  compound  with  the  soldiers^"  and  take  possession  of  Sir  Richard's 
seat  at  Sayes  Court,  Deptford,  with  a  view  to  permanent  residence, 
"  there  being  now  so  little  appearance  of  any  change  for  the  better, 
all  being  entirely  in  the  rebels'  hands."    Shortly  after  Evelyn  had  so 
left  Paris,  at  which  his  young  wife  was  to  remain,  with  her  father,  till 
Sayes  Court  should  be  prepared  for  her  reception,  Sir  Richard  Browne 
had  to  communicate  a  piece  of  news  of  much  domestic  interest  to  his 
son-in-law,  and  his  notes  on  the  occasion  may  be  given  here  not 
inappropriately,  whether  as  specimens  of  Sir  Richard's  moi'e  intimate 
and  friendly  manner  of  writing,  or  as  connected  very  closely  with  the 
family  story  of  the  Evelyns.    The  first  is  dated  from  Paris,  on  the 
11th  of  May,  1652,    "Dear  Son, — Dick  Hoare  hath  formerly  given 
you  notice  of  the  safety  of  your  lost  half,  or  half  lost  Ben:  Johnson, 
and  will  also  tell  you  by  what  good  fortune  I  have  (paying  the  half- 
pistole)  got  possession  of  your  letter  post.    I  am  now  to  acquaint 


328 


SlPt  mCHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


[1610. 


you,  tliat  youi' wife  will  (God  blessing  her  with  safety)  bring  you  a 
(lepositum  you  left  behind  you  here,  of  far  gi'eater  value,  viz.  a  JIans 
ill  Keldc,  a  young  cavalier,  who  hath  within  these  few  days  unexpect- 
edly discovered  his  A'ivacity,  and  plainly  manifests  his  intention 
within  few  months  to  come  forth,  and  be  a  citizen  of  this  world. 
This  (though  yet  a  secret  here)  is  so  real  a  certainty,  that  I  exceed- 
ingly joy  to  give  you  this  first  notice  thereof.  And  if  grandfathers 
love  more  tMiderly  their  remote  offspring,  you  will  not  I  hope  envy 
me  my  share  in  the  great  contentment,  who  so  passionately  wish  you 
and  yours  all  happiness,  under  God's  eternal,  and  the  temporary  bless- 
ing of  your  ever  dearly  loving  father,  to  serve  you,  Ri:  Browne." — 
The  second  is  dated  three  days  later,  and  addressed  "My  son  Evelyne." 
Thus  it  runs:  "Dear  Son, — Lest  what  I  sent  you  by  the  last  post 
should  by  accident  have  gone  astray,  I  now  repeat  what  much  con- 
cerns you  to  know,  that  you  may,  as  soon  as  may  be,  participate  our 
joy,  the  nature  whereof  is  to  be  diffusive.  Your  wife,  by  being  since 
your  departure  so  free  from  nausea's  and  other  ordinary  indications 
of  child-bearing,  hath  so  deceived  us  that,  until  very  lately,  we  scai'ce 
other  ways  than  in  wishes  thought  of  so  great  a  blessing  ;  of  the 
certainty  whereof  there  is  now  no  doubt  to  be  made,  though  as  yet  it 
be  here  so  much  a  secret,  that  none  but  my  wife  and  1  and  your 
maid  do  know  it.  God  accomplish  prosperously  this  his  mercy,  to 
his  glory,  your  comfort,  and  the  singular  contentment  of  your  dearly 
loving  father  to  serve  you,  Richard  Browne." 


Instructions  for  our  trusty  id  ell -he]  one  cl  Seruant, 
Richard  Browne,  Gierke  of  our  Privy  Coun- 
cell  <^T.  {in  1640). 

Charles  R. 

Hauing  occasion  to  send  a  person  of  trust  into 
Holland,  unto  our  deare  Sister  the  Queene  of 
Bohemia,  and  our  Nephew  the  Prince  Elector 
Palatin,  Wee  are  pleased  to  make  choise  of  you  for 
the  iraployraent,  and  for  your  better  direction  there- 
in, to  prouide  you  w*''  the  Instructions  following : 

You  shall  represent  unto  our  Sister,  and  Nephew, 

The  Elector  Palatine  had  been  in  England  before  this  date,  and 
was  then  elected  Knight  of  the  Garter.  In  consequence  of  the  pre- 
sent negotiation,  he  did  not  proceed  to  England  until  1643,  two  years 
afterwards.  Charles  the  First  may  already  have  suspected  the  young 
Prince  of  the  design  which  he  afterwards  did  not  scruple  to  carry 
into  effect  by  joining  the  party  arrayed  against  his  uncle. 


1C40.] 


SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


329 


(wee  beeing  informed  lie  liatli  a  desire  to  passe  over 
into  these  partes)  how  inconuenient  it  would  be  for 
our  seruice  if  att  present  he  should  undertake  the 
journey,  and  that  w'^all,  it  can  noe  ways  aduantage 
his  owne  affaires,  since  we  shall  still  haue  the  same 
care  and  affection  for  them,  in  his  absence,  as  if  he 
were  present,  and  now  especially  in  this  Treaty 
between  us  and  the  States  of  the  Ynited  Provinces, 
and  the  Prince  of  Orange,  wherein  his  interests  shall 
not  be  forgotten. 

That  for  the  paper  w^^^  Eichard  Cave*  hath 
given  us,  Wee  find  it  soe  directly  contrary  to  the 
interests  of  the  States,  and  in  itselfe  impracticable, 
that  from  that  ground,  Wee  cannot  hope  any  effects 
conducible  to  the  good  of  our  Nephewes  affaires,  yet 
in  the  present  Treaty  we  are  resolued  to  endeauour 
y^  interest  of  him,  and  the  House  Palatene,  soe  farre 
as  the  present  conjuncture  of  affaires  will  permit,  it 
being  one  of  the  principall  motiues  that  induced  us 
to  harcken  to  this  Alliance  w^^'  the  States,  and  the 
Prince  of  Orange. 

You  are  further  to  giue  our  Sister  and  Nephew, 
all  reall  asseurances  of  our  loue  and  affection  to 
them,  and  particularly  of  our  desires,  that  all  mis- 
understands (if  such  there  chaunce  to  haue  bin)  that 
haue  happened  either  in  circumstance  or  otherwayes, 
concerning  the  ouuertures  of  this  Marriage  f  intended 
betweene  our  eldest  daughter  and  the  Prince  of 
Oranges  son,  may  be  taken  away :  Wee  foreseing 
that  nothing  can  be  of  more  aduantage  to  tliem  in 
their  present  condition,  then  that  there  be  a  cleare 
vnderstanding,  and  all  reall  friendship  betweene 
them,  and  the  Prince  and  Princesse  of  Orange :  w^^ 

*  This  Sir  Tlicliard  Cave  appears  to  have  been  much  engaged  in 
the  affairs  of  Holland  and  the  Palatinate.  In  Bromley's  Collection  of 
Royal  Letters  he  is  mentioned  by  the  Count  Palatine  in  a  letter  to 
the  Queen  of  Bohemia,  as  Captain  Cave ;  he  was  then  serving  in  the 
army,  and  occasionally  employed  in  diplomatic  affairs. 

f  The  mai'riage  took  place  on  the  2nd  of  May,  1641,  Avhen  the 
Princess  was  only  twelve  years  of  age  ;  and  it  is  a  curious  fact  in 
Charles's  private  history,  that  it  was  celebrated  with  great  magni- 
ficence in  the  interval  between  the  sentence  and  the  execution  of  the 
Earl  of  Strafford. 


330  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS.  [1641. 


you  are  effectually  to  represent  vnto  tliem  by  all  the 
arguments  and  reasons  you  can  frame,  and  of  what 
dangerous  consequence  the  contrary  may  be  to  their 
interests  and  restitution. 

You  shall  likewise  give  unto  our  Sister  and 
Nephew,  a  true  and  particular  knowledge  of  the 
state  of  the  Treatyes  betweene  us  and  the  States 
Ambassad"  (as  our  principall  Secretary  shall  informe 
you)  as  well  of  that  of  the  Marriage,  as  of  y^  Con- 
federation, in  the  latter  of  which,  we  are  resolued 
(as  aforesaid)  to  take  a  special  care  of  their  interests. 

You  are  to  acquaint  them,  that  although  the  two 
Treatyes  are  not  come  as  yett  to  a  conclusion,  neuer- 
thelesse  hauing  been  pressed  by  the  Prince  of  Orange, 
that  his  son  might  passe  into  England  before  his 
going  to  the  Field,  Wee  haue  so  farre  giuen  our 
assent  thereunto  as  that  wee  haue  left  it  to  him,  to 
doe  therein  as  he  shall  thinke  fitt. 

You  are  to  impart  these  our  Instructions  vnto  S' 
William  Boswell  our  Resident,  and  to  take  his  aduise 
in  all  things  that  may  concerne  our  seruice,  and  you 
are  w*^  him  to  addresse  your  selfe  in  our  name  to  the 
Prince  &  Princesse  of  Orange,  &  to  passe  like 
offices  w^^  them  for  the  endeauouring  &  setling  of  a 
good  understanding  betweene  our  deare  Sister,  our 
Nephew,  and  them,  according  as  wee  soe  earnestly 
desire,  and  their  interest  requires  :  Giuen  under  our 
Signe-manuall  att  our  Court  at  Whitehall  y^  23*'''  of 
Febru:  1640. 

(Signed)  H.  Vane. 

Indorsed, 

"  His  Ma*'«^  Instructions  to  Mr.  Browne,  going  into  Holland  1641." 

Instructions  for  our  trusty  and  icelbeloued  Richard 
Broivne,  Esq.  one  of  the  Clerkes  of  our  Privy 
Councell^  and  our  Agent  iv^^  our  good  brother  the 
most  Christian  King  :  {in  1641). 

Charles  H. 

Wee  hauing  occasion  to  imploy  our  right  trusty 
and  right  welbeloved  Cousin  the  Earle  of  Leycester,''' 

Robert  Sidney,  nephew  of  tlie  gallant  Sir  Philip. 


1641.] 


SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


331 


our  extraord'y  Ambassad'  with  our  good  brother  the 
Erench  King,  in  the  gouernmen*  of  our  Ttealme  of 
Ireland,  as  our  Lieutenant  generall  there,  and  to 
that  end  being  now  to  recall  him  from  his  employ- 
ment in  France :  Wee  haue  that  confidence  of  your 
fidelity,  and  abilities,  and  particularly  of  your  expe- 
rience in  those  parts,  that  wee  haue  thought  fitt  to 
make  choice  of  you  for  to  be  our  Agent  there,  and 
that  you  may  the  better  acquitt  your  selfe  in  that 
charge,  you  shalbe  provided  w*^  the  Instructions 
following  : 

First  vpon  your  arriuall  in  that  kingdome,  you 
shall  addresse  yo'^'selfe  vnto  our  said  Ambassad''  ex- 
traord'^  for  to  be  by  him  presented  vnto  that  King, 
to  whom  you  shall  deliuer  yo""  Tres  of  Credence,  and 
impart  your  charge : 

And  when  you  shalbe  thus  admitted  to  his  pre- 
sence, you  shall  in  due,  and  the  best  manner,  lett 
him  know  the  great  affection  wee  beare  to  his  person, 
and  the  good  aduancement  and  prosperity  of  him 
and  his  affaires,  and  how  much  wee  doe  desire,  accord- 
ing to  the  antient  friend shipp  and  strait  obligations 
betweene  us,  to  maintaine  all  good  intelligence  and 
correspondence.  To  w'^^'  end,  that  there  may  be 
nothing  wanting  on  our  part.  We  haue  now,  vpon 
the  comming  away  of  our  Ambassad'",  sent  you  to 
reside  there :  And  soe  you  are  accordingly  to  make 
this  your  principall  aime,  as  it  is  indeed  the  proper 
charge  of  all  AmV',  Legats,  and  Agents,  to  nourrishe 
and  maintayne  a  good  correspondence  betwixt  the 
two  Crownes. 

And  therefore  you  are  to  informe  yo''^selfe  of  all 
former  Treatyes,  and  more  especially  of  the  last  and 
most  freshe  in  practice,  betweene  these  Crownes, 
being  the  rule  by  y?"^'  the  proceedings  of  the  subjects 
of  both  sides  are  to  be  regulated. 

And  that  you  may  better  know  wherein  Wee,  or 
our  subjects,  are  any  way es  concerned  in  those  parts, 
whether  in  suites,  processes,  or  otherwayes,  you  are 
to  take  all  fitting  and  necessary  informations  from 
our  said  Ambassad'',  and  what  businesses  shalbe  left 
in  agitation  by  him  for  o'"^  seruice,  you  are  in  our 


332 


SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS.  [1641. 


name  to  continue  the  prosecution  thereof,  and  to 
giue  account  of  yo""  proceedings  therein. 

Another  part  of  your  charge  is,  that  you  watch 
carefully  oner  the  motions  of  that  State  where  you 
are,  what  treaties,  alliances,  assistances,  or  ennemi- 
tyes  shalbe  moued  w"'  other  States  openly,  or  vnder- 
hand,  wherein  our  affaires  may  be  any  wayes  con- 
cerned ;  and  for  yo""  better  light  and  information 
herein,  you  are  to  keepe  intelligence  w*^  our  Ambas- 
sad""'  and  Agents  w*^  other  Princes,  and  States,  to 
whom  wee  wnll  giue  orders  to  correspond  w*^  you. 

And  as  there  shall  further  occasion  arise  for  you 
to  negotiate  in,  for  our  seruice,  you  shall  receiue 
directions,  either  immediately  from  our  selues,  or 
from  our  principall  Secretaries  in  our  name,  w'^'' 
you  are  to  obserue  &  follow,  as  if  it  came  vnder  our 
owne  hand,  and  from  time  to  time  to  aduertise  them 
(or  vs  as  the  importance  of  the  occasion  may  require) 
of  all  yo''^  proceedings,  and  what  soeuer  else  may 
come  to  yo'^  knowledge,  w*"^'  may  be  usefull  and 
necessary  for  the  good  of  our  affaires. : — Whitehall 
the  23^^  of  July  1641. 

H.  Vane. 

"  Instructions  for  Mr.  Browne." 
Jahj12>,  1641. 


Charles  E. 

Nostre  feal  et  bien  ame  Richard  Browne,  Gentil- 
hom^e  de  Nostre  Chambre  Privee,  Secretaire  en 
Nostre  Conseil  Privee,  et  Nostre  Resident  en  France, 
salut.  Comme  ainsi  soit  que  ceux  contre  qui  Nous 
avons  a  faire  presentem*  touchant  le  reste  des 
derniers  Dotaulx  *  de  Nostre  tres  chere  Epouse  la 
Reyne,  se  veulent  servir  contre  Nous  de  certains 
pretendus  Ordres  donnez  Tun  an  mois  d'Octobre 
1633,  par  feu  Nostre  Grand  Thresorier  :  f  1' autre  par 

■*  This  resumption  in  regard  to  the  Queen's  dowry  was  to  facilitate 
supplies  from  the  Continent  ;  her  Majesty  at  this  precise  period 
transmitting  to  the  King  a  considerable  sum  of  money  raised  upon  the 
l)awned  jewels  of  the  Crown.  She  had  gone  to  Holland  on  the  23rd 
of  Februai'y  pi'eceding.         +  Kichard  Weston,  Earl  of  Portland. 


1G12.] 


SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


333 


Nous  du  20"''=  Juiii  1039  a  Barwick.  Nous  vous 
declarous  &  tous  aultres  qu^il  appartiendra,  que  Nous 
desavouons  celuy  pretendu  du  dit  N^re  Grand  Thre- 
sorier,  com^e  estant  donue  hors  son  pouvoir,  et 
contre  le  bien  de  Nos  affaires  et  interests^  &  contre 
Nostre  intention.  Et  pour  celuy  donne  au  diet 
Barwick,  Nous  le  revoquons  absolument,  com'e 
ayant  este  tire  de  Nous  par  surprise  &  du  tout  contre 
N'*"  intention  &  le  bien  de  Nos  affaires.  Ce  que 
vous  declarez  et  notifierez  quand  ainsi  vous  adviserez 
estre  affaire.  Et  pour  ce  faire,  ces  Nos  Lettres 
vous  seront  G arrant  et  Authorite  suffisante.  Donne 
soubs  Nostre  signet  le  dixneufiesme  jour  de  Juillet 
a  N^'^  Cour  a  Beuerley,  1642,  Tan  XIIX"'^  de  N're 
Eegne. 

A  N'^s  feal  et  bien  ame  Ricliai'd  Browne,  Gentilliom'e  de  N're 
Chambre  Privee,  Sec're  en  N're  Conseil  d'Estat  &  Prive,  et 
N're  Resid*  en  France.  1642. 


Charles  R. 

Trusty  and  well  beloued  Wee  greet  you  well. 
Whereas  one  Walter  Strickland  *  hatli  bin  very 
lately  sent  in  y^  name  of  both  Houses  of  Parliani* 
heere  with  credentials  to  treate  with  o'^  AUyes  the 
States  G^rall  of  the  Vnited  Netherlands,  as  pre- 
tended, for  the  publick  good,  though  without  any 
concurrence  or  knowledge  of  Us,  which  We  must 
interprett  the  highest  act  of  affront  &  disobedience 
w''^  hath  bin  committed  against  o''  Boy  all  person  & 
dignity ;  And  this  example  leading  us  to  a  beleefe  of 
what  Wee  haue  bin  told,  but  were  not  apt  to  creditt 
w^hilest  there  was  any  shew  of  reverence  of  o^  knowne 
Begalities  yet  remaining,  that  Augier,t  or  some 
other  person,  is  by  the  said  Houses  sent  with  their 
usurped  comission  into  Erance ;  Wee  haue  thought 
fitt  hereby  to  authorise  &  command  you  to  use  y^'' 

*  Strickland  Avas  afterwards  a  member  of  the  House  of  Common?, 
and  strenuous  in  the  affjxir  of  the  "  Self-denying  Ordinance." 

f  Augier  had  formerly  been  engaged  in  the  diplomatic  negotiations 
on  the  Continent  with  regard  to  the  Elector  Palatine.  . 


334 


>SIR  PJCHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


[1642. 


best  and  utmost  meanes  as  well  privatly  as  publicldy 
&  in  Our  Name  to  hinder  &  oppose  any  audience, 
countenance,  or  treaty  in  any  kind  to  be  afforded 
the  said  Augier  or  other  "whatsoeuer  craving  the  same 
of  o'"^  Brother  the  French  King,  the  Princes  of  the 
Blood,  or  any  of  the  Protestant  Party,  o'^  Friends  & 
Allves,  without  Warrant  under  owre  owne  hand. 
And  if,  notwithstand",  Augier  or  any  other  shall 
prevaile.  That  you  then  in  C''  Name  solemnely  pro- 
test there  against  the  highest  violacon  of  theire 
Allyance  &  Friendship  with  Vs,  against  w*^^  Wee 
shall  seeke  such  reparacon  as  by  God's  assistance 
Wee  shall  be  enabled.  For  all  w*^^  as  these  o'^ 
Letters  shalbe  y"  sufficient  Warrant  &  Proteccon, 
So  we  shall  expect  hereof  yo""  faithfull  &  bounden 
discharge  as  occasion  therefore  shalbe  offred  vnto 
you.  Giuen  at  o"  Court  at  Nottingham  the  12^^  day 
of  Septemb'  in  the  Eighteenth  veare  of  o'^  Keigne 
1642. 

"  To  our  trusty  «Sc  welbeloved  Richard  Browne,  Esq. 
Our  Resid'^with  o""  Brother  the  French  King." 

Indorsed, 

"  From  his  lla.^y  20'''  day  of  SqA-'  1642."  * 


Charles  K. 

Trusty  &  welbeloved  Wee  greet  you  well.  Wee 
beleeve  that  before  this  Letter  the  Capucinsf  of 
Somersett  house,  or  some  from  them,  wilbe  arrived 
at  Paris  &  haue  represented  there  how  disgracefully 
they  were  lately  entreated  at  London.  Wee  are 
exceedingly  displeased  that  soe  high  an  alfront  hath 

*  Tills  letter  was  written  a  month  after  the  King  had  raised  his 
standard  at  Nottingham. 

f  An  allusion  to  the  complaints,  so  long  existmg,  against  the 
Queen's  Popish  attendants.  So  strong  was  the  feeling  on  this  subject, 
that  the  King,  unable  to  resist  it,  was  under  the  necessity  of  conceding 
to  Parliament  their  demands  that  he  should  by  royal  proclamation 
require  all  statutes  concerning  Popish  recusants  to  be  put  in  execu- 
tion, that  the  seven  condemned  Popish  priests  should  be  banished, 
and  that  all  Romish  priests  should  be  ordered  to  depart  the  Kingdom 
in  twenty  days. 


1642.] 


SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


335 


been  put  upon  the  Treaty  between  Vs  &  the  French 
King  Our  Brother,  &  upon  Our  owne  Authority. 
But  forasmuch  as  this  barbarous  Act  is  the  child  of 
that  monstrous  KebelKon  vf"^^  goes  big  with  confusion 
&  destruccon  to  our  Person  &  Posterity  as  well  as 
our  Laws  &  Bights.  Wee  wilbe  cleere  of  any  impu- 
tacon  thereof,  disavowing  the  same,  the  authors, 
actors  &  abettors  thereof,  as  Wee  doe  disavow  & 
detest  all  their  traytrous  machinacons  against  Ys 
&  the  Peace  of  Our  Kingdoms,  leaning  them  obnoxi- 
ous to  the  iust  indignacon  &  revenge  w*"""  God  shall 
inflict  upon  them  in  his  due  time.  And  to  this 
effect  Wee  will  &  command  you  in  Our  Name  to 
make  yo''^  addresse  to  Our  said  deare  Brother  the 
French  King  for  his  satisfaccon  &  the  discharge  of 
Our  conscience  &  affeccon  to  Him  in  this  regard. 
And  soe  Wee  bid  you  farewell.  Giuen  at  Our  Court 
at  Oxford  the  5^^  day  of  Aprill  in  the  Nineteenth 
yeare  of  Oure  Beigne. 

1643. 

"  To  our  trusty  and  welbeloued  Richard  Browne, 
our  Resident  with  our  deere  Brother  the  French  King." 
From  his  Ma"e  oth  Ajml,  1643. 


The  extracts  which  now  follow  are  from  letters  written  by  Sir 
Richard  Browne  whilst  Ambassador  at  Paris.  They  generally,  but 
not  always,  indicate  to  whom  they  were  addressed ;  but  the  topics 
sufficiently  explain  themselves.  In  a  few  instances,  a  genex-al 
abstract  of  the  subject  of  the  letter  precedes  the  particular  extract 
given. 

21  Oct.  1G42. 

Bich*^  Browne,  Esq;  Ambass''  at  Paris  writes  to  S'' 
Edw*^  Nicholas,  Secretary  of  State — That  by  his 
Ma*^'^  late  speech  at  ...  .  Shrewsbury  &  by  other 
advices,  he  hears  the  possibility  of  a  thing  w'^''  he 
hopes  will  never  come  to  pass,  that  his  Ma*^  will  be 
constrained  to  sell  or  engage  his  faii-est  parks  or 
lands :  that  there  is  at  Deptford  certain  pastures 
called  Sayes  Court,  reserved  in  his  jMa^"  hand  for 
the  special  service  of  his  household,  for  w*"^  being  so 
near  London^  there  may  in  these  intruding  times. 


336 


SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


be  persons  ready  to  deale  :  he  beseeches  Edw.  to 
move  his  Ma*^  that  they  may  not  be  sold,  but  if  (w*^'' 
God  defend)  his  Ma'^  sho*^  have  just  cause  to  part 
from  them,  that  he  wo*^  let  some  sufficient  persons 
(whom  he  shall  find  out)  to  deale  for  them,  have  the 
first  ofi'er,  not  above  260  acres ;  no  man  shall  give  a 
clearer  light  than  he  Avill,  for  they  have  been  long  in 
the  custody  of  his  ancestors,  by  whom  the  dwelling 
house  thereon  was  built  at  their  own  charge,  &  it 
is  the  only  seat  he  has,  &  is  the  place  wherein  he 
was  borne. 


To  Sii'  Edward  Nicholas. 

7  Nov.  1642. 

That  [m  cypher']  doth  continue  his  assistance 
to  the  Irish,  furnishing  money  to  buy  arms,  w*"^'  they 
send  away  for  Ireland  ;  that  he  has  made  reiterated 
complaints  by  his  Ma*-^  express  order,  &  in  his 
name,  with  so  little  success  that  it  is  useless  to 
endeavour  any  more.  The  Irish  priests  as  well  as 
the  soldiers  flock  very  fast  into  their  country  & 
pretend  bishopricks  and  other  benefices  by  donation 
from  Home.  Col.  Tirel  is  here  lately  come  out  of 
Portugal  and  hastens  into  Ireland.  Col.  Belinge 
(late  prisoner  in  England)  hath  obtained  his  liberty, 
&  is  now  in  this  town. 


To  the  same. 

9-19  Nov.  1642. 

The  Prince  of  Conde  lately  sent  for  me  &  told 
me  the  Counsells  of  France  had  hitherto  beene 
contrary  to  his  Ma^-' — excused  and  asked  pardon  for 
his  complyinge  :  bad  mee  assure  his  Ma*^  he  would 
henceforward  do  all  that  lay  in  his  power  to  serve 
him,  that  he  would  in  confidence  advertise  me  (and 
only  me)  of  all  that  passeth,  and  (yf  neede  so 
require)  hee  would  himselfe  endeavour  assistance  for 
his  Ma^>'. 

Use  may  be  made  hereoff  yf  cherisht  &  kept 
secrett,  especially  in  regard  the  French  King  is 


16i2  3.]       SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


337 


not  like  to  live  longe,  &  the  Princes  of  the  blood 
will  probably  have  their  share  in  govornm'  then  yf 
not  sooner. 

To  the  same. 

13-23  Jan.  1G42-3. 

The  whole  numbers  of  the  Scotch  who  doe  allready 
serve  or  have  contracted  to  serve  this  Crowne,  are^ 


Colonel  Douglas  his  foot  Reg'   2000 

Earl  of  Erwin  his  new  Reg'  of  Guard  consisting  of  30 

companies    ..........  4500 

My  Lord  Gray  one  Reg'  of  foote   1000 

My  Lord  Lundy  one  Reg'  of  foote   1000 

Colonel  Fullerton  one  Reg'  of  foote   1000 

Earl  of  Laudian  (is  sayd)  shall  have  auncit;nt  conip;ii)y  of 

Gens  d'Armes   100 

9600 

Of  these,  allready  here 

Coll.  Douglas  Reg'   1000 

The  Earl  of  Erwins   2000 

Coll.  Fullertoa's   500 


3500 

The  rest  expected,  butt  much  difficulty  to  find 
men  in  Scotland. 

I  have  scene  letters  lately  written  from  a  person 
of  great  quality  in  Scottland,  bearinge  the  Earl  of 
Laudian^s  speedy  comminge  over  hither  with  his 
Ma*^*  leave  to  treate  the  renewinge  of  the  auncient 
allyances  betweene  the  Crowns  of  Scotland  and 
France;  uppon  which  Treaty  many  particular  in- 
terests depend,  as,  the  reestablishinge  the  Marquis 
Hamilton  in  the  Dutchy  of  Chatelraut,  of  the  Marq. 
Douglas  in  that  of  Turenne,  of  restoringe  the 
Captainship  of  the  Scottish  Archers  and  Guardes- 

du-corps  to  one  of  that  nation,  &c  relative  to 

which  negotiations  [cypher]  and  Mons'  de  la  Ferte 
Imbault  pretends  to  have  in  favour  of  him  erected  a 


VOL.  IV. 


z 


338 


SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS.  [1642-3. 


new  office  of  Colonel  de  la  Nation  Escossoise,  of  the 
same  nature  and  in  all  points  of  profitt  and  honour 
equall  to  that  of  the  Suisses. 

Mr.  Chambers  hath  very  honestly  beene  with  mee 
and  tells  mee  unlesse  the  Earle  Laudian  come  (as 
he  pretends)  with  his  Ma*'*"*  leave,  and  that  his  Ma*^ 
doe  well  approve  of  the  employment  whertoo  hee  is 
dessigned,  he  shall  not  bee  very  forward  so  farre  to 
quit  his  allegeance  to  his  lawful!  Soveraigne  as  to 
accept  theroff. 

I  beseech  y'  Hon'  lett  me  receive  y'  orders  how  I 
shall  carry  myself  in  this  business. 

Mons*"  de  la  Ferte  Imbaull  is  nott  only  a  vehement 
stickler  for  the  Scotch,  butt  in  a  manner  also  agent 
for  the  Parliament  here.  I  have  by  me  the  authen- 
tique  copie  of  a  letter  written  lately  to  him  by  a 

Peere  *  in  the  name  of  the  Upper  House 

to  sollicit  a  businesse  here.  In  all  his  discourse  he 
raysetli  their  reputation  to  what  heighth  hee  can, 
and  depressetli  his  Ma*'"  causelessly,  dishonestly, 
and  maliciously. 

To  the  same. 

11-21  March,  1642-3. 

Passports  to  treat  for  a  general  Peace  to  assemble 

at  Munster.  The  Earle  of  Laudian  with  T. 

Dishington  solicite  very  earnestly  here  for  the 
sendinge  an  Ambass''  into  England,  to  treat  of  an 
accommodation,  by  order  as  is  presumed  of  the 
Par?  in  England,  and  Mr.  Pert  Imbault  is  noe  lesse 
earnest  to  bee  the  man.  These  three  are  all  one 
and  violent  Parliamentarians. 

[An  inclosure  in  cypher.] 

To  the  same. 

2-12  June,  1643. 

"By  the  letters  I  recommended  to  Mr.  de  Gressy's 
safe  delivery,  your  Hon'  will  have  understood  in 

*  In  this  part  of  the  original,  the  words  "my  lord  of  Holland'* 
are  scratched  through  with  a  pen. 


1643.] 


SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


339 


what  a  miserable  condition  I  am  for  want  of  some 
present  supply  of  money,  my  friends  haveinge  plainly 
signified  unto  mee  that  I  must  expect  no  more  from 
them_,  or  from  my  estate  in  England  already  engaged 
to  its  utmost  extent. 

By  the  same  opportunity  I  likewise  give  y'^  Hon' 
notice  of  S'  Bait.  Gerbiers  manner  of  proceedinge 
here  at  his  first  arrival,  since  which  he  continues  his 
frequent  visits  to  the  Oueene,  Princes,  and  Ministers, 
taking  much  uppon  him,  and  using  his  Ma^'^*  name 
how  hee  pleases  uppon  all  occasions,  not  onely 
givinge  out  here,  butt  also  waiting  into  other  parts 
(as  I  have  received  notice  by  letters  from  good 
hands)  that  he  is  sent  hither  by  his  Ma*''  to  condole 
about  other  business  of  great  consequence. — I  shall 
be  glad  to  know  what  y'  Hon'  thinkes  of  this  kinde 
of  carriage  of  his,  and  whether  it  bee  his  Ma*'^'  plea- 
sure to  have  a  pretended  Ambassad'  where  he  hath 
allready  an  avowed  Besident. 

The  Elector  Palatine  to  Mr.  Browne. 

Sir, 

Y"  of  the  ^  past,  brought  along  w^h  it  soe  good 
efi'ects  of  y'  endeavours  in  my  afi*aires,  as  that  besides 
y'  owne  assurances  &  my  Besid*  Pawls  constant  tes- 
timonie  of  y'  assiduity,  the  contents  of  what  it  hath 
procured  in  my  favour,  doth  clearely  confirme 
me  in  confidence,  &  augment  my  obligation  towards 
you. 

My  constant  ill  fortune  hath  taught  me  not  to 
stand  att  this  time  much  upon  formalities  w*^  those 
whose  helpe  I  need,  therefore  I  must  rest  satisfied 
w*^  what  the  mentioned  letter  wants  thereof,  in  hopes 
it  will  be  supplied  w*^  reallity  when  it  comes  to  the 
push. 

I  thanke  you  also  for  y'  good  advertisements  to 
Pawel,  &  am  very  glad  to  find  by  y'  last  concerning 
Mad^^^  de  Bohan,=»=  the  care  w''^  the  King  my  gracious 

*  This  lady  was  only  daughter  of  the  Duke  de  Rohan,  one  of  the 
great  leaders  of  the  Huguenot  party  in  France ;  and  who  signalised 

z2 


340 


SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


[1643. 


V^ncle  hath  of  those  that  doe  him  acceptable  service. 
And  soe  desiring  the  continuance  of  yo'  good  offices 
in  w^'  still  further  concerne  the  good  of  my  interests, 
I  assure  you  that  I  shall  euer  reraaine 

y  most  affectionnate  frend, 

Charles. 

Haghe  the      of  Sept:  164.3. 

"  For  Mr.  Browne,*  Resid'  to  the  King  of  Gr:  Britt:  att  Paris." 

Indorsed, 
From  Pr:  El:  Palatine  7:  Sept.  1643. 


Sir  Richard  Broivne  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas. 

3  Sept.  1643. 

[Cypher]  concerning  -which  money es  as  I  treated 
with  335  .  420  (who  hath  very  much  contributed  to 
the  findinge  out  and  sending  this  summe)  hee  know- 
inge  my  case,  of  himselfe  offered  mee  to  move  335  . 
501  .  to  reserve  here  what  part  I  would  towards  pay- 
ment of  my  entertainement  until  they  received  his 
Ma*'''^  order  to  put  it  into  my  hands,  but  I  replyed 

himself  in  the  affairs  at  Roehelle  and  the  Isle  du  Rhe.  In  Hardwicke's 
State  Papers  there  is  a  letter  from  Sir  Henry  de  Vic  to  Lord  Conway, 
dated  from  the  Coast  of  France  in  1627,  in  which  she  is  said  to  be  on 
the  point  of  marriage  with  the  Count  de  Soissons ;  a  match  which  the 
Duke  of  Buckingham  also  describes  as  most  desii^able  for  the  Pro- 
testant Cause.  See  Hardwicke's  State  Papers,  pp.  34 — 38.  It  was  at 
one  time  intended  by  Charles  the  First  that  Prince  Rupert  should 
marry  Mademoiselle  de  Rohan  :  and  in  the  Harleian  Collection  there 
is  a  letter  from  the  King  to  Prince  IMaurice  in  favour  of  the  match. 
The  Elector  Palatine,  Charles  Louis,  the  writer  of  the  letter  in  the 
text,  returned  soon  after  its  date  into  England,  where  he  had  long 
been  a  pensioner.  His  brothers  were  constant  to  the  Royal  cause  ; 
but  he  took  part  with  the  Parliament,  and  sat  in  the  Assembly  of 
Divines.  The  truth  was,  that,  being  the  next  heir  to  the  English 
Crown  in  case  the  family  of  Charles  the  First  were  set  aside,  a 
section  of  the  popular  leadei's  had  undoubtedly  cast  their  thoughts 
towards  him  as  a  means  by  which  some  settlement  might  be  efiected 
similar  to  that  which  was  made  with  the  Prince  of  Orange  between 
forty  and  fifty  years  later  ;  and  there  can  be  as  little  doubt  that 
the  young  Elector,  who  had  nothing  amiable  or  generous  in  his  dis- 
position, and  who  felt  bitterly  his  dependence  on  his  royal  uncle's 
generosity  and  charity,  caught  greedily  at  the  bait  held  out. 
*  Afterwards  Sir  Richard. 


1643.] 


SIR  RICHAKD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


341 


that  though  my  necessities  did  much  presse  mee,  yett 
I  would  uott  presume  to  stopp  or  divert  any  supply 
whatsoever  sent  to  his  Ma*^  Here  is  a  very  consider- 

and  ammunition* 

able  quantity  of  259  .  82  .  91  .  83.  sent  and  sendinge 
from  hence,  the  particulars  wherofF  are  I  assure 

myselfe  well  knowne  to  his  Ma^^  and  to  y'  Hon^  

prays  for  money  &  to  be  preserved  from  perishing. 


To  the  same. 

3  Sept  1643. 

 the  welcome  newes  of  20,000/.  sterling  which 

this  good  Queene  sends  to  their  Ma*'"  by  her  Am- 
bass'. — They  offered  to  put  part  into  his  hands,  but  he 
refused  it,  tho^  his  necessities  were  great,  as  he  w^o*^ 
not  intercept  any  supply  sent  to  his  Ma*^ 

Much  arms  &  ammunition  sent — lord  V.  Moun- 
tague  had  50,000  livres  Tournois  to  purchase  arms — 
35,000  only  expended — prays  the  other  part  may  be 
ordered  for  him. 


To  the  same. 

10-20  Nov.  1613. 

The  Queene  is  in  a  manner  wholly  governed  by 
Card^  Mazarine,  who  is  secretly  leagued  with  the 
Prince  of  Conde,  but  governed  by  Mons'  de  Chavigny ; 
this  last  beinge  by  this  meanes  though  in  a  close  v/ay 
more  powerfull  than  ever.  The  whole  triplicitly  I 
feare  will  league  noe  very  favourable  influence  on 

England.  Mr.  Croft  is  gone  to  Rouen  joyntly 

with  my  L'^  V.  Mountague  &  others  to  treat  with 
som  merchants  for  furnishinge  his  Ma*^  with  armes  & 
ammunition,  &c. 

*  The  words  "and  ammunition"  are  struck  through  with  a  pen  in 
the  original. 


342  SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS.  [1644. 


To  Lord  Digby. 

6 /an.  1644. 

Delivers  tlie  Kings  passe  for  100  barrells  of  powder, 
12,000  waiglit  of  match,  2000  swords  &  500  case  of 
pistols  to  be  by  a  merch*  put  aboard  his  Ma*^''  2  men 
of  war  at  Havre.  The  passe  was  drawn  according  to 
my  memoire,  for  the  king  of  Gr.  Br.  service,  but  the 
Secretary  of  State  caused  it  to  be  new  written,  and 
those  words  left  out ;  w*"^  among  many  other  things 
I  have  observed,  makes  me  think  those  here  very  far 
from  declaring  for  either  side  in  England. 


To  the  same. 

25  March,  1644. 

I  have  received  your  L'ps  letter  of  21.  Feb.  that 
some  supplies  of  money  will  speedily  be  sent  to  me, 
&  intimating  his  Ma^^"  gracious  pleasure  to  conferre 
upon  mee  (not  lesse  unexpected  than  undeserved) 
the  dignity  of  Baronett ;  as  y""  Lo^  has  happily  joyned 
these  two  together,  soe  I  humbly  beseech  ....  they 
may  not  be  separate  butt  for  mutual  support  and 
ornament  march  hand  in  hand.  To  attend  y""  Lo^' 
commands  in  both  I  have  desired  the  bearer  hereoff 
Mr.  William  Prettyman  (a  younger  brother  of  my 

wife^s)  to  make  a  journey  to  Oxford  within  few 

dayes  I  shall  have  better  opportunity  to  express  my 
thankfulnesse  more  at  large, 

I  humbly  beseech  yo''  to  represent  my  most 
abundant  gratitude  to  his  Ma*^ 


To  Lord  Jermyn, 

Z-njane,  1644. 

Lo^  hath  obtained  from  his  Ma^^  a  grant  of  the 
perpetuity  here  in  France  of  2822  livres  tournois  p' 
an\  If  yo'  Lo^  should  not  already  have  made  sure 
thereoff,  I  know  not  how  Mr.  Aubert's  pretensions 


1614.]  SIR  RICHAKD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


313 


may  interfere  with  this  of  yo'Lo'"  ;  for  three  days  since 
liis  Agent  here  signified  his  Ma'^*  order  to  mee  for 
payment  to  him  of  25°'  livres  and  returning  from  him 
the  diamond ;  which  sume  not  being  to  bee  had  out 
of  the  arreares,  it  is  probable  hee  will  now  make  a 
demand  of  the  rents  themselves,  which  if  he  doe 
obtain,  and  that  they  bee  made  over  to  him  in  that 
lowe  and  underhand  rate  hee  expects,  he  will 
make  up  his  summe,  sweep  awaj^  not  only  the  rents 
themselves_,  but  alsoe  the  remaininge  part  of  the 
arreares. 


To  Lord  D'lgby. 

June,  1644. 

The  inclosed  arret  will  lett  yo""  see  that  I  have 
at  last  finished  the  longe  dependinge  suite  for  reco- 
very of  a  remainder  of  His  Ma*'^'  portion-monc}^  longe 
since  deposited  here  for  the  payment  of  certaine 
creditors  &  servants  of  His  Ma*'^  The  rents  or  per- 
petuity tenn  yeares  since  bought  with  this  money, 
with  the  arrears  of  the  sayd  rents,  I  have  been  forced 
to  wrest  out  of  violent  hands  uppon  the  best  terms 
I  could;  for  to  say  the  truth,  the}^  were  in  a  manner 
swallowed  up  by  some  greedy  cormorants  in  too 
great  place  and  power  here,  who  never  thought  to 
have  thus  regorged  them  to  their  true  owner  his  Ma*''. 
Of  the  tenn  yeares  arreares  of  2822  livres  p'  an. 
there  are  little  above  seaven  at  present  to  bee  found 
in  ready  money  (the  rest  being  nott  yet  payed), 
which  present  money  will  all  be  disposed  off  partly 
by  the  arret  itselfe,  and  partly  for  necessary  compo- 
sitions, charges,  and  gratuities  (as  shall  appeare  by  my 
just  and  good  account),  so  that  to  his  Ma*'*"'  profitt 
there  will  come  cleare  only  the  perpetuity  or  rents 
themselves,  and  betweene  two  or  three  j^eares  arreares. 
These  rents  stand  his  Mat*^  in  twelve  yeares  pur- 
chase, but  by  reason  of  the  seasures  the  late  French 
King  and  this  have  since  these  warres  made  uppon 
rents  of  this  nature,  and  of  the  uncertaine  con- 
dition of  these  times,  they  will  not  now  bee  sold  at 


344  SIR  RICH.VRD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS.  [1G44. 

SO  good  a  rate  as  they  may  improve  to  after  a  general 
peace. 


To  Lord  Digby. 

7-17  June,  1644. 

Writes  earnestly  for  money — inevitable  ruin  must 
befall  him — has  not  wherewithall  to  provide  himself 
out  of  mourning,  a  new  Coat  and  Liveries,  w''"''  will 
much  tend  to  his  Ma*'"'  disreputation — "  I  appeall  to 
all  the  world  whether  I  have  not  in  this  absolutely 
dearest  part  of  Christendom  for  these  three  yeares 
maintained  his  Ma*'"  honour  beyond  what  could  be 
expected  from  my  quality  in  these  distracted  times, 
my  estate  lying  all  in  Kent  and  Essex  yielding  little 
or  nothing,  the  moneys  I  take  upp  comeing  uppon 
much  disadvantage^  and  a  constant  great  interest 
paid/^ 


To  Lord  Jermyn. 

Right  Hon^^"  my  singular  good  Lord. 

Accordinge  to  y  Lo^'  command  to  send  you  the 
Inglish  newes,  I  now  begin  by  this  opportunity  of 
Mr.  Besse^s  departure  :  What  London  affords  this 
inclosed  printed  will  acquaint  y*"  Lo^.  Besides  which 
the  letters  containe  little  or  nothinge,  onely  some 
hopes  of  misunderstandinge  and  diuisions  amonge 
the  Parlamentary  Generalls. 

Yesterday  the  Pr:  Elector  Pal.  his  Agent  came  to 
acquaint  mee  that  His  Elec:  High:  hee  thought  was 
by  this  time  in  London :  and  to  declare  the  cause  of 
his  ionrney  thither  to  bee,  partly  to  see  what  aduan- 
tages  he  might  reape  to  himselfe  from  his  Ma*^  and 
Pari:  according  to  both  their  promises,  in  case  they 
treated  an  accommodac^on ;  &  partly  to  sollicit  some 
supplies  of  money  for  y^  Queene  his  mother  and  him- 
selfe, without  which  they  can  neyther  of  them  subsist 
any  longer.  And  this  hee  desired  mee  to  write  to 
their  Ma"".  And  I  thinke  the  same  excusatory 
account  will  bee  brought  within  fewe  dayes  to  y 


1644.] 


SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


345 


Court  by  Pr.  Edward,  who  was  also  yesterday  witli 
mee  to  consult  where  he  might  most  speedily  and 
most  conueniently  find  His  Ma*^. 

The  Duke  of  Orleans  is  on  his  way  hither,  and  yf 
what  I  heare  be  true,  will  visit  his  Ma^^  ere  long  at 
Bourbon.  Of  the  Duke  d^Anguien's  action  at 
Fribourg,  I  will  nott  giue  an  account  till  the  lame 
Post  bee  come,  and  then  I  shall  send  it  by  a  speedier 
conueyance.  It  shall  suffice  that  by  this  sure  hand 
I  present  my  humble  seruice  to  y'"  Lo^.  and  giue 
assurance  of  my  diligent  endeauours  to  obey  y'  com- 
mands. Beseeching  y'  Lo^  to  take  some  speedy  care 
for  the  subsistance  of  a  creature  of  yours  whose  sole 
ambition  it  is  to  bee  vsefall  to  you :  Many  haue 
allready  passed  by  and  pitied  his  condition ;  butt  y'' 
Lo^  is  the  Samaritan  from  whom  alone  his  vrgent 
necessities  expect  that  balme  must  cure  them.  In 
which  happy  omen  I  take  the  boldnesse  to  kisse  y'' 
Lop^  hands  in  quality  off, 

Most  faithfull  humble  Ser*, 

Richard  Browne. 

Paris  19  Aug.  1G44. 


After  seuerall  negotiations  betweene  the  Palais 
Cardinal  and  the  Court  of  Parlament,  the  Queen e 
Regent  vppon  Tewsday  last  signified  to  the  Parlam^ 
that  being  well  informed  of  their  good  intenc^ons  and 
sincerity,  she  approued  of  theire  proceedings,  willinge 
them  to  meet  frequently  and  to  continew  dilligently 
their  consultations  for  the  publique  good ;  w^^all 
acquaintinge  them,  that  the  Ennemy  was  vppon  the 
ffrontier,  and  that  the  King  wanted  mony,  wherefore 
they  might  doe  well  to  bring  theire  resolutions  to 
maturity  wSn  the  space  of  8  dayes :  since  w*"^'  satis- 
factory answere  the  Parlament  is  uery  busy  in 
finding  meanes  how  to  reforme  the  abuses  in  the 
gouvernement  chiefly  in  that  of  the  Kings  reuenews, 
in  which  Avorke  the  rest  of  the  Parlaments  of  fi^rance 
will  doubtlesse  comply  w*^  this  of  Paris.     And  some 


3i6 


SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS.  [1648. 


great  Ministers  may  perliaps  be  sacrificed  to  the 
people^  who  have  already  confessed  their  feares  by  dis- 
furnishinge  theire  houses  of  their  choicest  moueables. 

Heere  is  all  possible  care  taken  to  furnish  the 
Prince  of  Conde  w^^  mony,  and  heere  is  also  much 
seeking  after  horses  to  sende  to  him,  wherewith  to 
remount  his  Caualiers ;  the  Prince  is  w*^  his  array 
neere  Guize,  where  he  hath  lately  arrested  a  gent'  of 
Piccardy  (whose  name  is  Ragny)  for  hauing  giuen 
intelligence  to  the  Spaniard^  and  hauing  drawne 
great  pensions  from  them  any  time  this  6  or  7  yeares. 

The  ffrench  ffleet  consistinge  of  13  shipps  and  19 
gallies  hath  presented  it  selfe  vppon  the  coast  of 
Naples^  but  as  yet  w*^out  any  success  at  all. 

This  weeke  hath  safely  brought  hither  Mr.  Langton, 
with  all  j^our  noble  tokens,  for  all  which  (particularly 
for  the  rare  booke  to  mee)  I  render  you  my  hearty 
acknowledgements,  as  also  your  two  letters  of  15.  & 
19.  June,  containinge  (as  allways  of  late)  feares  and 
hopes.  God  in  his  mercy  direct  thinges  to  some 
tolerable  end  or  other.  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Spencer  this 
day  seauenight,  as  to  you  also ;  and  hope  it  went 
safe,  though  I  find  some  of  the  former  Post  (none 
of  mine,  for  I  wrote  nott)  were  intercepted.  Our 
Prince  being  disappointed  of  the  somme  of  money 
hee  expected  from  the  French  for  his  iourney,  goes 
the  beginninge  of  the  next  weeke  to  Callice,  butt 
with  lesse  traine  than  hee  intended,  which  is  all  I 
can  say  to  you  of  that  matter,  onely  that  all  his 
Ma*'"  Priuie  Councellors  in  France  haue  orders  to 
attend  his  High''^  at  Callice :  my  Lord  Treasurer,  Lord 
BristoU,  Sir  Ed.  Nicholas,  are  on  their  way  thither. 

Our  best  respects  to  the  good  company  with  you 
in  the  Country  :  where  I  hope  you  injoy  j^ourselues, 
and  amongst  other  diuertisments  with  that  of  hay- 
makinge,  the  season  for  which  now  approaches  ;  and 
ought  (yf  you  haue  there  had  soe  wett  a  growinge 
time  as  here)  to  afford  you  store  of  exercise.  Fare- 
well, D.  S. 

Yours  for  euer. 

Paris  4.  Juh/  1648. 
From  Sir  Ric:  Browne. 


1618.] 


SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


347 


I  know  not  yet  what  judgment  to  make,  or  what 
the  euent  will  bee  of  the  affaires  now  in  agitation 
betweene  our  Royall  and  our  pleadinge  Pallace  heere. 
For  notw^^standinge  that  the  exiled  members  of  the 
Parlament  be  restored ;  that  the  reuocation  of  the 
Intendants  out  of  the  Prouinces  bee  resolued  (three 
onely  excepted)  namely,  in  the  Lyonnois,  in  Cham- 
paign e,  and  in  Piccardy,  where  theire  employment  is 
restraned  onely  to  the  affaires  of  the  armies  and  that 
y^  Queene  hath  condescended  to  y^  erection  of  a 
Chamber  of  Justice,  as  they  terme  it,  w*^^  is  to  consist 
of  a  selected  number  of  Parlament  men,  whereof 
the  Kinge  (to  saue  the  reputac^on  of  his  authority) 
is  to  haue  the  nomination,  and  is  established  to 
inquire,  and  informe  against  financiers,  partisans, 
and  others  that  haue  misbehaued  themselves  :  yet  it 
will  be  a  difficult  matter  to  reconcile  other  differ- 
ences, for  there  is  much  dispute  about  the  reraitt- 
inge  y*"  arrears  of  the  Tailles  of  y®  yeares  44,  45,  and 
46,  and  about  abatinge  of  the  8*^  part  of  the  Tailles 
of  the  yeare  47,  and  the  fourth  part  of  48  and  49  ; 
about  the  regulating  the  impositions  uppon  the  entry 
of  merchandises,  about  the  reuokinge  those  Edicts 
by  which  the  rents  vppon  the  Towne  house  and  the 
wages  of  Officers  are  diuerted  to  the  Kings  vse,  and 
generally  whatsoeuer  almost  hath  passed  w%ut  the 
verificac^on  of  the  Parlament,  is  subject  to  question. 
Nor  is  the  Counsell  altogeather  complyant  w*^  the 
Court  of  Parlament,  hauing  lately  by  their  arrest 
cashiered  an  arrest  of  Parlament  against  the  Dutchesse 
of  Aiguillon.  Nor  is  the  Parlament  vndiuided  in 
ittselfe,  the  Kinge  hauinge  a  party  there  amongst 
whome  the  S'  Boulanger,  Conc^  in  the  first  Cham- 
ber, two  dales  since  pleadinge  very  earnestly  on 
the  Kings  side,  in  behalf  of  the  Partisans  in 
whose  handes  he  is  sayd  to  haue  great  sum^es 
of  money,  fell  downe  dead  in  the  House,  where- 
vppon  the  Duke  of  Orleans  retired,  the  meeting 
dissolued,  and  the  people  conclude  this  blow  to  bee 


3i8 


SIK  niCHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


[1648. 


a  judejment  of  God  vppon  him  for  defendinge  soe 
bad  a  cause. 

Mars"  de  Gramont  is  come  hither,  whose  privat 
businesse  being  not  yet  knowne,  what  appears  is 
that  he  hath  addressed  himselfe  to  the  Parlament  to 
acqiiainte  them  the  necessityes  of  the  army,  and 
to  demand  snpplyes  of  them,  seeing  all  other  meanes 
of  raysinge  monyes  are  now,  by  their  stirringe,  soe 
disordered,  that  the  new  sur-intendant  can  neither 
by  intreatyes  or  threats  dispose  the  partizans  to 
aduance  one  penny  till  they  see  farther  what  settle- 
ment these  disputes  will  produce. 

The  ffrench  ffleet  is  returned  from  the  coast  of 
Naples  (not  hauinge  made  any  impression  at  all 
vppon  that  people)  to  Piombino  &  Portolongone.  Nor 
doe  I  heare  that  Prince  Thomas  is  yet  embarqued. 

My  Lord  Jermin  went  hence  towards  Callice 
Munday  last.  The  Queene  is  returned  to  St.  Ger- 
mains.  My  Lord  Marq^  of  Ormond  prepares  for 
Irland.  And  my  L*^  Marq*  of  Newcastle  goes  next 
weeke  towards  Holand  by  the  way  of  Flanders,  with 
his  Lady,  &c.  God  blesse  you  and  vs.  And  send  vs 
a  happy  meetinge. 

Yours  euer  to  loue  and  serue  you. 

Parts,  18  July  1648. 
From  Six'  Ri.  Browne. 


The  businesse  of  the  Parlament  this  weeke 
hath  been  to  deliberate  vppon,  and  examine  the 
declaration  w""^  the  King  brought  them,  hauinge 
appointed  fower  of  theire  members  to  make  report 
thereof  vppon  the  16*^  of  this  moneth  ;  in  the  mean 
tyme  they  make  great  difficulty  to  obey  that  part 
thereof,  wherein  the  King  com'andes  them  not  to 
assemble  any  more  in  the  Chambre  St.  Lewis;  and  this 
notw^^standmg  that  the  Duke  of  Orleans  hath  seuerall 
tymes  beene  w*^  them  to  maintaine  the  King's 
authority,  and  to  vrge  the  conueniency,  yf  not  the 
necessity,  of  theire  obedience ;  so  that,  by  what  yet 
appeares,  the  Parlam*  yf  they  meete  not  in  the 


1648.] 


SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


349 


Cliambre  St.  Lewis  yet  they  will  doe  tlieire  businesse 
in  some  other  place^  and  perhaps  at  last  make  a  foule 
house;  for  that  is  certaiiie,  tliat  some  other  Parla- 
ments  of  flfrance  doe  manifestly  declare  and  foUowe 
theire  example. 

The  Prince  of  Conde  findinge  great  difficultyes  in 
the  reliefe  of  Tourne  *  is  encamped  at  B'ethune, 
there  expectiuge  the  succors  y*  Erlack,  Vaubecour, 
and  others  are  to  bring  to  him. 

At  Naples  the  affaires  betweene  the  King  and 
people  (ill  satisfied  w^th  the  Spaniards  non-perform- 
ance of  treaty,  and  murmoringe  by  reason  of  the 
scarcety  of  bread)  are  againe  fallen  into  great  dis- 
order ;  insomuch  as  it  is  thought  the  flPrench  ffleet 
may  therevppon  make  yet  an  other  journey  to 
attempte  some  new  impression  in  that  Kingdome. 
The  newes  of  the  seidge  of  Cremona  is  confirmed, 
not  w%ut  hopes  of  the  speedy  takinge  thereof. 

The  Marquis  of  Ormond  is  vppon  his  departure 
for  Irland,  Wee  are  here,  God  be  praysed,  in  good 
health.  Butt  w'hen  will  our  deare  Brother  William 
come  ?  I  am  glad  to  heare  our  cottage  hath  beene 
dignified  with  such  good  company  as  your  brother, 
to  whom  I  longe  to  present  my  seruice.  Our  honest 
cousin  Stefens  (who  will  well  deserue  your  acquaint- 
ance, and  whom  I  recommend  vnto  your  afi'ection) 
will  perhaps  by  that  time  these  come  to  you,  bee 
arriued.  Which  yf  hee  bee,  I  pray  present  my 
seruice  to  him,  and  soe  wdth  our  relatiue  cordiall 
affections,  I  rest 

Yours  euer. 

Paris,  S  Aug'^  1G48. 

Our  Court  wants  money,  and  Hues  very  quietly  at 
St.  Germains :  where  no  peere  appeares  but  my 
Lord  J ermin.  The  Lord  Marq.  of  Worster,  the  Lords 
Digby  &  Hatton,  though  yett  in  France,  yet  line  for 
the  most  part  in  Paris. 
From  Sir  Ri.  Browne. 

*  Note  appended  :  "  Wliicli  is  lost." 


350 


SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS.  [1648. 


Since  Com'ittinge  of  the  King^s  declaration  to 
fower  Members  of  the  Parlament^  to  bee  by  them 
examined  w*^  order  to  make  reporte  thereof  on 
Munday  next,  the  Parlament  hatli  followed  theire 
ordinary  course  of  businesse,  and  this  interim  seemes 
to  bee  a  kind  of  truce  betweene  the  Royall  and  y* 
pleading  Pallace. 

The  losse  of  Tourne  hath  not  yet  exasperated  y^ 
Prince  of  Conde  into  any  newe  vndertakinge  against 
the  Spaniard,  v/^^  now  vppon  y^  joyninge  of  Erlack^s 
troops  vnto  him,  it  is  expected  hee  shoulde,  soe  that 
probabily  wee  shall  soone  heare  of  his  remoue  from 
Bethune.  In  this  stationary,  or  rather  retrograde, 
condition  of  the  ffrench  affaires  in  fflanders,  the 
certaine  expectation  of  the  taking  Cremona,  and  the 
weaknesse  of  the  Spaniard  in  Catalonia,  are  very 
considerable  supports ;  but  aboue  all,  the  relaps  of 
Naples  into  (as  they  heere  thinke)  a  more  desperate 
state  than  euer,  doth  raise  their  mindes,  and  giues 
here  great  hopes  of  the  losse  of  that  Kingdome  to 
the  Spaniard.  In  order  to  w'^^  the  ffrench  ffleet  hath 
set  saile  for  L^Abruzzo,  there  to  joyne  w*^  the  Conte 
de  Conuersano,  who  hath  reuiued  y^  rebellion  and 
is  at  the  head  of  a  considerable  army. 

The  Com'andeur  de  Souuray  prepares  for  his 
journey  into  Holland,  in  quallity  of  Ambassador 
from  the  Religion  of  Malta,  there  to  demande  resti- 
tution of  the  Com'andarieSj  w'^^'  the  States  of  Holland 
doe  possesse. 

The  Duke  of  Beaufort  (who  'tis  thought  hath  not 
beene  out  of  ffrance)  attended  w*^  40  or  50  horse, 
hath  lately  (as  is  saide)  appeared  in  Brittany, 
wherevppon  there  are  some  troopes  sent  thither,  and 
into  Normandy,  to  secure  those  Provinces.  And  to 
Card"  Mazarin  they  speake  of  giuinge  a  guard  of  100 
horse,  for  the  safety  of  his  person. 

The  Marquiss  of  Ormond  two  dales  since  begane 
his  journey  towards  Ireland. 

Thank es  for  yours  of  28  &  31.  most  wellcome. 


1648.] 


SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


351 


All  your  relations  here  salute  you  most  cordially. 
To  my  brother  yf  nott  com  away,  &  to  my  cousin  S'. 
yf  arriued,  present  my  loue  and  seruice,  the  like 
to  all  the  good  company  with  you.  Farewell,  my 
deare  S. 

Yours  for  euer  louinge. 

Paris.  15  Aur,.  1648. 
From  Sii'  Ri.  Browne. 


Yf  thorough  the  difficult  and  hazardous  passage, 
these  lines  come  safe  to  you,  they  will  conuey  my 
serious  and  hearty  congratulations  of  that  condition 
you  are  now  in  neere  his  Ma*^',  wlierein  his  gracious 
fauour  and  your  owne  merit  haue  concurrently  placed 
you.    Though  I  haue  receiued  noe  letter  from  you 
since  your  arrivall  in  Schotland,  yett  I  in  joy  the 
fruits  of  your  care  and  kindnesse  towards  mee, 
witnesse  the  two  warrants  of  his  Ma*'%  dated  y^ 
4  Aprill  3°  Car.  1651,  directed  to  Prince  Rupert  and 
to  Mr.  Windam  in  my  behalfe,  for  which,  as  I  render 
all  humble  acknowledgements  to  my  most  Gracious 
and  Royall  Maister,  soe,  I  giue  you  also  my  hearty 
thankes  for  beinge  soe  happily  instrumental!  in  a 
concernment  of  mine,  though  hithertoo  neyther  of 
them  haue  prouued  any  way  aduantageous  unto  mee, 
for  I  can  giue  noe  account  where  Pr.  Uupert  is  since 
his  comminge  into  the  Ocean,  and  takinge  some  rich 
shipps  belonginge  to  the  Kinge  of  Spaine,  and  to 
the  Genoese  :  And  when  I  addresse  any  demands  to 
Mr.  AVindham,  hee  makes  mee  noe  returne  butt 
these  kind  of  warrants,  such  as  the  inclosed,  of 
which  he  hath  many.    Soe  that  unlesse  his  Ma'^  be 
pleased  eyther  to  thinke  of  some  other  way  of  supply 
for  mee,  or  direct  some  more  eflfectuall  commands  to 
Mr.  Windam,  your  kindsman  and  his  family  must 
(for  ought  I  see)  begge  bread  (or  starue)  in  the 
streetes  of  Paris.     In  March  last  Mr.  Windam 
assigned   mee   a  thousand  guilders  of  Dunkirke 
money,  which  makes  little  aboue  fourescore  pistolls 


352  sm  r.ICHARD  BROWNE'S  letters.  [1618. 


here.  Butt  tlie  man  (one  Jolm  Arden)  in  whose 
hands  he  had  deposited  the  prize  goods,  out  of  which 
this  summ  was  to  bee  raysed,  is  soe  insoluent  that 
he  lyes  in  prison  eyther  nott  able  or  not  willinge  to 
j^iue  any  satisfaction.  The  truth  of  this  will  bee 
confirmed  to  you  by  word  of  mouth  by  Mr.  Edgman, 
of  whose  safe  arriuall  with  you,  and  returne  into 
these  parts,  I  should  be  gladd  to  heare. 

The  afFau'es  of  this  kingdome  are  in  a  dubious 
condition,  occasioned  chiefly  by  reason  of  some 
jealosies  betweene  the  Queene  Regent  and  the 
Princes ;  to  w  hich  the  neere  approachinge  majority 
(the  6^^.  7'.)  will,  in  probability  giue  a  period,  one 
way  or  other,  by  a  more  firme  settlement  of  the 
authority,  ministery,  and  direction  of  affaires.  As 
for  the  aspect  towards  vs,  all  I  can  say  to  you  is,  it 
will  bee  answerable  to  the  successe  of  his  Ma*'^* 
affaires  in  schottland,  vppon  which  they  here  looke 
as  the  North  Pole- star  re  by  which  they  intend  to 
steere.  Our  good  Queene  spends  much  of  her  time 
of  late  in  a  new  monastery  at  the  end  of  Queene 
Mother's  Cours  (formerly  the  faire  and  pleasant 
house  of  Mar^  Basompeere  at  Challiot)  of  which  shee 
is  the  titular  foundresse;  and  the  sweete  Duke  of 
Yorke  doth  here  subsist  vppon  the  allowance  of  one 
thousand  crownes  a  month  payd  him  from  this 
state,  beinge  greatly  esteemed  by  all  for  his  comeli- 
nesse  and  personall  dexterity,  in  his  behauiour  and 
exercises. 

Amongst  all  the  publique  and  priuat  calamities 
wherwith  it  hath  pleased  God  to  visit  my  poore 
family,  wee  yett  (by  His  gracious  blessinge  and 
mercy)  injoy  our  healths,  and  the  hopes  of  a  better 
condition,  when  eyther  our  humiliations,  or  our 
enemies  sinnes  shall  moue  the  Divine  power  to 
looke  more  fauourably  vppon  vs ;  in  order  to  the 
obtaininge  wheroff  I  yett  make  shifte  to  keep  vp  a 
chappell  and  the  Inglish  Liturgie  in  my  house, 
v»'here,  by  ordinary  and  extraordinary  deuotions 
Avee  implore  Gods  blessinges  vppon  his  Ma*'"  person 
and  just    cause.     To  that   diuine  Omuipotency 


1651.] 


SIR  RICHARD  BROWNE'S  LETTERS. 


353 


recom mending  you  (witli  all  our  cordiall  and  kind 
salutes)  I  rest, 

Dear  cousin, 
Y'  most  affectionate  kindsman 
and  faitlifull  humble  seruant, 

R.  Br. 

Parts,  19  Aurj.  1651. 

I  pray  present  my  seruice  to  all  such  worthy 
friends  of  mine  of  our  owne  nation,  in  whom  j^ou 
find  any  memory  of,  or  kindnes  for,  mee.  Butt, 
faile  nott  to  render  mee  most  louinfre  and  most 
respectfull  to  my  noble  friend  to  me  still  (for  I  know 
nott  his  new  titles)  'Mr.  William  Murray. 

Postscript.  Extract  of  a  letter  from  Nantes. 
15*^  Aug\  Prince  Rupert  is  arriued  with  his  prizes 
in  Portugal!,  15  leagues  from  Lisbone,  and  there 
hee  fitts  his  shipps  with  some  others  that  belonge 
to  the  Kinge  of  Portugall,  to  goe  against  the  Kinge 
of  Spaines  galiions.  This  is  written  by  a  good  hand 
from  Lisbone. 

Wee  heere  hope  the  newes  of  Schottland,  and  the 
defeat  in  Fife,  is  nott  soe  bad  as  the  London  prints 
would  make  vs  beleeue.  I  pray  God  send  us  some 
comfortable  tidinges,  and  bless  his  Ma'^'.  with  victory 
and  successe  in  all  his  undertakinges. 


VOL.  IV. 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


TO  THE 

DIAEY   AND  COERESPONDENCE. 


Abbeville,  notice  of,  i.  41 

Abbot,  Dr.  George,  Archbishop  of  Can- 
terbury, his  hospital,  i.  286;  family 
of,  iii.  342;  portrait,  301 

 ,  Mr.,  a  scrivener,  ii.  116  n  ;  con- 
demned as  a  loyalist,  ii.  136 

Abdy,  Mr.,  i.  219 

Abel,  John,  his  counter-tenor  voice, 
ii.  163 

Abingdon,  Montague  Bertie,  Earl  of. 
Lieutenant  of  the  Tower,  displaced, 

ii.  376 

Academies  at  Richelieu,  i.  74;  at  Paris, 
257,  258 

«  Acetaria"  (1699),  by  Mr.  Evelyn,  ii. 

355,  392,  393,  396;  iii.  384 
Acoustics,  &c.,  letter  on,  iii.  209,  210 
Act  at  Oxford  (1654),  i.  290  ;  (1664), 

384  ;  (1669),  ii.  40,  41 
Acton,  Sir  WiUiam,  Lord  Mayor,  iv. 

55  n 

Acts,  of  the  Apostles,  MS.  of,  i.  140;  of 

the  Council  of  Basil,  i.  295 
Addresses  to  the  king,  origin  of,  ii.  348 
Adolphus,  Prince,  proposes  for  Princess 

Sophia  of  Bohemia,  iv.  2 1 3 
Adriatic  Gulf,  notice  of,  i.  196 
Adscomb,  Surrey,  Mr.  Di'aper's  house 

at,  ii.  358,  368,  371 
"  Adventures  of  Five  Hours,"  a  play 

(1662),  i.  372 
Advocates'  library,  the  founder,  iii.  193  n 
jEmiliana,  Margaret,  i.  212 
^tna.  Mount,  eruption  of  (1669),  i.  338 

n ;  ii.  43 

Agates,  &c.,  curious,  i.  43,  86,  214,  306, 
307 

"  Agreement  of  the  People,"  debate  on, 

iii.  34 

Agrippina,  Julia,  mother  of  Nero,  her 

sepulchre,  i.  160 
Ague,  cure  for  the,  ii.  1 64 


Aid,  royal,  distribution  of  (1665),  iii.  1 70 

Aiguillon,  Duchess  of,  iv.  347 

Air,  excellence  of  the  Italian,  i.  84; 
experiment  on,  i.  362 

Aitzema,  Leo  D',  his  "  History  of  the 
United  Provinces"  (1657),  i.  20  n 

Aix,  in  Provence,  account  of,  i.  80 

Albano,  tombs  of  the  Horatii  and 
Curiatii  at,  i.  162,  163 

Albemarle,  George  Monk,  Duke  of, 
various  references  to,  i.  359,  374,  377, 
385—399;  ii.  2,3,20,24,25  n,75,  157, 
170,  185;  stays  in  London  during  the 
plague  (1665),i.396 ;  appointed  General 
at  sea,  &c.,  399  ;  his  victory  over  the 
Dutch  fleet,  ii.  5, 6 :  share  of  a  Spanish 
galleon  (1687),  267;  trials  respecting 
an  estate,  327,  343,  366;  portrait  of, 
iii.  301 

 See  Keppel,  ii.  352  n 

Albemarle  Street,  notice  of,  ii.  20  and  n 
Albert  Eremitano,  bust  of,  i.  210 
Alberti,  Cherubin,  paintings  by,  i.  139 
Albury,  Surrey,  villa  of  Mr.  Howard, 
i.  247,  249,  308,  364;  the  grounds 
improved  by  Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  29,  52; 
bought  by  Mr.  Solicitor  Finch,  1687, 
268;  Mr.  Evelyn  desirous  of  possess- 
ing (1657),  iii.  63  and  n 
Alchemist,  a  pretended  one  at  Paris 
(1650),  i.  263,  266  n;  stories  of  an,  273 
Aldobrandini,  Cardinal  Pietro,  i.  179, 
180 

Alessandro,  Signor,  musician,  i.  134,255 
Alexander  III.,  Pope,  (Roland,  Bishop 
of  Sienna),  i.  2U0;  painting  respect- 
ing, 138 

 VII.,  Pope,  Fabio  Chighi, 

liis   intrigues    with   the   Queeu  of 
Sweden,  ii.  149 
Alexander,  Mrs.,  letter  to,  iv.  29 
Algardi,  Alessandro,  architect,  i.  182 

A  A  2 


356  GENERAL  IXDEX  TO 


Alibone,  Sir  Hichard,  Justice  of  the 

King's  Bench,  a  Papist,  ii.  276 
Alkoran,  written  on  a  sheet  of  calico, 

i.  291 

Allegri,  Antonio  da  Corregio,  paintings 
by,  i.  56,  93,  133,  163,  369;  ii  341; 
sum  paid  for  a  Venus  by,  ii,  326 

Allen,  Capt.  Sir  Thomas,  i.  391,  392  n, 
393;  ii.  60 

Allestree,  Dr.  Richard,  Dean  of  West- 
minster, i.  344,  3.52;  ii.  41,  42,  382; 
sermons  of,  97,  137 

Aileyn,  Edward,  his  College  at  Dulwich, 

ii.  102 

Allington,  WiUiam,  Lord,  ii.  59;  his 

house  at  Horseheath,  48,  and  n 
<  ,  Rev.  John,  preaches  against 

regicides,  i.  302 
AUix,  Dr.  Peter,  ii.  243  and  n,  256 
All  Souls'  College,  Oxford,  painting  in 

the  chapel  of,  i.  384 
Almont,  Sir  James  Levingston,  Eai'l  of 

Callendar,  iv.  81 
Alois,  Planta,  its  peculiarities,  iii.  205 
Alps,  joui-ney  over  the  (1646),  i.  230 — 

235 

Alstedius,  John  Henry,  referred  to,  i. 
267,  382;  ii.  330 

Alston,  Dr.,  President  of  the  College  of 
Physicians  (1664),  i.  382 

Althorp,  Northamptonshire,  seat  of  Lord 
Sunderland,  ii.  100,  277—279,  338; 
earthquake  at,  310 

Amazons  in  Persia,  ii.  146 

Ambassadors,  see  Embassies,  on  the 
precedency  between  the  French  and 
Spanish  (1661),  i.  355;  ii.  395;  nar- 
rative by  Mr.  Evelyn,  vindicating  the 
King  and  his  servants,  i.  426 — 429; 
French  and  Spanish  apply  for  Irish 
soldiers,  iv.  53,  66  ;  foreign,  ordered 
to  give  up  priests  who  were  tha  King's 
subjects,  109  ;  the  Venetian,  offended 
by  the  parliament,  127  ;  instructions 
to  Sir  R.  Browne,  328  ;  sent  to  France 
and  Holland,  333  ;  seat  of  the  English, 
disfigured  at  Chareuton,  314 

Amber,  spider,  &c.,  enclosed  in,  ii.  165 

Amboise,  Castle  of,  i.  70,71  ;  Cardinal 
George  D',  his  tomb,  60,  79 

Ambi-ose,  St.,  quoted,  iii.  89 

Ambrosian  library  at  Milan,  i.  226,  227 

Ammanatti,  Vincenzo,  architecture  of, 
170 

Amphitheatre  at  Venice,  i.  78  ;  at  Peri- 
gueux,  82  ;  of  Vespasian,  116  ;  at 
Verona,  221 


Amsterdam,  account  of  (1641),  i.  22 — 

25  ;  hospital,  23,  401 
Anabaptists,  their  objection  to  oaths, 

i.  322  ;  increase  of,  323  ;  iii.  45 
Anatomy,  school  of,  at  Leyden,  i.  26  ; 

at  Padua,  211,  216  ;  at  Oxford,  292 
Anchor,  method   of  casting  in  Acts, 

xxvii.  29,  illustrated,  ii.  197 
Anchorite  of  Mount  Calvary  at  Paris, 

i.  254 

Anderson,  Sir  Richard,  ii.  150,  175 

Andoyne,  Abbot  of,  i.  36 

Andrews,   Dr.    Launcelot,   Bishop  of 

Winchester,  i.  304  ;  ii.  129,  130,  181 
 Mayor    of   London,  1649, 

iii.  44 

Angelica,  an  apothecary  at  Vincenza, 
i.  221 

Ange'oni,  Signer,  his  medals,  &c.,  i.  110, 
163 

Anglesea,  Arthur  Annesley,  Earl  of. 
Viscount  Valentia,  i.  347  ;  ii.  35  ' 

Anio,  cascade  of  the,  i.  181 

Anjou,  Gasto  Jean-Baptiste,  Duke  of, 
performs  in  an  opera,  1651,  i.  265  ; 
his  embassy  to  Charles  II.,  340 

Anne,  of  Denmark,  Princess,  afterwards 
Queen,  ii.  235  n,  222,  273,  288,  291, 
300,  336  ;  her  marriage,  182  ;  refuses 
to  dismiss  Lady  Marlborough,  318  ; 
William  III.  reconciled  to,  333  ;  en- 
tertained, when  Queen,  at  Oxford, 
&c.,  368  ;  goes  in  procession  to  St. 
Paul's  Cathedral,  369,  373 

 ,   of   Austria,  Queen  Regent,  iv. 

352  ;  message  to  Parliament  of  Paris, 
345  ;  agrees  to  erect  a  Chamber  of 
Justice,  347 

Annunciada  (Annunciata),  churches  of, 
i.  87,  95,  187 

Antenor,  founder  of  Padua,  inscriptions 
to,  i.  206 

Anthonie,  Capt.,  iv.  237,  269,  271,  281, 
287  ;  Sir  Richard  Browne's  opinion 
of,  289,  292 

Antibes,  i.  82 

Antichrist,  final  destruction  of,  ii.  297 
Antoninus,  Marcus  Aurelius,  Emperor 

of  Rome,  his  baths,  i.  165  ;  column 

of,  169  ;  his  palace,  ib. 
Antonio,   Marco,  singer,   i.   182  ;  an 

enameller,  &c,,  at  Paris,  273 
Antwerp,  account  of  (1641),  i.  31 — 33  ; 

cathedral,  32,  403 
Apennines,  passage  over  the  (1645), 

i.  191 

Apiaries,  transparent,  notice  of,  i.  292 


THE  DIARY  AND 


CORRESPONDENCE. 


357 


A  pianos,  Mr.  Evelyn's  signature  to  his 

letters,  iii.  4 — 42. 
Apollo,  Temples  of,  i.  159 
"  Apology  fur  the  Royal  Party"  (1659), 

by  Mr.  Evelyn,  i.  333  ;  ii.  391,  395 
Aponius,  Peter,  bust  of,  at  Padua,  i.  210 
Appian  Way,  its  extent,  «kc.,  i.  147, 

148 

Appii  Forum,  etched  by  Mr.  Evelyn, 

ii.  392 
Aqua  Claudia,  i.  175 
Aqua  Paula,  fountain  of,  i.  145 
Aquapendente,  town  of,  i.  100 
Arabian  horses,  account  of  some,  ii.  201, 

202 

Ara  Coeli,  church  of,  at  Rome,  i.  106, 
136 

«  Archseologia,"  cited,  ii.  106  n,  189 
Architects  in  Rome  (1G45),  i.  182 
"  Architecture,  Parallel  between  Ancient 
and  Modern"  (1664),  by  Mr.  Evelyn, 

i.  382  and  n,  384,  386,  ii.  391  ;  his 
directions  for  reprinting  it,  iii.  318, 
360;  M.  D'Aviler's  work  on,  361,  362 

Arconati,  Cavaliero  Galeazzo,  his  gift  to 

the  Ambrosian  library,  i.  227 
Arden,  John,  conduct  to  Sir  Richard 

Browne,  iv.  352 
Aretino,  Pietro,  epitaph  on,  i.  209  n 
Argyle,  Archibald  Campbell,  Marquis 

of,  i.  314,  318  ;  his  son,  362  ;  his 

rebellion,  ii.   223 ;   executed,  225  ; 

notice  of,  i.  413;  iv.  80,  81,  91,  111 
 ,  Archibald,  ninth  Earl,  son  of  the 

preceding,!.  362,  418 
Arlington,  Sir  Henry  Bennett,  Earl  of. 

Secretary  of  State,  references  to,  i. 

355,  357,  362,  379,  385,  391,  393; 

ii.  2,  8,  20,  26,  27,  38,  39,  46,  48, 
51,  53,  56,  58—60,  62,  63,  71,  77,  81, 
82,  84,  85,  86,91,  188  ;  iii.  222,  223  ; 
Lord  Chamberlain,  ii.  106  —  108,  110, 
115,  135,  187,  211  ;  disappointment 
of  being  Lord  Treasurer,  370  ;  Mul- 
berry Garden  granted  to,  i.  288  n  ;  his 
daughter,  ii.  77,  135  ;  Gox-ing  House 
burned,  93;  his  pictui'es,  109;  re- 
built Euston  church  and  parsonage, 
113;  his  seat  at  Euston,  110—114; 
letters  to,  iv.  198  n,  202,  208  n,  224  n, 
235  n,  236  ;  life  and  character,  ii. 
114,  115;  died  a  Roman  Catholic, 
237 

•  ,  Countess  of,  ii.  82,  176,  186, 

249,  260 

ArUngton  House  and  Street,  in  London, 
historical  notice  of,  i.  391  n  ;  ii.  144 


Armourer,  Sir  James  and  Sir  Nicholas, 

ii.  26,  380  ;  iv.  217 

Armoury  at  Genoa,  i.  87  ;  the  Pope's  in 
the  Vatican,  141  ;  at  Florence,  loo 

Armstrong,  Sir  Thomas,  ii.  178  ;  his 
execution,  &c.,  198,  341  and  n 

Army,  proceedings  for  - disbanding  the 
(1641),  iv.  52,  66,  94  ;  provisions  for 
the  payment  of,  52,  64,  108 ;  dis- 
banded soldiers  permitted  to  serve 
the  States,  66  ;  tumults  of  the  troop- 
ers, 83,  85  ;  orders  concerning,  87  ; 
guard  kept  at  the  Parliament  Houses, 
98;  sent  to  Ireland,  110,  112,  119, 
121  ;  design  of  gaining  the  army  for 
the  King,  106  ;  marched  into  Oxford- 
shire, 136  n  ;  advancing  to  England, 
ib.  ;  state  of  the  Royal  forces,  147, 
180;  Rebel  army  (1648),  i.  246;  ex- 
pels the  Parliament,  333  ;  afterwards 
limited,  ii.  351 

Arnauld,  Mons.,  iii.  219 

Arno,  notice  of  the  River,  i,  90,  91 

Arnold,  Michael,  a  brewer,  against  the 
seven  bishops  (1688),  ii.  276 

Arpino,  see  Cesari 

Ai-ran,  James  Hamilton,  Earl  of,ii.  170, 
233  ;  his  marriage,  270,  279 

 ,  Lady  Anne  Spencer,  Countess 

of,  her  death,  iii.  315 
Arras,  Spaniards  defeated  before,  iv.  206 
Arsenal  at  Florence,  i.  190  ;  at  Venice, 

207  ;  at  Geneva,  243 
Arundel,  Capt.  William,  iv.  299 

 ,ofWardour,  Lord  (1647), iii. 5; 

(1660),  i.  334;  (1664  85),  379;  ii.58, 
62,  2U4,  213,  224;  (1687),  Privy  Seal, 
262 

Arundel  and  Surrey,  Thomas  Howard, 
Earl  of,  Earl  Marshal,  i.  15,  28,  35— 
38,  166,  211,  218,  223,  227  ;  his  last 
sickness,  &c.,  218  ;  medals,  &c.,  of, 

iii.  300 

 ,  Henry  Frederick 

Howard,  Earl  of,  and  Eliz.  Stuart,  his 
Countess  (1649),  i.  247,  251  ;  iv.  192 

 ,  Henry  Howard, 

Lord,  married  to  I-ady  Mary  ]Mor- 
daunt  (1677),  ii.  110;  alluded  to 
(1680),  154 

 ,  Earl  of,  Manor  of 

Worksop  belonging  to,  i.  299 

Arundel  House,  various  references  to, 
i.  319,  357—360,  365,  374  ;  ii.  20,  23, 
31,  89,  121  ;  see  also  Howard  and 
Norfolk 

Arundel  Street,  notice  of,  ii.  89  n 


358  GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Arundelian  Library,  procured  for  the 
Royal  Society  by  Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  20, 
122  ;  iii.  216 

Arundelian  Marbles,  procured  by  Mr. 
Evelyn  for  the  University  of  Oxford, 

ii.  29,  41  ;  iii.  219 
Ascension-day,  ceremony  on,  at  Venice, 

i.  197  ;  sports  of  Ascension  week,  203 
Ashburnham,  Mr,,  ii.  28,  380 
 ,  Col.,  referred  to,  iv.  154 

n  ;  Parliament  sequesters  the  pay  of, 

56,  58  n,  76  n 
■  ,  Mr.  John,  iv,  135  n  174 — 

176 

Ashley,  Sir  Anthony  Ashley  Cooper, 
Lord  (1671-2),  ii.  59,  70 

Ashmole,  Elias,  Windsor  Herald,  i.  310, 
322,  328;  ii.  161  n,  227  ;  his  library, 
museum,  portrait,  and  collection  of 
coins,  i.  322  and  n,  328  ;  ii.  119,  120; 

iii.  299 

Ashted,  Surrey,  seat  of  Sir  Robert 

Howard  at,  ii.  196 
Ashton,  Colonel,  iii.  36 

 ,  John,  executed  (1691),  ii.  311 

Ashurst,  Sir  Henry,  ii,  341 

 ,  Sir  William,  a  subscriber  to 

Greenwich  Hospital,  ii.  344  n,  345  n 
Ash-AVednesday,  observance  of  neglected, 

i.  287 

Astley,  Sir  Jacob,  sent  to  Ireland,  iv. 
110  ;  examined  on  O'Neal's  affair,  128 

Atkins,  Sir  Jonathan,  ii.  89 

 ,  Sir  Robert,  Puisne  Justice  of  the 

Common  Pleas,  ii.  133  n.  269  n 

Atterbury,  Dr.  Francis,  Bishop  of  Ro- 
chester, iii.  365  and  n 

Attornies,  number  of,  reduced,  ii.  358 

Atwood,  Mr.,  ii.  270  n 

Aubert,  Mr.,  employed  by  King  Charles 
L,  iv,  342 

Aubigny,  Lord,  Almoner  to  the  Queen, 
i.  272,  300,  379  ;  his  character,  360 

Aubrey,  John,  his  "  History  of  Surrey  " 
I'eferred  to,  ii.  26  n 

Audley-End,  Essex,  Palace  of  the  Earl 
of  Suffolk,  i.  305  ;  ii,  49,  115,  185  n 

Auger,  Sir  Anthony,  ii.  26 

Augier,  Mr.,  Parliament  sent  to  France, 

iv.  333 

Augustine,  St.,  citation  from,  iii.  88,  89 
Augustus  Octavianus  Csesar,  Emperur  of 

Rome,  his  aqueduct,  i.  145  ;  Temple 

of,  at  Puteoli,  158  ;  Obehsk  of,  171  ; 

his  Mausoleum  at  Rome,  ib. 
Aungier,  Lord,  i.  305,  ii.  119  ;  account 

of,  i.  411 


Aurelius,  Marcus,  equestrian  statue  of, 
i.  104 

"  Aurum  Potabile,"  prepared  by  M. 

Roupel,  i.  285 
Austen,  Colonel,  a  subscriber  to  Green- 
wich Hospital,  ii.  344 
Austria,  Don  John  of,  iv.  311 
Avernus,  Lake,  at  Naples,  i.  159 
Aviaries   and  Menageries,  notices  of 
various,  i.  32,  35,  58,  86,  111,  117, 
174,  178,  181,  212,  288,  314,  390 
Avignon,  account  of,  i.  79 
Axtall,  Daniel,  regicide,  executed,  i.  341 
Aylesbury,  Sir  Thomas,  iv.  235 
Aylesbury,  Robert  Bruce,  Earl  of,  ii. 

170,  287 
Ayliffe,  Capt.,  i.  392  n 
Ayscue,  Sir  George,  captured  by  the 
Dutch,  ii.  6 

Backhouse,  Sir  William,  ii.  240  n,  iii. 
1G5  n 

Backstair,  Colonel,  iii.  23 

Bacon,  Sir  Edward,  ii.  Ill 

 ,  Sir  Francis,  Viscount  St.  Alban, 

i.  86,  380,  383;  iii.  297,  301 
 ,  Dr.,  at  Rome,  i.  101 

"  Bacula,"    Treatises    concerning,  ii. 

392  n;  iii.  221-224 
Baden,  Louis- Guillaume,  Prince  of,  in 

London  (1 694),  ii.  327 
Baglioni,  Cavaliere  Giovanni,  paintings 

by,  i.  103,  167 
Bagni  di  Tritoli,  i.  160 
Bagnios  at  Veiaice,  i.  196 
Baije  of  the  Romans,  i.  154,158,160,  161 
Baker,   Mr.,   his    house    on  Epping 

Forest,  ii.  43,  173 
 ,  Capt,,  attempts  the  North- West 

Passage,  ii.  107 
 ,  George,  his  "  History  of  North- 
amptonshire" cited,  ii.  102  n 
 ,  Sir  Richard,  his  "  Chronicle  " 

referred  to,  i.  422 
Baldarius,  Andrea,  i.  210 
Baldassare.    See  Peruzzi 
Baldero,  Dr.,  Sermon  of,  i.  345 
Balfour's  "  Pratiques,"  or  Reports,  iii. 

383 

Balgrave,  Dr.  Isaac,  Dean  of  Canterbury, 

ii.  73 

Baliol  College,  Oxford,  Mr.  Eveljn's 

present  to,  iii,  247—249 
Ball,  Robert,  letter,  iii.  286 

 ,  Sir  Peter,  i,  360 

Ballad  on  the  Queen  Mother  burned, 

iv.  57 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


859 


Ballard,    George,    his    "  Memoirs  of 

Learned  Ladies  "  referred  to,  ii.  37  n 
Dallatine,  Sir  William,  iv.  91,  96  ;  raised 

to  the  Peerage,  91  n 
Balle,  Dr.  Peter,  his  gift  to  the  Royal 

Society,  i,  377 
Balls  Park,  Hertfordshire,  i.  39  n 
Bamfield,  Mr.,  iv.  209 
Banbury,    Nicholas  Knollys,  Earl  of 

(1G45),  robbed  in  Italy,  i.  146 
Bancroft,  Dr.  Richard,  Archbishop  of 

Canterbury,  his  library,  i.  304 
Bandiuelli,  Baccio,  productions  of,  i.  92, 

95,  188 

Banditti  in  Italy,  i.  147,  223 ;  in  France, 
264 

Bank,  for  the  poor  in  Padua,  i.  211  ; 
of  England  estabUshed,  1694,  ii.  329, 
331,  345 

Bankes,  Sir  John,  Lord  Chief  Justice, 

iv.  53,  54,  59,  64 
  Lord,  proposed  as  Speaker  of 

House  of  Peers,  iv.  99 
Banks,  Sir  John,  an  opulent  merchant, 

ii.  107 

Banquetting-house,  touching  for  the 
Evil  at  the,  i.  338  ;  creation  of  Peers 
there,  347;  lottery  held  there,  380  ; 
auction  of  pictures  at,  ii.  325 

Banstead,  Sui'rey,  Roman  medals  found 
near,  i.  329 

Baptism  of  a  Turk  and  a  Jew,  i.  172  ; 
pi'ivate,  censured,  ii.  296 

Baptist,  Signor  Giovanni,  musician,  ii. 
198,  204 

Baptistery  of  San  Giovanni,  i.  89  ;  of 

St.  John  Baptist,  124 
Bar,  defects  in  educating  for  the,  iii.  378 
Baraterius,  Nicholas,  architect,  i.  202 
Bai-badoes,  i.  365,  395  ;  conspiracy  of 

negroes  at  (1693),  ii.  323  ;  trees,  &c., 

there,  iii.  258 
Barberini,    Cardinal    Francesco,  his 

courtesy  to  the  English,  i.  124,  178 
Barberini,  Palazzo,  i.  107,  167 
Barclay,  John,  his  "  Icon  Animarum" 

(1614),  i.  283  andn;  ii.  37  n 
 ,  Lord  George,  mechanical  occu- 
pations of,  iii.  167 
 ,  Mr.  John,  iv.  89,  91,  107,  125, 

146 

Bargrave,  Dr.  Isaac,  ii.  73 
Barill,  Mr.,  i.  246 

Barillon,  Monsieur,  French  Ambassador 

(1685),  ii.  246 
Barlseus,  Caspar,  "  Historia  Rerum  in 

Brasilia"  (1647),  iii.  258 


Barlow,  Dr.  Thomas,  Bishop  of  Lincoln, 
i.  291,  383  ;  ii.  30,  31,  41,  99  ;  iii. 
149  ;  lettei's  to  Mr.  Evelyn,  acknow- 
ledging presents  to  the  Bodleian,  iii. 
64,  104  ;  on  a  lost  MS.,  132  ;  on  the 
Jesuits,  143 

 ,  Francis,  painter,  notices  of,  i. 

312,  412  ;  ii.  158  ;  iii.  81  n  ;  letter  to 
Mr.  Evelyn  on  dedicating  a  plate  to 
him,  81  ;  answer  to  ditto,  82 

 ,  Mrs.,  alias  Walters,  notices  of, 

i.  253;  ii  229  andn;  account  of,  i.  407 

Barnaby,  Mr.,  iii.  380 

Barnard's  Castle  occupied  by  troops, 
iii.  33 

Baron,  Barnard,  engraving  from  Titian 

by,  i.  328  n 
Baronius,  Ccesar,  his  sepulchre,  i.  109 
Barrow,  Dr.  Isaac,  Bishop  of  Chester, 

sermon  by,  ii.  97  and  n 
Bartholomew  Fair  (1648),  i.  247 
Bartolomeo.    See  Porta 
Bartolomeo,  Signor,  musician,  ii.  137, 

164,213 

Barton,  Mr.  John,  his  death,  i.  285  ; 

referred  to,  iii.  63 
Basil,  Council  of,  original  acts  of  the,  i. 

291 

Basilisco  at  Ghent,  i.  36 

Basire,  Dr.  Isaac,  i.  357,  370,  417  ;  iii. 
3  ;  letter  to  Mr.  Evelyn  on  his 
loyalty  to  Charles  I.,  1  ;  on  some 
theological  questions,  218 

Bassano.    See  Ponte 

Bassano,  Dorainico,  and  his  daughter, 
musicians,  i.  215 

 ,  Veronese,  paintings  of,  i.  133 

Bassompiere,  Fran9ois  de,  his  palace,  i. 
44  ;  iv.  352 

Bastille  at  Paris,  i,  50 

Bath,  visit  to  (1654),  i.  289;  given  up  by 
Prince  Rupert  (1645),  iv.  153,  156 

 ,  John  Grenville,  Earl  of,  account  of, 

i.  415  ;  references  to,  i.  347  ;  ii.  107, 
1  17,  170,  176,  206,  211,  223,  269  and 
n  ;  trial  with,  concerning  an  estate 
left  by  the  Duke  of  Albemarle,  ii.  327, 
343,  366,  392  ;  his  death,  366 

 ,  Henry  Bourchier,  Earl  of,  iv.  84 

Bath,  Knights  of  the,  their  creation, 
1661,  i.  347- 

Bathurst,  Dr.  Ralph,  Dean  of  Wells, 
i.  4,  21,  30,  95  n  ;  iii.  199  ;  iv.  25;  let- 
ter  respecting  Lord  Howard's  arms, 
iii.  219  ;  his  death,  ii.  373 

 ,  Mr.,  a  merchant,  ii.  98 

Bauli,  notice  of,  i,  160 


3  GO  GENERAL 

Bavaria,  Duke  of,  iv.  242,  244,  245 
Baxter,  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower  (1657), 
iii.  86  n 

Baylev,  Dr.,  Vice-Chancellor  of  Oxford 

(1636),  i.  420 
Baynards,  at  Ewhurst,  Surrey,  i.  246  ; 

iii.  330  ;  described,  i.  320  and  n 
Baynton,  Sir  Edward,  his  house  at  Spy 

Park,  i.  293 

Beach,  Sir  R.,  ii.  236 

Beale,  Dr.,  letters  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to,  on 
his  "  Acetaria,"  and  Hortulan  collec- 
tions, ii.  392,  393  ;  on  philosophical 
subjects,  iii.  207—211,  254 

Beale,  a  tailor,  discovers  a  plot,  iv.  126 

Bear-garden,  sports  at  the  (1670),  ii.  46 

Beauchamp,  Lady,  i.  310 

Beaufort,  Henry  Somerset,  first  Duke  of, 
his  house  at  Chelsea,  ii.  127  n,  183  ; 
death  of,  357  and  n  ;  his  family,  173, 
242 

  Edward  Somerset,  Duke  of, 

iv.  350 

Beaugensier,  notices  of,  iii.  85  and  n 
Beaumont,  Francis,  iii.  301 

 ,  Herbert  Van,  iv.  22 

Beauvais,  town  of,  i.  42 
Becher,  Mr.,  ii.  33,  90 
Beckford,  Lady,  ii.  139,  155 
Beddington,  seat  of  the  Carews,  i.  6, 

329  ;  ii.  361  and  n 
Bede,Venerable,  MS.  of,  in  the  Bodleian 

Library,  i.  291 
Bedell,  Mr.,  iii.  56 

Bedford,  William  Russell,  Earl  of,  i. 
347  ;  ii.  34,  178,  203  ;  his  protest,  iv. 
68  n 

Bedford  House,  Bloomsbury,  i.  389  n 

Bedloe,  William,  a  witness  against  Sir 
George  Wakeman,  ii.  132  ;  iii.  253 

Bedsteads,  splendid  ones  noticed,  i.  86, 
110,  214,  364 

Bee-hives,  remarks  on,  iii.  76 

Befort,  Monsieur,  iv.  202,  203 

Belin,  Mr.,  i.  382 

Belinge,  Col.,  iv.  336 

Bella,  Stephano  della,  engraver,  i.  256 

Bellarmine,  Cardinal  Robert,  his  sepul- 
chre, i.  108 

Bellasis,  Henry  Lord,  i.  373,  384  ;  ii. 
34,  261  ;  iii.  253 

 ,  Governor,  iv.  166  n 

Bellcar,  pictures  possessed  by,  i.  249 

Belle  Cour  at  Lyons,  i.  78 

Bellino,  Giovanni,  master  of  Titian,  his 
portrait,  i.  343 

Bells,  notices  of,  i.  24,  25,  60,  301 


INDEX  TO 

Bcllsize  House,  Hampstead,  notice  of 

i.  380  ' 
Belluccio,  Dr.,  of  Sienna,  i.  185 
Belvidere  Gardens,  i.  141 
Belvoir  Castle,  Lincolnshire,  i.  298 
Bembo,  Cardinal  Pietro,  i.  1 72 
Bemde,  Henry,  letter,  iii.  31  9 
Benbow,  John,  Admiral,  ii.  342,  347  n  ; 

his  gallantry  and  death,  369 
Benedict  VII.,  Pope,  i.  173 
Benevento,  statue  by,  i.  95 
Benlowes,  Edward,  references  to,  and 

notice  of,  i.  303  and  n 
Bennett,  Mr.,  iv.  274,  277,  285,  301 
 ,  Mrs.,  sister  to  Lord  Arlington, 

i.  379 

Benotti,  an  artist  in  Pictra  Commesso, 

i.  94,  190 

Benson,  Henry,  M.P.,  iv.  109  n 
Bentivoglio,  Cardinal  Guide,  his  gardens, 

&c.,  i.  173  ;  Castle  Bentivoglio,  195 
Bentley,   Dr.  Richard,   references  to, 

ii.  130  n,  328,  333,  347  n,  348  ;  iii. 
341,  362,  370,  388  ;  delivers  the 
Boyle  lectures,  ii.  319,  322,  327,  328  ; 
letters  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to,  on  a  new 
edition  of  the  "  Sylva,"  iii.  365  ;  the 
library  in  St.  James's  Park,  369 

 ,  Mr.,  a  bookseller  (1697),  iii. 

366 

Bergamo,  Damiano  di,  inlaying  by,  i.  192 

Bergen-op-Zoom,  i.  30 

Berkeley,  George,  first  Earl  of,  various 
references  to,  i.  329,  332,  336,  368, 
378  ;  ii.  8,  85,  93,  167,  181  ;  ambas- 
sador to  France  for  the  treaty  of 
Nimeguen,  102,  106  ;  seized  v/ith 
apoplexy,  102  ;  sets  out  for  France, 
103,  104  ;  commits  his  affaii's  to  Mr. 
Evelyn,  103—105,  107,  110 

Berkeley,  of  Stratton,  John,  Lord,  his 
house  in  London,  ii.  78,  79,  377 

 ,  Lord,  bombards  Dieppe  and 

Havre  (1694),  ii.  331 

 ,  Lady,    property    of,  from 

Berkeley  Gardens,  ii.  197 

 ,  Sir  John,  iv.  235  n,  236  n  ; 

danger  from  the  Parliament,  76  ; 
arrested,  78  n  ;  sent  to  the  Tower, 
94  ;  political  intrigue  of,  154 

 ,  Mr.  Arthur,  iv.  110,  112 

 .  ,  Sir  Robert,  Puisne  Justice  of 

the  King's  Bench,  his  portrait,  iii. 
301  ;  examined  by  the  Peers,  iv,  99  ; 
his  sentence,  ih.  ;  grandson  of,  ii.  188  ; 

iii.  273,  275,  276,  280,  282,  320,  332, 
337 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


3G1 


Berkeley,  Sir  Charles,  i.  355,  373 
 ,  Mr.  (son  of  Lord  Berkeley), 

i.  312,  313;  iii.  70  n 

Berkeley  House,  described,  ii.  4,  78  n, 
377  ;  gardens  of,  built  over,  197  ; 
residence  of  Pi-incess  Anne  (1696), 
333 

Berkeley  Castle  East  Indiaman  sunk, 

ii.  328 

Berkenshavv,  Mr.,  musician,  i.  381,  419 
Bei'kshire,  Thomas  Howard,  Earl  of, 
iv.  143 

 ,  Charles  Howard,  Earl  of,  ii. 

39,101,211 
Berkshire,  or  Cleveland,  House,  ii.  20, 

and  n 

Bernini,  Giovanni  Lorenzo,  sculptor  and 
architect,  i.  182  ;  works  of,  107,  110, 
122,  124,  166,  188,  253  ;  his  varied 
talents,  122 

Bertie,  Mr.,  ii.  5 

Berwick,  James  Fitz- James,  Dake  of, 

engaged  in  the  conspiracy  (i696),  ii. 

339  ;  noticed,  iii.  319 
•  ,  Garrison  of,  paying  off,  iv.  65  ; 

jealousy  respecting,  94 
Bestland,  Cantlo,  engraving  by,  ii.  324  n 
Betcliworth  Castle,  i.  305 
Betterton,  Thomas,  his  theatre  in  Dorset 

Gardens,  ii.  53  n 
Beveridge,  Dr.  William,  anecdote  of,  ii. 

312 

Bevei'ley,  notice  of  the  town  of,  i,  301 
Bewdley,  Charles  I.  visits,  iv.  140  n 
Bianchi,  a  singer  in  Rome,  i.  183 
Bible,  English  MS.  in  the  Bodleian 

Library,  Oxford,  i.  291  ;  versions  of 

the,  309 

«  Biblia  Polyglotta,"  by  Bishop  Walton, 

i.  283 

BickerstafF,    Sir    Charles,  purchases 

Pilton,  ii.  197 
Bickerton,  Mrs.  Jane,  daughter  of  Sir 

Robert,  ii.  65  and  u,  118  n,  120  n 
Biddulph,  Sir  Theophilus,  i.  372 
Bie,  Jacques  de,  and  Sieur  de  Bizot, 

their  "  Histoire  Metahique,"  iii.  355 
Billiards,  Portuguese  manner  of  playing, 

ii.  138 

Bills,  Parliamentary,  tacked  to  Money 

Bill,  contested,  ii.  359 
Bindley,  Mr.  James,  i.  356  n 
Biographia  Britannica,"  referred  to,  i. 

Introduction,  271  n,  387  n,  426;  ii. 

196  n,  306  u,  374  n,  393 
"  Biographia  Dramatica,"  referred  to,  i. 

331  n 


Birch,  Dr.,  sermon  by,  against  Papists, 
ii.  259 

Birds,  Royal  Collection  of,  in  St.  James's 
Park,  i.  389 

Birkenhead,  John,  a  spy,  iii.  51  ;  his 
reply  to  the  Jesuits,  iii.  70 

Bishoprics,  proceedings  for  filling  up 
those  vacant  (1641),  iv.  72,79,  83,98, 
115,  116,  129;  Parliament  dislikes 
the  measure,  99,  102,  106 

Bishops,  impeached,  proceedings  against 
(1641),  iv,  51  n  ;  summoned  by  the 
Queen,  84  ;  pamphlet  against,  99  n  ; 
King  Charles's  directions  about  a 
pardon  for  them,  118,  123  ;  pro- 
ceedings in  Parliament  concerning, 
97  n,  99—102,  106,  115,  123,  128  ; 
Parliament  endeavours  to  take  away 
their  votes  (1641),  95,  97,102;  popular 
outcry  against,  102  n  ;  inattentive  to 
the  Church  at  the  Restoration,  ii.  71  ; 
the  six  Bishops  petition  James  II. 
against  his  declaration  for  liberty  of 
conscience,  ii.  274  ;  sent  to  the  Tower, 
275  ;  trial  of,  275,  276  ;  called  upon 
to  reconcile  matters  on  the  expected 
invasion  (1  688),  281 ;  the  Bishops  and 
Convocation  at  variance  (1701),  365 

Blackburn,  Cornet,  brought  to  trial,  iv. 
284  n 

Blackfriars  garrisoned,  iii.  33 
Blackheathjcamp  at (1673),ii.83 ;  (1 685), 

230;  (1690),  308  ;  fair  on  (1683,)  174 
Blacksmiths,  ingenious  works  of,  i.  293 
Blackwall,  Dr.,  Boyle  lecturer,  ii.  356 
Blagge,  or  Blague,  Mrs., ii.  39,  77  n,  94, 

381;  marriage  of,  98,  123,  124.  Ste 

Godolphin 
Blake,  Admiral  Robert,  iv.  218,  232 
Blandford,  Dr.  Walter,  Bishop  of  Wor- 

cester,  ii.  79 
Blathwaite,  Mr.,  Secretary  at  War,  &c., 

ii.  268 

Bleaw,  William  Jansen,  i.  25,  402 
Blechingley,  Surrey,  house  of  Hen.VIII. 
,at,  i.  308  ;  sale  of  the  manor  of,  ii. 
110 

Blenheira,''thanksgiving  for  the  victory 

of,  ii.  373  and  u 
Blois,  notice  of  the  town,  &c.,  of,  i.  69 
Blood,  Colonel,  account  of,  ii.  57,  382 
Bloomsbury-square,  building  of,  i.  389  ; 

Montague  House  erected  in,  ii.  106, 

135, 248 
Blount,  Sir  Henry,  i.  332,  414 
 ,Col.,  i.  141,  281,  310,  313,  320, 

332 


302 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Bobart,  Jacob,  a  botanist,  and  a  de- 
scendant of,  i.  384  and  n 

Bodleian  Library,  Oxford,  curiosities  of 
the,  i.  291  ;  Mr.  Evelyn's  presents  to, 

iii.  64,  104 
Boet,  Dr.,  i.  263 
Boggi,  a  sculptor,  i.  123 

Bohemia,  Elizabeth,  Queen  of,  i.  18, 
401  ;  iv.  90  n,  103  n,  195  n,  205  n  ; 
letters,  205—226  ;  character  of  her 
writing,  205  n  ;  her  cypher,  208, 226  ; 
spleen  against  Q,.  Christina,  205,  207. 
214,  221  ;  fond  of  shooting,  207, 
210,  212  ;  Prince  Adolphus  of  Swe- 
den proposes  for  her  daughter  Sophia, 
213  ;  travels  to  see  Q.  Christina,  215, 
216  ;  gaiety  at  the  Hague,  222  ;  at  a 
royalty  at  Tilling,  224  ;  solicits  a  com- 
mission for  Killegi-ew,  225,  226  ;  Sir 
Richard  Browne  sent  to,  328  ;  her 
funeral,  i.  362 

 ,  Sophia,  Princess  of,  daughter 

of  preceding,  offer  of  marriage,  iv.  213 

Bohemians,  revolt  of  (1618),  i.  4,400 

Bohun,  Dr.  Ralph,  tutor  to  Mr.  Evelyn's 
son,  i.  396  ;  ii.  21,  53  ;  iv.  30  n  ; 
letter  to  by  Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  346  n  ; 
living  presented  to  him,  364  ;  Dr. 
Bathurst's  legacy  to,  373  ;  character 
of  Mrs.  Evelyn  by,  i.  Introduction; 

iv.  3 — 7  ;  notice  of,  3  n  ;  sermon  by, 
ii.  110  ;  letters  of  Mr3.  Evelyn  to,  iv. 
8—11,  24—26,  29,  30,  34  ;  alluded 
to,  14 

 ,  Mr.,  his  house  and  garden  at 

Lea  in  Surrey,  ii.  134,  168,  169,  184 

Bois-de-Boulogne,  muster  of  gens  d'armes 
in  the,  i.  66  ;  referred  to,  256 

Bois-de-Vincennes,  palace  of,  i.  50,  255 

Bois-le-Duc,  fortifications,  &c.,  of,  i.  28 

Bologna,  account  of,  i.  191 — 194  ;  Torre 
d'Asinelli  and  Churches,  192;  Palace 
of  the  Legate,  ib,  ;  Dr.  Montalbano, 
St.  Michel  in  Bosco,  193  ;  religious 
houses,  &c.,  ib.  ;  observations  on,  194 

Bologna,  Baldassa  di,  painting  by,  i.  1 1 1 

•  ,  Giovanni  di,  sculptures  of,  i. 

45,  94,  95,  146 

Bolognesi,Giovanni'Francesco,Grimaldi, 
called  II  Bolognesi,  painting  by,  i.  167 

Bolsena,  Lake  of,  i.  100 

Bolton,  Dr.,  his  Consecration  Sermon, 
i.  371 

Bombardment,  a  cruel  species  of  war- 
fare, ii.  337 
Bombs,  experiments  made  upon,  ii.  264 
Bommell,  town  of,  i.  20 


Bond,  Sir  Thomas,  his  house  at  Peck- 
ham,  ii.  107,  159 
Bonifacio,  Father,  at  Venice,  i.  218 
Bonnes  Hommes,  Convent  of,  at  Paris, 
i.  55,  263 

Books,  various  particulars  concerning, 
i.  11  and  n,  43,  140  n,  243,  291,  292, 
300,  303,  380  ;  ii.  122 

Booksellers,  at  Geneva,  i.  240  ;  loss  of, 
by  the  Fire  of  London,  iii.  188;  their 
editions  of  the  classics  censured,  190 

Boord,  Mad.  de,  censures  the  carving  of 
Gibbon,  ii.  56 

Booth,  Sir  George,  created  Lord  Dela- 
mere,  i.  347 

 ,  Mr.,  i.  260 

Borell,  Peter,  work  of,  referred  to,  iii.  84 

 ,  Mynheer,  Dutch  Ambassador, 

iv.  240,  241,  246,  252—254,  320 

Borem.an,  Sir  William,  Clerk  of  Green 
Cloth,  ii.  246 

Borghese,  Cardinal  Scipio,  houses  of,  i. 
133,  180 

Borghese  Villa,  i.  117,  1 18,  178 

Boi'romean  Islands,  i.  231  n 

Borromeo,  Cardinals  St.  Charles  and 
Frederick,  ii.  91  ;  burial-place,!.  224  ; 
munificence  of,  225,  226 

Boscawen,  Mr.,  ii.  230  ;  his  daughter, 
346,  366 

 ,  Mrs.,  ii.  123 

Bosio,  Antonio,  his  "Roma  Sotterranea" 
(1632),  i.  177 

Boswell,  Sir  Wdliam,  iv.  90,  210  ;  resi- 
dent at  the  Hague,  55  n,  223 

Bouehai-vant,  Abbess  of,  i.  266 

Bouillon,  Duke  and  Duchess  of,  i.  174 

Boulanger,  Sieur,  counsellor,  his  sudden 
death,  330 

Boulogne,  account  of,  i.  41 

Bourbon,  L'Archambant,  i  76 

Bourdeaux,  iv.  273,  280 

Bourdon,  Sebastian,  his  portrait  of  Mrs. 
Evelyn,  i.  249,  275,  277  ;  iv.  317 

Bourges,  account  of,  i.  75 

Bowles,  Sir  John,  ii.  190 

Bowyer,  Sir  Edward,  ii.  26  ;  his  seat  at 
Camberwell,  i.  321  ;  noticed,  iii.  18 

Boyle,  Richard,  first  Earl  of  Cork,  i. 
382  ;  iii.  349  ;  anecdotes  of,  396 

.  Hon.  Robert,  refei*ences  to,  i. 

313,  332,  346,  362,  364,  383  ;  ii.  104, 
283,  307,  318,  322  ;  iii.  70  n,  391  ; 
experiment  by,  i.  362  ;  elected  Presi- 
dent of  the  Royal  Society,  ii.  150  ; 
letters  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to,  on  his 
«  History  of  Ti-ades,"  and  Ray's  work 


THE  DIARY  AND 


CORRESPONDENCE. 


303 


on  Flowers,  393  ;  enclosing  certain 
Treatises  of  Arts,  iii.  92  ;  on  Essences 
of  Roses,  110;  on  his  works  on  Garden- 
ing, 114  ;  on  a  plan  for  a  Mathe- 
matical College,  116—120;  on  Mr. 
Boyle's  "Seraphic  Love,"  121—126  ; 
on  a  vai'nish  and  books  of  Mr.  Boyle's, 
133  ;  on  several  new  publications,  147  ; 
his  death,  and  Bishop  Burnet's  funeral 
sermon,  ii.  316  ;  particulars  of  him, 
i.  412;  iii.  346—352,  359,  370,  385, 
387—393,  395 
Boyle,  Mr,,  killed  in  a  sea-fight,  iii.  240 
Boyle  Lecture,  notices  of  the,  ii.  319, 
322,  327,  333,  338,  341,  356  ;  iii.  367, 
376 

Boyne,  battle  of  the,  ii.  308,  309 
Bracciano,  Duke  di,  his  house,  i.  135 
Bradford,  Mr.,  of  Bow  Church,  proposed 

Boyle  lecturer,  iii.  377 
Bradsliaw,  George,  of  Balliol  College, 

Oxford,  i.  9 
 ,  John,  regicide,  i.  9,  248,  251, 

260  n,  281 
Bramante.    See  Lazzori 
Bramliall,   Dr.   John,   Archbishop  of 

Armagh,  i.  339  ;  ii.  252 ;  account  of, 

i.  415  ;  iv.  263  n 

Bramstone,  Francis,  Baron  of  the  Ex- 
chequer, iii.  301  ;  his  son,  i.  213,215  ; 

ii.  34  ;  iii.  31 

Brandenburgh,  George  William,  Elector 
of,  iv.  220 

■  ;  Elizabeth  Charlotte,  Elec- 

tress  of,  iv.  225 

 ,  Duke  of,  his  present  to 

the  Royal  Society  (1682),  ii.  165  ;  to 
the  Queen  (1693),  325,  326 

Brandon,  Lord,  Charles  Gerard,  trial 
and  pardon  of,  ii.  245 

 ,  Charles,  Duke  of  SufiFolk,  paint- 
ing of,  ii.  121 

Bray,  Sir  Edward,  i.  320  n 

 ,  William,  F.  S.  A.  "History  of 

Surrey  "  referred  to,  i.  249,  383  n  ; 
ii.  20  n,  26  n,  159  n,  203  n,  219  n, 
252  n,  269  n,  300  n,  323  n  ;  iv.  31  n, 
60  n,  297  n,  419  n  ;  great  age  of,  iii. 
208  n,  357  n 

■  ,  Captain,  iii.  36,  37 

Brazen  Tables  at  Lyons,  i.  78 

Breakwater  at  Plymouth,  i.  87  n 

Breames,  Sir  Richard,  ii.  19 

Breda,  ship  of  war,  blown  up,  ii.  31 0 

Brederoke,  ,  iv.  210 

Bredrod,  family  of,  i.  28  ;  ii.  114 

Brenta,  fine  country  on  its  banks,  i.  205 


Brentford,  Patrick   Ruthen,  Earl  of 

Forth,  iv.  211 
Brentford,  battle  of,  i.  38 
Bi'ereton,  Lord,  ii.  26 
 ,  Mr,,  son  of  Lord  Brereton,  i. 

332,  4]  4 
Brescia,  account  of,  i.  220,  223 
Brest,  the  harbour  of,  iv.  282,  292,  295, 

303,  306 
Bret,  Colonel,  ii.  160 
Bretagne,  claims  of  the  Admiralty  of, 

iv.  281,  307 
Bretagne  language,  its  great  resemblance 

to  the  Welsh,  ii.  98 
Breton,  Dr.  John,  sermon  by,  ii.  44 
 ,  Mr.,  Vicar  of  Wotton,  sermons 

by,    i.  357  ;    his   death,   and  Mr. 

Evelyn's  regret  for,  ii.  68  ;  iv.  30 
Brett,  Sir  Edward,  i.  398 
Breughel,  Peter  (called  the  Old),  paint- 
ing by,  i.  34  ;  ii.  43 
 ,  John  (called  Velvet  Breughel), 

i.  34,  226,  246,  248 
Brevell,  Mons.,  ii.  68 
Brevent,  Dr.,  Dean  of  Durham,  i.  258 
Brick-Close,  Deptford,  granted  to  Mr. 

Evelyn,  ii.  34 
Brideoak,  Dr.  Ralph,  Bishop  of  Chiches- 
ter, ii.  97,  105 
Bridgeman,  Sir  Orlando,  ii.  59,  80,  107, 

224  ;  iii.  301  ;  iv.  84,  135 
 ,  Mr.,  Clerk  of  the  Council,  his 

death,  ii.  352 

 ,  Mrs.,  ii.  192 

Bridges,  particulars  concerning,  i.  44, 

45,  57,  59,  60,  62,  75,  77,  79,  90,  91, 

98,  99,  153,  158,  175,  180,  221,  232, 

242,  244,  259,  300 
Bridgewater,  Parliament  captures,  iv. 

154  n 

 ,  Francis  Egerton,  Duke  of, 

his  improvements,  ii.  33  n 
Brienne,  Mons.  le  Corate  de,  iv.  240, 

310,  313 

Brightman,  Thomas,  an  expounder  of 

the  Revelation,  ii.  308 
Brill,  Paul,  paintings  of,  i.  56,  139,  369 
Briloft,  curious  mechanism  at  the,  i.  23, 

402 

Bi'indley,  James,  engineer,  notice  of,  ii. 
33  n 

Brisbane,  Mr.,  Secretary  to  the  Admi- 
ralty, 1681,  ii.  155,  188 

Bristol,  i.  289  ;  St.  Vincent's  Rock  at, 
290  ;  Prince  Rupert  sui'renders,  iv. 
163—165,  180 

 George  Digby,  Earl  of,  i.  356, 


364 


GENERAL  IXDEX  TO 


3Q0,  3G3  ;  iii.  301  ;  his  house  and 
library  at  Wimbledon,  i.  361  ;  ii.  1 17, 
118  ;  house  of,  in  Queen-street,  ii.  58 ; 
account  of,  i.  417 

Bristol,  Countess  of,  ii.  183,  278  ;  her 
house  at  Chelsea,  127,  129,  136,  183 

— — ,  John,  Lord  Digby,  Earl  of,  iv. 
84  ;  votes  against  "  Instruciions  "  to 
Commissioners,  121  ;  references  to, 
95,  124,  249,  311,  315,  34G 

Broclii,  Vinceiitio,  sculptor,  i.  190 

Brockman,  Sir  Payton,  iii.  1 3 

Brodiick,  Sir  Aleyn,  ii.  96  ;  iii.  394 

Broghill,  Richard  Lord,  Plays  by,  i. 
391  ;  ii.  18  and  n 

Bromley,  Mr.  John,  his  house  at  Horse- 
heath,  ii.  48  n 

•  ,  Sir  George,  "  Royal  Letters  " 

referred  to,  iv.  90,  91,  115,  130,  195, 
205,  206,  210,  221  (notes) 

Brompton  Park,  rare  plants  in,  ii.  329 

Broniwich,  Dr.,  iv.  72 

Bronziuo,  Agnolo,  paintings  by,  i.  93, 
189 

Brook,    Francis    Greville,    Lord,  his 

house  at  Warwick,  i.  297 
•  ,  Lady,  her  gai'den  at  Hackney, 

i.  287 

Brook,  seat  of  Lady  Camden,  i.  298 

Brooks,  W.,  architect  of  the  London  In- 
stitution, ii.  79  n 

Broomfield  and  Deptford,  Kentish  loyal- 
ists meet  in,  i.  246 

Bi-ouages,  M.,  iv.  274 

Brouncker,  William,  Viscount,  First 
President  of  the  Royal  Society,  i. 
351,  367,  378  ;  ii.  110,  117,  272  ; 
iii.  348  ;  account  of,  i.  416 

 ,  Mr.  Henry,  ii.  59,  148;  his 

house  at  Sheen,  ii.  122 

Brown,  Islv.,  detained  in  Holland,  iii.  270 

.  ,  Sir  Adam,  of  Betchworth,  ii. 

128,  219,  370  u 

■  ,  Sir  Ambrose,  of  Betchworth, 

i.  305,  329 

.  ,  Sir  Richard,  temp.  Elizabeth  and 

James  L,  ii.  172 

Browne,  Serjeant,  a  commissioner  at 
Newport,  iii.  48  ;  iv.  185  n 

 ,  Sir  Richard,  Ambassador  to 

France,  father-in-law  of  Mr.  Evelyn, 
references  to,  i.  44,  245,  250,  257, 
258,  269,  271,  274,  282,  283,  337, 
343  n  ;  ii.  33,  56,  58,  88,  98 ;  iv.  190, 
191  ;  uncle  to  the  Countess  of  Car- 
narvon, i V.  1 1 5  n  ;  letter  to,  from 
Elector  Palatine,  339  ;  King  Charles 


tlie  First's  instructions  and  letters  to, 
on  being  sent  to  Elector  Palatine, 
328  ;  on  going  Ambassador  to  France, 
330  ;  directing  him  to  revive  claim 
to  Qaeen  Henrietta's  dowry,  332  ; 
about  the  Parliament's  agent  in 
France,  333  ;  on  Queen  Henrietta's 
Capuchins,  334  ;  transports. arms,  &c., 

341  ;  baronetcy  conferred  on  (1644), 

342  ;  correspondence  with  Sir  Edward 
Hyde  on  affairs  of  Charles  II.,  231 — 
323  ;  great  distress,  244,  255,  339— 
346  ;  indebted  for  rent  at  Paris,  264, 
271  ;  rent  dischai'ged  by  Sir  K. 
Foster,  273,  275,  281  ;  his  enemies, 
247  n,  288  u  ;  difhculties  of  the  cor- 
respondence, 245,  251  ;  warned  of 
Mr.  Holder,  261  ;  sends  a  present  to 
Charles  II.  at  Paris,  288  ;  sends 
money  to  Charles  II.,  290—297,  304; 
sends  a  present  of  money  to  Sir 
Edward  Hyde,  296,  297  ;  desires  in- 
structions about  Cromwell's  minister 
at  Paris,  310  ;  about  his  continuing  at 
Paris,  316,318  ;  anxious  lest  Charles  I. 
should  dispose  of  Sayes  Court,  335  ; 
selection  from  his  correspondence,  327 
— 353  ;  his  support  of  the  Church 
while  abroad,  i.  258,  270  n,  337  ;  ii. 
172;  iv.  281,  352  ;  disappointed  of 
the  wardenship  of  ^lerton  College, 
Oxford,  i.  346  ;  resigns  the  clerkship 
of  Council,  ii,  68  ;  master  of  the 
Trinity  House,  82  ;  his  death  and 
funeral,  171  ;  eulogium  on,  171,  172  ; 
debts  owing  to,  from  the  crown,  266  ; 
despatches  of,  iii.  262  ;  letters  of  Mr. 
Evelyn  to,  iii.  5 — 54,  101 

Browne,  Lady,  i.  256,  279  ;  her  death, 
283 

 ,  Sir  Thomas,  ii.  65,  383  ;  his 

curiosities,  C6 

Brownists,  accuse  King  Charles  I.  of 
Popery  (1641),  i v.  71;  founder  of  the 
sect,i6. ;  object  to  Common  Prayer,  72 

Brownrigg,  Dr.  Ralph,  Bishop  of  Exe- 
ter, iii.  301  ;  iv.  72,  82  n 

Bruce,  Robert,  Lord,  i.  204,  312  ;  ii. 
192  ;  account  of,  i.  404 

Bruges,  notice  of,  i.  36 

Drunker,  Mr.,  iv.  100 

Brussels,  account  of,  i.  33 — 35  ;  ii.  Ill 

 ,  "The  late  Newsfi'om  Brussels 

unmasked"  (1660),  i.  336  and  n  ;  ii. 
395 

Buat,  Mons.,  brother  to  Admiral  Vaa 
Tromp,  ii.  20 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


8G5 


Bucentnur,  the  Doge's  vessel,  at  Venice, 

i.  208 

Buchanan,  George,  portrait,  ii.  37  n 
Bnckhurst,  Thomas  Sackville,  Lord  High 

Treasurer,  iii.  301 
Buckingham,    George    Villiers,  first 
Duke  of,  i.  310,  316  ;  iii.  301  ;  im- 
peached, iv.  95  n,  215  n,  340  n 

 :  ,  second 

Duke,  i.  253,  298,  385  ;  ii.  35,  67, 
118, 136  ;  iv.  263  n  ;  his  "Rehearsal" 
performed,  ii.  67  and  n  ;  his  glas?- 
work,  108  ;  seat  of,  at  Clifden,  133  ; 
his  estate  at  Helmsley,  343  and  n 

 ,  Duchess  of  (1686),  ii.  255 

Buckingham  House  erected,  i.  288  n, 
410 

Buckle,  Sir  Christopher,  i.  329 

Buda,  thanks2;iving  on  the  capture  of 
(1686),  ii.  257  ;  iii.  286 

Buffaloes  at  Pisa,  i.  90 

Bulkelev,  Sir  Richard,  chariot  invented 
by,  ii'  242  ;  letter,  iii.  322 

— — ,  Mr.,  a  commissioner  at  New- 
port, iv.  1 85  n 

Bull,  Mr.,  F.R.S.,  i.  351 

Bullen,  Mr.,  iv.  274,  323 

Buonarrotti,  ]\Iichael  Angelo,  architec- 
ture of,  i.  102,  106,  111,  114  ;  paint- 
ings by,  56,  93,  128,  139,  144,  188  ; 

ii.  342  ;  sculpture,  &c.,  of,  i.  92,  95, 
124,  128,  129,  172,  188,  189,  191  ; 

ii.  270 

Burghers,  ^Michael,  engraving  by,  i. 
384  n 

Burial  in   churches  censured,  ii.  173, 

296 

Burleigh,  Robert  Cecil,  Lord,  picture  of, 
ill  mosaic,  i.  39  ;  portraits  and  letters 
of,  iii.  301,  380 

 ,  William  Cecil,  Lord,  iv.  119 

Burleigh-on-the-Hill,  i.  298  and  n  ; 
garden  at,  ii.  189  ;  fire  at,  374 

Burlington,  Earl  of  (1682),  ii.  170,283  ; 

iii.  347,  370,  396 

Burnet,  Dr.  Gilbert,  Bishop  of  Salisbury, 
Mr.  Evelyn  contributes  to  his  "  His- 
tory of  the  Reformation,"  ii.  155  ;  iii. 
380  ;  bis  pi'eachinsj,  ii.  93  ;  sermons 
by,  ii.  167,  291,  295,  305,  348,  358  ; 
funeral  sermon  for  Mr.  Boyle,  316; 
«  Pastoral  Letter  "  burned,  323  ;  por- 
trait, 299  ;  various  references  to,  ii. 
7  n,  71  n,  81  n,  85  n,  131  n,  142, 
147  n,  179  n,  204  n,  252  n,  254  n 

Burrow  Green,  Cambridgeshire,  Mr. 
Hingsby's  house  at,  ii.  47  and  n 


Burton,  ^Ir.  Sheriff",  of  Surrey,  ii.  109 

 ,  Mr.,  of  Honson  Grange,  ii.  210 

Bury  St.  Edmund's,  Suff"olk,  abbey  and 

town  of,  ii.  110 
Busby,   Dr.    Richard,   theatiical  per- 
formance of,  i.  421 
Bushel,  — ,  iii.  37 

Bushell's  Wells  at  Enstone,  Oxfordshire, 

i.  383  and  n 
Butler,  Mrs.,  ii.  94  n. 
Byron,  Sir  John,  first  Lord,  i.  273  ; 

iv.  123  n  ;  family  seat  at  Newstead 

Abbey,  i.  299 
 ,  Lord,  iv.  303  n 

Cabinets   of  inlaid  leather,  i.    266  ; 

Indian,  364 
Cade,  Dr.,  a  Commissioner  of  Greenwich 

Hospital,  ii.  344  n 
Cadiz,  bombardment  of  (1695),  ii.  337 
Caen,  town  and  abbey  of,  i.  61,  62 
Caernarvon,  Robert  Dormer,  Earl  of, 

directed  to  attend  Parliament,  iv.  115, 

124  ;  killed  at  the  battle  of  Newburv, 

115  n 

 ,  Charles  Dormer,  Earl  of  i. 

239,  405 

Csesar,  C.  Julius,  Emperor  of  Rome, 
obelisk  erected  to,  i.  119 

 ,  Augustus  Octavianus,  Emperor 

of  Rome,  i.  171  ;  see  Augustus 

Cagliari,  Paolo,  called  Veronese,  paint- 
ings by,  i.  55—57,  189,  201,  207, 
369 

Cajetan,  Cardinal,  his  palace,  i.  170 

Calais,  notices  of,  i.  40,  252 

"  Chalcography,  History  of,"   by  IMr. 

Evelyn  (1662),  various  notices  of,  i. 

344,  364  ;  ii.  392,  395  ;  iii.  304,  318 
Caldwell,  Mrs.,  married  to  Mi*.  George 

Evelyn,  i.  13  ;  ii.  354  and  n 
Calendar,  Earl  of,  enUsts  in  Charles  I.'s 

cause,  iii.  15  n 
Caligula,  C,  Emperor  of  Rome,  bridge 

of,  i.  158 

"  Calisto,"  a  comedy  performed  at 
Court  (1674),  ii.  94  ;  account  of  it,  ib. 

Cambridge,  remarks  on  the  colleges, 
i.  303 

Camden,  William,  Clarencieux  King  of 
Arms,  iii.  145,  301,  372  ;  his 
"  Britannia"  (1695),  additions  to  Sur- 
rey, furnished  by  Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  334 

 ,  Lady,  her  seat  at  Brook,  i.  298 

Camomile  flowers,  fumes  of,  for  the 
head-ache,  i.  250 

Campania,  notice  of,  i.  149 


3G6 


GENERAL  IXDEX  TO 


Campanile  at  Pisa,  i.  89 

Canipanilla,  "  De  Subjugandis  Belgis " 

quoted,  iii.  131 
Campion,  Edmund,  his  portrait,  i.  167 
Campo  di  Fieri  at  Rome,  i.  167 
Campo  Martio  at  Vincenza,  i.  221 
Campo  Martius  at  Geneva,  i.  241 
Campo  Santo  at  Pisa,  i.  89  ;  at  Rome, 

135 

Campo  Scelerato  at  Rome,  i.  112 

Campo  Vaccino  at  Rome,  i,  103,  104,  160 
Can,  Dr.,  sermon  by,  ii.  197 
Cauarv  merchants  desire  a  new  charter, 
i.  385 

Cannes,  notice  of  the  town  of,  i.  82 
Cannon,  of  leather,  i.  41  ;  remarkable 

one  at  Ghent,  36  ;  at  Havre,  61  ;  at 

Venice,  208 
Canterbury,  Archbishop  of,  order  about 

his  jurisdiction,  iv.  98 
Canterbm'y  Cathedral,  notices  of,  i.  37, 

388 

Capel,  Arthur,  Lord,  i.  310  ;  iii.  14,  28  ; 
iv.  105  n,  134  n  ;  his  ti"ial  and  death 
(1649),  i.  248,  249  and  n,  338;  ii. 
141 

■  ,  Sir  Henrv,  afterwards  Lord  Capel 

of  Tewkesbury,  ii.  23,  130,231,  518, 
326,  379  ;  his  house  at  Kew,  122, 
188,  272  ;  letter  from,  iii.  2S7 

•  ,  Arthm',  created  Earl  of  Essex 

(1661),  i.  347 

Capellus,  Mons.,  ii.  299 

Capitol  at  Rome  described,  i.  104 — 106 

Caprarola,  palace  of,  near  Rome,  i,  184 

Capua,  notice  of,  i.  149 

Capuchins  at  Rome,  i.  168  ;  Queen  Hen- 
rietta's cloister  of,  complained  of,  iv. 
51  n  ;  recommended  to  be  dissolved, 
73  ;  proceedings  in  Parliament  about, 
109  and  n,  334 

Carabines,  manufactory  of,  at  Brescia, 
i.  223 

Caracci,  Agostino,  gallery  painted  by,  i. 
102 

.  ,  Annibal,  paintings  of,  i.  107, 

144,  168,  184,  193,  343,  354 
 ,  Ludovico,  fresco-paiutmg  by,  i. 

193 

Caravag2;io,  Polydore  Caldara,  i.  109, 
170 

Cardenas,  Don  Alonzo,  Spanish  Ambas- 
sador, iv.  54  n,  175  n 

Cai-di,  Ludovico,  called  Cigali,  i.  55 

Cardigan,  Thomas  Brudeuell,  Earl  of, 
his  creation  (1661),  i.  347 

Cardinars  hat  given  at  the  Vatican,  i.  1 1 S 


Carew,  family  and  seat  at  Beddington,  i. 

329  ;  ii.  331,  361  and  n 
 ,  Mr.,  a  performer  on  the  harp, 

i.  251 

 ,  John,  regicide,  executed,  i.  341 

Carey,  Patrick,  brother  of  Lord  Falk- 
land, i.  101 

 ,Mrs.,  i.  308,  319 

Carle,  Dr.  Walter,  Bishop  of  Winchester, 
iv.  99  n 

Carlingford,  Lord,  ii.  58,  380  ;  new  fuel 
[     projected  by,  26 
Carlisle,  James  Hay,  Earl  of,  iiL  301  ; 
iv.  75  n 

 ,  Charles  Howard,  Earl  of,  his 

creation  (1661),  i.  347,  416  ;  com- 
plained of  as  Ambassador,  373 

 ,  Garrison  of,  Pai'liament  pays 

off,  iv.  65  ;  surrender  of,  164  n 

 ,  Lucy  Percy,  Countess  Dowager 

of,  iii.  37  ;  iv.  75 

Carmarthen,  Thomas  Osborne,  Lord 
(1701),  ii.  302,  303,  3G4 

Carnivals  at  Naples,  i.  152  ;  at  Rome, 
174  ;  at  Venice,  205,  216 

Caroline  of  Braudenburgh,  Queen  of 
George  II.,  ii.  24  n 

Carolus  Quintus,  a  captured  vessel,  i. 
396 

Carr,  Sir  Robert,  i.  379 ;  pilloried  for  a 

libel,  ii.  32 
 ,  William,  Lord,  of  Cessford,  iv.  64, 

70 

Carrara,  marble  quarries  at,  i,  88 

Carshalton,  Surrey,  i.  329 

Carte,  Thomas,  "  Life  of  James  Duke  of 
Ormond  "  referred  to,  iv.  204  n,  217  n 

Carteret,  Sir  George,  Treasurer  of  the 
Navy  and  Vice-Chamberlain,  i.  252, 
339,  361,  367,  370,  377  ;  ii.  58,  258  ; 
iv.  231,  235  —  238,  246,  256  — 
262,  265,  269—273,  289,  303,  323; 
services  to  Chai'les  II.,  238  n,  246  n, 
280  n;  account  of,  i.  406  ;  his  daugh- 
ters, i.  370,  375 

Carthusian  Church  and  Monastery,  i. 
151 

Cartwright,  Colonel,  ii.  60 

 ,  Dr.,  Archdeacon    of  St. 

Alban's,  his  library,  ii.  276 
 ,  Dr., Dean  of  Ripon,  Sermon 

by,  ii.  256 

 , William,  his  «  Royal  Slave," 

i.  421 

Casaubon,  Isaac,  hints  for  a  treatise 

De  Baculis,"  left  by,  iii.  220 
 ,  Dr.  Meric,  coiu'espondence  on 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


3G7 


his  father's  treatise  "De  Baculis,"  &c., 

iii.  220—225,  246 
Cascade  of  tlie  Aiiio,  i.  181 
Cashiobury,  Hertfordshire,  seat  of  the 

Earl  of  Essex,  ii.  140 
Casimir,  John  II.,  King  of  Poland,  iv. 

220,  221 

Castelfranco,  Giorgione  da,  i.  198 
Castel-Mellor,  Count  de,  his  character, 

&c,,  ii.  118,  227 
Castile,  Don  Michael  de,  iv.  317,  318 
Castillion,  Dr.,  Prebendary  of  Canter- 
bury, sermon  of,  ii.  107 
Castle^  Mrs.,  her  marriage,  ii.  189 
Castlehaven,  the  second  Earl,  his  ar- 
raignment and  execution,  i.  6,  400 

 ,  Lord,  ii.  170,  176 

Castlemaine,  Lady,  satire  on,  &c.  ii.  33 
Castlenau,  Marquis  of,  iv,  236  n,  255, 
263,272,292,293;  admits  Charles II.'s 
cruisers  into  France,  263 
Castles,  notices  of,  i.  19,  28,  29,  38,  40, 
41,  55,  61,  62,  69,  70,  75,  79,  82,  150, 
223,  236,   252,  298,  300  ;  ii.  235. 
Sec  Fortifications 
Cat,  singular  one  at  Orleans,  i.  403  j 

another  called  the  Mocock,  320 
Catanea,  earthquake  at  (1693),  ii.  323  ; 
iii.  327 

Catharine,  Infanta  of  Portugal,  Queen 
of  Charles  II.,  various  references  to, 
i.  363,  365,  381,  418  ;  ii.  5,  16,  23,  45, 
55,  56,  57,  127,  176, 184,  282;  arrival 
of,  i.  358,  363  ;  her  person,  363  ; 
furniture  of,  364;  procession  on  the 
Thames  in  honour  of,  367  ;  her  toilet, 
364;  ii.  83  ;  birth-day  of  (1668),  ii. 
35;  (1672), 80;  (1684),  200;  grief  on 
Charles's  death,  206,  209,  212  ;  re- 
mains in  England,  274 
Catharine  Hall,  Cambridge,  i.  304 
Cathedrals,  notices  of,  in  England,  i.  37, 
38,  289,  292,  294,  296,  297,  300,  301, 
302  ;  ii.  235  ;  abroad,  i.  31, 34,42,  46, 
57,  74,  77,78,80,  81,  89,  97,151,  184, 
223,  224,  242,  244,  403  ;  St  Peter's 
at  Rome,  120 — 124;  St.  John  Lateran, 
124—128 
Catiline,  Tragedy  of,  ii.  36 
Cats,  I'emarks  on  the  sight  of,  iii.  209 
Catta   Malata,  equestrian  statue  of,  i. 
206 

Cavalerizzo  at  Florence,  i.   95 ;  at 

Naples,  152 
Cave,  Sir  Richard,  iv.  329 

 ,  Dr.,  sermon  of,  ii  139,  385 

Cecil,  Robert,  Earl  of  Salisbury,  his 


portrait  and  letters  referred  to,  i.  39  ; 

iii.  301,  380 

Cedar  of  Bermuda,  iii.  259 
Centi  Camerelli,  notice  of  the,  i.  161 
Cercean  Promontory,  &c.  i.  147 
Cesare,    Giuseppe,    called  D'Arpino, 

paintings  of,  i.  105,  109,  121,  127, 

179 

Cestius,  C,  tomb  of,  at  Rome,  i.  165 
Chamberlain,  Captain,  iv.  272  n 
Chambers,  Mr.,  iv.  338 
Chambourg,  palace  of  the  French  Kings 
at,  i.  69 

Chamois  goats,  account  of,  i.  236 

Champneys,  Justinian,  his  imprison- 
ment and  portrait,  ii.  365  n 

Chandos,  Duke  of,  carving  of  Gibbon 
bought  by,  ii.  54  n 

Chanterell,  Mr.,  portrait  of  Mr.  Evelyn 
by,  i.  5 

ChapUn,  Dr.,  said  to  be  the  author  of 

the  "Whole  Duty  of  Man,"  ii.  312 
Chapman,  Captain,  iv.  236  n 
Chardin,  Sir  John,  references  to,  ii.  145, 

188,  191,  194,  195,  257,  266,  269, 

374  ;  notice  of,  385 
Charenton,  Protestant  Church  at,  i.  57  ; 

monument  there,   254  ;  zealots  of, 

iv.  314 

Chariot  invented  by  Sir  R.  Bulkeley,  ii. 
242 

Charitable  Uses,  &c.,    Commission  of 

inquiry  concerning,  i.  365,  368 
Charite,  Hospitals  of  La,  i.  49,  78,  256 
Charles  I.,  King  of  England,  references 
to,  i.  12, 14,  38,  227,  245,  248,  299, 
372  ;  ii.  136,  270,  273  ;  iii.  301  ;  iv. 
227  n,  232,  328  n  ;  visits  Oxford 
with  the  Queen  (1636),  i.  420  ;  pro- 
cession (1640)  to  the  Short  Parliament, 
i.  12  ;  on  his  return  from  the  North, 
14  ;  on  proclamation  of  peace  (1642), 
38 ;  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  iii.  5  ; 
martyrdom  of  (1649), i.  248 ;  paintings, 
&c.,  dispersed,  249  ;  restoration  of 
ditto,  338  ;  his  effigies  thrown  down, 
251  ;  daily  forms  of  Prayer  ordered 
by,  270  ;  his  burial-place,  288  ;  his 
murderer's  tried  and  executed,  341  ; 
Fast  on  his  Martyrdom  ordered 
(1661),  345  ;  prayers  used  on  it 
altered  (1689),  and  Dr.  Sharp's  ser- 
mon on,  ii.  291;  sermon  on,  by  Ste- 
phens (1700),  357  ;  Private  Corre- 
spondence with  Sir  Edward  Nicholas, 
iv.  47 — 185  ;  his  instructions  to  Sir 
Richard  Browne,  on  his  going  to 


3G8  GENERAL 

Elector  Palatine,  328  ;  as  Ambassador 
to  France,  330  ;  letters  to  and  from 
Secretary  Nicholas,  47 — 185  ;  de- 
parture for  Scotland,  49,  50  ;  engages 
four  Irish  regiments  for  Spanish 
service,  54  ;  a  general  pardon  pub- 
lished, 58,  59  ;  an  attack  on  the  deer 
in  Windsor  Forest,  60,  63  ;  forfeitui-e 
of  Londondei'ry,  Gl  ;  his  Scottish 
affair,  68  ;  confidence  in  Sir  H.  Vane, 
62  ;  act  of  tonnage  and  poundage,  63; 
■  the  disposal  of  his  collar  of  rubies,  69, 
73,  90,  103;  suspected  of  popery,  71; 
the  vacant  Bishopricks,  72,  98  ;  and 
on  Common  Prayer,  72  ;  recom- 
mended to  dissolve  cloister  of  Capu- 
chins, 73  ;  refers  the  matter  to  the 
Queen,  ih.  ;  commands  certain  Lords 
to  attend  in  Parliament,  74  ;  his  plans 
for  countermining  plots  of  the  Fac- 
tions, 76,  80,  85,  89,  117  ;  ti'eacherous 
counsellors  about  his  person,  77,  103, 
115  ;  Lord  Mayor  desires  to  attend 
him  through  London,  78,  86,  110,  113, 
124  ;  fills  up  the  vacant  Bishopricks, 
82 ;  advised  to  prorogue  Irish  Pai'- 
liament,  87 ;  firm  in  the  doctrines 
of  the  Church,  88,  97,  99,  160  ; 
directs  Lord  Bristol  to  renew  a  dis- 
pute between  the  two  Houses,  95  ; 
anecdote  of,  respecting  Ireland,  98  n  ; 
on  House  of  Peers  choosing  their  OAvn 
speaker,  99  ;  supports  the  Bishops' 
votes,  99,  100;  division  in  his  council- 
boai'd,  103;  letter  to  Queen  Henrietta^ 
ih.  ;  anxious  to  stop  the  progress  of 
Commons'  remonstrance,  117;  pardons 
the  thirteen  Bishops,  118,  123  ; 
declares  against  orders  of  Parliament 
made  without  him,  124  ;  gentry  of 
Hertfordsihire  welcome  him,  127,  132; 
his  return,  133  ;  speeches  by  Mayors 
of  different  towns  on  his  return  from 
Scotland,  133  n  ;  his  military  affiiirs 
decline,  135  n  ;  his  memorial  for  the 
treaty  of  Uxbridge,  140  ;  letter  on 
Parliament's  treatment  of  Queen 
Henrietta's  Capuchins,  334  ;  French 
Queen  sends  money  to,  341  ;  aimis, 
&c.  sent  to  (1643)  from  France,  342  ; 
orders  a  fast  on  the  treaty  of  Uxbridge, 
136  ;  directs  Sir  Edward  Nicholas 
to  talk  with  the.  Parliament's  Com- 
missioners on  their  rebellion,  137  ; 
determines  not  to  treat  without 
Marquis  Montrose,  135,  138  ;  direc- 
tions, &c.  about  treaty  of  Uxbridge, 


INDEX  TO 

137 — 139  ;  his  IMemorial  on  Religion 
and  the  INIilitia,  140  ;  his  retreat  from 
Oxfordshire  to  Bewdley,  ih.  ;  defeats 
Waller  at  Cropredy  Bridge,  141  n  ; 
state  of  affairs  before  the  Battle  of 
Marston  Moor,  ih.  ;  directs  Prince 
Rupert  to  relieve  York,  142  ;  council 
of  war  held  at  Oxford  daily,  141  n  ; 
ditto  on  Parliament's  propositions 
(Dec.  1644),  143,  144  ;  state  of  his 
army  (June,  16-15),  and  anxiety  to 
relieve  Oxford,  147  —  149  ;  plans 
before  battle  of  Naseby,  151  and  n  ; 
proceedings  after  that  battle,  152  n  ; 
determines  to  adhere  to  the  pro- 
positions at  Uxbridge  (Aug.  1645), 
156  ;  his  intercepted  private  corre- 
spondence published,  156 — 161  ;  his 
contempt  for  the  Parliament,  157  ; 
route  from  Bridgenorth  to  Newark, 
158  ;  constant  to  the  Church,  his 
friends,  &c.,  160  ;  state  of  his  affairs, 
ih.  ;  displeasure  at  surrender  of 
Bristol  (Sept.  1645),  163,  164;  orders 
Oxford  to  be  cleared  of  disaffected, 
167;  his  intention  of  joining  Montrose, 
1  68  ;  observation  on  the  conduct  of 
Sir  E.  Herbert,  169  ;  his  design  to 
break  through  the  reljel  army  to 
Oxford,  170 ;  writes  to  Sir  Henry 
Vane  the  younger,  172;  taken  prisoner 
by  Colonel  Hammond,  174  n  ;  direc- 
tions for  the  surrender  of  Oxford,  176; 
anxiety  about  his  cabinet,  178  and  n  ; 
reasons  for  his  sending  his  propositions 
to  London  (1646),  "l  79;  letter  to 
Speaker,  for  his  Chaplains  to  attend 
him,  181;  thanks  Sir  Edward  Nicholas 
for  his  services,  184  ;  speech  to  Com- 
missioners at  Newport  (Dec.  1648), 
185;  libel  against,  by  Marsys,  190 
Charles  II.,  King  of  England,  references 
to,  i.  252,  253,  332  n,  342,  346,  347, 
350—360,  366  n,  370—395  ;  ii.  2—7, 
20—26,  34,  38,  51-57,  61-65,  70, 
71,  74—78,  92—96,  127,  134,  135, 
148,  177—187,  228  ;  crowned  by 
the  Marquis  of  Argyle,  iv.  80  n ; 
his  education,  1 05  n ;  his  servants 
examined  by  the  Parliament,  109  ; 
his  tutors  and  residence,  154  n  ; 
letters  on  his  affairs  (1641-59),  233 
— 323  ;  goes  from  Jei'sey  to  Paris, 
233  ;  at  St.  Germain's,  349  ;  letters 
of  Sir  Edward  Nicholas  on  his  affairs 
(1649),  191—194;  documents  respect- 
ing his  counsellors,  194  ;  letters  on 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


8G9 


his  affairs  in  Scotland,  194  ;  to  Mrs. 
Twisden,  about  the  George  and  seals 
of   King  Ciiarles   I.,    19G  ;  to  Mr. 
llinton,  respecting  bills  of  exchange 
for  his  use,  197  ;  to  Sir  John  Gren- 
ville,   to   procure  arms,  &c.,    1,98  ; 
accused  of  popery,  237  ;  expedition 
to  Scotland  alluded  to,  194  n,  352, 
353  ;  letter  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas 
(1652),  on  his  affairs,  201  ;  notices  of 
his  court  at  Cologne,  223  n  ;  anecdote 
of  the  King  and  Killegrew,  225  n  ; 
letter  from  the  States  of  Holland, 
&c,,    concerning    his    residence  at 
Tilling,  22()  ;  design  of  putting  places 
in  Scotland  and  Ireland  into  hands  of 
Holland,  248  ;  thanks  Borell,  Dutch 
Ambassador  in  France,  for  kindness, 
241,  252  ;  his  answer  to  complaint  of 
Venetian    Ambassadors   against  his 
Envoy,  249,  250  ;   hopes  from  the 
German  Princes  (1652),  258  n;  French 
King  and  Queen  pay  a  visit  to,  2G1  n  ; 
indignity  offered  to  his  cruisers  at 
Brest,  2G2  ;  English  journals  cari- 
cature his  Court,  263  n  ;  fleet  under 
Prince  Rupert,  267—270  n  ;  pro- 
ceedings ridiculed  in  English  prints, 
272,  273,  275  n  ;  his  distresses  in 
exile  (1652),  244,  245,  253  n,  254  n, 
256-258  ;  (1653),  261,  264  n,  290  ; 
(1655),  301 ;  letter  to  Sir  E.  Nicholas 
(Sept.  1653),  202  ;  at  Chantllly,  289  ; 
Sir  Richard  Browne  sends  money  to, 
290—297,  304;  (1654),  designs  leaving 
France,  299  ;  letter  to  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester,  on  attempt  to  pervert  his 
religion,  203  ;  at   Cologne,  223  n ; 
shipping  shut  out  from  Brest,  303, 
306  ;  (1655),  at  Frankfort,  305  and  n  ; 
anxious  to  get  into  Flanders,  307  ; 
(1655-6),  discharges  a  debt  due  to 
Monsieur  Marces,  304,  308;  difficulty 
in   keeping  his  adherents  together, 
309;  (1656),  state  of  his  afiairs,  317— 
320 ;  escape  of,  after  the  battle  of 
Worcester,  i.  271  —  273  ;  iii.  263  ; 
Mr.  Evelyn's  letter  in   defence  of, 
against    a    pretended    paper  from 
Brussels,  i.  136  ;  his  declaration  to 
Parliament,  &c.,  and  address  to,  ih.  ; 
triumphal  return  of,  to  London,  337  ; 
Mr.   Evelyn's  correspondence  with 
Col,  Morley,  previous  to  the  Restora- 
tion, 422  ;  "  Mystery  and  Method  of 
his  Restoration,"  425  n  ;  entertained 
at  Guildhall,  338  ;  touches  for  the 

VOL.  IV. 


evil,  ih.  ;  his  speech  to  Parliament, 
339 ;   Peers,  &c.,  created  by,  347  ; 
account  of  his   progress  aiid  coro- 
nation (1661),  348— 351;  Ml'.  Evelyn's 
"  Panegyric"  on  it,  351;  ii.  391,  395; 
iii.    132  ;    opens    Parliament,  and 
declares  his  intention  of  marrying, 
i,  352  ;  miniature  painting  presented 
to  him  by  Mi-s.  Evelyn,  ih.  ;  day  of 
his   Restoi-ation   kept,    ib.  ;  sailing 
match  with  the  Duke  of  York,  354  ; 
design  of  rebuilding  Greenwich  Palace, 
361  ;   marriage   with   Catharine  of 
Portugal,  363  ;  in  danger  at  sea,  365; 
commends    Mr.    Evelyn's  writings, 
and   explains  his  plan   of  building 
Whitehall,  384  ;  favour  to  the  Royal 
Society,  367  ;   visit  to  Mr.  Evelyn, 
374  ;  thanks  him  for  his  "  Mystery  of 
Jesuitism,"  389  ;  prorogues  the  Par- 
liament (1665),  390  ;  visits  the  fleet 
after  victory  (1665),  395  ;  gracious 
reception  of  Mr.  Eveljn  after  the 
plague,  ii.  2  ;  proclamation  of,  at  the 
Fire  of  Loudon,   11  — 16;  orders 
thanlvsgiving   after   fight    with  the 
Dutch  (1666),  5  ;  visits  the  fleet,  6  ; 
assumes  the  Persian  habit,  17  ;  dines 
in  ancient  state,   27  ;    gaming  and 
gaiety  at  Court,  22,  32  ;  commands 
Mr.  Evelyn  lo  write  the  "  History  of 
the  Dutch  War,"  46,  51,  55,  90—92  ; 
at  Newmarket,  48,  63  ;  at  Euston, 
with  Mad.  Qnerouaille,  63  ;  conduce 
of,  to  Lord  Arlington,  70  n  ;  visits  the 
fleet,  77  ;  attachment  to  Mrs.  Frances 
Stuart,  91  n  ;  his  library  at  White- 
hall, 146  ;  the  Rye  House  Plot,  181; 
profligacy  of  his  Court,  203,  210  ; 
sickness  and  death,  204,  205  ;  conduct 
in  his  last  hours,  206  ;  character  of, 
206,  237  ;  funeral  of,  211;  papers 
proving  him  to  be  a  Roman  Catholic, 
237 — 239  ;  iii.  279  n  ;  anniversary  of 
his  Restoration  neglected  (1 686),  ii.  254; 
(1692),  320  ;  causes  of  his  death,  332  ; 
order  of  Regicides  for  his  apprehen- 
sion, iii.  263 
Charles  IIL,  of  Spain, in  England  (1704), 
ii.  372 

  v.,  statue  of,  i.  36.  ;  his  horse- 
armour,  188  ;  hearse,  or  trophy  of, 

192 

  IX.,  letters  of,  referred  to,  iii. 

380  . 

Charles  Gustavus  X.,  King  of  Sweden, 
iv.  220,  223,  305,  314 

B  B 


370  GENERA.L 

Charles,  ship  of  110-  uns,  lauucliing  of, 
ii.  32 

Charlet,  Dr.,  iii.  359 

Charleton,  Dr.,  his  lecture  on  the  heart, 

ii.  174  ;  noticed,  38(5  ;  iv.  9 
 ,  Mr.,  ii.  106,  260,  306,  316  ; 

iii.  299,  315 

Charlton,  Robert,  of  Whitton,  iv.  73  n 
Charlton,  Kent,  Sir  H.  Newton's  house 

at,  i.  278,  285,  310,  381 
Cliarmont,  notice  of,  i.  70 
Charnoek,  Robert,  executed,  ii.  340  n 
Chaiter-House,  London,  i.  319 
Charts  of  the  British  Coast,  ii.  171 
Chasteauneuf,  Mons.  le,  iv.  319  n 
Chastre,  Claude  de  La,  i.  77 
Chatelets  at  Paris,  i.  49  ;  question  given 

at  the,  264 
Chaucex",  Geoff  rev,  referred  to,  i.  289  ; 

iii.  301 

Chavigny,  Mons.  de,  iv.  341 
Chaworth,  Lord,  i.  299 

 ,  Dr.,  i.  376 

Cheapside  Cross  destroyed,  i.  39,  297 
Cheke,  family  of,  seat  at  Burrow-green, 
ii.  47 

Chelsea,  Duke  of  Buckingham's  House, 
&c.  at,  ii.  127,  129,  136,  183  ;  Apothe- 
caries' Garden  at,  230  ;  Wiustanley's 
water-works  there,  343 

Clielsea  College,  prisoners-of-war  eon- 
fiued  at,  i.  389,  392  ;  given  to  the 
Royal  Society,  ii.  29,  39  ;  purchased 
to  erect  the  Royal  Hospital,  159,  163, 
166,  169 

Cheney,  Lord,  and  his  son,  ii.  303,  320, 

343 

Chenonceau,  Castle  of,  i.  75 
Chepstow  Castle  stormed,  iii.  21 
Chester,  the  King's  intent  of  summoning 

(1645),  iv.  145  ;  loss  of,  180 
Chesterfield,  Philip  Stanhope,  Earl  of, 

i.  256,  408  ;  ii.  42,  47,  138 
Chetto  di  San  Felice  at  Venice,  i  205 
Chetwin,  Mr.,  sermon  of,  ii.  262 
Cbevreuse,   Duchess    of,   iv.    319  n  ; 

Parliament  discovers  her  cypher,  130; 

anecdote  of,  ib. 
Chevreux,  notice  of,  i.  73 
Chicheley,   Sir   Thomas,  ii.   7,  9,  49, 

378 

Chichester,  Francis  Leigh,  Lord  Duns- 
more,  Earl  of,  iv.  135  n,  143 

Chiesa  Nova,  at  Rome,  i.  108,  132,  136, 
176 

Chiffinch,  Mr.  Thomas,  the  King's  closet 
keepei',  i.  358  ;  letter  to,  from  Mr. 


INDEX  TO 

Evelyn,  on  catalogue  of  the  King's 

curiosities,  iii.  1 35  and  n 
Child,  Sir  Josiah,  his  great  wealth  and 

seat,  ii.  173 
Chillingworth,  William,  iii.  301 
Chilston,  Kent,  seat  of  Mr.  Hales  at,  ii.  4 
Chimes,  at  Amsterdam,  i.  24,  402  ;  at 

Venice,  198 
China,  curiosities  from,  i.  3''9  ;  account 

of,  by  Mr.  Vander  Douse,  translated 

by  Mr.  Evelyn,  iii.  137  ;  list  of  books 

on,  then  published,  ib.  u 
Chiswell,  Richard,  bookseller,  iii,  381 
Chiswick,  Lady  Fox's  house  at,  ii.  169, 

175 

Chi  Vali,  licentious  custom  of,  at  Padua, 
i.  215 

Choppines  of  the  Venetian  ladies,  i.  203 
Choquex,  Mons.,  iv.  256,  264,  286,  293 
Christ  Church,  London,  attendance  of 

the  grandees,  iii.  55 
Christ  Church,  Oxford,  i.  292 
Christ  College,  Cambridge,  i.  304 
Christ's  Hospital,  at  Rome,  account  of, 

i.  145  ;  in  London,  319;  ii.  263 
Christina,  Queen  of  Sweden,  ii.  24,  148, 

149;  iv.  205—216,  224,  226,  305  ; 

gives    an    assignation    to  French 

Ambassador,  205  ;  anecdotes  of,  ib.  n ; 

her  meeting  with  Prince  of  Conde', 

218  ;  at  Brussels  (1654),  221 
Christmas  Eve,  ceremonies  on,  in  Rome, 

i.  135 

Christmas  Day,  in  Rome,  i.  106,  107, 
136  ;  prohibited  in  England,  i.  284, 
287,  306,  311,  323 

Chrysostom,  St.  John,  his"  Comment  on 
the  Gospel,"  i.  97  ;  his  "  Golden  Book 
on  Education,"  translated  by  Mr. 
Evelyn  (1659),  326  n,  329  ;  ii.  391, 
395  ;  iii.  112,  337 

Church  of  England,  splendour  of  the 
ritual  iu  1638,  i.  10  ;  service  and 
clergy  of  the,  suppressed.  250.258,  267, 
276,  283,  286,  287,  306,  310,  311,  31  7, 
323,  327,  332,  338  ;  innovations  of 
the  Parliament  iu  the  (1641),  iv.  65  n, 
66  and  n,  68  and  n,  72,  95,  136  ;  pro- 
tested against  by  the  Lords,  68  ;  px'o- 
tection  of,  by  Charles  L,  88,  96,  99, 
160  ;  collection  for  persecuted  minis- 
ters of  the  (1658),  i.327;  sttite  of,  under 
the  Commonwealth,  iii.  67,  68,  108  ; 
controversy  of  Papists  with,  i.  338  ; 
iii.  139—142,  231—238;  restoration  of 
the,  i.  339,  366  ;  ii.  45  ;  missionary  of 
the,  i.  357  ;   Asian  Churches'  sub- 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


371 


scription  to  the,  370  ;  excellence  of 

the,  ii.    239  ;   danger  of,  from  the 

Papists,  277,  281  n 
Churches  in  Italy,  measures  of,  i.  194 
Churchill,  Francis  Spencer,  Baron,  i. 

383  n 

 .,  Sir  Winstan,  ii.  318 

 ,  Gen.,  made  Lieutenant  of  the 

Tower,  ii.  37b" 

 ,  Mr.,  his  collection  of  cui'iosi- 

ties,  ii.  338 

•  ,  Mrs.,  ii.  249 

Church-music,  dispute  on,  i.  20 ;  alter- 
ation in,  372 

Churchyards  in  Norwich,  ii.  66 

Ciaconio,  Alphouso,  on  Trajan's  Column, 
iii.  262 

Cicero's  Palace,  i.  104,  158  ;  tomb,  &c., 

147—149 
Cifaccio,  a  famous  singer,  ii.  261,  265 
Cigali.    See  Cardi,  Ludovico 
Circumcision,  Jewish  Ceremony  of,  at 

Rome,  i.  137 
Circus  Caracalla,  i.  165 
Circus  Ma.N.imus  at  Rome,  i.  106,  129, 

165,  171 
Cisii,  Siguier  Pietro,  ii.  35 
Citolin,  M.,  taught  Mr.  Evelyn  to  write, 

i.  5 

Clancarty,  Earl  and  Countess  of,  ii.  279, 
310,  389  ;  iii.  347 

Claurickarde,  Ulick  Bourk,  Earl  of, 
house  at  Summer-hill,  i.  281 

Clapham,  houses  at,  ii.  320,  362,  389 

Clare,  John  Holies,  Earl  of,  i.  299  ; 
pi'otest,  iv.  68  n 

Clare,  Dr.,  i.  272  ;  sermon  by,  ih. 

Clare  Hall,  Cambridge,  i.  304 

Clarendon,  Edward  Hyde,  Earl  of,  Lord 
Chancellor,  i.  252,  265,344,  345,  351, 
357,  365,  3G8,  375,  378,  382,  384  ;  ii. 
4,  7,  8,  20—23,  31,  240  n,  373  ;  iii. 
145,  153,  165  n  ;  attempts  to  remove 
him  from  the  office  of  Chancellor 
(1656-7),  i.  347  n;  his  daughter's  mar- 
riage to  the  Duke  of  York,  341  ;  iv. 
321  ;  elevated  to  the  Peerage,  i.  347  ; 
visits  Mr.  Evelyn  in  state,  367  ;  re- 
marks by  Mr.  Evelyn  in  vindication 
of  him  against  Sorbiere,  iii.  145  ; 
letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to,  189—192  ; 
portraits  worth  collecting,  proposed 
to  him  by  Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  36  n  ;  iii. 
301,  302  ;  collection  formed  by,  ii.  36  ; 
iii.  295,  301  ;  impeached  by  the  Par- 
liament, and  the  Seals  taken  from 
him,  ii.  28,  31  j  party  in  Parliament, 


&c.  against  hini,i.  347  n  ;  ii.  28—32; 
iii.  302  ;  his  flight,  ii.  32  ;  injurious 
charges  against  him, '&c.,  184;  liis 
conduct  contrasted  with  that  of  his 
supplanters,  iii.  302.  See  Clarendon 
House,  Hyde 

Clarendon,  Henry  Hyde  (Lord  Corn- 
bury),  second  Earl,  i.  382  ;  ii.  5,  36, 
83,  169,  176,  178,  191,  199,  211,  240, 
268,  299,  373  ;  iii.  286  ;  letters  of  Mr. 

.  Evelyn  to,  on  the  "  Mystery  of  Jesuit- 
ism," i.  387  ;  iii.  149,  287  ;  hints  for 
a  course  of  study,  iii.  1 62  ;  congi-atu- 
lating  him,  &c.,  164,  168  ;  opinion  of 
Clai-endon  House,  ii.  185  ;  iii.  177  ; 
Lord-Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  ii.  231, 
236,  241,  245,  247  ;  his  recall,  &c., 
261,  262  ;  letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to, 
on  materials  for  his  work  on  the  Dutch 
War,  iii.  242  ;  corresponds  with  Mr. 
Evelyn  on  the  afJairs  of  Ireland,  &c., 
281,  285  ;  refused  to  sit  in  council 
with  Papists  (1 688),  ii.  282 ;  dissatisfied 
at  the  Revolution,  iii.  289 ;  opposed 
William's  assumption  of  the  Crown, 
ii.  292  ;  sent  to  the  Tower  (1690),  308 ; 
bailed,  309;  confined  again,  311—313; 
permitted  to  take  country  air,  314  ; 
medals  and  library,  iii.  301 

 •  ,  Countess,  i.  343  ;  ii.  142, 

198,  217,  227,  240  ;  iii.  188,  206, 
283 

 ,  Edward  (Lord  Cornbnry), 

thii'd  Earl,  grandson  of  the  Chancellor, 

ii.  242  ;  iii.  286  ;  his  account  of  Den- 
mark (1687),  ii.  268  ;  goes  over  to  the 
Prince  of  Orange,  284 

Clarendon  House  built,  i.  382  ;  ii.  4, 
20,  23,  31  ;  collection  of  pictures  at, 
36  ;  iii.  295,  301  ;  sold  and  demo- 
lished, ii.  178,  184,  197  ;  Mr.  Evelyn's 
opinion  of  the  house,  185  n  ;  iii,  177, 
178 

Clarges,  Sir  Thomas,  i.  422 

 ,  Sir  Walter,  ii.  332  n,  360 

Clarges  Street,  in  London^  ii.  332  n 
Clarke,  Mr.,  player  on  the  Irish  harp,  i. 

287  ;  ii.  36 
 ,  Rev.  ;Mr.,  Boyle  lecturer,  ii. 

374  ;  iii.  399 
Classics,  Greek  and  Latin,  Mr.  Evelyn's 

proposal  for  correct  editions  of  the, 

iii.  190 

Claude,  Mons.,  forced  to  quit  Fr.mce,  ii. 
243  ;  his  book  burnt,  253  ;  account 
of,  387 

 ,  Dr.,  physician,  i.  335 

B  B  2 


S72 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Claudius,  son-in-law  of  Mr.  Ilartlib,  a 
chemical  adept,  iii.  3fi9,  391 

Clayton,  Sir  John  and  Roljert,  i.  318  ; 
ii.  87,  107,  110,  129,  300  n,  335  ; 
house  of,  in  the  Old  Jewry,  London, 
ii.  78,  79  ;  seat  at  Marden,  1 1 5,  300  n, 
361  ;  account  of,  116  n,  136 

•  ,  ?ir  T.,  warden  of  Merton  Col- 
lege, i.  3-16 

Clement  VIIL,  Hippolito  Aldobrandini, 
Pope,  Palace  of,  i.  1 80 

Clement,  Dr.,  i.  8 

 ,  regicide,  executed,  i.  341 

Clench,  Dr.,  his  son's  early  talents,  ii. 
288—290  ;  murder  of,  288  n,  317 

Clere,  Mons.  St.,  his  collections  of  draw- 
ings, &c.,  i.  259 

Clerk,  George,  Sheriff  of  London,  his 
loyalty,  iv.  82 

Clerkenwell,  Newcastle  House  at,  ii.  22 

Cleve,   Duke  of,  his  heart  preserved, 

i.  29 

Cleveland,  Thomas  Wentworth,  Earl  of 
(1662),  i.  374  ;  lawsuit  of,ii  18  ;  no- 
ticed, 379 

.  ,  Duchess,  i.  353  n  ;  ii,  57,  206, 

210  ;  her  chihiren  by  Charles  IL,  ii. 
65,  77,  108,  136,  195,  251 
Cleveland  House,  ii.  20  n,  138 
Clifden,  Duke  of  Buckingham's  seat  at, 

ii.  133 

Cliiford,  Sir  Thomas,  afterwards  Lord, 
Treasurer  of  the  Household,  i.  385  ; 

ii.  19,  52,  55,  58,  62,  63,  73,  75,  78  ; 

iii.  242,  260  ;  Lord  Treasurer  by  the 
Duke's  interest,  ii.  70  n  ;  death  of  his 
eldest  son,  67  ;  Exchequer  closed 
by  his  advice  (1672),  70  ;  inclined  to 
Popery,  71  ;  resigns  his  Treasurer's 
staff,  84  ;  his  engagement  to  the  Duke 

;  of  York  affects  his  mind,  ib. ;  his  life, 
and  unhappy  death,  85 — 88  ;  iii.  241  n, 
261  ;  letters  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to,  153, 
157,  213,  221,  238,  241  ;  letter  from, 
155 

Clincars,  a  brick,  i.  24,  402 
Clitheroe  Castle  fortified,  iii.  36,  43 
Clocks,  curious,  i.  109,  118,  144,  175, 

198,  342,  347,  353 
Clotvvorthy,  Sir  John,  iii.  33  ;  accused 

of  peculation,  iv.  108 
Coaches  in  Rome,  i.  120  ;  in  Naples,  162 
Coale,  Mr.  Gregory,  ii.  20  and  n 
Cock,  Mr., lottery-prize  gained  by  (1694), 

ii.  332 

Cocke,  Capt.,  Treasurer  to  the  Commis- 
sion for  sick  and  wounded,  i.  386 


Cocke,  Mr.,  Mr.  Evelyn  at  law  with, 
ii.  59 

Cockerell,  Mr.  Samuel  Pepys,  original 
letters  belonging  to,  iii.  260  n 

Cockpit,  play  performed  there,  i.  246,  361 

Coffee  introduced  into  England,  i.  10, 
400  ;  Coffee-club,  iii.  381  ;  Coffee- 
houses established,  i.  400 

Coilus,  King  of  Britain,  i.  315 

Coin,  plan  for  reducing  gold,  i.  376  ; 
depreciated  state  of  (1694),  ii.  331  ; 
ditticulties  in  reforming  it  (1664),  378; 
(1695),  339  ;  new  coinage  (1695),  ib.  ; 
scarcity  of  (1696),  342,  343 

Coins,  ancient,  iii.  344  ;  observations  on 
Roman,  i.  182  ;  collections  of,  iii.  299, 
300  ;  Prince  Henry's  collection,  305 

Coke,  Sir  Edward,  his  portrait,  iii.  301  ; 
library,  307 

Colbert,  Jean  Baptiste  de,  French  Am- 
bassador, ii.*19,  34,  63,  64 

Colchester,  siege  of,  i.  246  ;  ii.  272  ;  ac- 
count of,  i.  314 

Coldbrook,  at  Cashiobury,  in  Hertford- 
shire, ii,  140 

Coleman,executed  (1678),  ii.  126,127,152 

Colepeper,  Sir  John,  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer,  iv.  68 

Colepepper,  Thomas  and  William,  their 
imprisonment  and  portraits,  ii.  365  n 

Coligni,  Admiral,  Gaspard,  assassination 
of,  a  painting,  i.  138 

College,  scheme  for  a  Philosophical  and 
Mathematical  one,  iii.  116 — 120 

Collier,  Jeremy,  nonjuring  clergyman, 
ii.  341  n 

Collins,  Dr.,  of  King's  College,  i.  304 

 ,  Capt.,  sea-charts  by,  ii.  171,  386 

 ,  Arthur,  his  "  Peerage"  referred 

to,  ii.  100  n  ;  iv.  55  n 
Collyer,  David,  Earl  of  Portmore,  his 

mai-riagp,  ii.  120,  385 
Cologne,  Kings  of,  their  bodies,  i.  225  ; 

city  of,  addresses  Charles  IL,  339 
Colone,  Bart(domeo,  statue  of,  i.  209 
Colonna,  Connestabile,  i.  127  ;  wife  of 

Colonna,  ii.  353  ;  Vittoria,  iii.  245,  296 
Colosseum  at  Rome,  i.  115 
Colours  of  the  ancients,  iii.  277 
Colson,  Mr.  John,  notice  of,  i.  386 
Columbus,  Christopher,  painting  of,  ii. 

204 

Combefis,  Padre  Francesco,  his  ti'act  of 

St.  Chrysostom,  iii.  337 
Comber  family,  of  Sussex,  i.  2 
Comets,  notices  of  several  (1680),ii.  155; 

(1682),  169 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


373 


Cominazzo,  Lazariiio,  carbine-maker,  i. 
223 

Commerce  of  England,  iii.  271 
Coniminges,    Gaston    Jean  Baptiste, 
Frencli  Ambassador,  i.  374,  3B5,  3ii5 
"  Committee,"  a  play  by  Sir  K.  Howard, 

i.  371 

Common  Prayer,  Book  of,  ordered  by 
the  House  of  Loi'ds  to  be  observed 
(1641),  iv.  68;  opposed  by  the 
Browiiists,  72 ;  denied  being  read 
(1C44),  136 
Compagno,  Hieronyma,  sculptor,  i.  206 
Compton,  Dr.  Henry,  Bishop  of  London, 

ii.  41,  173,  176,  257  ;  sermon  by,  ii. 
83  ;  notice  of,  83  n,  107,  381 

 ,  Sir  William,  i.  355  ;  iv.  134 

 ,  Sir   Spencer,    gallantry  in 

youth,  iv.  208  n 
Con  ally,  Owen,  discovers  Irish  Rebel- 
lion, 108  and  n  ;  Parliament  reward 
foi',  ib. 

Coude,  Louis,  Prince  of,  and  his  party, 
referred  to,  i.  249,  253,  255,  279  ;  iv. 
235-243  n,  254,  259  n,  261,  272,  341 ; 
meeting  with  Queen  Christina,  218 
and  n,  221  ;  px'oceedings  of  (July, 
1648),  346,  349  ;  professes  friendship 
for  Charles  I.,  336  ;  his  insurrection- 
ary army  (1653),  285  n 

Confederates  (1689),  progress  of,  ii.  299 

Conflans,  bathing  at,  i.  267 

Congreve,  William,  poem  by.  iii.  369 

Conopios,  Nathaniel,  a  Greek,  i.  10 

Conscience,  liberty  of,  proclamation  for, 
in  Scotland  (1687),  ii.  262  ;  bishops 
petition  the  King  against  reading  the 
declaration  for,  274  ;  proceedings 
against  them  for  not  suffering  it  to  be 
read,  274—276 

Conservator!,  apartment  of  the,  at  Rome, 
i.  105  ;  procession  of  the,  136 

"  Consideration,"  Treatise  on,  by  Dr. 
Hoi'neck,  ii.  173  and  n 

Constable  of  the  Tower  ordered  to  reside 
in  the  fortress  (1641),  iv.  51 

Const'intine  the  Great,  statues  of,  i.  106; 
arch,  116  ;  palace,  124  ;  obelisk,  126  ; 
churches  built  by,  &c,,  173 

Constantinople,  name  of  an  ancient  coin, 

iii.  375,  381 

Convention  (1689),  proceedings  of,  as  to 
disposal  of  the  Crown,  ii.  287, 291 ,  293 

Convents  and  Monasteries,  notices  of,  i. 
19,  29,  32,  34,  46,  72,  95,  98.  100, 
109,  1 12,  147,  157,  164, 166,  170,  172, 
192,  201,  207,  210,  215,  226,  227 


Converaano,  Conte,  iv.  350 

Convocation  (1690),  for  reforming  Lit- 
urgy, &c.,ii.  301,  303;  (1701),noticesa 
passaLje  in  a  book  of  Dr.  Daveuant's, 
364  and  n  ;  disputes  in,  3<)5 

Conway,  Edward,  Lord,  ii.  118  ;  iv.  340 

Cony,  Mr.,  ii.  103 

(/onyers.  Sir  Jo.,  examined,  iv.  128  and  n 

Cook,  Dr.  George,  Bishop  of  Hereford, 
iv.  99  n 

 ,  Sir  Robert,  i.  261 

 ,  Mr.,  nonjuring  clergyman,  ii.  341  n 

 ,  John,  regicide,  executed,  i.  341 

Cooke,  Col.,  i.  253  ;  ii.  192 

 ,  Capt.,  an  excellent  singer,  &c., 

i.  306,  317 

 ,  Mr.,  at  Cashiobury,  ii.  141 

 ,  Sir  T.,  discovery  about  East 

India  Company,  ii.  335 

 ,  Rev.  Edward,  pamphlet  re- 
printed by,  ii.  329  n 

Cooper,  Samuel,  portrait-painter,  i.  360, 
418 

 ,  Anthony  Ashley  Cooper,  Lord, 

creation  of,  i.  347 

 ,  Mr.  Surgeon,  on  Mr.  Evelyn's 

Tables  of  the  Veins,  &c.,  ii.  367 

 ,  Rev.  xMr.,  Fellow  of  Baliol  Col- 
lege, i.  10 

Coque,  Mons.  le,  ii.  301 

Corbeil,  notice  of,  i.  59 

Cork,  Richard  Boyle,  First  Earl  of,  i. 
382,  iii.  396 

Corker,  James,  trial  of  (1679),  ii.  131  n 

Cornaro,  Helen,  a  learned  Italian,  iii. 
296 

 •,  family  painting  of,  i.  328 

Cornbury,  Lord  Corubury's  house  at,  i. 

382  ;  portraits,  &c.,  thei-e,  iii.  301. 

See  Clarendon 
Cornea,  Antonio  de  la,  painter  at  Rome, 

i.  182 

Cornelius  Nepos,  statue  of,  i.  222 
Cornwallis,  Lord,  i.  347,  416  ;  ii.  148, 

202,  209 

Coronada,  Don  Juan  Vasquez,  i.  228 
Coronation  and  Harwich  ships  lost,ii.  316 
Coronation  of  King  Charles  II.,  i.  347 — 
351 

Corpus-Christi  day  in  Paris,  i.  245,  266 

Correggio.    See  Allegri 

Corsica,  Is'and  of,  i.  83 

Cortone,  Pietro  Berretini  il,  paintings, 

&c.,  by,  i.  107,  109,  183,  190 

 ,  Dr.,  of  Verona,  i.  222 

Cosin,  Dr.  John,  Dean  of  Peterborough, 

afterwards  Bishop  of  Durham,  i.  255  ; 


^"^^  GENERAL  IXDEX  TO 


notice  of  him,  270  n  ;  officiated  in  the 
English  Chapel  in  Paris,  258,  2G6, 

'  270,  271  n  ;  occasion  of  publishing  his 
«  Offices,"  270,27 1 ;  iMr.  Evelyn  treated 
with  him  for  the  purchase  of  his 
library,  277  ;  iii.  d07  ;  letter  on  that 
subject,  iii.  307  n  ;  letter  to  Mr. 
Evelyn,  on  his  visiting  his  daughter, 
61  ;  alluded  to,  i.  304,  374  ;  ii.  45  n, 
229  n  ;  iv.  281 

Cosin,  John,  son  of  the  Bishop,  perverted 
to  Popery,  i.  273,  277  ;  his  letter  to 
Mr.  Evelyn  on  joining  the  Roman 
Church,  iii.  58 

Cosmo  II.,  Grand  Duke  of  Florence, 
fine  statue  of,  i.  188 

Cotterell,  Sir  Charles,  ii.  35  160  ;  iv. 
205,  207,  224  ;  his  son,  ii.  75 

Cottington,  Sir  Francis,  Lord,  sum- 
moned by  the  Queen  (1641),  iv.  84  ; 
referred  to,  i.  253,  2G5  ;  iv,  93,  146  n  ; 
King  Charles  1.  requires  his  presence 
in  Parliament,  124  ;  portrait,  iii.  301 

Cotton,  Sir  John,  i.  59  ;  a  great  Grecian, 

ii.  7  ;  library,  33  ;  his  relict,  i.  3  n,  13 
n  ;  ii.  355 

■  ,  Sir  Robert,  ii.  7  ;  MSS.  collected 

by,  33  ;  portrait,  iii.  301  ;  medals  of, 
299 

'  ,  Lady,  christening  of  her  daugh- 
ter, i.  247  ;  birth  of  a  son  to,  277  ; 
death  and  funeral,  381  ;  letter  of  Mr. 
Evelyn  to,  on  the  death  of  her  infant, 

iii.  136 

Courland,  Duke  of,  iv.  139 

Course  in  Paris,  i.  51  ;  at  Vincenza,  220; 
in  Milan,  228 

Court  of  Vulcan,  i.  156 

Courts  in  Venice,  i.  201 

Covel,  Dr.  John,  ii.  338  and  n 

Covenant,  Scotch,  i.  40  ;  burnt,  352  ; 
ordered  to  be  abjured,  366 

Covenberg,  F.,  painting  by,  i.  28 

Covent  Garden,  Church  and  Piazza  of, 
copied  from  Leglioi-n,  i.  91 

Coventry,  city  of,  notice  of,  i.  297  ; 
address  to  James  II.  (1687),  ii.  267 

Coventry,  Thomas,  Lord,  summoned  by 
the  Queen  (1641),  iv.  84 

 ,  Henry,  iii.  240,  243 

•  ,  Sir  Wm.,  secretary  to  James 

Duke  of  York,  &c.,  i.  253,  333,  373, 
396  ;  ii.  2,  27,  106  ;  account  of,  i.  407; 
letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to,  i.  Introduc- 
tion; iii.  172,  243 

Cowley,  Abraham,  i.  374,  378  ;  ii.  149  ; 

^  iii.  317  ;    iv.  193  ;    his  death  and 


funeral,  ii.  27  ;  iii.  322  ;  letter  of  Mr. 
Evelyn  to,  ii.  21  n  ;  iii.  194  ;  letter  to 
Mr.  Evelyn  respecting  his  verses  on 
Royal  Society,  195  ;  on  the  treaty  of 
Breda,  iv.  202  n  ;  portrait,  iii.  301 
Cowper,  Mr.  William  (afterwai-ds  Earl 
Cowper),  made  Lord  Keeper,  ii.  375 
and  n 

Cox,  Capt.  of  the  Charles,  ii.  33,  71 

 ,  Sir  John,  iii.  258. 

Coxhall,  Rev.  Mr.,  of  South  jM ailing,  i.  5 

Craddock,  Dr.,  Provost  of  Eton,  ii.  133, 
135  ;  sermon  of,  251 

Crafford,  John,  notice  of,  i.  12 

Cranbourne  Lodge,  ii.  90,  258 

Cranbourne,  Lord,  ii.  160 

Crane,  Mr.,  Clerk  of  Green  Cloth,  i. 
342,  343,  344 

Cranmer,  Thomas,  Archbishop  of  Can- 
terbury, iii.  301 

Craven,  William,  Lord,  ii.  60  ;  house  at 
Caversham,  i.  289  ;  notice  of,  410 

Ci'eech,  Rev.  Thomas,  letters  by,  iii.  267, 
272 

Creighton,  Dr.,  sermons  by,  i.  253,  358, 
374  ;  ii.  88,  107,  231  ;  account  of, 
i.  417 

Cressy,  Dean,  his  answer  to  Dr.  Pierce, 

i.  376  and  n  ;  iii.  139,  141 
Crevecoeur,  jMarquis  de,  i.  21)5 
Crew,  Bishop  of  Rochester,  ii.  248,  256, 

257,  259  n 

 ,  Sir  Clepesby,  i.  246 

 ,  Thomas,  Lord,  creation  of,  i.  347 

 ,  ,  a  commissioner  at  Newport, 

iv.  185  n 

Crisp,  Sir  Nicholas,  projects  of,  i.  310, 
361 

Crispe,  a  confidential  servant  of  King 

Charles  I.,  i v.  73  and  n 
Croft,  Dr.  Herbert,  Bishop  of  Hereford, 

«  Naked  Truth  "  by,  ii.  104  ;  referred, 

38 

Crofts,  Lord,  i.  253  ;  ii.  110 

 ,  Mr.,  iv.  263  n,  341  ;  Parliament 

discovers  his  cypher,  130  ;  account  of 
him,  ib.  n 

Crombe,  Col.,  i.  29 

Cromer,  ,  musician,  i.  372 

Cromwell,  Thomas,  Earl  of  Essex,  por- 
trait, iii.  301 

 ,  Oliver,  iv.  180,  194  n,  202— 

215  n,  222,  226,  294,  302,  305—313  ; 
dissolves  Long  Parliament,  2(i8  n, 
275  n  ;  assumes  the  Protectorate, 
208,  209,  294  ;  his  Parliament 
(1654),  and  its  dissolution,  211  and  n  ; 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


375 


procures  Charles  II. 's  cruisers  to  be 
shut  out  from  Brest,  303,  306  ;  sends 
a  squadron  to  the  Indies,  30G  ;  his 
.  I  vision,  iii.  G  ;  resolves  to  proceed  to 
Ireland,  39  ;  murders  by  his  guards, 
i.  246  ;  Act  of  Oblivion,  277  ;  feasts 
with  Lord  Mayor  on  Ash  Wed- 
nesday, 2J57  ;  prohibits  Ministers  of 
the  Church  fi'om  preaching,  &c.,311  ; 
death  and  funeral,  329,  330  ;  disinter- 
ment, 345  ;  alhisions  to,  i.  275,  276, 
288,  307,  316,  319  ;  ii.  352 
Cromwell,  Richard,  i.  331 
Croone,  Dr.,  letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to,  iii. 
138 

Cropredy  Bridge,  battle  of,  iv.  141  n 
Cross,  fragments  of  the,  i.  123,  128,  173; 

of  St.  Edward  discovered,  ii.  234, 

390 

Crouch,  Dr.,  iii.  249  n 

Crowder,  Rev.  Mr.,  i.  271 

Crowe,  Sir  Sackville,  i.  393 

Ci'owne,  John,  masque  by,  at  Court 

(1674),  ii.  94  n 
Crowther,  Mr,,  iv.  322 
Croydon  Church,  mouuraents  in,  ii.  361 
Croydon,  Dr.,  i.  266 
Crusca,  Academy  de  la,  i.  189  ;  iii.  310 
Crypt  of  St.  Peter's  at  Rome,  i.  135 
Cud  worth,  Dr.,  sermon  of,  ii.  128 
Cullum,  Sir  Dudley,  letters,  iii.  331,  339 
Culpeper,  Col.,  attack  on  the  Earl  of 

Devon,  ii.  227 
Culpepper,  John,  Lord,  i.  398  ;  ii.  4,58  ; 

iv.  135  n,  140,  143,  164  n,  199  n  ; 

letter  of  James  Duke  of  York  to,  200 
Cuma,  City  of,  i.  159 
Cumberland,  Dr.  Richard,  Bishop  of 

Peterborough,  ii.  312,  313  and  n 
Cumberland,  Henry  Clifford,  Earl  of, 

iv.  1 64  n ;  summoned  by  the  Queen,  84 
Cuperus,  Gisbertus,  on  the  colours  of 

the  ancients,  iii.  277 
Cupid  and  Psyche,  Raff'aelle's  painting 

of,  i.  134 

Cupola,  curious  effects  of  one  on  the 

voice,  i.  89 
Curtius,  ,  notice  of,  iv.  207  n,  213, 

214 

•  ,    Sir   William,   President  for 

Charles  II.  at  Frankfort,  i.  267,  382 

-■  ,  M.,  his  place  of  sacrifice,  i.  103 

Custance,  Capt.,  knighted,  i.  395 
Custom-house,  rebuilt  after  fire,  ii.  62, 
383 

Cuthbert,  St.,  Hegge's  MS.  Life  of,  iii. 
383,  384 


Cutler,  Alderman  Sir  John,  patron  of 
Deptford,  i.  331;  ii.  69,  73,  383 

Cylinder  with  chimes,  i.  24 

Cypher,  various  letters  in,  with  inter- 
pretations, iv.  137,  145—179,  246— 
254  ;  notices  concerning  cyphers, 
153,  157—159,  164,  178,  267,  280 

Cypress  Tree,  remarkable  one,  i.  222 

Cyril,  patriarch  of  Constantinople,  i.  10 

D'Ada,  Ferdinand,  Count,  Pope'snuncio, 

ii.  247  and  n,  269  and  n 
Daincourt,  Lord,  ii.  94  n 
D'Ameron,  Mons.,  iv.  223 
Dampier,  Capt.  William,  notices  of,  ii. 

350  and  n 

Dauby,  Thomas  Osborne,  Earl  of,  Lord 
Treasurer,  ii.  162,  302  n,  303  ;  iii. 
261,  308  ;  imprisonment  of,  ii.  194 

Danes,  their  title  to  Dominion  of  the 
Sea,  &c.,  iii.  268—271 

Dangerfield,  whipped  for  perjury,  ii.  226 

D'Anguien,  Duke,  iv.  345 

Darcy,  Edward,  Mr.  Evelyn's  sister  un- 
happily married  to,  i.  6  ;  her  death,  7 

Darieri,  Scotch  book  about  the  Colony 
of,  ii.  357  and  n  ;  Parliament  votes 
against  the  Scotch  settling  in,  358 

Darneford,  Magna,  farm  so  called,  i.  295 

Dai'uel,  Rev.  Mr.,  sermon  by,  i.  309 

Dartmouth,  Lord,  fair  on  Blackheath 
procured  by,  ii,  174  ;  Master  of 
Trinity  House,  175,  197,  230 

Davenant,  Sir  William,  plays,  &c.  by,  i. 
331  n,  357  n,  372  n 

 ,  Dr.  Charles,  ii.  326,  389  ;  con- 
vocation displeased  by  a  book  of  his, 
364  and  n 

Davenport,  Mrs.,  "  Roxalana,"  i.  359  ; 
ii.  18,  379 

D'Aviler,  Mons.,  his  book  on  Architec- 
ture, iii.  361 
D'Avinson,  Dr.,  of  Paris,  i.  254 
Davis,  Lieut.,  i.  392  n 

 ,  Mrs.,  ii.  18  n,  94  n 

Daun,  M.,  ii.  326 

Dean  Forest,  planting  of,  suggested  by 

Mr.  Evelyn,  i.  370 
Dean,  West,  Wiltshire,  descent  of  the 

Evelyns  of.  Pedigree;  ii.  397. 
Deane,  Mr.,  iv.  288 

 ,  Sir  Anthony,  ii.  165  ;  on  mode 

of  building  men  of  war,  164  ;  conver- 
sation respecting  frigates,  fire-ships, 
&c.,  304,  305,  306 

De  Brie,  i\L,  iv.  224 

De  Camper,  Mons.,  iv.  271 


376  GENERAL 

Declaration  from  Kins;  Charles  I.  (1641), 
iv.  58  ;  from  the  Parliament,  against 
superstitious  rites,  65  n  ;  of  the 
Commons  against  the  Lords,  68,  69, 
72.  74  ;  of  ditto  on  the  state  of  the 
Kingdom,  109  ;  of  ditto  on  the  army 
for  Ireland,  113  n,  119,  125;  from 
King  Charles  I.  against  Orders  in 
Parliament  made  without  him,  124; 
of  the  House  of  Commons  on  ill 
Councils,  117,  125,  130  and  n,  133; 
of  Freedom  of  the  Ports,  318 

Decoy  in  St.  James's  Park  (1665),  i.  390, 
39  i 

De  Creete,  painter,  i.  294 
Dedham,  Essex,  notice  of,  i.  315 
Deepden,  at  Dorking,  Surrey,  i.  308 

and  n,  381 
Deering,  Sir  Edward  and  his  daughter, 

ii.  142 

D'Harcourt,  Count,  Grand  Ecuyer  of 

France,  i.  269 
Delabarr,  paintings  possessed  hy,^i.  250 
Delamei'e,  Henry  Booth,  Lord  (1 688 ),  ii. 

285 

De  I'Angle,  M.,  minister  of  Charenton, 
ii.  177 

De  Larrey,  Isaac,  his  character  of  Duke 
of  Richmond,  iv.  69  n  ;  of  Lord  War- 
wick, 105  n  ;  of  Sir  Edwai'd  Nicholas, 
192  n 

Del  Camp,  M.,  his  Equestrian  Academy, 
i.  256 

Delft,  i,  18  ;  church  and  senate-house 
of,  21  ;  explosion  at  (1654),  iv.  2]  4 

Delichio,  Busqueto,  bending  tower  built 
by,  i.  185 

Demalhoy,  Mr.,  ii.  90 

Denbigh,  Basil  Fielding,  Earl  of  (1664), 
i.  382 

Denham,  Sir  John,  i.  287,  312,  356 
Denmark,  Resident  of  the  King  of,  i. 

340  ;  Ambassadors  fi-om,  341,  345; 

tyranny  exercised  in  (1687),  ii.  268 
■  ,  Prince  Geor^^e  of  (1662),  i. 

370  ;   married  to  Princess  Anne,  ii. 

182  ;  allusions  to  him,  201,  202,  268 
■  ,  Christian  IV.,  King  of,  iv. 

139  ;  reported  present  to  Charles  II., 

262  n 

Deptford,  monument  at,i.  375  n  ;  plague 
at,  i.  396  ;  ii.  4,  8  ;  hre  in  dock-yard, 
25  ;  church  built,  ii.  354 

Derby,  James  Stanley,  Earl  of,  executed, 
i.  272;;  iv.  192  ;  portrait,  iii.  301 

Derby,  William  George  Richard  Stan- 
ley, Lord  (1689),  ii.  290,293 


IXDEX  TO 

Derby,  Countess  of,  ii.  108, 145. 
Derby  House,  notice  of,  i.  329  u 
De  Rosny,  Mr.,  his  talents,  iv.  30 
De  Ruyter,  Admiral  Michael  Adrian,  his 

conuni.'^sion  to  Guinea,  iii.  240 
Descartes,  Rene',  iii.  296,  346,  350 
Desguynes,  Connestable  de,  iv.  317 
D'Espagne,  Mons.,  i.  317 
D'Este,  Palace  of,  i.  180 
D'Estrades,  Marslaal,  obliged  James  II. 

to  dismiss  Protestants,  ii.  296 
Devereux,  Lord,  house  at  Ipswich,  i.  315 
De  Vic,  Sir  Henry,  i.  35,  353,  402  ;  ii. 

22  ;  iv.  215,  218,  221,  318,  340  n 
Devou!?hire,  William  Cavendish,  Earl  of, 

afterwards  Duke  (1652;,  i.  278,  366  ; 

ii.  293,  £26,  344,  352  ;  iv.  84  ;  account 

of,  i.  409  ;  Col.  Culpeper's  assault  on, 

ii.  227 

 ,    Christian,    Countess  of 

(l':62),  i.  366  ;  (1686),  ii.  249 
De  Wit  faction  in  Holland,  iv.  215  and  n, 

246  n 

Diamond   and   Ruby   ships  launched, 

i.  276 

Diana,  Baths  of,  &c.,  i.  160, 164 
Dichley,  Sir  Henry  Lee's  seat  at,  i.  383 
Dickinson,  Dr.  Ednmnd,  ii.  374  and  u 
Dieppe,  i.  60  ;  bombarded,  ii.  331 
Digby,  George,  Lord,  I'eferred  to,  iv.  95, 
121,  139,  143,  155,  156,  157,  165  n, 
167  n,  170,  231  ;  letters  to,  342—344; 
opposes  "  Instructions  "  to  Commis- 
sioners at   Edinburgh,   121  ;  King 
Charles    thanks    him,    ib.  ;  Prince 
Rupert,  &c.,  quarrel  about  defeat  at 
Sherbourne,  166  n 

 ,  Mr.  John,  son  of  the   Earl  of 

Bristol,  iv.  123,  124 
 ,  John,  Earl  of  Bristol,  portraits, 

ii.  203  ;  iii.  301. 

 ,  Sir  Everard.  ii.  127 

 ,  Sir  Kenelm,  i.  29,  272,  287,  291, 

353,  370  ;  Mr.  Evelyn's  opinion  of 

him,  &c.,  271  ;  ii.  47  ;  portrait,  203  ; 

library,  iii.  309 

 ,  J.,  son  of  Sir  Kenelm,  i.  219 

Digesters,  Papin's,  bones  dissolved  by, 

ii.  166 

Dillon,  Capt.  in  navy  of  Charles  II.  in 
exile,  iv.  300,  301 

Dioclesian,  C.  Valerius  Aurelius,  Em- 
peror, bath  of,  at  Rome,  i.  Ill 

Diodati,  Signior  John,  i.  238,  240,  211 

Dishington,  Sir  T.,  iv.  338 

Diskvelt,  Mynheer,  Dutch  Ambassador, 
ii.  266 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESrONDENCE. 


377 


Dissenters,  Act  of  Indulgence  for, 
ii.  29B 

Dives,  Sir  Lewis,  adventures  of,  i.  267, 
27-2 

Diving  Rell,  trial  of  (1661),  i.  353 
Dobson,  William,  paintings  by,  ii.  120  n, 

203  ;  noticed,  387 
Dodd,  Charles,  his  "  Church  History  " 

referred  to,  iii.  108  n 
Doge  of  Venice,  his  espousal  of  the 

Adriatic,  i.  197,  208 
Dogs,  Market  of,  at  Amsterdam,  i.  23  ; 

use  of,  in  Holland,  36  ;  in  Bologna, 

194  ;  spaniel  l«stby  Mr.  Evelyn,  244  ; 

mention  of,  367 
Dolben,  Dr.  John,  Bishop  of  Rochester, 

ii.  117  n  ;   house  at  Bromley,  43  ; 

Archbishop  of  York,  ii.  183,  248  ; 

death  of,  252 
Dolman,  Mr.  Thomas,  iv.  212  and  n 
D'Ulonue,  Count,  i.  268 

 ,  Mr.  Justice,  ii.  1 33  n 

Domenico,   Zampieri,   called  Domeni- 

chino,  paintings  by,  i.  193 
Donatelli,  statue  by,  i.  95 
Doncaster,  notice  of,  i.  300 
Donghi,  Cardinal,  i.  98 
Donna,  Count,   Swedish  Ambassador, 

ii.  32 

Donne,   Dr.  John,  iv.  10  ;  portrait, 

iii.  301 

Donniiigton,  notice  of,  i.  289 

Dorchester,  Henry  Pierrepoint,  Mar- 
quis of,  i.  299  ;  ii.  23,  351 

•  ,  Countess  of,  ii.  120  n,  248, 

385 

Dorell,  Mr.,  i.  328  ;  Major,  ii.  77 
Dorislaus,  Dr.  Isaac,  death  of,  i.  251  ; 
iii.  51,  53 

Dormitory    of    St.  Michael,   i.   194  ; 

measure  of,  ib. 
Dornavius  s    "  Amphitheatrum,"  &e., 

iii.  194  n 

Dorset,  Charles  Sackville,  sixth  Earl  of, 
ii.  85,  248,  293,  335,  344  n  ;  iv.  39 

 ,  Countess  of,  1657,  i.  323 

 ,  Edward  Sackville,  Earl  of,  i  v.  1 49 

Dort,  notice  of  the  town  of,  i.  18,  29 
Douglas,  Marquis  of,  estates  in  France, 

iv.  337 
Douglas,  Mr.,  iv.  250 

 ,  Colonel,  a  commander  for  the 

French  King,  iv.  337 

 ,  Lieut.-Gen.,  ii.  303 

Dove,  Dr.,  sermons  by,  ii.  135,  203 
Dover,  Earl  (1687),  ii.  2G1,  285,  316  ; 

his  daughters,  i.  319,  414 


Dover,  Countess  of  (1686),  ii.  249 
Dover  Castle,  prisoners  of  war  at,  i.  388, 

394  ;  iii.  156 
Dowe,  Gerard,  painting  by,  i.  343 
Downes,  Mr.,  funeral  of,  i.  254 
Downing,  Sir  Georg",  account  of,  ii.  8, 

377  ;  minister  in  Holland,  55  ;  iii.  242 
D'Oyly,  Sir  William,  i.  385  ;  ii.  3,  8,  17, 

378  ;  iii.  156 

Drake,  Sir  J'rancis,  painting  of  his  ac- 
tion in  1580,  i.  316  ;  letters,  iii.  380 

Draper,  William,  married  Mr.  Evelyn's 
daughter  Susanna,  ii.  323,  324  ;  Mr. 
Evelyn's  character  of  his  daughter, 
324  ;  their  mutual  happiness,  347  n  ; 
Adscomb  House,  &c.,  l)equeathed  to 
him  by  Lady  Temple,  358  ;  the  house 
rel)uilt,  368,  371  ;  Treasurer  of 
Greenwich  Hospital,  347  n,  371  ; 
allusions  to,  337,  368 

 ,  Mrs.,  mother  of  the  preceding, 

ii.  347  n  ;  her  death,  364  and  u 

Drayton,  Dr.,  works  referred  to,  iii.  109 

Drebbell,  Cornelius  Van,  chemist,  ii.  8, 
377 

Dress,  various  notices  concerning,  i.  47, 
81,  88,  118,  130,  131,  137,  139,  162, 
186,  203,  237,  268,  363,  379 

Drogheda  taken  (1649),  i.  254  ;  surren- 
dered, ii.  308 

Dryden,  John,  plays  by,  i.  373  and  n, 
378  and  n  ;  ii.  21,  327  ;  alluded  to, 
ii.  90,  176  ;  said  to  go  to  mass,  248 

Dryfield,  Sir  John  Prettyman's  house 
at,  i.  295,  296 

Dublin  surrendered,  ii.  308  ;  earth- 
quake at,  310 

Du  Bois,  John,  paintings  possessed  by, 
i.  249,  260  ;  his  election,  ii.  177 

Du  Bosse,  Abraham,  engraver,  i.  255 

Ducal  Palace  at  Genoa,  account  of,  i.  86  ; 
at  Venice,  201 

Ducie,  Sir  William  (afterwards  Lord 
Downe),  i.  246,  332,  381  ;  notice  of, 
405  ;  his  paintings,  i.  249,  288 

Duel,  fatal  one  (16y4),  ii.  328 

Duerte,  Signer.  Antwerp  merchant,  i.  .33 

Dugdale,  Sir  William,  Garter  King  of 
Ai-ms,  i.  314,  334  ;  ii.  122  ;  his  great 
age,  222  ;  portrait,  iii.  301 

 ,  Stephen,  a  witness  against  Lord 

Stafftn-d,  ii.  151 

Duke,  Dr.,  i.  399 

Dull  House  at  Amsterdam,  i.  23 

Dulwich  College,  ii.  101 

Dumaresque,  Philip,  letters  to  Mr. 
Evelyn,  iii.  189,  227 


878 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Dumblaine,  Peregrine  Osborne, Viscount,  I 

ii.  94  n,  191  n  ;  his  wife,  191 
Du  Menie,  chemist,  fraud  of,  i.  9.66 
Dunbarton,  George  Douglas,  Earl  of, 
ii.  254 

Duncan,  Rev.  Dr.,  i.  271  n  ;  sermon 
of,  263 

 ,  Mr.,  iv.  21 

Duncomb,  goldsmith,  estate  of  Duke  of 
Buckingliam  purchased  by,  ii.  343 

■  ,  Sir  Sanders,  i.  8  ;  introduced 

sedans  into  England,  162 

■  ,  Rev.  Mr.,  of  Albury,  his  ser- 
mons, ii.  331,  336 

'  ,  Rev.  William,  Rector  of  Ash- 
ted,  ii.  334,  348 

 ,  Mr.,  ii.  110  ;  one  of  the  Lords 

Justices  in  Ireland,  ii.  326 

Duncoml)e,  Mr.  Anthony,  ii.  349  n 

 ,  Charles,  parliamentary  pro- 
ceedings against,  iii.  349  and  n 

■  ,  Sir  John,  ii.  7,  8,  59,  162, 

342  ;  Burnet's  character  of  him,  7  u 

Dundas,  Lord,  ii.  100  n 

Dundonald,  Archibald  Cochrane,  Earl 
of,  his  scheme  of  charring  sea-coal 
(1785),  i.  316  n 

Dunkirk,  i.  37  ;  Louis  XIV.  before 
(1671),  ii.  57 

Dunluce  Castle,  m  Ireland,  iv.  119  and  n 

Dunsmore,  Francis  Leigh,  Lord,  Charles 
I.  requires  him  to  attend  Parliament, 
iv.  124 

Dunstall,  John,  engraver,  ii.  20  n 
Duport,  Dr.  James,  Greek  Professor, 

i.  352,  416  ;  sermon  of,  ii.  78 
Duppa,  Dr.  Brian,  Bishop  of  Chichester, 

ii.  148,  iv.  82  n  ;  tutor  to  Prince 
Charles,  154  n  ;  portrait,  iii.  301. 

Du  Prue,  performer  on  the  lute,  ii.  137 
Durance  river,  i.  80 
Durante,  painting  of,  i.  1  67 
Duras,  Lewis,  Earl  of  Feversham,  ii, 
102,  202 

Durdans,  at  Epsom,  i.  329,  368,  396  ; 
ii.85 

Durell,  Dr.,  Dean  of  Windsor,  i.  258  ; 
ii.  128,  176  ;  translation  of  the  Liturgy 
into  French,  45  ;  account  of,  382 

Diirer,  Albert,  drawings  by,  i.  56 ;  pi'ints, 
66  ;  carvings,  93,  186,  308  ;  paint- 
ings, 127,  133,  186,  188,  308 

Durfe,  Mrs.,  iv.  28 

Dutch,  their  traffic  in  pictures,  i.  21  ; 
towns,  23,  402  ;  avarice  of,  333  ; 
embassy  to  congratulate  William  III., 
ii.  299  ;  jealousy  concerning  the  Spice 


Islands,  iii.  258,  259  ;  toll  for  the 
fishery  in  Scotland  refused  by  the,  270 
Dutch  Bishop,  humorous  story  of,  i.  100 
Dutch  Boy,  phenomena  in  the  eyes  of 

(1701),  ii.  365 
Dutch  Fleet,  first  action  of  the  CI 664), 
i.  392  n  ;  daring  enterprise  (1667),  in 
the  destruction  of  ships  at  Chatham, 
&c.,  ii.  24,  25  ;  scheme  of  the  action, 
iii,  263  and  n  ;  completely  block  up 
the  Thames,  ii.  25 — 27  ;  encounter 
with,  27 

 ,  Vice  Admiral  of  the,  cap- 
ture and  misfortunes  of,  i.  398 

Dutch  War,  vigorous  prosecution  of,  on 
both  sides  (1665),  i.  391 ;  Mr.  Evelyn's 
occupation  with  the,  ii.  392  ;  letter 
of  Mr.  Evelyn  to  Sir  T.  Clifford 
respecting  libels  on  England  in  rela- 
tion to,  and  recommending  the  com- 
piling of  a  History  of  it,  iii.  21 3 — 216  ; 
Mr.  Evelyn  requested  by  his  Majesty 
to  write  the  History,  i.  394  ;  ii.  38, 
46,  51,  52,  55,  62,  78  ;  impeded  by 
the  publication  of  a  Dutch  foho,  &c., 
on  the  subject,  iii.  221—223  ;  the 
History  divided  into  three  pai'ts ; 
brief  account  of  them,  and  of  the  pre- 
face, 228 — 231  ;  great  extent  of  the 
work,  231  ;  progress  hindered,  238 — 
242  ;  other  papers  on  the  subject 
alluded  to,  242  ;  the  design  laid  aside, 
ii  91  and  n  ;  the  MS.  (as  far  as  com- 
pleted) communicated  to  Mr  Pepys  ; 
observations  respecting  it ;  the  work 
left  unfinished,  i.  Introduction^  xxviii. ; 
iii.  260. 

Earle,  Dr.  John,  Bishop  of  Salisbury, 
i.  245,  253,  271  n  ;  sermon  of,  344  ; 
consecration,  character,  and  works  of, 
371,  405  ;  noticed,  iv,  208,  242  n,  290 

Earnley,  Sir  J.,  ii.  261 

"  Earth  and  Vegetation,"  Mr.  Evelyn's 
«  Discourse  of"  (1675),ii.  98,  392,396 

Earthquakes, — in  England  (1687),ii.266 ; 
at  Althorpe,  &c.  (1690),  310  ;  in 
Jamaica  (1690),  and  in  all  parts  of 
Europe,  321  ;  at  Catanea  and  Malta 
(1693),  324  ;  at  Portland  (1696),  339  ; 
at  New  Batavia  (1699),  354  ;  at  Rome 
(1703),  370  ;  Dr.  Tenison's  and  Mr. 
Evelvn's  letters  on  Earthquakes,  iii. 
323,  325— 330 

Easter  in  Rome,  i.  1 76 

Eastern  languages,  superficial  informa- 
tion of  the,  i.  308 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


879 


East  India  Company,  union  of,  &c. 
(1G.')7),  i.  322  ;  prosperous,  ii.  170  ; 
probable  dissolution,  299  ;  transac- 
tions in  Parliament  respecting,  31 9, 351 

■  .  ,    Dutch,    i.    398  ; 

ii.  33  ;  their  palace  at  Antwerp,  i.  33  ; 
account  of  the  Company  (1656),  318  ; 
yachts  introduced  by  the,  354 

 ,  Scotch,  ii.  343 

Eaton,  Judge,  i.  251 

Ecclesiastical  aflairs,  Commission  for 

(1686),  ii.  256 
Echo,  remarkable  one,  i.  57 
EcHpse  of  the  sun  (1652),  i.  278 
Edgehill,  battle  of,  i.  38 
Edgman,  Mr.  William,  iv.  274,290,295, 

352  ;  fidelity  to  Sir  E.  Hyde,  243 
Education,  Academic,  defects  of  (1699), 

iii.  378,  379 

Edward  the  Confessor,  King  of  England, 
crucifix  and  gold  cliaiu  found  iu  his 
coffin,  ii.  234  and  notes,  390,  391 

  VI.,  King  of  England,  portrait 

of,  i.  249  ;  MS.  exercises  of,  ii.  147 

 ,  Prince,  i.  255  ;  iv.  345 

Edwards,  Rev.  Mr.,  of  Denton,  ii.  331 
Egyptian    Antiquities    given    to  Mr. 

Evelyn,  i.  213 
"  Eikon   Basilike,"  malicious  French 

translation  of,  iv.  189 — 191 
Eleanor  of  Provence,  Queen  of  Henry 

III.,  i.  301 
Elector,   Charles   of  Bavaria,  Prince 
Palatine  of  the  Rhine,  i.  255  ;  iv.  49  u, 
55  n,  195  n,  248  n;   Sir  Richard 
Browne  sent  to  him   (1641),  328  ; 
letter  of  thanks  to  Sir  Richard  Browne, 
339  ;  joins  the  Parliament,  340  n ; 
comes  to  Loudon  (1644),  344;  ingrati- 
tude to  Charles  I.,  248  n 
Elector  Palatine,  Frederick,  i.  400 
Elephant  of  a  monstrous  size,  i.  20 
Eliot,  Mr.,  of  the  bedchamber,  ii.  63 
Elizabeth,  Queen   of  England,  Dutch 
hospital  founded  by,  i.  22  ;  portrait 
of,  249  ;  head  of,  cut  in  sardonyx, 
282  ;  her  effigies  unhurt  by  the  fire 
(1666),  ii.  14  ;  referred  to,  i.  316 

•  ,  Princess,  daughter  of  Queen 

of  Bohemia,  iii.  296 
Ellesmere,  Sir-  Thomas  Egertou,  Lord, 

Lord  Chancellor,  iii.  301 
EUiott,  Mr.  Thomas,  iv.  96,  98  n,  161 
Ellis,  Mr.,  a  scrivenei-,  ii.  116  u 
EUowes,  Sir  John,  ii.  157 
Eltham  Palace,  dilapidated  state  of,  i. 
313 


Eltham,  Sir  John  Shaw's  house  at,  i.  380 

Elysian  Fields,  notice  of  the,  i.  161 

"  Elysium  Britannicuni,"  Mr.  Evelyn's 

collections  for  that  work,  ii.  392,  393  ; 

plan  of  the  contents,  393,  394 
Elzevir  printing-office  at  Leyden,  i.  26 
Emanuel  College,  Cambridge,  i,  304 
Embalming,   nevv-hivented  method  of, 

ii.  165 

Embassies  and  ambassadors  attend 
Charles  II.  ou  his  restoration,  i.  338 
—  340 

Emerald,  remarkable  one,  i.  87  n 
"  Employment,  Public,  and  an  Active 
Life  preferred  to  Solitude,"  published 
by  Mr,  Evelyn  (1667),  ii.  21  and  n, 
306,  392,  396  ;  his  letter  to  Cowley 
respecting,  ii.  21  ;  iii.  194, 196 
Enfield  Chace,  Lord  Coventry  s  Lodge 
in,  ii.  106 

"England,  a  Character  of"  (1659),  i.  344 

and  n  ;  ii.  395 
England,  New,  proceedings  in  the  colony 

of  (1671-2),  ii.  59—61,  68  ;  increase 

of  witches  in,  323 
English  language,  Mr.  Evelyn's  plan  for 

improving  the,  iii.  159 — 162  ;  society 

for, recommended  by  (1686), 310;  such 

a  society  begun  in  1665,  311 
English   portraits    collected   by  Lord 

Clarendon,  ii.  36  and  n  ;  iii.  295,  301; 

othei's  worthy  of  being  preserved,  ii. 

36  n,  37  n  ;  iii.  301;  portraits  by 

Holbein  and  others,  296 
Enhydrus,  stone  so  called  by  Pliny,  i.  129 
Eustone,  Oxfordshire,  Bushell's  Wells 

at,  i.  383 

"Epicteti  Enchiridion,"  consolation  in, 

iii.  150 

Epiphany,  ceremony  on  the,  at  Rome, 
i.  136 

Episcopacy,  Cromwell's  opposition  to, 

i.  311 ;  iii.  66  n 
Epping  Forest,  Earl  of  Norwich's  house 

on,  ii.  43 

Erasmus,  Desiderius,  statue  and  birth- 
place of,  i.  18  ;  portrait  of,  by  Holbein, 
308 

Eremitano,  Albert,  head  of,  i.  210 

Erizzo,  Francisco,  Doge  of  Venice,  iv. 
249,  and  n 

Erlack,  •  ,  iv.  349 

Erskine,  Mr.,  Master  of  the  Charter- 
house, ii.  160 

Erwin,  or  Irvine,  James  Campbell,  Earl 
of,  iv.  337 

Esdras,  ancient  books  of,  i.  192 


380 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Esquire,  payment  for  the  title,  i.  341 

Essex,  Robert  Devereux,  Earl  of.  Lord 
General  of  the  Parliament,  his  esti- 
mate of  the  debts  of  the  army,  iv.  52  ; 
Scottish  forces  stated  by,  64  n  j 
pursues  tlie  Royal  army,  140  n  ;  Lord 
Chamberlain  (1G41),  Charles  I.'s  di- 
rections to,  113,  131  ;  letter  to  Prince 
Rupert  (Dec.  1G44),  143 

•  ,  Arthur  Capel,  Earl  of,  his  crea- 
tion (1661),  i.  347  ;  his  house,  &c.,  at 
Cashiobury,  ii.  140,  141  ;  character, 
&c.,  of,  and  his  countess,  l4l ;  alluded 
to,  135,  155  ;  not  acquainted  witli  the 
marriage  of  LacJy  Ogle  and  Mr. 
Thynne,  159  ;  committed  to  the 
Tower,  178,  179  ;  his  death,  179,  194 

 ,  petition  brought  from,  i.  246 

Essex  Hou^e,  notice  of,  ii.  80  and  n 

Essling,  Mons.,  of  Paris,  his  gardens^  i.  59 

Estampes,  town  of,  i.  67 

Estcourt,  Sir  William,  killed,  ii.  203  n 

Este,  Palazzo  D',  at  Tivoli,  i.  180 

 ,  Lucretia  D',  a  philosopher,  iii.  245 

— ,  Princess  Mary  Beatrice  D', 
married  to  James  Duke  of  York,  ii.  89 

Eucharist,  doctrine  of  the  Clmrch  of 
England  on  the,  iii.  231—238 

Euganeau  Hills,  notice  of  the,  i.  219 

Evans,  Rev.  ,  ii.  110 

Eve,  statue  of,  i.  201 

Evelyn,  origin  of  the  family  of,  and  ai'ms. 
Pedigree  ;  ii.  3!  7  ;  i.  Introduction,  xx.; 
French  branch  of,  ii.  46  ;  pedigree  of, 
at  Wotton,  394 

•  ,  Anne,  daughter  of  Richard,  of 

Woodcott,  marriage  of,  referred  to, 
ii.  36  and  n 

 ,  Sir   Edward,  cousin  of  John, 

elected  M  P.,  ii.  219  ;  his  death,  320 

■  ,  Eleanor,  mother  of  John,  i.  1  ; 

her  chai'acter,  2 ;  death  of,  7,  8  ;  epi- 
taph on,  Introduction,  xxxv. 

 ,  Eliza,  sister  of  John,  i.  1,6; 

ii.  35  ;  see  Darcy  ;  her  death,  7 

,  Elizabeth,  second  daughter  of 
John,  birth  of,  ii.  29 ;  her  marriage 
and  death,  231 

 ,  tlie  late  Sir  Frederick,  i.  Intro- 
duction, xxxiv,;  ii.  299  n 

 ,  George,  grandfather  of  John, 

i.  Introduction,  xx.,  5  ;  epitaph  on, 
xxxiv. 

.  ,  George,  elder  brother  of  John, 

birth  of,  i.  1  ;  letter  to  his  father 
Richard,  descriptive  of  the  visit  of 
Charles  I.  to  Oxford  (1636),  420;  his 


marriage,  i.  13  ;  his  brother  John's 
present  to  his  daughter  at  her  christen- 
ing, 247  ;  improvements  by,  in  the 
garden  at  Wotton,  277;  birth  of  a  son 
to,  ib. ;  letter  from  Jolm  Evelyn  ou 
the  death  of  his  son  Richard,  iii.  79  ; 
death  of  his  second  wife.  Lady  Cotton, 

i.  381  ;  prevented  from  becominga  can- 
didate for  Surrey  (1685),  ii.  219  ;  de- 
puty lieutenant  of  the  county,  328 ; 
his  death,  i.  latroduclion,  xxv. ;  ii.  354  ; 
character  of,  and  ])articulars  of  his 
family,  354,  355,  363 ;  his  property, 
various  allusions  to,  i.  246,  247,  248, 
277,  305,  399  ;  ii.  128 

•  ,  Captain  George,  son  of  Sir  John, 

and  cousin  of  Jolm,  a  great  traveller, 
his  skill  in  architecture,  i.  249,  285 

 ,  George,  of  Nutfield,  cousin  of 

John,    deputy  lieutenant   of  Surrey, 

ii.  328  ;  his  family,  331  ;  daughter  of, 
mai'ried,  333  ;  death  of,  353 

 ,  George,  son  of  George,  and 

nephew  of  John,  i.  278  ;  his  travels, 
marriage,  and  death,  ii.  354  and  n  ; 
daughters  of,  ib. 

 ,  George,  fourth  son  of  John,  birth 

of,  i.  320  ;  his  death,  326 

 ,  Jane,  sister  of  John,  married  to 

William  Glanville,  birth  of,  i.  1  ;  death 
of,  273  ;  allusions  to,  15,  246,  252,261 

 ,  Jane,  gi'aud-daughter  of  John, 

ii.  316,  318 

 ,  Sir  John  (sen.),  his  monument  at 

Godstone,  i.  Introduction,  xxi.  ;  ii.  116 

 ,  Sir  John,  of  God>tone,  cousin 

of  John,  i.  249—251,  286, 377  ;  ii.  115, 
361  ;  his  house  at  Godstone,  inferior 
to  what  was  first  built  by  his  fathei', 
i.  328  ;  his  forty-first  wedding-day, 
334 

 ,  Sir  John,  of  Deane,  in  Wiltshire, 

i.  251;  ii.  266  ;  his  daughter,  Mrs. 
Pierrepoint,  i.  251  ;  ii.  351 

 ,  John,  summary  of  his  life  and 

character,  and  pedigree,  i.  Introduc- 
tion, xvii. — xxviii.  ;  ii.  394  ;  (162U) 
his  birth,  i.  1  ;  (1624)  received  his 
first  instruction  under  Mi*.  Frier,  4  ; 
(1625)  passed  his  childhood  at  Lewes, 
with  his  grandfather,  5  ;  (1626)  his 
picture  painted  by  Chanterell,  ib. ; 
(1628)  taught  to  write  by  M.  Citolin, 
and  sent  to  the  free  school  at  South- 
over,  ib.;  (1631)  begins  to  record 
remarkable  circumstances,  6  ;  his 
Diary   mentioned,  iii.  438  ;  (1636) 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


881 


admitted  of  the  Middle  Temple,  i.  9  ; 
(1637)  entered  a  Commoner  of  Baliol 
Collej^e,  'ib.  ;  presents  books  to  its 
library,  10  ;  (1638)  first  exercise,  11  ; 
visits  his  friends,  ib.  ;  (1639)  studies 
music,  and  visits  various  parts  of 
England,  12  ;  confirmed  at  St.  INIai'y's, 
ib.  ;  (1641)  his  poi'ti'ait  painted  by 
Vanderborcht,  15  ;  makes  a  tour 
throu;^h  various  parts  of  Holland  and 
Flanders,  16 — 37  ;  volunteers  befoi-e 
Genep,  1 7  and  n,  1 9,  20  ;  at  the  court  of 
the  Queen  of  Bohemia,  18  ;  at  the  fair 
of  Rotterdam,  20  ;  mati*iculated  at 
Leyden,  26  ;  ditto  at  Bois-le-Duc,  28  ; 
ditto  at  Williamstadt,  30 ;  leaves 
Holland,  ib.  \  arrives  in  London,  37  ; 
elected  one  of  the  Comptrollers  of  the 
Revellers  of  the  Middle  Temple,  but 
declines,  38  ;  (1642)  a  royal  volun- 
teer at  the  battle  of  Brentford,  38  ; 
Introduction,  xxii.  ;  Dr.  Basire's 
letter  to,  iii.  3  ;  (1643)  impi'oves  the 
house  at  Wotton,  i.  39  ;  sends  a  horse 
accoutred  to  the  King  at  Oxford,  40  ; 
embarks  for  France,  ib.  ;  his  remarks 
during  his  travels  in  that  kingdom 
(1643-4),  40—82  ;  (1644)  travels  to 
Normandy,  59 — 62  ;  attacked  by 
robbers,  67  ;  arrested  by  his  valet, 
73  ;  establishes  two  of  his  relations  at 
Tours,  74  ;  sets  out  for  Italy,  75  ; 
embarks  at  Cannes,  82  ;  sails  down 
the  Meditei'ranean,  82, 83;  his  perilous 
situation,  ib.  ;  arrives  at  Genoa,  85  ; 
account  of  his  travels  (1644-6), 
in  various  parts  of  Italy,  87 — 230  ; 
his  treatise  of  "  Liberty  and  Servi- 
tude," published  in  1644  and  1649, 
248  ;  ii.  391,  395,  438  ;  blessed  by 
the  Pope,  i.  178  ;  travelling  ex- 
penses of,  183,  219,  243  ;  his  illness 
from  bathing  at  Venice,  196  ;  dis- 
appointed of  a  voyage  to  the  Holy 
Land,  205  ;  matriculated  at  Padua, 
211  ;  accompanies  the  Earl  of  Arun- 
del to  the  gardens  of  Mantua,  212  ; 
contributes  to  Father  Kircher's 
"Obeliscus  Pamphihus,"  213,  313; 
elected  Syndicus  Artistarum  at  Padua, 
but  declines,  213  ;  studies  at  Padua, 
ib.  ;  obliged  to  arm  there  in  self- 
defence,  215;  his  illness  from  drinking 
wine  cooled  with  ice,  ib.  ;  learns  the 
theorbo,  134,215  ;  receives  a  present 
from  the  Nuns  of  St.  Catharine  at 
Padua,  on  his  birth-day,  215 ;  enter- 


tains the  British  residents  in  Venice 
(1646),?&.  ;  fired  at  by  a  Venetian  in 
his  gondola,  216;  studies  surgery  at 
Padua,  217  ;  obtains  a  Spanish  pass, 
218  ;  with  the  Earl  of  Arundel  at 
Padua,  ib.  ;  adventure  with  a  Scotch 
Colonel,  229  ;  journey  over  the  Alps 
into  Switzerland  (1646),  231—235  ; 
detained  at  Mount  Sampion,  233, 
236  ;  catches  the  small-pox,  238,  239, 
243  ;  crosses  the  Lake  of  Geneva, 
238,  240;  and  joins  in  the  exercises  of 
the  Campus  Martins,  242  ;  sails 
down  the  Rhone  and  arrives  in 
France  (1647),  243  ;  learns  High 
Dutch  and  Spanish  at  Paris,  244  ; 
attends  a  course  of  Chemistry,  ib.; 
learns  the  lute,  ib.  ;  marries  Mary, 
the  daughter  of  Sir  Richard  Browne, 
Ambassador  at  Paris,  245;  returns  to 
England,  ib.;  visits  King  Cliai-les  I. 
at  Hampton  Court,  ib.;  letter  to  Sir 
R.  Browne  on  the  political  crises,  iii. 
5  ;  (1648)  buys  the  manor  of  Hur- 
cott,  i.  246 ;  his  portrait  painted  by 
Walker,  247  ;  gives  a  present  to  his 
niece  Mary  (daughter  of  his  brother 
George),  at  her  christening,  ?6.;  letters 
during  1648  to  Sir  R,  Browne,  iii.  7 — • 
33  ;  (1649)  nari-ow  escape  of,  i.  248  ; 
studies  chemistry,  ib.  ;  corresponds 
with  Sir  Richard  Browne,  250  ;  illness 
of,  ib.  ;  manor  of  Warley  bought  by, 
ib.  ;  sets  out  for  Paris  (1649),  250— 
252  ;  remarks  during  his  resi<ience  in 
France  (1649-50,)  ^252—260;  with 
King  Charles  II.  at  St.  Germain's, 
245,  253  ;  presented  at  an  audience 
with  the  French  Regency,  254  ; 
letters  during  1649  to  Sir  Richard 
Browne,  iii.  36 — 54  ;  (1650)  perilous 
adventure  of,  in  company  with  Lord 
Ossory,  i.  256,  257  ;  his  portrait 
drawn  and  engraven  by  Nanteuil,  258 
and  n  ;  sails  for  England  (1650),  260  ; 
his  pass  fx'ora  Bi-adshaw,  ib.  n  ;  in 
danger  of  the  Rebel  army,  261  ; 
returns  to  France  in  two  months,  ib.  ; 
remarks  during  his  stay  there,  (1650- 
52),  262 — 275  ;  resolves  to  return  to 
England,  273  ;  lettex'sfrom  Alexander 
Ross  to,  acknowledging  presents,  iii. 
56,  57  ;  (1651)  letter  from  John 
Cosin,  on  his  joining  the  Roman 
Church,  58  ;  letter  of  Dr.  Cosin  to,  on 
his  proposal  of  purchasing  Dr.  C.'s 
library,  i.  277;  iii.  307;  at  an  audience 


GENERAL 


INDEX  TO 


of  Sir  Richard  Browne  with  Louis 
XIV.,i.269;  letter  to  Lady  Garret,  on 
the  loss  of  a  present  sent  to  him,  iii.  57 ; 
(1652)  returns  to  England,  i.  274  ; 
motives  for  settling  in  England,  276  ; 
his  «  State  of  France  "  (1652),  ii.  395  ; 
settles  at  Sayes  Court,  Deptford,  i.  276, 
307  ;  improves  the  garden  at  Wotton, 
227  ;  urged  to  publish  his  Letter  to 
Bishop  Cosin's  son,  ib.  ;  letter  from 
Dean  Cosin,on  Mr.Evelyn's  visit  to  his 
daughter,  iii.  61  ;  letter  to  Mr.  Thur- 
land  on  his  legal  affiiirs,  and  desiring 
to  purchase  the  seat  at  Albui'y,  iii.  63  ; 
letters  from  Dr.  Barlow  acknowledg- 
ing presents  for  the  Bodleian,  64, 
104  ;  goes  to  Rye  to  receive  his  wife, 
i.  279 ;  robbery  committed  upon,  near 
Bromley,  280 ;  birth  of  his  first  son, 
Richard,  283;  discharges  all  his  debts, 
285  ;  (1653)  arranges  the  garden  at 
Sayes  Court,  284  ;  purchases  ditto, 
282,  284 ;  birth  of  his  second  son, 
John,  286  ;  (1  654)  death  of  ditto,  287 ; 
binds  his  servant  apprentice,  ib.  ; 
letter  to  Dr.  Jeremy  Taylor,  con- 
soling him  in  his  imprisonment  (Feb. 
(1654-5),  iii.  65  ;  journey  into  Wilt- 
shire, &c.  (1654),  i.  288—305  ;  birth 
of  his  third  son,  John,  306  ;  attends 
a  private  meeting  of  the  Church  of 
England  in  London,  ib.  ;  (1  655),  307, 
310;  (1656),  316;  (1657),  ib.;  (1655), 
applies  to  Dr.  Jeremy  Taylor,  as  his 
spiritual  adviser,  307  ;  letter  to  Dr. 
Jeremy  Tayloi',  on  the  disastrous  state 
of  the  Church,  iii.  66  ;  visits  Arch- 
bishop Usher,  i.  308;  conversation 
with  Oughtred,  309  ;  catechises  his 
family,  310  ;  letter  from  Dr.  Jeremy 
Taylor,  commending  his  piety  (Nov. 
1655),iii.78;  visits  Mr.  Harthb,  i.  310; 
takes  cold,  311;  attends  a  farewell 
sermon,  on  the  prohibition  of  the 
Church  ministers,  ib.  ;  (1656)  takes 
cold,  312  ;  procures  ordination  for 
Mons.  Le  Franc,  whom  he  had  con- 
verted, 313  ;  publishes  his  Essay  on 
Lucretius"  (1656),  314;  ii.  391,  395  ; 
iii.  18,  75,  77  ;  letters  of  Dr.  Jeremy 
Taylor  to,  on  the  depressed  state  of 
the  Church,  his  "  Cases  of  Conscience," 
69  ;  thanking  him  for  his  hospitality, 
and  imposing  a  task  on  him  for  pub- 
lishing his  "  Lucretius,"  71 ;  letters  to 
Dr.  Taylor,  on  his  desire  of  retirement 
from  the  world  (April,  1 656),  72  ; 


from  the  same,  concerning  Mr.  Thur- 
land,  "  Lucretius,"  &c.,  74,  76  ;  visits 
the  Dutch  Ambassador,  i.  314,  318, 
322  ;  journey  to  the  North-east  of 
England  (1656), 31 4— 316;  letter  from 
Dr.  Triplet  on  the  rendezvous  at  Bex- 
hill,  iii.  75  ;  letter  from  Dr.  John 
Wilkins  on  errata  in  "  Lucretius,"  76; 
letters  to  George  Evelyn,  on  the 
death  of  his  son  Richard,  iii.  79  ;  of 
Barlow,  the  painter,  on  dedicating  a 
plate  to  him,  81  ;  answered,  82  ;  to 
Mr.  Maddox,  on  b(  half  of  Dr.  Need- 
ham,  with  hints  for  travellers  in 
France  and  Italy,  83  ;  to  Lieutenant 
of  the  Tower,  on  account  of  Dr.  Tay- 
lor, 86  ;  to  Mr.  Thurland,  on  his 
"  Treatise  on  Prayei',"  87  ;  from  Dr. 
Taylor  on  the  loss  of  his  children,  91 ; 
to  Hon.  Robert  Boyle,  inclosing  some 
of  his  unpublished  Treatises,  &c.,  92  ; 
to  Dr.  Jeremy  Taylor,  sending  him  a 
present,  &c.,  93  ;  Dr.  Taylor's  ac- 
knowledgment for,  94  ;  birth  of  his 
fourth  son,  George,  i.  320  ;  falls  from 
his  coach,  319  ;  soldiers  quartered  on, 
320  ;  uses  his  intei'est  about  the  living 
of  Eltham,  ib.  ;  letter  from  the  Rev. 
E.  Snatt,  acknowledging  the  first  book 
of  "  Lucretius,"  iii.  95  ;  letters  to  Dr. 
Jeremy  Taylor  to  christen  his  son,  96; 
of  Dr.  Taylor,  complying  with  his 
request,  97 ;  from  ditto,  on  the  immor- 
tality of  the  soul,  98  ;  subscxnbes  to 
the  stock  of  the  English  East  India 
Company,  i.  322 ;  surprised  with  many 
others  in  Exeter  chapel  by  the  mili- 
tary, 323  ;  (165a)  his  grief  at  the 
death  of  his  eldest  son  Richard, 
323—326  ;  letter  to  Sir  Richard 
Browne  on  that  occasion,  iii.  101  ; 
death  of  his  son  George,  i.  326 ;  letter 
of  Dr.  Taylor  on  those  afflictions,  iii. 
102  ;  from  ditto  concerning  a  living, 
and  the  lawfulness  of  interest,  104  ; 
publishes  a  translation  of  "  St.  Chry- 
sostomon  Education"  (1659),i.  326  n, 

329  ;  ii.  391,  395  ;  summoned  by 
Commissioners  for  new  foundations,  i. 

330  ;  letter  to  Mr.  Thurland,  recom- 
mending a  person  to  travel  with  Lord 
Percy,  lii.  106;pubhshes  his  "  French 
Gardener"  (1658), i.  331;  ii.  391,  395; 
(1659)  his  intimacy  with  Hon.  Robert 
Boyle,  i.  332,  340,  346  ;  comes  to 
lodge  in  London,  333;  extracts  from 
letters  to  Mr.  Boyle  on  his  "History 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE.  383 


of  Trades,'*  aud  on  the  culture  of 

Flowers  and  "Sylva"  (1659),  ii.  393  ; 
iii.  114  ;  publishes  his  "Apology  for 
the  Royal  Party  "  (1659),  i.  Introduc- 
tion, xxiii.  333;  ii.  391,  395  ;  letter  to 
GeorgeTuke  on  his  brother's  becoming 
a  proselyte  to  the  Romibh  communion, 
iii.  108;  treats  with  Colonel  Morley  to 
bring  in  the  King,  i.  334  ;  account  of 
the  negotiation,  and  letters  to  Colonel 
Morley,  urging  him  to  the  enterprise, 
422  ;  letters  from  Dr,  Taylor  on  the 
literature,  &c.,  of  England,  iii.  109  ; 
to  Robert  Boyle  on  Essence  of  Roses, 
110  ;  from  L)r.  Taylor,  on  literary 
subjects,  112  ;  to  Robert  Boyle,  on  a 
Mathematical  College,  116  ;  i.  Intro- 
diictio7i,  xxii.  xxxii.;on  his  "  Seraphic 
Love,"  iii.  121  ;  from  Dr.  Taylor,  on 
religious  subjects,  and  Mr.  Evelyn's 
writings,  126  ;  (1660),  127  ;  to  Dr. 
Wilkins  on  the  anatomy  and  the  vege- 
tative motion  of  trees,  129;  letter  from 
Samuel  Hartlib  on  monastic  education, 
131  ;  illness  of,  i.  335  ;  publishes  his 
"  News  from  Brussels  Unmasked  " 
(1660),  in  defence  of  the  King,  i.  Intro- 
duction, xxiv.,  336  ;  ii.  395;  procures 
Colonel  Morley 's  pardon,  i.  336  ; 
solicited  to  go  and  invite  over 
the  King,  ib.  ;  presented  by  the 
Duke  of  York  to  the  King  at  the 
Restoration,  337  ;  invited  to  accept  a 
commission  for  a  troop  of  horse,  but 
declines,  340  ;  presented  to  Anne, 
Duchess  of  York,  343  ;  his  "  Character 
of  England"  presented  at  Court,"  344 
and  n  ;  ii.  395  ;  (1661)  chosen  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Philosophical  Society  (after- 
wards the  Royal  Society),  i.  344  ; 
presents  his  "  Circle  of  Mechanical 
Trades"  to  the  Society,  ib.  ;  and  his 
«  Relation  of  the  Peak  of  Teneriffe," 
346  ;  Prince  Rupert  shows  him  the 
method  of  Mezzotinto,  345,  346  ; 
declines  the  honour  of  Knight  of  the 
Bath,  347  ;  presents  his  "  Panegyric 
on  the  Coronation"  (1661 )  to  the  King, 
351  ;  ii.  391,  395  ;  discourses  with 
Charles  II.  about  the  Royal  Society, 
&c.,  352  ;  and  presents  his  *'  Fumi- 
fugium"  (1661)  to  the  King,  354  ;  ii. 
391,  395  ;  letters  fi*om  Lord  Mordaunt 
on  Mr.  Evelyn's  panegyric  on  Charles 
II.,  iii.  132;  from  Thomas  Barlow  on 
a  lost  MS.,  ib.  ;  to  Mr.  Boyle  with 
that  tract,  133  ;  from  Dr.  Taylor  on 


his  works,  134  ;  to  Mr.  Chiffinch  on 
a  catalogue  of  llie  King's  curiosities, 
135  ;  sails  down  the  Thames  with  the 
King(on^a  wager  between  the  King  and 
the  Duke  of  York's  pleasure  boats)  ; 
his  discourse  with  tlie  King,  i.  354  ; 
commanded  to  draw  up  a  relation  of 
the  "  Encounter  of  the  Spanish  and 
French  Ambassadors,"  355  ;  ii.  395  ; 
reads  it  to  the  King,  i.  355  ;  the  "  Nar- 
rative" i-eprinted,  426  ;  his  "  Trans- 
lation of  Caspar  Naudseus  concerning 
Libraries,"  357  ;  ii.  391,  395  ;  receives 
the  thanks  of  the  Royal  Society  for 
a  comphment  in  it,  i.  358  ;  James 
Duke  of  York's  discourse  with,  ib.  ; 
his  "  Tyrannus,  or  the  Mode  "  (1661), 
359  ;  ii.  392,  395  ;  (1662)  holds  the 
candle  while  King  Charles's  head  was 
drawn  for  the  new  coin,  i.  360  ; 
Duke  of  York  pays  a  visit  to  him, 
361  ;  attends  the  King,  and  talks  with 
him  about  the  Palace  at  Greenwich, 
ib.  ;  appointed  a  Commissioner  for 
improving  streets,  &c.,  in  London, 
i.  Introduction,  xxiv.,  362,  374  ;  at- 
tends Prince  Rupert  to  the  Royal 
Society,  362  ;  presents  his  "  History 
of  Chalcography"  (1662)  to  the  Royal 
Society,  344,  364  ;  ii.  392,  395;  made 
a  Commissioner  for  Charitable  Uses, 
i.  365,  366,  368  ;  visit  of  the  Queen 
Mother  to,  366  ;  Lord  Chancellor 
Hyde's  visit  to,  ib.  ;  nominated  by  the 
King  of  the  Council  of  the  Royal 
Society,  367  ;  sails  down  the  Thames 
With  the  Kiug  and  Queen,  368  ;  letters 
to  Lady  Cotton  on  the  death  of  her 
infant,  iii.  136  ;  to  Mr.  Vander  Douse, 
on  translating  his  "  Relation  of  China," 
137  ;  petitions  the  King  about  his  own 
concerns,  and  goes  with  him  to  Mons. 
Febure,  i.  368  ;  presents  his  "Sylva" 
to  the  Royal  Society,  369,  378  ;  at 
Court,  368,  369  ;  suggests  the  planting 
of  Forest  of  Dean  with  oak,  370 ; 

(1663)  King  pays  him  a  visit  at  Sayes 
Court,  374  ;  his  house  broken  open, 
373  ;  letters  to  Dr.  Croone,  offering 
him  the  situation  of  travelling  tutor 
to  the  Howards  of  Norfolk  (July, 
1663),  iii.  138  ;  to  Dr.  Pierce  on  his 
Seriuon,  and  Cressy's  Reply,  recom- 
mending answer,  i.  376  ;  iii.  139,  141 : 
to  ]\lr.  Boyle  on   literary  subjects 

(1664)  ,  147  ;  made  a  Commissioner  of 
the    Mint,    i.    Introduction,  xxiv.^ 


384  GENERAL 

376,  378  ;  death  of  his  son  Richard, 
378  ;  lettex'  to  George  Evelyn  on  ex- 
penses of  his  travels  in  Italy,  ii.  354 
n ;  (1664)  with  the  King,  i.  378  ;  sub- 
scribes to  Sir  Arthur  Shugsby's  Lot- 
tery, 380  ;  goes  with  Lord  Cornbury 
into  Oxfordshire,  382  ;  King  Charles 
commends  his  "  Parallel  of  Ancient 
and  Modern  Architecture"  (16G4),and 
his"  Sylva,"  384  ;  the  former  referred 
to,  382  n,  386  ;  ii.  391  ;  ih.  360  ; 
refei'ences  to  his  "  Sylva"  (1664),  &e., 

i.  369.  370,  378;  ii.  44,  392,  395; 

iii.  226,  317  ;  appointed  a  Commis- 
sioner for  Sick  and  Wounded,  i.  In- 
troduction, xxiv.  —  xxvii.  385  ;  iii. 
148  ;  proceedings  in  that  office,  i.  386, 
388,  389,  391—399  ;  ii.  1—8,  23—28, 
71,  72,  76,  77,  88  ;  letter  from  Di\ 
Barlow  on  Jesuitism,  iii.  143  ;  letter 
to  Dr.  Sprat  on  Sorbiere,  and  his 
"Voyage  to  England,  and  a  vindication 
of  Lord  Clarendtm  from  his  aspersions, 

iv.  144  ;  i.  386  ;  Queen  Mother's 
compliment  to,  for  his  book  on 
"Architecture,"  i.  386  ;  (1665)  pub- 
lishes a  Part  of  the  "  Mystery  of 
Jesuitism"  (1664),  387,  389  ;  ii.  391, 
395  ;  iii.  149  ;  presents  a  copy  of  it 
to  Lord  Cornbury,  i.  387  n  ;  King 
Charles  commends  it,  389  ;  his  '*  Ka- 
lendarium  Hortense"published (1 664), 

ii.  392,  395  ;  iii.  317;  visits  the  Royal 
Menagerie  in  St.  James's  Park,  i.  389  ; 
letters  to  Lord  Cornbury  on  the  Lent 
Fast,  and  recommending  the  closing 
of  the  theatres,  iii.  149  ;  to  Sir  Thomas 
(afterwards  Lord)  Clifford,  on  the 
affairs  of  the  sick  and  wounded,  153  ; 
to  Dr.  (afterwards  Sir  Christopher) 
Wren,  to  desire  him  to  recommend  a 
tutor  for  his  son,  154  ;  to  Duke  of 
Albemarle,  on  the  affairs  of  the  sick 
and  wounded,  156  ;  to  and  from  Sir 
Thomas  Clifford  on  the  same  subject, 
155,  157  ;  to  Sir  Peter  Wyche  on 
the  English  language,  159;  to  Lord 
Cornbury,  with  hints  for  a  course  of 
study  on  history,  162  ;  entertained  on 
board  the  fleet  at  the  Nore,  i.  395  ; 
sends  his  family  from  London  on 
account  of  the  plague,  but  remains 
there  himself,  397  ;  passes  through 
the  infected  parts  of  the  City,  ib. ; 
letters  to  Lord  Cornbury  congratu- 
lating him  on  his  marriage  ;  his  own 
critical  btate  as  Commissioner  for  sick 


IXDEX  TO 

and  wounded,  iii.  164,  168  ;  of  Sir 
Philip  Warwick  to,  on  the  same  sub- 
ject, 169  ;  Mr.  Evelyn's  answer,  171  ; 
to  Sir  William  Coventry  on  the  same 
subject,  172  ;  to  Mr.  Pepys,  inclosing 
a  plan  of  his  proposed  Infirmary,  175, 
178,  180  ;  to  Lord  Cornbury  in  praise 
of  Clarendon  House,  177  ;  to  Dr. 
Wilkins  on  «  Tillotson's  Rule  of  Faith," 
&c.,  192  ;  (1666)  graciously  received, 
and  his  services  acknowledged,  by 
King  Charles  and  the  Duke  of  York, 
ii.  2,  3  ;  his  plan  for  an  Infirmary  for 
sick  and  wounded,  3  ;  iii.  175- — 186  ; 
presents  a  part  of  "  Mystery  of 
Jesuitism  "  to  the  King,  ii.  3  ;  com- 
manded by  the  King  to  recommend  a 
Justice  of  Peace  for  Surrey,  4  ;  elected 
of  the  Council  of  the  Royal  Society, 
but  declines,  ib.  ;  with  Prince  Rupert 
at  the  Nore,  7 ;  made  a  Commissioner 
for  the  farming  and  making  of  salt- 
petre, ih.  ;  a  Commissioner  for  repair 
of  old  St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  i.  Intro- 
duction, xxiv.  xxvii.  ;  ii.  9  ;  witnesses 
the  awful  Fire  of  London,  9 — 13;  passes 
over  the  ruins.  13 — 15  ;  presents  his 
plan  for  rebuilding  London  to  the 
King,  16  and  n,  ii.  394;  overturned 
in  his  carriage,  ii.  19  ;  letter  to  Sir 
Samuel  Tuke  on  the  death  of  his  Lady, 
on  the  fii*e  of  London,  and  noticing  his 
plan  for  rebuilding  the  City,  16  n  ;  iii. 
186  ;  Persian  habit  assumed  by  the 
King,  which  he  had  recommended  in 
his  "  Tyrannus,"  ii.  18  ;  letter  from 
Philip  Duraaresque  on  "  Kalendarium 
Hortense,"  iii.  189 ;  letter  to  Lord 
Clarendon,  on  correct  editions  of  school 
classics,  ib.  ;  library  and  MSS.  of  the 
Earl  of  Arundel  given  to  the  Royal 
Society  by  his  means,  i.  Introduc- 
tion, xxiv.  xxviii.  ;  ii.  20,  122,  123  ; 
(1667)  publishes  his  "Public  Em- 
ployment preferred  to  Solitude"  (1667), 
i.  Introduction,  xxxii.  ;  ii.  21,  306, 
392,  396  ;  letter  to  Mr.  Cowley  on 
that  subject,  and  recommending  him 
to  write  a  poem  on  the  Royal  Society, 
i.  Introduction,  xxii.;  iii.  194  ;  let- 
ters from  Sir  G.  Mackenzie  enclosing 
a  poem,  193,  202  ;  visits  the  Duke 
and  Duchess  of  Newcastle,  ii.  22,  23 ; 
letter  of  Cowley  on  bis  Poem  on 
Royal  Society,  iii.  195  ;  inquiries 
respecting  Mr.  Phillips  from  Sir 
John    Langhara,    196,    197  ;  con- 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


385 


ducts  the  Duchess  of  Newcastle  to 
a  meetiug  of  Royal  Society,  ii.  23  ; 
with  King  Charles  II.,  ib.  ;  com- 
manded by  his  Majesty  to  search 
for  peat,  25  ;  his  receipt  for  making 
"  houllies "  (a  mixture  of  charcoal 
and  loam)  tried,  26  ;  letter  to  Henry 
Howard  of  Norfolk,  sohciting  the 
"  Marmora  Arundeliana"  for  the  Uni- 
versity of  Os.iovd,i.  Introductmi,  xxiy. ; 
ii.  41  ;  iii.  198  ;  obtains  the  Arun- 
delian  Marbles,  i.  Introduction,  xxxii. ; 

ii.  29,41 ;  letter  to  Dr.  Bathurst  on  that 
subject,  iii.  199  ;  University  in  convo- 
cation presents  its  acknowledgments 
to,  ii.  30,  31  ;  gives  the  Royal  Society 
his  Tables  of  veins  and  arteries,  i. 
217  ;  ii.  31  ;  letters  to  Earl  of  Sand- 
wich on  Spanish  horticulture,  iii.  201, 
205  ;  (1668)  gives  a  quantity  of  bricks 
for  building  a  College  for  Royal  So- 
ciety, ii.  33  ;  letter  from  Sir  Robert 
Moray  on  his  personal  friendship, 

iii.  203 ;  to  Dr.  Joseph  Glanvil,  thank- 
ing him  for  a  compliment  in  his  "  Ne 
plus  ultra,"  204  ;  from  Lord  Henry 
Howard  of  Norfolk,  to  lodge  Signor 
Muccinigo,  and  on  Signor  Pietro's 
Memoirs,  211;  lease  of  land  granted 
to,  by  the  King,  who  discourses  with 
him  on  several  subjects,  ii.  34  ;  letter 
to  Dr.  Beale  on  Optics  and  Acoustics, 
207 ;  publishes  his"  Perfection  of  Paint- 
ing" (1668),  ii.  35, 39 1, 396 ;  list  of  great 
men  whose  portraits  he  recommended 
Lord  Clarendon  to  procure,  36  ;  iii. 
301  n  ;  (1669)  letter  to  Sir  Thomas 
Clifford  on  a  libel  on  England,  pub- 
lished by  the  Dutch,  213  ;  presents 
his  "  History  of  the  Three  Great 
Impostors"  (1669)  to  the  King,  ii.  38, 
392,  396  ;  letter  from  Dr.  Fell  on  the 
Arundelian  MSB.  iii.  216,  250  ;  to 
Lord  Henry  Howard  of  Norfolk,  to 
permit  the  Royal  Society  to  exchange 
some  of  the  MSS.  given  by,  for  mathe- 
matical and  other  scientific  books,  217 ; 
Dr.  Basire  on  the  Greek  Church,  218; 
Dr.  Bathurst's  inquiry  respecting 
Lord  Howard's  arms,  219  ;  degree  of 
Doctor  conferred  on  him  by  the 
University  of  Oxford,  ii.  42,  43  ; 
letters  to  Dr.  Meric  Casaubon,  inquir- 
ing whether  his  father  left  a  treatise 
« De  Baculis,"  &c.  iii.  220,  225  ; 
of  Dr.  Casaubon  in  answer,  224  ;  his 
affliction  on  account  of  his  brother 

VOL.  IV. 


Richard,  ii.  35,  44,45  ;  (1670)  solicits 
the  office  of  Latin  Secretary,  45  ; 
pressed  to  write  the  Historv  of  the 
Dutch  War,  38,  46,  90  ;  draws  up  a 
draft  of  the  History,  51  ;  the  King 
orders  official  documents  to  be  given 
to  him  for  the  History,  51,  52,  55, 
62,  78  ;  letters  to  Lord  Clifford,  in- 
closing a  Synopsis  of  the  History,  &c., 

iii.  221  ;  contents  of  the  first  and 
second  books  (1671),  228  ;  from 
Duchess  of  Newcastle,  Rev.  N.  Jame- 
son, and  P.  Dumaresque,  on  "  Sylva," 
226,  227  ;  from  Theodore  Hook  on 
the  author  of  "  The  History  of  the 
German  Impostor,"  241  ;  to  Father 
Patrick  on  the  doctrine  of  the  English 
Church  concerning  the  Eucharist,  231 ; 
complains  of  want  of  co-operation, 
238  ;  introduces  Gibbon  the  carver 
at  Coui't,  ii.  53,  55,  56  ;  appointed  on 
a  Council  for  Foreign  Plantations, 
i.  Introduction,  xxiv.  xxvii. ;  ii.  56, 57  ; 
attends  the  meetings  of,  58 — 62,  67 — 
69,  73,  77 — 81  ;  entertained  by  the 
Trinity  Company  on  passing  a  fine  of 
land  for  their  Alms-house,  58  ;  his 
law-suit  with  Mr.  Cocke,  59  ;  dines 
with  King  Charles  II.  at  Euston,  63  ; 

iv.  27  ;  (1672)  lease  of  Sayes  Court 
granted  to,  by  the  King,  ii.  68  ;  with 
the  King  about  the  fleet,  74  ;  conver- 
sation with  Lord  Sandwich,  and  re- 
flections on  his  death,  75  ;  reads  the 
first  part  of  his  Dutch  War  to  Lord 
Clifford,  78  ;  chosen  Secretary  of  the 
Royal  Society,  80  ;  letters  to  Lord 
Clifford,  returning  documents  con- 
sulted for  the  Dutch  War,  85,  iii.  241  ; 
to  Lord  Cornbury,  desiring  the  perusal 
of  Sir  George  Downing's  Despatches 
for  the  Dutch  War,  &c.,  242  ;  (1673) 
sworn  a  Younger  Brother  of  the 
Trinity  House,  ii.  82  ;  takes  the  sacra- 
ment and  oaths  as  ordered  by  Parlia- 
ment, 83  ;  Lord  Clifford's  prophetic 
farewell  to,  87  ;  charitable  works  of, 
90;  (1674)  his  "Navigation  and 
Commerce,  their  Original  and  Pro- 
gresse;"  (1674)  the  preface  to  the  His- 
tory of  the  Dutch  War,  i.  Introduc- 
tion, xxviii.  ;  commended  by  King 
Charles  II.,  but  publicly  recalled,  ii. 
91,  92,  396  ;  letters  to  the  Duchess 
of  Newcastle  on  a  present  of  her 
Works,  iii.  244  ;  to  Dr.  Meric  Casau- 
bon, consoling  him  in  his  affliction 

c  c 


386  GENERAL 

from  the  stone,  and  on  his  own  trans- 
lation of  Lucretius,  241 — 6;  (1675) 
his  character  of  Sir  William  Petty, 

ii.  95 — 97  ;  his  "  Discoui'se  of  Earth 
and  Vegetation"  (1675),  ii.  98,  392, 
396  ;  Lord  Berkeley  confides  his 
estates  and  property  to,  ii.  103;  letters 
to  Dr.  Good  on  pecuniary  matters, 

iii.  248  ;  (1676),  ii.  105,  107,  110  ;  the 
Queen  entertained  at  Sayes  Court, 
105  ;  a  copy  of  "Marmora  Oxonieu- 
sia  Arundeliana"  presented  to  him 
by  the  University,  ib.  ;  serious  conse- 
quences of  a  fall  to  him,  108  ;  (1677) 
becomes  a  trustee  for  Lord  Mordaunt, 
109  ;  (1678)  his  friendship  for  Mrs. 
Godolphin,  123 — 125  ;  correspondence 
with  Anne,  Countess  of  Sunderland, 
iii.  250—253  ;  (1679)  appointed  one 
of  the  executors  of  Lady  Mordaunt, 

ii.  26,  138,  141  ;  his  "  Acetaria,"  part 
of  the  "  Elysium  Britanuicum,"  392  ; 
success  of  his  "  Sylva,"  «Scc.,  392,  396  ; 
contents  of  his  "  Elysium  Britanui- 
cum," 393  ;  treats  for  marriage  of  his 
son  with  daughter  of  Sir  John  Stone- 
house,  138;  (1680)  last  convei'sation 
of,  with  Lord  Ossory,  &c.,  143  ;  letters 
to  the  Countess  of  Ossory  on  his  death, 

iii.  254  ;  correspondence  with  Mrs. 
Owen,  iv.  41,  42;  (1681)  to  Mr. 
Pepys,  on  his  escape  from  ship- 
wreck, iii.  256  ;  to  Dr.  Morley,  Bp. 
of  Winchester,  on  the  late  Duchess  of 
York  deserting  the  Church  of  England, 
and  accusing  him,  ii.  167  ;  iii.  235  ; 
to  Mr.  Wm.  London  on  his  proposed 
History  of  Jamaica,  &c.,  257  ;  Earl 
of  Essex  vindicates  himself  from  an 
injurious  report,  ii.  159  ;  letters  to 
Mr.  Pepys,  inclosing  his  History 
of  the  Dutch  War,  «Sic.,  iii.  260  ; 
(1682)  consulted  by  Sir  Stephen  Fox 
about  Chelsea  Hospital,  ii.  163,  166  ; 
attacked  with  ague,  and  settles  his 
affairs,  1 64  ;  letters,  to  Dr.  Fell, 
recommending  answers  to  be  written 
to  the  "  Histoire  Critique,"  and  other 
atheistical  books,  iii.  264  ;  to  Mr. 
Pepys  on  the  Dominion  of  the  Sea 
and  the  Fishery  claimed  by  the 
English,  and  on  English  commerce, 
267  ;  seized  with  a  fainting  fit,  and 
declines  standing  the  election  for 
President  of  Royal  Society,  ii.  170  ; 
disposes  of  his  East  India  adventure, 
ib. ;  (1683)  his  account  of  Sir  Richard 


INDEX  TO 

Browne,  171  ;  communicates  to  Dr. 
Plot  a  list  of  his  works,  391  ;  plants 
his  walks  at  Sayes  Court,  175  ;  de- 
clines a  lucrative  employment  from 
conscientious  motives,  186  ;  attends 
the  King  on  a  visit  to  the  Duchess  of 
Portsmouth,  187  ;  visits  the  Loi'd 
Danby  in  the  Tower,  191  ;  (1684) 
consulted  by  Dr.  Tenison  about  erect- 
ing a  Public  Library,  194;  his 
"  Account  of  the  Winter  of  1683-4," 
published  in  "  Phil.  Trans."  1 96  ; 
consulted  about  building  over  Berke- 
ley Gardens,  197  ;  corresponds  with 
Mr.  Robert  Berkeley,  iii.  273,  275, 
276,  280,  282  ;  (1685)  assists  in  pro- 
claiming James  II.  on  the  death  of 
Charles,  210  ;  his  affliction  on  the 
death  of  his  daughter  Mary,  212,  218  ; 
his  "Mundus  Muliebris"  (1690)  re- 
ferred to,  215,  395  ;  death  of  his 
daughter  Elizabeth,  231  ;  melancholy 
reflections  on  the  deaths  of  his  daugh- 
ters, ib.  ;  James  II. 's  gracious  recep- 
tion of,  ib. ;  accompanies  Mr.  Pepys 
to  Portsmouth  to  attend  on  James  II., 
232—236;  letters  to  Mr.  Pepys  on 
the  colours  of  the  Ancients,  &c.,  iii. 
276  ;  of  Mr.  Pepys,  about  papers 
tending  to  prove  Charles  II.  a  Roman 
Catholic,  279  ;  ii.  237—239  ;  his  por- 
traits taken  by  Kneller,  239,  299  ;  ap- 
pointed Commissioner  of  Sewers,  245  ; 
and  Commissioner  for  executing  the 
office  of  Privy  Seal,  i.  Intro clitction, 
xxiv.  xxvii. ;  ii.  247  ;  transactions, 
247  ;  (1686),  248,  252—257,  261  ; 
takes  the  Test,  249  ;  tedious  law-suit 
against,  ib. ;  Sir  Gilbert  Geri'ard  pro- 
poses to  marry  his  son  to  Mr.  Evelyn's 
daughter  Susanna,  250  ;  refuses  the 
Privy  Seal  for  printing  Missals,  250  ; 
and  declines  attendance,  251  ;  refuses 
Privy  Seal  for  printing  Popish  Books, 
&c.,  254  ;  in  attendance  on  James  II. 
on  his  birth-day  (1686),  258  ;  letters, 
to  Lady  Ann  Spencer,  Countess  of 
Sunderland,  inclosing  a  catalogue  of 
religious  books  for  her  use,  iii.  284  ; 
to  Henry  Earl  of  Clarendon  on  the 
aff"airs  of  Ireland,  &c.,  285  ;  (1687)  re- 
flections of,  on  K.  James's  (attempted) 
introduction  of  Popery,  ii.  261  ;  Com- 
missioners for  Privy  Seal  dismissed, 
262  ;  particulars  relating  to  his  law- 
suit, which  was  terminated  by  the 
favour  of  James  II.,  265 — 268  ;  ap- 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


887 


pointed  a  Governor  of  St.  Thomas's 
Hospital,  269  ;  (1688)  petitions  to  be 
allowed  charges  as  a  Commissioner  of 
sick  and  wounded,  273  ;  letter  to 
Archbishop  San  croft,  detecting  ma- 
chinations of  the  Jesuits,  281  n  ; 
prayer  on  the  anniversary  of  his 
birth-day  (68th  year),  283  ;  letters  to 
his  son  about  return  of  James  11.  to 
Whitehall  (1688),  and  consequent 
proceedings,  &c.,  iii.  287  ;  to  the 
Countess  of  Sunderland  of  moi*al 
advice,  290  ;  to  Lord  Spencer  on 
collections  of  English  letters,  294  ; 
(1689)  Archbishop  Sancroft  thanks 
him  for  his  lettei',  ii.  287  ;  his  ex- 
amination of  the  extraordinary  talents 
of  Dr.  Clench's  son,  288  ;  his  remarks 
on  Queen  Mary  II.,  292  ;  conversa- 
tions with  Archbishop  Sancroft  and 
Bishop  Lloyd,  296—299  ;  letter  to 
Mr.  Pepys  on  a  compliment  paid 
him — on  painters,  &c. — coins — Lord 
Clarendon's  collection  of  portraits — 
on  prints — public  libraries  in  Paris, 
and  in  England — Society  for  im- 
proving the  English  language  recom- 
mended, iii.  294  ;  Mr.  Pepys'  answer 
to,  312  ;  continuation  of  his  former 
letter  on  dreams,  313  ;  prayer  on  his 
birth-day  (1689),  ii.  301  ;  (1690)  con- 
versation with  Mr.  Pepys  on  the 
Navy,  304  ;  dines  with  Sir  G.  Mac- 
kenzie, against  whom  he  had  written 
his  "  Essay  on  Public  Employment," 
305  ;  conversation  with  Dr.  Lloyd, 
305—307  ;  letter  to  Lady  Sunder- 
land, consoling  her  on  the  death  of 
her  daughter,  the  Countess  of  Arran, 
iii.  315  ;  becomes  one  of  the  bail  for 
Lord  Clarendon,  ii.  309 ;  letter  to 
the  Countess  of  Sunderland,  on  his 
*'  Kalendarium  Hortense,"  "  Sylva," 
"  Parallel  of  Architecture,"  &c.,  iii. 
317;  (1691)  encourages  Dr.  (after- 
wards Sir)  Hans  Sloane  to  write  a 
History  of  Jamaica,  ii.  312  ;  conver- 
sation with  Archbisliop  Sancroft,  ih.  ; 
letter  to  Mr.  Anthony  a  Wood,  com- 
municating particulars  of  Mr.  Wells, 
and  of  himself  and  publications,  for 
the  "  Athense  Oxonienses,"  iii.  321  ; 
(1692)  at  the  funeral  of  Mr.  Boyle, 
ii.  316  ;  a  trustee  for  the  Boyle  Lec- 
ture, 318,  327  ;  his  opinion  of  Dr. 
Bentley's  Boyle  Lecture,  319  ;  letter 
to    Dr.   Tenison    on  Earthquakes 


and  their  causes,  iii.  325  ;  letter  to 
his  brother  on  the  sale  of  Baynards, 
330  ;  (1693)  Mr.  Draper's  mar- 
riage with  his  daughter  Susanna,  ii. 
324  ;  declines  Presidentship  of  the 
Royal  Society,  326  ;  letter  to  Mrs. 
M.  Tuke  on  Sir  Lawrence  Staughton's 
proposals,  iii.  333  ;  letters  to  Dr. 
Plot  on  Coins,  335  ;  answer,  337  ;  to 
Lord  Spencer  on  his  making  a  tour 
through  E:ngland,  336  ;  (1694)  his 
Translation  of  M.  de  la  Quintinye's 
"  Complete  Gardener,"  1693,  ii.  396  ; 
Duke  of  Norfolk's  kindness  for  the 
Evelyn  famil}^,  328  ;  goes  with  his 
family  to  live  with  his  brother  at 
Wotton,  330  ;  letters  to  Dr.  Tenison 
communicating  information  relative 
to  Archbishop  Laud,  to  Mr.  Whar- 
ton's life,  &c.,  340  ;  to  Bishop  Gibson, 
communicating  particulai's  for  his 
edition  of  the  "Britannia,"  iii.  341  ; 
to  Mr.  Benjamin  Tooke,  sending  him 
the  copy  of  his  "  Essay  on  Medals  " 
(1697)  to  print,  &c.,  342  ;  the  work  re- 
ferred to,  ii.  392,  396  ;  his  conversa- 
tion with  the  Marquis  of  Normanby 
about  Charles  II.,  332  ;  Treasurer  of 
Greenwich  Hospital,  333,  347  n,  363  ; 
his  account  of  the  death  of  Queen 
Mary,  333  ;  furnished  the  additions 
to  Surrey  in  "  Camden's  Britannia  " 

(1695)  ,  334  ;  one  of  a  Committee  to 
survey  Greenwich  House,  &c.,  i.  In- 
troduction, XXV.,  xxvii. ;  ii.  335,  344  ; 
his  intimacy  with  Dr.  Tenison,  333, 
336,  338  ;  interests  himself  about  the 
Royal  Library  at  St.  James's,  338  ; 

(1696)  ,  348  ;  letters  to  Mr.  Wotton, 
containing  an  account  of  Hon.  Robert 
Boyle,  for  his  intended  life,  iii.  346  ; 
from  Mr.  Wotton  in  answer,  and 
sending  him  his  abridgment  of 
Scilla's  book  on  Shells,  352  ;  from  the 
same,  thanking  him  for  recommending 
him  to  the  Archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury, 353  ;  settles  the  Boyle  Lecture 
in  pei'petuity,  ii.  341  ;  lets  his  house 
at  Sayes  Court  to  Admiral  Benbow, 
342  ;  letter  to  Lord  Godolphin,  on 
English  Historical  medals,  Council  of 
Trade  enlarging  of  London,  scenes  at 
elections,  iii.  354  ;  first  stone  of 
Greenwich  Hospital  laid  b}'  him,  and 
others,  ii.  344  ;  letters  to  Mr.  Place 
about  reprinting  his  "  Parallel  of 
Architecture,"    iii.   360  ;    to  Mr. 

c  c  2 


388 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Wotton  on  his  "  S}lva,"  and  on  the 
husbandry  and  gax'dening  of  the 
ancients,  3G3  ;  (1697)  letter  to  Dr. 
Bohun,  noticing  his  employments, 
&e.,  at  Wotton,  his  grandson,  and 
daughter  Draper,  ii.  346  ;  letter  to 
Dr.  Bentley  on  his  "Sylva"  and 
"  Parallel  of  Architecture,"  iii.  365  ; 
goes  with  the  Surrey  Address  of  con- 
gratulation for  peace  to  King  William 
III.,  ii.  348  ;  letters  to  Dr.  Bentley 
on  his  proposal  for  erecting  a  new 
library  in  St.  James's  Park,  iii.  369  ; 
fi'om  Mr.  Wotton,  concerning  his 
intended  life  of  Boyle,  370  ;  from  the 
same  on  Medals,  371  ;  (1698)  to  Dr. 
Godolphin,  with  an  account  of  his 
"Treatise  on  Medals,"  373;  to  Mr. 
Henshaw,  introducing  Dr.  Hoy,  375  ; 
his  house  at  Sayes  Court  let  to  Peter 
the  Great,  i.  Introduction,  xxv.  ;  ii. 
349  n  ;  (1699)  affliction  for  the  loss  of 
his  son,  351  ;  regret  for  his  brother 
Richard's  death,  354  ;  letter  to  Dr. 
Nicolson,  on  education  for  the  bar, 
the  "  Historical  Library,"  ravages 
committed  in  the  Paper-office,  original 
letters  in  his  possession,  iii.  378  ; 
(1700)  his  «  Acetaria,"  1699,  referred 
to,  ii.  355,  392,  396  ;  settles  at  Wotton, 

i.  Introduction,  xxv.  ;  ii.  357  ;  his 
prayer  on  completing  his  80th  year, 
362  ;  his  concern  for  the  illness  of  his 
gi'andson,  ib. ;  (1701)  subscribes 
towards  rebuilding  Oakwood  Chapel, 
at  Wotton,  366  ;  holds  his  courts  in 
Surrey,  366—368  ;  (1702)  his  Tables 
of  Veins  and  Arteries  ordered  to  be 
engraven  by  the  Royal  Society,  367  ; 
letters  from  Mr.  Wotton  concerning 
his  intended  life  of  Boyle,  iii.  385, 
387  ;  elected  a  member  of  Society  for 
Propagating  Gospel  in  Foreign  Parts, 

ii.  368  ;  pious  examination  of  himself 
on  completing  his  82d  year,  ib.  ; 
(1703)  resigns  the  Treasurership 
of  Greenwich  Hospital  to  his  son-in- 
law  Draper,  371 ;  account  of  his 
Treasurership,  363  n  ;  reflections  on 
his  83d  year,  372,  373  ;  letters  from 
Mr.  Wotton,  with  queries  for  his  Life 
of  Boyle,  iii.  388  ;  answer  to,  with 
anecdotes  of  Hartlib,  Boyle,  Sir  W. 
Petty,  Sir  Geoffrey  Fenton,  &c.,  390  ; 
Wotton's  reply  to,  398  ;  (1705)  con- 
versation with  Dr.  Dickinson  about 
Philosopher's  Elixir,  ii.  374  ;  Duke 


of  Marlborough's  condescension  to, 
ib. ;  his  sickness  and  death,  376  ; 
Christmas  hospitality  to  his  neigh- 
bours, i.  387  ;  ii.  37,  44,  90  ;  his  piety 
at  that  season  and  on  his  birth-day,  see 
at  the  close  of  each  year,  and 
October  31  ;  list  of  his  unpublished 
Treatises,  «Scc.,  ii.  394  ;  his  published 
works,  391  ;  list  of  his  works  from 
the  "  Biographia  Britannica,"  395  ; 
etchings  by,  ii.  396  ;  his  monument 
and  epitaph,  i.  Introduction,  xxxvi. 

Evelyn,  John-Stansfield  (second  son  of 
John),  birth,  i,  286  ;  death,  287. 

 ,  John   (third  son   of  John), 

account  of  him,  i.  Introductiony 
xxxii. ;  birth,  306  ;  presented  to  the 
Queen  Mother,  343  ;  alluded  to,  365 ; 
396  ;  ii.  19,  117  ;  entered  of  Oxford 
University,  2],  38  ;  admitted  of 
Middle  Temple,  73  ;  published  a 
translation  of  Rapinus  "  Hortorum," 
81  and  n  ;  his  interview  with  the 
Bishop  of  Chichester,  82  ;  a  Younger 
Brother  of  the  Trinity-house,  83  ; 
went  with  Lord  Berkeley  into  France, 
102,  103  ;  return  of,  106  ;  his  mar- 
riage, 1 38,  1 39  ;  sent  into  Devon  by 
Lords  of  the  Treasury,  269  ;  Com- 
missioner of  Irish  Revenue,  321  ;  his 
death  and  burial,  351 

 ,  John  (grandson  of  John),  ac- 
count of,  i.  Introductiony  xxxiii.  ; 
birth,  ii.  165  ;  at  Eton,  320  ;  en- 
tered of  Oxford,  351  ;  attacked  with 
small-pox,  362  ;  quits  College,  367  ; 
Commissioner  of  prizes,  366  ;  treaty 
for  marriage,  ib.  ;  Treasurer  of  stamp 
duties,  373 

 ,  John   (son  of   George  and 

nephew  of  John),  marriage,  ii.  139, 
155 

 ,  John,  of  Nutfield,  M.  P.,  his 

dea  th,  ii.  369 

 ,  Martha    (daughter-in-law  of 

John),  account  of  her,  i.  Introductiont 
XXX.  iii. ;  thrown  out  of  her  coach,  ii. 
270 

■  ,  Mary  (daughter  of  Sir  Richard 

Browne,  and  wife  of  John  Evelyn), 
her  person  and  character,  i.  Intro- 
ductiony XXX.;  marriage  with,  and 
references  to,  Pedigrecy  ii.  397;  i.  249, 
250,  253,  256,  267,  278, 279, 286,  289 
—291,  306,  397  ;  portrait,  249,  258  n, 
275,  277  ;  Charles  II. 's  condescension 
and  promise  to,  341,  346  ;  Princess 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


389 


Henrietta  thanks  lier  for  her  "  Cha- 
racter of  England"  she  had  presented, 
?>44  ;  presents  a  copy  of  a  miniature 
by  Oliver  to  Ciiarles  11.,  352  ;  cha- 
racter of  her  by  Dr.  Bohun,  iv.  3 — 7  ; 
letters,  to  Dr.  Bohun  on  the  Duchess 
of  Newcastle,  8  ;  on  epistolary  writing, 
10;  on  Sir  S.  Tuke's  marriage,  11; 
on  Dryden's  "  Siege  of  Grenada,"  25  ; 
on  her  cousin  Glauville,  26  ;  on  female 
accomphshments  and  duties,  31  ;  to 
Sir  Samuel  Tuke  on  an  expected  visit, 
11  ;  to  her  brotlier  Glauville  on  his 
son's  education,  12;  on  his  return 
froin  France,  15  ;  his  settlement  at 
Wotton,  16  ;  on  his  courtship,  22,  27  ; 
his  amiability  commended,  38  ;  to  Mr. 
Terryll  in  Ireland,  14,  15  ;  to  Mrs. 
Evelyn  of  Woodcote,  17,  19,  20  ;  to 
her  cousin  Mary  Evelyn,  20  ;  to  Lady 
Tuke,  and  to  Mr.  Bohun,  on  the  death 
of  Sir  S.  Tuke,  iii.  108  n  ;  iv.  23,  24  ; 
to  Mr.  Bohun  on  the  death  of  Dr. 
Bretton,  30  ;  on  domestic  duties,  31  ; 
on  pulpit  eloquence,  34  ;  on  recent 
shipwrecks,  27  ;  to  Mrs.  Alexander 
on  her  visit  to  Ireland,  29  ;  to  her 
husband,  33  ;  to  Mrs.  Saul  on  leaving 
her  family,  36  ;  to  Lady  Tuke  on  the 
death  of  her  own  daughter  Mary,  40  ; 
to  her  son,  exhorting  him  to  a  virtuous 
life,  21  ;  extract  from  her  Will,  con- 
taining a  character  of  Mr.  Evelyn,  7  ; 
her  death  and  epitaph,  i.  Introduction^ 
XXV.  XXX vii. 
Evelyn,  Mary  (daughter  of  John),  ii.  90, 
129,  164,  204  ;  birth  of,  i.  398  ;  her 
death  by  the  small-pox,  ii.  213;  her 
piety  and  accomplishments,  i.  Intro- 
duction^ XXV, ;  ii.  212 — 218 ;  her  monu- 
ment and  epitaph,  i.  Introduction, 
xxxix. 

 ,  Mary,  Lady  Y/yche  (niece  of 

John,  and  daughter  of  George),  John 
Evelyn  presents  her  with  a  piece  of 
plate  at  her  christening,  i.  247  ;  mar- 
riage, ii.  320.    See  Wyche 

■  ,   Mary    (niece  of   John,  and 

daughter  of  Richard ),mari'iage  of,ii.47 

 ,  Martha-Maria   (grandchild  of 

John),  birth,  ii.  179  ;  death,  183 

 ,  Richard  (father  of  John),  his 

marriage  and  family,  i.  1  ;  his  person 
and  character,  1,2,  14  ;  High  Sheriff 
of  Sui'rey  and  Sussex,  i.  1,  6,  7  ; 
sickness  and  death,  14  ;  epitaph  on, 
i.  Introduction^  25 


Evelyn,  Richard,  of  Woodcote  (brother 
of  John),  birth,  i.  1  ;  chamber-fellow 
with  his  brother  John  at  Oxford,  12  ; 
alluded  to,  246,  247  ;  ii.  47  ;  mar- 
riage, i.  247  ;  his  house  called  Bay- 
nards,  246,  320  ;  iii.  330  ;  afflicted 
with  the  stone,  ii.  30,  39,  44 ;  his  death 
and  funeral,  44  ;  letters  to  his  wife 
from  Mrs.  John  Evelyn,  iv.  17,  19 

 ,  Richard  (son  of  John),  birth 

and  christening,  i.  283 ;  death,  324  ; 
his  remarkable  early  talentsandpiety,i. 
Introduction,  xxv,  323 — 326;  his  early 
death  alluded  to,  ii.  290  ;  letters  oc- 
casioned by  his  death,  iii.  101 — 103; 
monument  and  epitaph  of,  i.  Intro- 
duction,   xxxviii.  Another  son 

Richard,  death  and  burial  of,i.  378, 379 

 ,  Richard  (grandson  of  John), 

birth,  ii.  155  ;  death,  158 

 ,  Richard  (nephew  of  John),  his 

death,  iii.  79  n 

 ,  Susanna  (daughter  of  John), 

birth  of,  ii.  39  ;  marriage,  324  ;  cha- 
racter and  accomplishments,  ih.  See 
Di-aper 

 ,  Sir  Thomas,  ii.  155 

 ,  William,  of  St.  Clere  (son  of 

George  of  Nutfield),  assumed  the 
name  of  Glauville,  ii.  367  n  ;  his 
issue,  ib. 

 ,  (cousin  of  John),  house 

near  Chfden,  ii.  1 34 

 ,  Evelyn  family,  epitaphs  of,  i. 

Introduction,  xxiv. — xl. 

 ,  Mons.,  a  French  physician,  ii.  45 

"  Evening  Lover,"a  play,ii.  33  andn,  380 
Everard,  Mrs.,  a  chemist,  i.  260 
Eversfield,  Mr.,  of  Sussex,  his  daughter, 

ii.  139,  155,  355 
Eversou,  iMr.,  iii.  155 
Everzen,  Capt.   Cornelius,  taken  pri- 
soner, i.  392  and  n  ;  his  liberty  restored 
by  Charles  II.  on  account  of  his  father's 
services,  ib.  iii.  153 
Euston,  Suffolk,  Loi'd  Arlington's  seat 
at,  Charles  II. 's  frequent  visits,  1671, 
ii.  63  ;  splendid  entertainment  at,  64  ; 
the  house  and  garden  described,  64, 
65,  112 — 114  ;  church  and  parsonage 
house  rebuilt  by  Lord  Arhngton,  48, 
111,  113 

"  Examen  of  the  Assembly's  Confession 

of  Faith,"  iii.  109 
Exchange  at  Amsterdam,  i.  22  ;  at  Paris, 

47  ;  Merchants'  Walk  at  Genoa,  80 

at  Venice,  198 


390 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Exchange,  the  Royal,  the  Kind's  statue 
at,  thrown  dowu  (1G49),  i,  251  ;  uew 
building  of  the,  ii.  89 

Exchequer  shut  up  (1G72),  ii.  70 

Excise,  &c.,  contiuuiince  ot,  i.  330  ;  duties 
let  to  farm  by  James  II.,  ii.  211;  Scots 
grant  them  for  ever,  221 

Executions  (see  Question)  at  Rome,  i. 
183 :  at  Venice,  208  ;  in  Switzerland, 
241  ;  in  England,  278,  282 

Exeter  College,  Oxford,  comedy  per- 
formed at  (lG37),i.  11 

Exeter  Chapel,  communicants  at,  sur- 
prised (1G57),  i.  323 

Exeter,  Earl  of,  garden  at  Burleigh,  i. 
298  n  ;  ii.  189 

-— — ,  Parliament's  terms  of  capitula- 
tion to,  iv.  176,  177  ;  siege  of,  180. 

Exhalation,  fiery,  account  of  (1694),  ii. 
328 

"  Exomologetis,"  by  Dean  Cressy,i.  376 
Experiment,  uew  invented  ship  so  called, 
ii.  96 

Exton,  Dr.,  Judge  of  the  Admiralty,  i. 
376 

Eye  of  a  Dutch  Boy,  phaenomenon  in, 
ii.  364 

Eyes,  receipt  for  strengthening,  iii.  208; 
wax  taper  at  night  recommended,  &c., 
209 

Eyre,  Mr.  Justice,  a  subscriber  to  Green- 
wich Hospital,  ii.  345 

Fairfax,  Major,  i.  300  n  ;  character  of, 
ii.  115 

 ,  Sir  Thomas,  Lord,  iii.  10,  35  ; 

iv.  141,  149,  154,  174,  176,  180,  181, 

302,  notes 
Faith,  Assembly's  confession  of,  iii.  109 
"Faithful  Post"  (1653),  a  journal,  iv. 

277  n 

"  Faithful  Scout"  (1653),  a  journal,  iv. 
285  n 

Faithorne,  William,  his  portrait  of 
Cathei-ine,  Queen  of  Charles  XL,  i. 

363  n 

Falcon  berg,  Thomas  Belasyse,  Viscount, 

ii.  117,  176 
Falkland,  Lucius  Gary,  Lord,  iv.  68  n, 

101  ;  portrait,  iii.  301 
•  ,  Lord  (Treasurer  of  the  Navy), 

ii.  176,  198,  218;  deatli,  and  account 

of,  330 

 ,  Lady,  ii.  215,  216,  330 

Fallen  Angels,  iii.  88 
Falmouth,  Charles  Berkeley,  Earl  of,  i. 
355  and  n  ;  iii.  240 


Family  of  Love,  address  to  the  King 

(1G87),  ii.  268 
Fanelli,  statues  in  copper  by,  i.  364 
Fans  from  China,  i,  379 
Fanshaw,  Sir  Simon,  his  collection  of 

coins,  iii.  300 
Fanshawe,  Sir  Richard,  allusions  to,  i. 

275,  276,  306,  349,  366,  418  ;  iv.  200 
Fai'nese  Palace  at  Rome,  account  of,  i. 

102,  143,  163,  175 
Farnese,  Cardinal  Alessandro,  i.  128, 

184 

Fari-ande,  iv.  256 

Farringdoii,  Mr.,  funeral  of,  ii.  27 

Fari'ingdon,  town  of,  i.  293 

Father  John  at  Rome,  i.  101 

Faubert,  Mons.,  riding-master,  his  aca- 
demy, &c.,  ii.  159,  169,  201,  202 

Faulkner,  Thomas,  his  "History  of 
Chelsea"  cited,  ii.  127  n 

Faustina,  temple  of,  i.  103 

Fay,  Governor  of  Portsmouth,  i.  334 

Fearne,  Dr.,  i.  334 

Febure,  Mons.,  his  chemical  experi- 
ments, &c.,  i.  244,  272  ;  Sir  W. 
Raleigh's  cordial  prepared  by,  368 
Fell,  Dr.  John,  Bishop  of  Oxford,  i. 
352,  383  ;  ii.  42  ;  sermon  in  blank 
verse,  i.  390  ;  letter  to  Mr.  Evelyn 
on  the  Arundel  MSS.,  iii.  216  ;  letter 
of  Mr.  Evelyn  to,  recommending 
answers  to  atheistical  books,  iii.  264  ; 
death  of,  ii.  256  ;  account  of,  i.  416 
Felton,  Sir  John,  ii.  Ill 

 ,  Sir  Maurice,  iii.  390,  395 

 ,Sir  Geoffrey,  iii.  389,  396 

Fenton,  letters  and  journal  of,  iii.  262, 
380 

Fenwick,  Sir  John,  taken,  ii.  342,  343  ; 
executed,  346 

 ,  Mr.,  and  his  wife,  cause  between, 

ii.  370  and  u 

Ferdinand  I.,  Grand  Duke  of  Florence, 
chapel  of,  i.  189 

Ferguson,  Robert,  conspirator,  ii.  178, 
180,  226,  228 

Feria,  Duke  of,  i,  227 

Fermor,  Sir  William,  afterwards  Earl 
of  Pomfret,  ii.  129,  156,  318  ;  some 
of  the  Arundehan  statues  purchased 
by,  now  at  Oxford,  31 1 

Ferrara,  notice  of,  i.  195 

Ferrarius,  Dr.,  of  Milan,  i.  224,  226  ; 
notice  of,  405 

Ferrers,  Barons,  their  tenure  at  Oak- 
ham, i.  298 

Ferte  Imbault,  Mons.  de  la,  iv.  337,  338 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


891 


Fete  Dieu,  at  Tours,  i.  72 

Feversham,  Lewis  de  Duras,  Earl  of, 

ii.  102,  202,  206,  226,  233  ;  taken 

prisoner,  28 O" 
Fiaramingo,  Gei*.,  picture  by,  i.  112; 

sculpture,  123,  182,259 
Fiat,  Mous.,  i.  291 
Field,  Dr.,  Bishop  of  Oxford,  i.  5 

 ,  Captain,  iii,  271 

Fielding,  Lady  Mary,  her  marriage, 

ii.  388 

Fienues,  Dr.,  sermon  of,  ii.  200 
Fiesole,  Gio.  di,  painting  by,  i.  172 
Fifth -Monarchy- Men,  sermon  against, 

i.  321 ;  insuiTection  of,  ^44 
Filmer,  Sir  E.,  ii.  190 

Finale,  notice  of  the  shore  of,  i.  83 
Finch,  Sir  John,  Lord  Keeper,  in  Hol- 
land (1641),  i.  18, 23  ;  advanced  to  the 
peerage  as  Baron  Finch,  401 ;  letter 
of  Charles  I.  to,  iv.  63  ;  noticed,  64, 
69,  70,  74,  77,  87—125 
 ,  Sir  John, afterwards  Lord  Chan- 
cellor, and  Earl  of  Nottingham,  i.  385  ; 

ii.  59,  153 

•  ,  Mr.  (son  of  Lord  Chancellor), 

afterwards  Earl  of  Aylesford,  ii.  1 30, 
250  and  n  ;  James  II.'s  speech  to 
the  Council  on  his  accession,  taken 
down  in  writing  by,  208  n,  268  ; 
Burleigh-on-the-Hill  bought  by  the 
family  of,  i.  298  n 

Fioravanti,  a  painter  in  Rome,  i.  183, 
259 

Fire-eater,  performances  of  a,  ii.  79 
Fire-ships,  appalling  nature  of,  iii.  305 
Fire-works  at  Rome  (1644),  i.  131 ;  in  St. 

James's-square  (1695),  ii.  338 
Firmin,  Mr.  Thomas,  account  of,  ii.  300 
Fish,  horn  of  one  presented  to  Royal 

Society,  i.  379  ;  sight  and  hearing  of, 

iii.  209,  210 

Fisher,  Dr.  John,  Bishop  of  Rochester, 

portrait  of,  iii.  301 
Fishery,  on  the  right  of,  iii.  268 — 271 
Fish-ponds,  various  references  to,  i.  39, 

51,  58,  64,  111,  112,  134,  181,  240 
Fitzgerald,  Lady  Catherine,  ii.  198 
Fitz-Harding,   Lord,  instructions  for 

Holland,  iii.  240  ;  death  of,  ii.  86 
Fitzpatrick,  Colonel,  ii.  266  ;  iii.  319 
Fitz-Roy,  Lady  Anne,  ii.  108  n 
Flagellants  at  Rome,  i.  176 
Flamel,  Nicholas,  i.  65 
Flamerin,  Mens.,  ii.  200 
Flamstead,  Dr.  John,  astronomer,  ii. 

108-111,  183,  198,  385 


Flanders,  apprehensions  of  the  French 
army  in,  iv.  210 

Fleet,  engagement  with  the  Dutch,  1665, 
i.  392  and  n,  393  ;  victory  over  the 
Dutch  (June,  1665),  394  ;  Charles  II. 
visits  the  English  fleet  at  the  Nore, 
395 ;  victory  over  the  Dutch  (June, 
1666),  ii.  5  ;  various  particulars  of  the, 
4,  8  ;  mangled  state  of  the  English 
fleet,  7  ;  English  and  French  united 
fleets  (1672),  73 

Fleetwood,  Dr.  James,  Bishop  of  Wor- 
cester, sermon  by,  ii.  105 

 ,    Mr.,    declines  the  Boyle 

lectureship,  iii.  376 

 ,  Sir  George,  on  Cromwell's 

dissimulation,  iv.  209 

Fletcher,  John,  poet,  portrait,  iii.  301 

Floors  of  rooms,  plaister,  &c.,  used  for, 
i.  85 

Florence,  account  of  the  city  of,  i.  91  — 
95,  186—190  ;  bridges  of,  91 ;  Palaces 
of  Strozzi  and  Pitti,  91  ;  church  of 
Santo  Spirito,  92 ;  Palazzo  Vecchio, 
ih. ;  Hanging  Tower,  ih. ;  the  Duke's 
Repository  of  Curiosities,  93,  94,  187  ; 
church  of  the  Annunciata,  95,  187  ; 
Duke's  Cavalei'izzo  and  Menagerie, 
95 ;  Poggio  Imperiale,  186  ;  collec- 
tions of  Prince  Leopold  and  Signor 
Gaddi,  Academy  de  la  Crusca,  189  ; 
church  of  St.  Laurence,  ih. ;  Arsenal, 
artists,  &c.,  190 

 ,  agent  of  the  Duke  of,  an 

affront  to,  iv.  127 

Florival,  Mons.,  of  Geneva,  ii.  352 

Fog,  remarkable  (1670),  ii.  53  ;  (1699), 
355 

Fondi,  i.  148 

Fondigo  di  Todeschi  at  Venice,  i.  198 
Fontaine,  Mrs.,  i.  314 
Fontainebleau,  palace  and  gardens,  i.  57, 
58,  299 

Fontana,  Annibal,  carving  by,  i.  225 
• —  ,  Domenico-Maria,  architect, 

works  of,  i.  113,  114,  119,  120,  126, 

141,  167,  171,  225 

 ,  Lavinia,painting  by,  i.  142,164 

Fontana  della  Therme,  at  Rome, i.  Ill 

Fontana  di  Specchio,  i.  180 

Fonts,  remarkable,  i.  29,  89 

Forbes,  Mr.,  ii.  1 89 

Force,  Duchesse  de  la,  ii.  301 

Forests,  notices  of,  i.  56,  57, 67,  70 

Forraiana,  i.  148 

Forstei*,  Sir  H.,  house  at  Aldermaston, 
i.  289 


392 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Fortifications,  continental,  i.  19,  20,  2G, 
28,  30,  33,  37,  Gl,  71,  73,  75,  76,  95, 
97,  99,  191,  228,  231,  252,  270  ; 
English,  29U,  299  ;  ii.  24,  72,  77 

Forum  Boarium  at  Rome,  i.  107  ;  Tra- 
jauuni,  172 

Fossa  Nuova,  monastery  at,  i.  147 

Foster,  Sir  Richard,  iv.  259,  2G5,  273, 
275,  281 

Fotherbee,  Sir  John,  i,  23 

Fountains  of  Lepidus.  See  Water-works, 
i.  113 

Fowler,  Dr.  Edward,  Bishop  of  Glou- 
cester, ii.  312  n 

 ,  Sir  Thomas,  his  aviary,  i.  288 

Fox,  Colonel,  iv.  167 

■  ,  Dr.  Edward,  Bishop  of  Hereford, 

portrait,  iii.  30 1 

■  ,  Sir  Stephen  and  Lady,  ii.  8,  129, 

1 34,  1 3G  ;  (a  Lord.  Commissioner  of 
the  Treasury,  139)  ;  account  of  him, 
147,  148,  378  ;  proposals  for  his 
daughter,  15G  ;  directed  by  the  King 
to  form  regukitions,  &c.,  for  Hospital 
at  Chelsea,  159,  163,  166,  169;  his 
great  interest  with  bankei-s,  1 62;  his 
house  at  Chiswick,  169, 175  ;  allusions 
to  him,  187,  192,  199,  218,  232,  283  ; 
grand  dinner  given  by,  241 ;  subscrip- 
tion to  Greenwich  Hospital,  344  n 

Foy,  Dr.,  ii.  350 

Frampton,Dr. Robert,  afterwards  Bishop 
of  Gloucester,  ii.  69,  80  ;  sermon 
(1686),  250  ;  deprived,  312  n 

Franc,  Mons.  le,  notice  of,  i.  313; 
ordained  of  the  Church  of  England,  i6. 

France,  Scotch  forces  serving  in  (1643), 
iv.  337  ;  fleet  sent  to  Naples  (1648), 
346 — 350  ;  proceedings  of  Court  and 
Parliament,  243,  322,  345—349,  352  ; 
peace  made  with  (1649),  i.  250  ;  de- 
sirous to  conclude  a  treaty  with 
Cromwell  (1653),  iv.  299  n;  tem- 
porising policy  of,  about  Cromwell's 
Ambassador  (1656),  313;  persecution 
of  Protestants  (1685),  ii.  225 

«  France,  the  State  of,"  ii.  395 

Francis  L,  King  of  France,  tomb  of,  i. 
42 ;  his  palace,  called  Madrid,  55, 
256  ;  his  regard  for  L.  da  Vinci, 
226  ;  portrait  of,  249 

Francis  a  Paula,  St.,  epitaph,  i.  73. 

Franciscan  Monastery  at  Sienna,  i.  100 

Francisco,  Signor,  his  skill  on  the  harp- 
sichord, ii.  94,  164 

Franco,  John  Baptist,  manufacturer  of 
fire-arms,  i.  223 


Frascati,  description  of,  i.  179 
Fraser,  or  Frisoll,  Mr.,  iv.  70,  223 

 ,  Dr.,  i.  373  ;  iv.  251,  263  n 

 ,  Sir  Alexander,  ii.  6 

 ,  Mr.,  books  purchased  by,  ii.  181 

Frato  del,  paintings  by,  i.  188 

Freart,  Roland,  treatise  of,  translated  by 

i\Ir.  Evelyn,  i.  382  n  ;  ii.  396 
Frederick,  Sir  John,  his  pageant.  Sec, 

when  Lord  Mayor,  i.  357,  and  n 
Freeman,  Sir  Ralph,  of  Betchworth,  i. 

371 

Freind,  Sir  John,  judicial  sentence  upon, 
ii.  340  ;  absolved  by  three  non-juring 
clergymen,  341 

French  Church  in  the  Savoy,  i.  317  ; 
refugees  at  Gx'eenwich  (1687), ii.  265 

French,  Dr.,  i.  290,  376 

"French  Gardener  and  English  Vine- 
yard" (1658),  pubHshed,  ii.  391,  395 
French  Litelligeucer"  (1656),  iv.  312  n 

Frene,  M.,  of  Paris,  his  collection,  i.  56 

Frey,  Hans,  famous  for  his  lutes,  i.  194 

Frier,  Mr.,  schoolmaster,  i,  4 

Frigates,  peculiar  advantages  of,  i.  375 n; 
ii.  304 

Frobisher,  Martin,  his  Journal,  iii.  262, 
Frognall,  Sir  Philip  Warwick's  house  at 
ii.  101 

Fromantil,  curious  clock  by,  i.  342,  351 
Frost,  remarkable  (1649),  i.  248 
Frowde,  Mr.,  clerk  to  Mr.  Locke,  ii.  80 
Fuel,  scarcity,  &c.,  of,  ii.  25,  26 
Fuensaldague,  General  under  the  Prince 

of  Conde',  iv.  285  n 
Fuente,  Marquis  de  la,  pass  granted  by, 

i.  218 

Fulgosi,  Rodolphua,  tomb  of,  i.  207 
Fulliam,  Dr.,  sermon  by,  ii.  348 
Fuller,  Isaac,  paintings  by,  i.  384 
 ,  Mr.,  iv.  12 

Fullerton,  Colonel  in  the  French  service, 
iv.  337 

"Fumifugium"  (1661),  by  Mr.  Evelyn, 
notice  of,  i.  84  n;  ii.  12  ;  publication  of, 
i.  354  and  n,  355  ;  ii.  391,  395 

Gaddi,  Signor,  of  Florence,  collection  of, 
i.  189 

Gaetano.    See  Pulsone 

Gaieta,  City  of,  i.  148 

Gale,  Dr.  Thomas,  Master  of  St.  Paul's 

School,  ii.  171,  38G  ;  iii.  323,  371; 

MSS.  possessed  by,  334,  337 
GaUcano,  Prince,  of  Rome,  i.  177 
"  Gallant,  the  Wild,"  by  Dryden,  i.  373 
Galleries  in  the  Vatican,  i.  139 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


39S 


Galley-alaves  at  Marseilles,  account  of, 

i.  80  ;  slaves  at  Leghorn,  90 
Galloway,  Thomas  Sysderf,   Bishop  of 

(1G50),  i.  271  n  ;  ordmation  by,  258 
Galloway,  Lord  (1G58),  i.  'd'd2 
Galway,  Henry  do  Ruvigne,  Earl  of 

(1701),  account  of,  ii.  3G5  and  n  ;  iii. 

313 

Gamboo,  Castle  of,  taken  by  the  French, 

ii.  328 

Gaming  at  Leghorn,  i.  91 ;  at  Venice, 
21 G  ;  at  Court,  359  ;  ii.  32 

Gardens  —  Abroad  :  at  the  Prince's 
Court  at  the  Hague,  i.  21  ;  at  Leyden, 
26  ;  Prince's  Court  at  Brussels,  35  ; 
Jardine  Royale  at  Paris,  49  ;  of  the 
Thuilleries,  51  ;  of  the  Archbishop  of 
Paris  at  St.  Cloud,  52;  of  Cardinal 
Richelieu  at  Ruell,  53  ;  ditto  at  Riche- 
lieu, 75;  at  St.  Germain's,  55;  Fou- 
tainebleau,  58  ;  M.  Essling  at  Paris, 
59,  at  Caen,  62  ;  of  the  Luxemburg 
Palace,  63,  64;  M.  Morine's  at  Paris, 
65,  265  ;  of  the  Palace  of  Negroes  at 
Genoa,  i.  85  ;  of  the  Prince  d'Orias' 
at  Genoa,  86 ;  of  the  Marquess 
Spinola,  87  ;  of  the  palace  of  Pitti  at 
Florence,  92  ;  Palazzo  de  Medici  at 
Rome,  108;  Prince  Ludovisio's,  109  ; 
Villa  Borghesi,  117,  178  ;  Cai-dinal 
Borghese's  at  Rome,  133  ;  Pope's 
palace  at  Monte  Cavallo,  111,  134  ; 
Vatican,  141;  Horti  Mathtei,  165; 
garden  of  Justinian,  171, 174;  Cardinal 
Bentivoglio's,  173;  Frascati  (Cardinal 
Aldobrandini's),  179  ;  Mondragone, 
180 ; palace  d'Este  atTivoli,z6. ;  Garden 
of  Simples  at  Sienna,  185  ;  at  Padua, 
211;  of  Mantua,  ib.;  at  Grand  Duke's 
near  Bologna,  1 90  ;  Count  Ulmarini's 
at  Viucenza,  220  ;  Count  Giusti's  at 
Verona,  222  ;  at  Geneva,  240,  242 ; 
Gardens  of  Palais  Cardinal  at  Paris, 
255,  270.  In  England  :  atWotton,  i. 
2,  3,  39,  277;  at  Sayes  Court,  284; 
Lady  Brook's  at  Hackney,  287  ;  Mr. 
Tombs's,  288  ;  Spring  and  Mulberry 
Gardens,  251,  288,  353;  Physic-garden 
at  Oxford,  292,  384  ;  ii.  99  ;  Earl 
of  Pembroke's  at  Wilton,  i.  294  ; 
Orangery,  «Scc.,  at  Bedington,  330  ;  ii. 
361 ;  at  Audley-end,  i.  305 ;  at  NewHall, 
316  ;  at  Hampton  Court,  364  ;  Mr. 
Rett's  at  Chatham,  375  ;  at  the  Earl 
of  Norwich,  Epping  Forest,  ii.  43  ;  at 
Albm*y,  52  ;  Lord  Arlington's  at 
Euston,  64  ;    at  Berkeley  House, 


London,  78,  197  ;  Lord 'Lauderdale's 
at  Ham,  122  ;  Sir  Henry  Capel's  at 
Kew,  ih.,  189,  272  ;  Countess  of 
Bristol's  at  Chelsea,  1 28  ;  Earl  of 
Essex  at  Cashiobury,  140  ;  Apothe- 
caries' Garden  at  Chelsea,  230  ;  Lady 
Clarendon's  at  Swallowfield,  240  ;  Sir 
William  Temple's  at  Sheen,  272  ;  Mr. 
Evelyn's  plan  for  a  Royal  Garden,  393 

Gardiner,  Sir  Thomas,  iv.  135  n 

Gardner,  Mrs.,  i.  262;  mai'riage  of,  272 

Garland,  Sir  Patrick,  iv.  302 

Garmus,  Mr.,  Hamburgh-resident  in 
England,  his  entertainment,  i.  352 

Garrarde,  ,  iv.  147 

Garret,  Lady,  iii.  308  ;  letter  of  Mr. 
Evelyn  to,  57 

Garrick,  David,  i.  386  n 

Garro,  arrest  of  Mr.  Evelyn  by,  i.  73 

Garter,  Order  of  the,  celebration  of  St. 
George's  day  (1667),  ii.  22 ;  offerings  of 
the  Knights  of,  51  ;  Installation  of 
the,  22 

Gascoigne,  Sir  Bernard,  ii.  48,  118 
Gassendus,   Peter,  translation   of  his 

«  Vita  Peiriskii"  (edit.  1657),  i.  319 
Gassion,    (soldier),  monument  for 

at  Charenton,  i.  254 
Gauden,  Sir  Denis,  ii.  134,  321 
Gaudy,  Sir  John,  account  of,  ii.  110 
Gaunt,  John  of,  i.  36 ;  Hospital  of,  298 
Gaurus,  Mount,  i.  158 
Gay  wood,  Robert,  engraver,  iii.  82 
Geare,  Sir  John,  his  conduct  before  the 

Lords,  iii.  8 
Geere,  Sir  R.,  present  to  St,  James's 

Church,  Piccadilly,  ii.  201 
Genep  on  the  Waal,  siege  of,  i.  17,  19 
General  Pardon  issued  by  Charles  I.,  iv. 

58  and  n,  68  ;  dishke  of,  59 
Geneva,  account  of,  i.  239 — 243  ;  book- 
sellers, the  Town  House,  240,  242  ; 

sports  in  the  Campus  Martins,  241  ; 

religion,  242;  Chui'ch  of  St.  Peter,  {6.; 

College,  243 
Genner  (Jenner),  Sir  Thomas,  Recorder 

of  London,  ii.  187 
Genoa  (1644),  i.  83  ;  account  of,  83—88  ; 

Palace  of  Hieronymo  del  Negros,  85  ; 

of  the  Prince  d'Urias,  86  ;  armoury, 

ih. ;  Strada  Nova,  Churches,  87  ;  the 

Mole,  and  Walls,  84,  87  ;  dress  of  the 

inhabitants,  88  n  ;  besieged  by  the 

French,  ii.  197 
Gens  d'armes  of  Paris,  muster  of,  i,  66 
Gentileschi  (Orazio  Lomi),  painting  by, 

i.  167 


394 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


"Gentleman's  Magazine"  referred  to, 

i.  357  n,  367  n,  370  n,  385 
Georgia,  &e.,  women  of,  ii.  146 
Georgioni  (Giorgio  Barliarelli),  painting 

by,  i.  328 

Gerard,  General,  liis  accusation  of  Lord 

Digby,  iv.  166  n 
Gerbier,  Sir  Balth.,  conduct  at  Paris, 

iv.  339 
Germaine,  Lord,  i.  253 

 ,  Sir  John,  ii.  359 

Germany,  method  of  pei'fuming  rooms 

in,  i.  311 

Gerrard,  Charles,  Lord,  i.  267,  373  ;  ii. 

21  ;  account  of,  i.  409;  referred  to, 

iv.  195,  217,  251  n 

 ,  Ladv,  i.  247,  278,  285—288 

■  ,  Sir  Gilbert,  ii.  250 

Ghent,  account  of,  i.  36 
Ghetto,  at  Rome,  i.  136  ;  at  Venice,  217, 
Ghisi,  Palace  of,  i.  134,  163  ;  chapel  of, 
'  170 

Gibbon,  Grinling,  carver,  discovered  by 
Mr,  Evelyn,  and  introduced  to  the 
King,  &c.,  ii.  53 — 57  ;  carvings  by, 
53—57,  119,  134,  142,  168,  176,  201, 
260,  261  ;  Walpole's  account  of  him, 
53,  54,  notes;  letter  of,  to  Mr.  Evelyn, 
soliciting  his  recommendation,  54  n 
Gibbons,  Christopher,  musician, i.  292 
Gibbs,  Dr.  James  Alban,  account  of, 

i.  101  and  n,  144 
Gibson,  Dr.  Edmund,  Bishop  of  London, 
communication  to,  by  Mr.  Evelyn,  for 
"Camden's  Britannia,"  iii.  341  and  n 
GifFord,  Captain,  misfortune  of,  ii.  337 
Gilbert,  lapidary  of  Venice,  i.  219 

.  ,  Dr.  William,  portrait  of,  i.  369 

Gildron,  paintings  possessed  by,  i.  250 
Gilpin,  Bei'nard,  ii.  259  n 
Giolo,  the  painted  Prince,  ii.  350  and  n 
Giotto  (Ambrogiotto),  mosaic  by,  i.  124 
Giovanni,  Signor,  of  Florence,  i.  190 
Giuseppe,  Cavaliero,  marbles  by,  i.  125 
Giusti,  Count,  of  Verona,  his  villa,  i.  222 
Gladiators,  celebrated  statues  of,  i.  1 02, 

110,  134,  143 
Glanvil,  Dr.  Joseph,  letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn 
to,  respecting  his  "  Plus  ultra,"  iii. 
204  ;  noticed,  ib. 
Glanville,  George  (brother-in-law  of  Mr. 
Evelyn),  i.  246,  285  ;  ii.  313;  Mrs. 
Evelyn's  letters  to,  iv.  12,  15,  16,  22, 
26,  38  ;  his  death,  and  burial  in  the 
sea,  ii.  367  ;  descendants,  ib. 

•  ,    William    (nephew    of  Mr. 

Evelyn),  ii.  313,  357,  367 


Glanville,  Sir  John  (Speaker),  i.  293 

 ,  William  (son  of  Speaker),  i. 

284,  293 

Glass  manufacture,  i.  212  ;  ii.  84  ;  paint- 
ing, remarks  relative  to,  165 

Glemham,  Sir  Thomas,  Governor  of 
Oxford,  iv.  164  ;  the  siege  of  Oxford, 
167,  171,  176  n  ;  iii.  8 

Glencairn,  William  Cunningham,  lltli 
Earl  of,  iv.  81 

Gloucester,  Henry  Stuart,  Duke  of,  iv. 
220,  278  n  ;  Henrietta  endeavours  to 
pervert  his  religion,  203,  214—217  ; 
letter  of  Charles  II.  to,  203  ;  death  of, 

i.  341,  ii.52 

 ,  Duke  of,  son   of  Princess 

Anne,  ii.  361 
Gloucester  Cathedral,  i.  296;  castle,  ih. 
Gloves,  custom  of  presenting,  i.  420 
Glow-worms,  flying  (Luccioli),  i.  195 
Glynne,    Serjeant,    Commissioner  at 

Newport,  iv.  185  n 
Godfrey,  Sir  Edmondbury,  murder  of, 

ii.  126,  133 

Godolphin,  Francis  (son  of  Lord),  birth, 
ii.  123,  124  n  ;  alluded  to,  126,  225, 
230  ;  marriage  of,  350,  369 

 ,  Dr.  Henry,  ii.  135,  276,  341; 

sermon  of,  195 

 ,    Sidney,    afterwards  Lord 

Godolphin,  his  marriage,  ii.  77,  98  n  ; 
Mr.  Evelyn  builds  him  a  house,  108  ; 
alluded  to,  103,  108—110,  123—126, 
135,  211,  218,  220,  225,  261,  285, 
310,  320,  325, 333,  335  ;  made  a  Lord 
Commissioner  of  the  Treasury,  129, 
131,  199;  created  Baron  Godolphin, 
199  ;  his  house,  Cranbourn,  in  Wind- 
sor Park,  258  ;  subscription  to  Green- 
wich Hospital,  344  and  n  ;  retires 
from  the  Treasury,  346  ;  his  return 
to  it,  362,  368  ;  letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn 
to,  iii.  354 

 ,  Mrs.,  wife  of  the  preceding 

(formerly  Mrs.  Blagge,  ii.  39,  77  n, 
94  n)  ;  her  marriage,  98  ;  allusions 
to  her,  105,  108,  117  ;  birth  of  her 
son,  123;  her  death,  ib. ;  character, 
&c.,  123,  124  ;  funeral,  125;  papers, 
&c.,  ib.  ;  life  of,  prepared  by  Mr. 
Evelyn,  124,  381,  394 

,  ,  Sir   WilHam,  ii.  123,  125, 

127,  130,  199,  218,  225,  276,  325 
Godstone,  Surrey,  descent  of  the  Evelyns 
of,  Pedigree  ;u.  397;  Sir  John  Evelyn's 
house  at,  i.  251,  328  ;  monument  of 
Sir  John  Evelyn  at,  116 


THE  DIAllY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


39e5 


Godwin,  William,  his  "Lives  of  Edward 
and  John  Philips"  (1815),  i.  377  n 

Goffe,  Dr.  Stephen,  a  llomish  priest,  i. 
19,  376  ;  Mr.  Evelyn's  conversation 
with,  respecting  Cressy's  Answer  to 
Pierce,  iii.  139,  141 

 ,  Colonel,  i.  323 

Golding,  Capt.,  killed  in  engagement 
with  the  Dutch,  i.  392  n 

Gondolas  of  Venice,  description  of,  i. 
197,  364 

Good,  Di\  Thomas,  letters,  iii.  247— 
249 

Goode,  Dr.,  minister  of  St.  Martin's,  ii. 
327 

Good-Friday,  ceremonies  at  Rome  on, 
i.  176 

Goodman,  Dr.  Godfx'ey,  Bishop  of  Glou- 
cester, impeached,  iv.  99  n,  123  u 

 ,  Dr.,  sermon  of,  ii.  199 

Goodrick,  Sir  Henry,  a  subscriber  to 
Greenwich  Hospital,  ii.  344  n 

Goose,  unnatural  one,  i.  287 

Gore,  Mrs.,  married  George  Evelyn,  ii. 
354 

Gorges,  Sir  Arthur,  i.  361 
 ,  Mr.,  ii.  61 

Goring,  Col.  George,  i.  19,  28,  38  ; 
account  of,  401;  examined  by  Parha- 
ment,  iv.  56  n,  76  n,  130,  133 

■  ,    General    George,    Earl  of 

Norwich,  iv.  149  n,  154n,  162,  163, 
169,  170,  210,220;  account  of,  133  n; 
Charles's  directions  to,  before  battle 
of  Naseby,  146  n  ;  defeated  by  the 
Parliament,  154  n 

Goring  House,  i.  391;  ii.  38,  46,  82; 
burned,  93 

Gosling,  his  fine  bass  voice,  ii.  204 

Gospel,  ancient  copy  of  St.  John's,  i.  92 

Gotefridi,  Signer,  collection  of  medals, 
i.  178 

Gouge,  Dr.,  iv.  72 

Gouttiere,  near  Colombiere,  caves  so 
called,  i.  73 

Governe,  Madame  de,  ii.  255 

Grafton,  Henry  Fitzroy,  Duke  of 
(natural  son  of  Charles  II.),  marriage 
of,  ii.  77  ;  remarriage,  135  ;  alluded 
to,  108,  168,  251,  309,  389  ;  duel 
fought  by,  250  ;  death,  309,  310  ;  iii. 
319  ;  birth  of  his  son,  ii.  189 

 ,  Duchess  of  (daughter  of  Lord 

Arlington),  marriage,  ii.  77,  135  ;  cha- 
racter and  notices  of,  135  ;  allusions 
to,  112,  184,  187—189,  325;  appeal 
to  the  House  of  Lords,  327 


Graham,  Colonel  Jame.",  in  love  with 
Mrs.  Dorothy  Howard,  ii.  100;  mar- 
ried, 100  n,  117  ;  Mrs.  Graham,  their 
house  at  Bagshot,  &c.,  232,  240 

 ,  Captain,  ii.  107 

 ,  Mr.,  absconded,  ii.  311  ;  in 

the  Fleet,  340 

Grammont,  Anthony  Hamilton,  Mar- 
shal de,  ii.  57,  382  ;  iv.  348  ;  «Me- 
moires"  cited,  122  n 

"  Granada,  Conquest,  or  Siege  of,"  a  play 
by  Dryden,  ii.  55  ;  iv.  25 

Granado  shot,  of  glass,  i.  378  ;  ii.  24 

Grand  Signior,  letters  of,  to  the  Popes, 
i.  227 

Grange,  ceremony  of  the  Prince  de  la, 
at  Lincoln's  Inn  (1662),  i.  359 

Granger,  Rev.  James,  his  Biographical 
History  of  England"  cited,  i.  321  n 

Grantham,  notice  of  the  town,  i.  302 

Graunt,  Mr.,  his  remarks  on  the  Bills  of 
Mortality,  ii.  97 

Grave,  Robert,  his  print  of  Rose,  gar- 
dener to  Charles  II.,  i.  353  n 

Gray,  Andrew,  eighth  Lord,  a  leader 
for  the  French  King,  iv.  337 

Greatorix,  Mr.,  mathematical-instrument 
maker,  i.  314 

Grebner,  Ezekiel,  his  "  Visions  and 
Prophecies  concerning  England,"  &c., 

i.  303  ;  iv.  62,  227  n 

Greek  Church,  ceremonies  of,  i.  174, 

182,  209;  iii.  219 
Greek  historians,  &c.,  iii.  162 
Green,  Henry,  a  florist,  iii.  254 
Greenborow,  painting  by,  i.  384 
Greene,  Mr.,  iv.  114,  116 
 ,  Anne,  restored  after  hanging, 

ii.  95  and  n 

Greenwich,  Italian  Glasshouse  at,  ii.  84 
 ,  Palace  at,  possessed  by  the 

rebels,  i.  247,  278  ;  design  of  building 

a  new  Palace  at,  356,  361 
Greenwich   Hospital,   commission  for 

endowing,  &c.,  and  proceedings  in 

relation  to  it,  ii.  333,  335—337,  341  ; 

iii.  345  ;  agreement  with  workmen,  ii. 
342  ;  first  stone  laid,  344,  401  ;  sub- 
scriptions, ib. ;  want  of  money  for  (in 
1696),  345  n  ;  hall  and  chapel  of,  350; 
lottery  for,  352  ;  Mr.  Evelyn's  ac- 
counts as  IVeasurer,  347  n,  363,  367, 
371  ;  seamen  first  received  there,  374 

Greenwich  Park,  elms  planted  in,  i.  378; 

observatory  built,  ii.  108 
Gregory  XIIL,  Pope,  Cardinal  Hugo 

Buoncompagno,   Palace  built  by,  i. 


396 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


111  ;  Chapel,  122;  his  hall  in  the] 

Vatican,  137 
Gregory  XIV.,  Pope,  Cardinal  Niccolo 

Sfrondati,  bridge  built  by,  i.  99 
Gregory,  Mr.  Justice,  a  subscriber  to 

Greenwich  Hospital,  ii.  345  n  { 
Grenadiers,  first  introduction  of,  119 
Grenville,  Bernard,  house  at  Abs  Court, 

ii.  88 

 ,  Sir  Richard  and  John,  after- 
wards Earl  of  Bath,  discontented  with 
the  Royalists,  iv.  15-4  ;  letters  of 
Charles  II.  to  procure  arms  and  men, 
198  ;  to  hold  himself  ready  for  his 
service,  ib. 

Gresham,  Sir  Thomas,  statue  of,  pre- 
served in  the  Fire  of  London,  ii.  14 

Gresham  College,  meetings  of  Royal 
Society  at,  i.  344,  345  ;  ii.  26,  89  {see 
Royal  Society),  enquiry  into  Reve- 
nues of,  i.  365—368 

Gressy,  Mons.  de,  iv.  338 

Grew,  Dr.  Neheraiah,  ii.  117,  385 

Grey,  Forde,  Lord,  proclamation  against, 
ii.  178;  defeated  with  the  Duke  of 
Monmouth,  and  taken,  226  ;  con- 
demned and  pardoned,  245  ;  heavilv 
fined,  261 

  Lady  Mary,  iii.  380 

  ;Mr.  (son  of  Lord  Grey),  ii.  59 

Griffin,  Mr.,  engaged  in  service  of 
Charles  II.,  iv.  300 

Griffith,  Prince,  i.  257 

 ,  Captain,  i.  275 

 ,  Lord,  his  Ciiapel  (1693),  ii.  325 

•  ,  Sir  John,  i.  398 


Grimaldi,  Giovanni  Francesco 
lognese),  i.  167 


(II  Bo- 


Grimani  Palace, 


Grimstone,  Sir  Harbottle,  a  Commis- 
sioner at  Newport,  iii.  21 ;  iv.  185  n 
Grindal,  Edmund,  Archbishop  of  Can- 
terbury, monument  of,  ii.  361 
Grocers'  Hall,  banquet  at  (1649),  iii.  55 
Groomsbridge  (Kent),  house  and  chapel, 

i.  281 ;  ii.  91 
Grotius,  Hugo,  his  escape  from  Fort 
Lovestein,  i.  20 

.  ,  INIons.  (son  of  Hugo),  i.  217 

Grotto  del  Cane,  Naples,  i.  156 
Guarda-Daraas,  office  of,  i,  363 
Guarini,  Battista,  portrait  of,  i.  166 
Guerchino,  Giovanni  Francisco  Barbiero, 

called,  painting  by,  i.  193 
Gueschn,  Bertraud  du,  his  sepulchre, 
i.  42 


Guicciardini,  Francisco,  portrait,  ii.  109 
Guido.    See  Reni 
Guildford,  Surrey,  i.  286 

 ,  Elizabeth,  Countess  of,  i.  343, 

415 

Guildhall,  London,  paintings  in,  i.  369  ; 

ii.  85  ;  Lord  Mayor's  feast  in  (1664), 
i.  385 

Guilford,  Francis  North,  Lord,  his  lady, 

and  chai'acter,  ii.  356 
Guillotine, in  Naples,  Vcuice,and  France, 

i.  183,  209 
Guise,  Duke  of,  i.  80,  81;  ii.  57 ;  his 

death,  iv.  218 
Gunman,  Captain,  ii.  104  ;  account  of 

him,  219 

Gunning,  Dr.  Peter,  Bishop  of  Ely, 
sermons  of,  and  allusions  to,  i.  323, 
326,  333,  334;  ii.  81,  82,  104  ;  cha- 
racter, &c.,  of,  81 ;  opinion  on  the 
Test,  127  ;  death,  200 
Guns  first  used  at  Genoa,  i.  87 
Gunson,  Treasurer  of  the  Navy,  ii.  172; 

iii.  392 

Gurney,  Sir  Richard,  Lord  Mayor(1641), 

iv.  82,  106,  128 

Gustavus  Adolphus  II.,  King  of  Sweden, 
i.  239 

Gustavus  X.,  King  of  Sweden,  iv.  220 ; 

invades  Poland,  223  n,  304,  314 
Guttemberg,  John,  i.  27 
Guzman,   Don    Gaspar  de   Teves  y, 

Spanish  Ambassador  at  Venice,  i. 

218 

Gwvnne,  Nell,  i.  18  n  ;  ii.  57,  162,  206, 
379 

Haak,  Theodore,  iii.  241 

Hacker,  Col.  Francis,  regicide,  exe- 
cuted, i.  341 

Hacket,  Dr.  John,  Bishop  of  Lichfield, 
sermon  of,  i.  329 

Haddock,  Sir  Richard,  lottery  prize 
gained  by,  ii.  326 

Haerlera,  church.  Sec,  of,  i.  25  ;  per- 
spective model  of,  312 

Hague,  the  HofF,  or  Prince's  Court  at, 
i.  21 ;  HofF  van  Hounslers  Dyck,  28 

Hale,  Sir  Matthew,  Chief  Justice  of  the 
King's  Bench,  ii.  60,  382 

Hales,  John,  of  Eton,  portrait,  iii.  301  ; 
library,  307 

 ,  Edward,  of  Chilston  (cousin  of 

Mr.  Evelyn),  ii.  4 

 ,  Mr.,  ii.  130 

 ,  Sir  Edward,  i.  308,  310 

 ,  Sir  Edward,  Governor  of  Dover 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


397 


Castle,  ii.  251  and  n  ;  Lieutenant  of 

the  Tower,  276 
Halford,  Sir  Henry,  College  of  Phy- 
sicians opened  by,  ii.  1 74  n 
Halifax,  Sir  George  Savile,  Marquis  of, 

ii.  34,  62,  107, 211,  2!J2,  285,  293,  303  ; 

death  of,  335 
Hall,  Dr.  Joseph,  Bishop  of  Exeter, 

translated  to  Norwich,  ii.  173  ;  iv. 

82  n ;  questioned  by  Parliament,  99  n 
 ,  patent  of  King's  printer  refused 

to,  ii.  250 

 ,  Dr.,  sermon  of,  i.  330 ;  ii.  41 

Halle,  ,  iv.  224 

Halls  and  Exchanges,  notices  of,  various, 

i.  21,  34,  47,  210,  219 
Ham,  Duke  of  Lauderdale's  house,  &c., 

at,  ii.  122 

Hamburgh,  siege  of  (1686),  ii.  257; 
succoured,  258 

Hamilton,  James,  first  Duke,  iii.  15; 
trial  (1648),  i.  248  ;  execution,  249 
and  n  ;  portrait,  iii.  301 

 ,  James,  third  Marquis,  i.  273  ; 

flies  from  the  Court,  iv.  91,  97,  111  ; 
his  letters  to  Charles,  104, 112;  speech 
published,  121 ;  his  envy  of  Marquis 
of  Montrose,  ]  35  n ;  estates  in  France, 
337  ;  executed  (1648),  105  n  ;  refer- 
ences to,  68,  107 

 ,  Lieut.-Col.,  iii.  35;  iv.  163, 

164 

 ,William  Douglas,Duke(1660), 

i.  340;  ii.5  ;  (1682),  170;  taken  (1690), 
308  ;  marriage  of  his  son,  270 

 ,  Lady,  and  George  her  hus- 
band, ii.  1 04 

 ,  Rev.  Mr.,  i.  271  n 

"  Hamlet,  Prince  of  Denmark,"  per- 
formed, i.  358 

Hammond,  Col.  Robert,  his  promise  to 
Charles  I.,  iv.  174  n 

 ,  Dr.  Henry,  i.  290 

 ,  founder  of  a  fellowship,  &c., 

iii.  342 

Hampden,  John,  ii.  151  ;  committed  to 
the  Tower,  178,  190  ;  tried,  194 

 ,  Mr.  (1693),  ii.  326 

Hampstead,  Lord  Wotton's  house  at, 

ii.  106 

Hampton  Court,  Charles  I.  at,  i.  245  ; 
court  held  there  (1665), 396;  palace  at, 
ii.  363  ;  ii.  300  ;  noticed,  iv.  131, 132, 
183 

Hanging,  women  restored  after,  ii.  95 
Hanging  Tower  at  Pisa,  i.  89,  185  ;  at 
Florence,  92  ;  at  Bologna,  192 


Hanmer,  Sir  Thomas,  i.  319  ;  portrait 
of,  ii.  203 

Hanover,  Duke  of,  excluded  from  the 

British  throne  (1689),  ii.  300 

 ,  Sophia,  Electress  of,  i,  401 

Harbord,  Sir  Charles,  i.  353  ;  his  son's 

death,  ii.  75 

 ,  Ambassador,  his  death,  ii.  322 

Harby,  Sir  Job,  employed  by  Charles  T., 

iv.  73,  83,  85,  90,  98,  164,  178  ;  his 

family,  73  n 
Harcourt,  Count  d'.  Grand  Ecuyer  de 

France,  i.  269  ;  iv.  246 

 ,  Earl  of,  ii.  299  n 

 •,  Sir  Simon,  i.  Iniroduction, 

xxxiii. ;  ii.  366 
Harding,  Mr.  Richard,  allusions  to,  by 

Queen  of  Bohemia,  iv.  210,  213,  217 

—220 

Hardwick  Hall,  plaster  floor  at,  i.  86  n 

"  Hai'dwick  State  Papers "  cited,  iv. 
340  n,  215  n 

Harlakenton,  jNIr.,  i.  310 

Harleian  Manuscripts  referred  to,  iv. 
133,  140,  340,  notes 

Harley,  Col.  Edward,  ii.  1 25  n 

 ,  Robert,  Earl  of  Oxford,  Speaker 

of  House  of  Commons,  ii.  363  and  n 

Harman,  Captain,  ii  5 

Harris,  IMr.,  candidate  for  Boyle 
lectureship,  iii.  367 

Harrison,  Sir  John,  house  near  Hert- 
ford, i.  39 

 ,  Henry,  executed,  ii.  317  n 

Hartlib,  Samuel,  visit  to,  by  Mr.  Evelyn, 
i.  310  ;  notice  of,  412  ;  alluded  to, 
iii.  115,  389,  391  ;  letter  to  Mr. 
Evelyn,  131 

Harthp,  Kent,  war  prisoners  at,  ii.  72 

Harvey,  Sir  Daniel,  ii.  5 

 ,  Dr.,  statue  of,  i.  369  ;  anniver- 
sary oration,  381 

 ,  Mr.,  of  Combe,  ii.  375 

Harwood,  Dr.,  iii.  381 

Hasted,  Edward,  his  "  History  of  Kent " 
referred  to,  i.  281  n,  282  n,  375  n 

Hatfield,  palace  at,  i.  39 

Hatton,  Christopher,  Lord,  i.  251,  253, 
257,  262,  319,  353  ;  iv.  135, 151,  169, 
192  ;  house  of,  at  Kirby,  302 

 ,  Lady,  i.  251,  323,  406 

 ,  Sergeant  Richard   (cousin  of 

Mr.  Evelyn),  i.  246 

 ,  Edward,  his  *'  New  View  of 

London,"  ii.  79  n 

Hatton  Garden,  built  over,  i.  332 ;  exhi- 
bition in,  ii.  88 


398 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Hausse,  M.  de,  his  library,  &c.,  i.  56 
Havannah,  Governor  of,  liis  misfortunes, 
i.  319 

Havre  de  Grace,  citadel,  &c.  of,  i.  61  ; 

bombarded,  ii.  331 
Hawkins,  Sir  John,  letters  of,  iii.  380 
Hawley,  Lord,  ii.  67 
Hayes,  Sir  James,  ii.  77 

 ,  WiUiam,  iv.  38 

Hay-Hill  Farm,  notice  of,  ii.  78  n 
Hay-Market,  paving  of  (1662),  i.  365 
Haywood,  Sir  William,  ii.  67 
Headache,  cure  for,  i.  250 
Headly,  Thomas,  servant  of  Mr.  Evelyn, 

i.  287 

Heard,  Sir  Isaac,  Garter  King  of  Arms, 

great  age  of,  ii.  222  n 
Hearth  Tax,  abolition  of,  ii.  294 
Heath,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  i.  275,  298  ;  ii. 

32  ;  iii.  95 
Heaviside,  Mr.,  i.  345  n 
Heber,  Dr.  Reginald,  late  Bishop  of 

Calcutta,  his  "  Life  of  Bishop  Taylor," 

referred  to,  iii.  69  n,  91  n 
Hebert,  Mr,  Evelyn's  valet,  robs  him, 

i.  245 

Hebrew  manuscript,  i.  140 

Hedges,  Sir  Charles,  ii.  362 

Hegge,R.,hisMS."Life  of  Sir  Cuthbert," 
iii.  383,  384 

Heinsius,  Daniel,  notice  of,  i.  26,  402  ; 
library,  ii.  181 

Helena,  St.,  statue  of,  i.  123;  monument, 
128  ;  chapel,  173 

Helmsley,  Yorkshire,  estate  of  Duke  of 
Buckingham,  ii.  343  and  n 

Hemly  Hall,  Staffordshire,  iv.  145 

Henchman,  Dr.  Humphrey,  Bishop  of 
London,  i.  334,  339  ;  ii.  8,  69 

 ,  Mr.,  i.  339 

Henrietta  Maria,  Queen  of  Charles  I., 
her  oi'der  of  Capuchins,  iv.  51  n,  73, 
109,  334  ;  summons  of  Lords  and 
Bishops  by,  83  ;  claim  for  remainder 
of  her  dowry,  332  ;  letter  on  recep- 
tion of  Charles  1.  at  Edinburgh,  50  ; 
directions  to  Sir  Ed.  Nicholas  about 
Charles's  free  pardon,  58  ;  answ^er  to 
Pai'liament  on  the  education  of  the 
Prince,  105  n  ;  intercedes  for  Father 
Phillips,  114  n;  letters  to  Sir  Edward 
Nicholas,  to  direct  attendance  of  Earl 
Caernarvon  in  Parliament,  115  ;  to 
forward  her  despatch,  118  ;  to  direct  j 
the  attendance  of  certain  Lords  in  | 
Parliament,  124  ;  to  inform  Lord  j 
Chamberlain  to  prepare  for  the  King's  | 


return,  131  ;  her  reception  at  Tours, 
i.  74  ;  resides  at  Bourbon  I'Archam- 
baut,  76;  averse  to  the  Duke  of  York's 
marriage,  341 ;  her  attempts  to  pervert 
the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  iv.  203,  214  n, 
216  n  ;  arrives  in  England,  i.  342  ; 
visits  Mr.  Evelyn,  366  ;  compliment 
to  him,  38G  ;  alluded  to,  i.  253,  337, 
342—344,  361,  366  n,  368,  371,  381, 
417  ;  iv.  49—53,  74—125,  149—155 

Henrietta,  Princess  (daughter  of  Charles 
I.),  i.  342  ;  condescension  to  Mrs. 
Evelyn,  &c.,  343  ;  married  to  Duke 
of  Orleans,  ii.  53  n 

Henry  IV.,  King  of  Fi'ance,  statues  of, 

i.  44,  58,  128  ;  book  of  drawings  be- 
longing to,  259  ;  letters  of,  iii.  380  ; 
attentive  to  his  maritime  interests, 
268 

 VII.,  Emperor,  i.  185 

 VII.,  King  of  England,  picture 

of,  at  Whitehall,  i.  312  ;  referred  to, 
316;  "Office"  of,  at  Wliitehall,  ii. 
147 

 VIII.,  King  of  England,his  Book 

against  Luther,  i.  140  ;  portrait  of, 
249  ;  an  "office"  of,  292  ;  chimney- 
piece  belonging  to,  308  ;  referred  to, 
316 

 ,  Prince  of  Wales,  son  of  James 

I.,  his  palace  at  Charlton,  i.  278  ;  col- 
lection of  coins,  &c.,  iii.  305 

Henshaw,  Thomas,  with  Mr.  Evelyn 
abroad,  i.  88,  164,  173,  177,  181,  213, 
215  ;  allusions  to,  after  his  return, 
248,  252,  285,  313,  318,  328  ;  ii.  107; 
recommended  for  an  embassy  by  Mr. 
Evelyn,  i.  338  ;  and  as  French  secre- 
tary to  the  King,  353  ;  his  "History 
of  Salt  Petre,"  ib.  ;  return  from 
Denmark,  &c.,  ii.  102,  142  ;  letter  of 
Mr.  Evelyn  to,  iii.  375  ;  etchings 
dedicated  to,  by  Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  396 

Heralds'  College,  part  of  the  Arundel 
library  presented  to,  ii.  122 

Herbert,  Richard,  Lord,  i.  287 

 ,  Edward,  Lord  (1665),  390 

 ,  Sir  Edward,  Lord  Chief  Justice 

of  the  King's  Bench,  bold  speech,  ii. 
255 ;  a  Conmiissioner  for  ecclesiastical 
affairs,  256  ;  his  house  at  Oatlands, 
269  and  n  ;  attainted,  Scc.,ib. 

 ,  Lord  Edward,  of  Cherbury,  i. 

271 

 ,  Sir  Henry,  i.  276,  389 

 ,  Admiral, defeated  by  the  French, 

ii.  298 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


399 


Herbert,  Mr.  (nephew  of  Lord  Herbert), 

ii.  165,  31.3 

 •,  Sir  Edward,  Attorney-General, 

i.  255;  iv.  59,  117,  121,129,  170,233, 
262—264,  270,  273  n,  282,  321  n  ; 
Kinnj  Charles  I.'s  observations  on  the 
conduct  of,  169 

 ,  Lady,  i.  255,  262  ;  iv.  208, 

212,  252 

 ,  Sir  Thomas,  his  "  Memoirs  of 

King  Charles  I."  referred  to,iv.  176  n, 
182  n 

Hercules,  i.  156,  158;  temple  of,  at 

Milan,  226 
«  Hercules  in  Lydia,"  an  opera,  i.  204 
Hereford,  Lord  Viscount,  his  house  at 

Ipswich,  ii.  Ill 
HexTOit  of  the  Colosseum  at  Rome,  i,  1 1 6 
Hertford,  William  Seymour,  Marquis 

of,  iv.  102,  105  n,  135  n,  137,  143, 

154  n,  179,  195 
Hertfordshire,  loyalty  of  the  gentry,  iv. 
i   127,  132  ;    remarkable  robbery  in 

a692),  ii.  322 
Hervey,  John,  i.  312;  ii.  123 

—  ,  Mr.,  of  Betchworth,  ii.  366 

Hewer,  Dr.,  i.  286  ;  condemned,  327  ; 

and  executed,  328 

•,  Mr.,  house  at  Claphara,  ii.  320  ; 

account  of  him,  ib. 
Hewson,  regicide,  executed,  i.  342 
Heylin,  Dr.  Peter,  sermon  by,  i.  346 
Hicks,  Sir  William,  his  house  and  family 

at  Ruckholt,  i.  332  and  n 
Hieroglyphics,  stone    inscribed  with, 

communicated    by  Mr.   Evelyn  to 

Kircher,  i.  213 
Higgins,  Sir  Thomas,  his  daughter,  ii. 

259 

Higham,  Rev.  Mr.,ii.  110  ;  sermons  by, 

i.  286,  305  ;  his  death,  ii.  196 
Highland  dragoons  (1694),  ii.  329  ;  two 

Dutchmen  killed  by  one  of  them,  ib. 
Hill,  Abraham,  F.R.S.,  ii.  165,  171  ;  iii. 

366,  367,  381 
Hinton,  Mr.  William,  letter  of  Charles 

IL  to,iv.  197 
Hippodrome  at  Rome,  i.  165 
"  Histoire  Critique,"  of  Father  Simon, 

strictures  on,  iii.  264 
Historiographer,  Royal,  recommended, 

iii.  215 

History,  advice  for  the  study  of,  iii.  162 
—164 

Hoare,  Richard,  an  excellent  penman,  i. 

252  ;  sti*ange  sickness  of,  285 
Hobbes,  John,  ii.  128  ;  visited  by  Mr. 


Evelyn,  i.  268,  311;  book  against  his 
«  Leviathan,"  284 
Hobbson,  Mr.,  of  Venice,  merchant,  i. 
217 

Hobson,  the  Cambridge  carrier,  i.  304 
Hoefnagle,  George,  print  by,  ii,  1  n 
HofF  Van  Hounslers  Dyck,  account  of, 

i.  28 

Holbein,  Hans,  portraits,  &c.  by,  i.  249, 
288,  308,  343;  ii.  120,  122,  147,  188, 
264  ;  alluded  to,  iii.  296 

Holborne,  Mr.,  supports  Charles's  right 
to  election  of  officers,  iv.  101 

Holden,  Dr.,  vicar  of  Deptford,  i.  255  ; 

ii.  105;  character  of,  81  ;  sermon  of, 
217 

Holder,  Dr.,  ii.  195 

 ,  Mr.,  iv.  235  n,  236,  258,  264, 

267,  270  ;  Sir  Edward  Hyde's  opinion 
of,  255  n,  261,  265 

Holland,  Henry  Rich,  first  Earl  of,  iv. 
60  n,  105  ;  account  of,  105  n,  338  ; 
appointed  Lord  General  beyond  Trent, 
129;  execution  of,  i.  249  ;  portrait, 

iii.  301 

Holland,  Sir  John,  ii.  17 

Holland,  Cromwell's  dissimulation  with, 

iv.  209  ;  propositions  to  engage  its 
assistance  to  Charles  IL,  248,  253  ; 
war  with,  i,  279  ;  fleet  defeated,  iv. 
278  n  ;  concludes  peace  with  Crom- 
well, 298;  letter  of  States  of,  to  Prin- 
cess Dowager  of  Orange,  226;  present 
of  the  States  of,  to  Charles  II. ,  i.  364 ; 
peace  with,  ii.  28  ;  embassy  from,  to 
William  III.,  299 

«  Hollandia  lUustrata,"  referred  to,  i.  20 
Hollar,  Winceslaus,  his  arrival  in  Eng- 
land, i.  15  ;  notice  of,  16,  401  ; 
engravings  by,  309  n,  338  n  ;  ii. 
17  ;  plan  for  rebuilding  London,  iii. 
72  n 

Holies,  Denzill,  Lord,  creation  of,  &c., 
i.  347  ;  iii.  243 ;  iv.  185  n  ;  account 
of,i.  416 

 ,  Mr.  Jarvis,  his  message  to  the 

Lords,  iv.  97 
Holloway,  Sir  Richard,  Justice  of  the 

King's  Bench,  ii.  276,  297 
Holly-hedges,  on  cultivating,  iii.  274  I 
Holmby  House,  ruins  of,  ii.  100 
Holmes,  Mr.,  iv.  278 
 ,  Sir  Robert,  ii.  39,  69,  79,  90, 

236 

Holt,  Sir  John,  Lord  Chief  Justice  of 
the  King's  Bench,  a  subscriber  to 
1     Greenwich  Hospital,  ii.  344  n 


400  GENERAL 

Holy  Island,  stores  taken  from,  by  the 

Parliament,  iv.  64 
Holy  Thursday,  ceremonies  on,  at  Rome, 

i.  175 

Holy-well,  near  Malvern  Hills,  i.  297 
Homei',  ancient  edition  of,  ii.  352 
Hondius,  WiUiam,  of  Amsterdam,  i. 
25,  402 

Honfleur,  in  Normnndy,  notice  of,  i.  Gl 
Honson,  Grange,  Staffordshire,  sale  of, 

ii.  210 

Honywood,  Lieutenant,  i.  19 

Hooke,  Dr.  Robert,  i.  378,  30(5,  419  ; 

built  Montagu  House,  ii.  1U6,  135, 

188 

Hooper,  Dr.   George,  bishop  of  St. 
Asaph,  ii.  38G  ;  sermon  of,  159. 

 ,  Bishop  John,  iii.  380 

Hope,  Thomas,  his  seat  called  Deepden, 

i.  308  n 

Hopkins,  William,  engi'aving  by,  i.  369 
Hopton,  Sir  Arthur  (uncle  to  Sir  Ralph, 

Lord  Hopton),  i.  251,405;  ii.  233  n  ; 

iv.  93  n,  192 
 ,  Sir  Ralph  (afterwards  Lord 

Hopton),  iv.  93  n 
"  Horace,"  Mrs.  PhiUips'  tragedy  of,  ii. 

32,  38  ;  iv.  14 
Horatii  and  Curiatii,  tomb  of,  i.  163, 165 
Horneck,  Dr.  Anthony,  character  of,  ii. 

173  and  n  ;  sermon  by  his  son,  356 
Horninghold,  Leicestershire,  seat  of,  i, 

297,  302 
Horns  at  Hampton  Court,  i.  364 
Horse  baited  to  death,  ii.  27 
Horseheath,  Lord  Allington's  house  at, 

ii.  48  and  n 

Horsemanship,  Duke  of  Newcastle  on, 

ii.  22  n  ;  iii.  246 
Horses,  fine  sculptures  of,  i.  104,  110; 

racing  of  Barbary  at  Rome,  174  ; 

regard  of  a  woman  for  one,  223  ; 

Turkish  or  Asian,  brought  over,  1684, 

ii.  201  ;  Charles  II.'s  sold,  iv.  199 
Horticulture,  Spanish,  letter  respecting, 

ii.  36;  iii.  201 
"  Hortus  Malabaricus,"  iii.  259 
Hoskins,  Sir  John,  ii.  145  ;  President  of 

Royal  Society,  170  ;  iii.  381 
Hospital,  called  Clmst's  Hospital  at 

Rome,  i.  145 
Hospitals,  various  notices  of,  abroad,  i. 

22,  23,  49,  78,  95,  97,  145,  167,  225, 

243,256,  262  ;  in  England,  298 
Hotel  Dieu,  and  Hotel  de  la  Charite,  i.  49 
Hotham,  Sir  John,  commander  of  Hull, 

i.  301 


INDEX  TO 

Houblon,  Mr.,  merchant,  ii.  128,  237, 
385 ;  his  house  on  Epping  Foi'est, 
173 

 ,  Sir  John,  a  subscriber  to 

Greenwich  Hospital,  ii.  344  u 

Hough,  Dr.  John,  made  Bishop  of  Wor- 
cester, ii.  310  and  n 

Houghton,  Mr.,  F.R.S.,  i.  Introduction, 

XXX 

Houllies,  a  species  of  fuel,  ii.  26 
Hounslow  Heath,  camp  on  (1678),ii.  119; 

(1686),  231,  254,  267 
Household,  Comptroller  of  the,  public 

dinners  of,  i.  376 
Household,  Royal,   purveyors  of  the, 

regulated,  ii.  172  and  n 
How,  John,  complained  of  Bishop  Bur- 
net's book  (1693),  ii.  323;  Mr.  How 

made  a  Bai'on,  365 
Howard,  Anne,  wife  of  Sir  G.  Silvius,  ii. 

100  and  n,  116 

 ,  Bernard,  i.  365  ;  ii.  203 

 ,  Charles,  i.  365,  380,  381  ; 

liouse  at  Dorking,  308  ;  ii.  52 
 ,  Craven,  law- suit  against  his 

mother,  ii.  100  and  n,  101;  account  of 

him,  100,  note 
 ,  Dorothv,  ii.  83;  married  to 

Colonel  Grahani,  100,  116,  232,  240 

 ,  Edward,  i.  365 

 ■ — ,  Lord  George  (son  of  sixth  ' 

Duke  of  Norfolk,  by  Mrs.  Bickerton), 

ii.  120  n 

 ,  Henry,  Lord,   grandson  of 

the  Karl  of  Arundel  (afterwards 
sixth  Duke  of  Norfolk),  at  Padua,  i. 
215,  219,  405  ;  Yilla  at  Albury, 
pictures,  &c.,  308  ;  ii.  29  ;  procures 
the  dukedom  to  be  restored,  and 
compounds  a  debt  of  his  grandfather's, 
i.  364  ;  Mr.  Croone  recommended  by 
Mr,  Evelyn  to  travel  with  his  sons, 

iii.  138  ;  permitted  the  Royal  Society 
to  meet  at  Arundel  House,  and  gave 
them  the  Arundelian  libi'ary,  ii.  21, 
38 ;  pre!;ented  the  Ai'undelian  marbles 
to  O.vford  University,  29—31,  41;  iii. 
198,  219  ;  created  Lord  on  his 
embassy  to  ^Morocco,  ii.  31,  39  ;  con- 
versation with  jNIr.  Evelyn  respecting 
marriage  of  his  son,  his  own  con- 
nexion with  Mrs.  Bickerton,  his  house 
at  Norwich,  Sec,  65,  66  ;  alluded  to, 
i,  332,  333,  365  ;  ii.  35,  38,  42,  78. 
Sec  Norfolk. 

 ,  Henry  (son  of  the  preceding, 

afterwards  seventh  Duke  of  Norfolk), 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


401 


i.  365,  380  ;  ii.  23,  42  ;  iii.  138.  See 
Norfolk 

Howard,  Philip  (afterwards  Cardinal), 

i.  219,  365  ;  ii.  45 

 ,  Sir  Robert  (son  of  the  Earl  of 

Berks),  play  by,  i.  371  ;  alluded  to, 
378  n  ;  ii.  18,  39,  378,  387  ;  im- 
peached Sir  W.  Penn,  33  ;  "  an 
universal  pretender,"  175,  211  ;  his 
house  at  Ash  ted,  196 

 ,   Mr.    Thomas    (son    of  Sir 

Robert),  ii.  313  ;  his  death,  364 

 ,   Thomas,   Earl    of  Arundel, 

Earl  Marshal,  iv.  57,  62,  67,  83,  93 

•  ,  Lord  Thomas  (son  of  Henry, 

sixth  Duke  of  Norfolk),  i.  365,  380  ; 

ii.  23,  121  ;  iii.  138  ;  his  children 
alluded  to,  ii.  359 

 ,  Lord,  of  Escrick,  concerned  in 

the  Ryehouse  plot,  and  discovered  his 
associates,  ii.  179  ;  Algernon  Sidney 
executed  on  his  single  witness,  190 

 ,   Mrs.    (widow    of  William, 

fourth  son  of  first  Earl  of  Berkshire), 
and  her  daughters,  ii.  39,  99,  100  n, 
101,  116;  law-suit  against,  by  her 
son,  100,  101 

■  ,  Eax'ls  of  Berkshire,  mansion 

of,  ii.  20  n 

Hoy,  Dr.,  Mr.  Evelyn's  opinion  of  his 

talents,  iii.  375 
Huddleston,  Father,  a  popish  priest, 

administered  the  sacrament  to  King 

Charles  II.  in  extremis,  ii.  206  n 
Hudibras  (Samuel  Butler),  portrait,  iii. 

301 

Hughes,  Margaret,  mistress  of  Charles 
II.,  ii.  18  n,  379 

Huguenots,  zealous  for  Cromwell,  iv, 
313  ;  persecution  of,  in  France,  ii. 
242—245,  249—254,  258,  269,  271— 
273  ;  brief  in  England  for  relieving, 
251,  252  ;  book  exposing  the  perse- 
cution burnt,  &c.  253  ;  released  and 
driven  out  of  France,  271  ;  remorse 
and  massacre  of  those  who  had  con- 
formed to  the  Romish  faith,  ih. 

Hull,  town  of,  noticed,  i.  301 

Hume,  Colonel  Alexander,  assumed  the 
name  of  Evelyn,  Pedigree^  ii.  397, 367 

Humorists,  academy  of,  at  Rome,  i. 
166  ;  iii.  310 

Hungate,  Sir  Henry  and  Sir  Philip,  iv, 
117—120,  132 

Hungerford,  Edward,  of  Cadenham,  i. 
289,  295,  297  n 

Hungei'ford,  town  of,  i.  290 

VOL.  IV. 


Hunter,  Dr.  A.,  editor  of  Evelyn's 

"  Sylva,"  ii.  395  ;  references  to  that 

work,  i.  Introduction,  xvii.  xxii. 
Huntercomb,   Bucks,   descent  of  the 

Evelyns  of,  Pediyree^  ii.  397 
Huntingdon,  Theophilus  Hastings,  Earl 

and  Countess  of,  ii.  47,  62 
 ,  Henry  Hastings,  Earl  of, 

summoned  by  the  Queen,  iv.  84 
Huntingdon,  Mayor  of,  addresses  King 

Charles  I.,  iv.  134  n;  custom  at,  i. 

303 

Huntingtower,  Lord,  ii.  Ill 
Huntly,  a  cavalier,  beheaded,  iii.  42 
Hurcott,  manor  of  (Worcester),  i.  246, 
247 

Hurt,  Mr,,  purchased  Warley  Magna 

(1655),  i.  310 

Husbandry  and  gardening  of  the 
ancients,  iii.  363 

Huss,  John,  medal  of  his  martyrdom,  ii. 
200  ;  iii.  298 

Hussey,  Peter,  of  Sutton,  ii.  52  ;  his 
attention  to  husbandry,  &c.,  158 

 ,  Mr.,  his  attachment  to  Mr. 

Evelyn's  daughter,  and  death,  ii.  227 

 ,  Mr.,  married  daughter  of  George 

Evelyn,  ii.  333 

Hutcheson,  Lady,  ii.  47 

Huygens,  Constantine,  i,  381  ;  notice  of, 
ii.  60,  383  ;  his  wax  taper  for  studying 
by,  iii.  209 

Hyde,  Dr.,  brother  of  Sir  Henry,  «&,c., 
i.  383  ;  ii.  41,  381 

 ,  Sir  Edward  (afterwards  Earl  of 

Clarendon),  ii.  135  ;  supports  Charles's 
right  to  election  of  officers,  iv.  101  ; 
with  the  Prince  of  Whales  (1645),  231  ; 
correspondence  with  Sir  R.  Browne 
(1646—1659)  on  affairs  of  Charles  IL 
and  of  Europe,  233 — 323  ;  dissatisfied 
with  Chai'les's  leaving  Jersey  for 
Paris,  233  ;  on  a  servant  of  Sir  R. 
Browne,  238  ;  his  distress  in  exile, 
254-258,  261,  269,  291,  297  ;  his 
opinion  of  Mr.  Taylor,  247  and  n ;  of 
Mr.  Holder,  235,  255,  261,  264  ;  ill- 
ness, 265,  303  ;  See  Carteret,  charges 
brought  against,  297  n  ;  present  sent 
to,  by  Sir  R.  Browne,  289,  295,  297  ; 
borrows  money  of  Sir  R,  Browne, 
305  ;  at  Antwerp  (1656),  311,  320  ; 
made  Lord  Chancellor,  232,  321  n  ; 
interests  himself  about  a  person  im- 
prisoned, 322  n.    See  Clarendon 

 ,  Anne,  Sir  S.  Compton  in  love 

with,  iv.  208  n  ;  at  a  raasquei-ade  at 
D  D 


402  GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Tilling,  215,  224  ;  married  to  James 
Duke  of  York,  i.  341,  343  ;  iv.  321  ; 
her  desertion  of  the  Chui'ch  of 
England  misrepresented,  iii.  255  ; 
alluded  to,  i.  361  ;  iv.  208 

Hyde,  Lady  Frances,  ii.  83 

 ,  Lady  Harrietta,  ii.  8 

Hyde  Park,  toll  at  (1 653),  i.  284  ;  coach- 
race  in  (1658),  327  ;  referred  to 
(1660)  338  ;  (1661),  351  ;  (1667),  ii. 
23  ;  review  in  (1663),  i.  374  ;  (1686), 
ii.  251 

Hyldiard,  Henry,  of  East  Horsley,  i. 

285,  305  ;  ii.  253,  313  ;  his  sons,  i. 

249,  273 
Hysduue,  town  and  fort  of,  i.  29 

Ice,  blue  and  transparent,  ii.  107 

"  Icon  Animarum"  (1614),  notice  of  that 

work,  i.  183  and  n 
II  Ponte,  notice  of,  i.  191 
Imperati,  Ferdinando,  plants  of,  i.  152 
"Impostors,  Three,  History  of"  (1669), 

by  Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  38  and  n,  392,  396 
Inchequin,  Lord,  Governor  of  Tangiers, 

ii.  143 

Inchiquin,  Marquess,  i.  263 

 ,  Murrough  O'Bryen,  Lord, 

iv.  254  n,  264 
Incident,  The  (1641),  account  of  that 

affair,  iv.  91—97,  105,  107,  111 
Indian  Ambassadors  (1682),  account  of, 

ii.  167,  168 
"  Indian  Queen,"  a  play,  i.  378 
Infirmary  for  sick  and  wounded,  Mr. 

Evelyn's  plan  for,  ii.  3  ;  iii.  175 — 186 
Inglish,  Esther,  beautiful  writing  of,  i. 

291  and  n 

Ingoldsby,  Sir   ,  house  at  York, 

i.  301 

Inks  for  copying,  i.  31 1 

Innisbofin,  iv.  237  ;  besieged  and  cap- 
tured (1653),  266  n,  269,  284 

Innocent  X.  Cardinal  Giovanni-Battista 
Pamphilio,  Pope,  his  election  to  the 
papal  chair,  i.  98;  procession  to  St. 
John  di  Laterano,  98, 130 

Inquisition,  references  to  the,i.  135, 224, 
229,  230 

Insensati,  Society  of,  iii.  310 

Interest,  lawfulness  of,  considered,  iii. 
105 

Ipswich,  account  of,  i.  315  ;  ii.  Ill,  112 
Ireland,  nomination  of  bishops  for,  i. 
339  ;  remarks  respecting  its  natural 
history,  357  ;  map  of,  by  Sir  Wil- 
Uam  Petty,  ii.  96  ;  ships  kept  back 


from  (1641),  iv.  62 ;  Rebellion  in 
the  North  of,  97,  106—108  ;  Treaty 
with  the  City  of  London  for  pay  of 
soldiers  in,  108  ;  progress  of  the 
Rebels  in,  110,  122  ;  Troops  sent  to, 
112;  Commons  order  Lord  Lieutenant 
to  raise  Volunteers,  119  ;  Rebels  give 
out  that  they  are  instigated  by  the 
King,  108,  127,  129,  161  ;  Scotch 
troops  employed  to  quell,  122,  125  ; 
Parliamentary  Instructions  for  Lord 
Lieutenant,  128  ;  arms,  &c.,  sent  to 
(1642),  336  ;  remark  of  King  Charles 
I.  respecting,  97  n  ;  intrigues  of  Spain 
with,  173  ;  proceedings  in  (1653),  for 
Cliarles  II.,  276  ;  (1654),  300  ;  criti- 
cal state  of  (1689),  ii.  294,  298  ;  pro- 
ceedings respecting  forfeited  estates 
(1700),  356,  359  ;  Lord  Galway 
removed  from  Lord  Lieutenancy, 
365  ;  paper  relating  to  (1587),  iii.  363 
Ireton,  Henry,  regicide,  iii.  34  ;  mur- 
ders by,  at  Colchester,  i.  276,  315  ; 
death,  273  ;  funeral,  275  ;  disinter- 
ment, &e.,  345 
Irish  Parliament  prox'ogued  (1 641), iv.  87 
Irish  regiments,  France  and  Spain  apply 
to  Parliament  for,  iv.  53  n  ;  Charles 
engages  to  grant  to  Spain,  53,  54  ; 
Lords  and  Commons  hold  a  conference 
concerning,  54  ;  refuse  them,  54  n,  66 
Irish  Kebellion  breaks  out,  i.  38 
Ironmongers'  Hall,  dinner  at  (1671), 
ii.  62 

Iron  Crown  at  Milan,  i.  227 
Iron  ovens,  portable,  ii,  8 
Iron  work  of  England,  i.  293 
Isaac,  Mons.,  dancing  master,  ii.  164,  214 
Isaacson,  Henry,  historical  work  of,  iii. 
164  n 

Isabella,  Queen  of  Castile,  iii.  245 
Isabella,  Island  of,  i.  231 
Isis,  statue  of,  in  Palazzo  Farnese,  i.  144 
Islands  about  Venice,  i.  202,  210—212 
Isle  Bouchard,  i.  74 

Isle  of  Wight,  debate  on  its  government 
(1641),  iv.  109,  130;  the  King's  fare- 
well speech  there,  185 

Italian  Opera,  introduction  of  into 
England,  i.  331  ;  ii.  90 

  singer,  female,  encouragement 

given  to  in  (1703),  ii.  370 

Italy,  various  notices  concerning,  i.  85 
—230  ;  Mount  Vesuvius,  153,  154  ; 
measures  of  churches  in,  194  ;  etch- 
ings of  views  in,  by  Mr.  Evelyn, 
ii.  396 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


403 


Jackson,  Mr.,  heir  to  Mr.  Pepys,  ii.  371 
Jacomb,  Dr.,  ii.  90 

Jamaica,  i.  Ml  ;  ii.  59,  68  ;  design  of 
the  Dutch  upon  (1673),  80  ;  earth- 
quake at  (1692),  321  ;  iii.  328,  329  ; 
profanely  mimicked  at  the  South wark 
Fair,  ii.  322 

James,  Duke  of  York,  after  King  James 
II. ;  letters  of,  to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas 
and  Lord  Culpepper,  for  money,  iv. 
199,200;  (1651),onthe  King's  esteem 
for  Sir  Edward,  200  ;  gallantry  of,  in 
an  engagement  with  the  Prince  of 
Coude,  236  and  n  ;  in  favour  at  the 
French  Court,  262  n,  352  ;  with  the 
army  of  Turenne  (1563),  265  n,  294  ; 
quarrels  with  Charles  II.  (1658),  321 
n  ;  discourse  with  Mr.  Evelyn  (1 662), 
i.  358  ;  visits  him  at  Deptford,  &c., 
861  ;  "  Life  of,  written  by  himself," 
quoted,  347  n,  392  n ;  ii.  25  n,  70  n  ; 
iii.  279  ;  sailing-match  with  Charles 
IL,  i.  354  ;  letter  to  Mr.  Evelyn  on 
the  Dutch  fleet,  392,  394  ;  kind  re- 
ception of  Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  2  ;  opposed 
laying-up  men  of  war  (1667),  25  n  ; 
forbears  receiving  the  sacrament,  70 
n,  82 ;  marriage  with  Mary  of  Mo- 
dena,  89  and  n  ;  neglects  to  attend 
the  Protestant  worship,  105  ;  Com- 
mons vote  against,  lor  recusancy, 
129;  libellous  papers  against,  130; 
his  case  as  to  the  succession,  155  ; 
remarkable  escape  of,  from  shipwreck, 
167  ;  iii.  256  ;  office  of  admiral, 
restored  to,  ii.  196  ;  his  account  of 
the  last  hours  of  Charles  II.,  205  n  ; 
speech  in  council  on  his  accession, 
207—209  ;  proclaimed,  209  ;  opens  a 
popish  oratory  at  Whitehall,  212  ; 
lets  to  farm  duties  of  customs,  &c., 
211  ;  coronation,  220  ;  his  first  speech 
to  Parliament,  222 ;  discourse  re- 
specting relics,  &c.,  233  ;  reception 
at  Portsmouth  (1685),  235  ;  remarks 
on  his  character,  236;  celebration  of 
his  birth-day  (1685),  239  ;  improve- 
ments at  Whitehall,  ib ;  speech  to 
Parliament,  244  ;  anniversary  of  his 
accession,  249  ;  birth-day  (1686),  258; 
speech  to  a  deputation  from  Coventry, 
267  ;  alarm  at  the  Dutch  fleet,  273  ; 
enjoins  the  reading  of  his  declaration 
for  liberty  of  conscience,  ib  ;  his  con- 
sternation at  the  landing  of  the  Prince 
of  Orange,  280—284  ;  his  flight  and 
return  to  Whitehall,  285  ;  his  return 


to  Whitehall  and  second  flight,  iii. 

287  ;  compared  to  Maxentius,  ii.  289; 
protest  against  having  abdicated,  291 
— 296  ;  assisted  by  France  in  his 
Irish  expedition,  294  ;  in  Ireland, 
296  ;  Scots'  reasons  for  setting  hira 
aside,  ib;  surprised  Londonderry,  298, 
301  ;  declaration  of  pardon,  299  ; 
defeat  at  the  Boyne,  308  ;  letter 
respecting  the  pregnancy  of  his  Queen, 
319;  offers  to  submit  all  differences 
to  Parliament,  325 ;  intended  invasion 
of  England  (1696),  339  ;  Oates'sbook 
against  him,  341  ;  his  death,  366 

James,  Dr.,  probable  origin  of  his  fever 
powder,  i.  264  n 

 ,  Mr.,  ii.  313 

Jameson,  Rev.  Nicholas,  on  "  Sylva," 
iii.  226 

Janicius,  Dr.,  physician,  i,  213 
January  30th  first  kept  as  a  fast,  i.  345 
Janus  Quadrifrons,  temple  of,  i,  107,298 
Jardine  Royale,  at  Paris,  i.  49 
Jeffreys,   George,  made    Lord  Chief 
Justice,  ii.  187,  190  ;  Baron  of  Wera, 
224  ;  likely  to  be  Lord  Keeper,  232  ; 
made  Lord  Chancellor,  character  of 
him,  242  ;  a  commissioner  for  eccle- 
siastical affairs,  256  ;  alluded  to,  198  n 
Jeffryes,  Dr.,  minister  of  Althorp,ii.  277 
Jenkins,  Sir  Leoline,  ii.  30 

 ,  Judge,  iii.  37 

Jennings,   Sarah,   Duchess   of  Marl- 
borough, ii.  94  n 
Jermyn,  Mr,  Henry,  afterwards  Baron 
Jermyn  of  Dover,  ii.  23,  63,  379 

 ,  Henry,  Lord,  pension  granted 

to,  by  Charles  I.,iv.  342  ;  influence 
in  Court  of  Charles  II.  iu  exile,  263 
n  ;  conduct  as  Treasurer  to  Charles 
II.,  290  n  ;  references  to,  231,  235, 
250,  254  n,  262,  263,  297  n,  313,  314, 
316,  322,  348,  349  ;  letters  to,  342, 
344 

 ,  Mr.,iv.250;  proceedings  against 

(1641),  51  n,  56 

Jerome  of  Prague,  medal  of  his  martyr- 
dom, iii.  298 

Jeronimo,  painting  by,  i.  56 

Jersey,  Edward  Villiers,  Earl  of.  Lord 
Chamberlain,  ii.  360 

Jerusalem  Church  at  Bruges,  i.  Pref. 
viii.  32  ;  earth  of  carried  to  Pisa,  89 

"  Jesuitism,  Mystery  of,  '  in  3  vols.,  the 
second  translated  by  Mr.  Evelyn(l  664), 
i.  Introduction,  xxix.,  387 — 389  ;  ii. 
391,  396  ;  iu.  149 :  thanked  by 
D  D  2 


404  GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Charles  II.  for  it,  i.  389  ;  presented 
to  ditto,  ii.  3  ;  thanked  by  Bishop 
Barlow  for  it,  iii.  143 
Jesuits,  their  church,  schools,  &c,,  at 
Antwerp,  i.  31,  32  ;  church  and  con- 
vent of,  at  Paris,  47,  266  ;  church, 
&c.,  at  Tours,  73  ;  at  Tournon,  79  ; 
at  Aix,  80  ;  at  Rome,  107,  132,  177  ; 
English  college  at  Rome,  136,  167  ; 
other  notices  of,  230  ;  iii.  70  ;  Mr. 
Evelyn's  books  against  the,  ii.  3  ;  iii. 
143 

Jesus  College,  Cambridge,  i.  304;  ii.  142 
Jewels,  Crown,   order  of  Parliament 
respecting,  iv.  69;  notices  of,  various, 

i.  42,  65,  86.  87,  93,  94,  109, 110,  113, 
139,  144,  188,  189,  200,  201,  214,  259 

Jews  in  Holland,  ceremonies  &c.  of,  i. 
22,  27  :  in  France,  79  ;  at  Rome,  107, 
131,  136,  183;  of  circumcision  &c., 
137,  172  ;  Jews  at  Venice,  marriage, 
217  ;  in  England,  309,  311 

Joan  d'Are,  her  statue,  i.  67 

John  Cassimir,  King  of  Poland  (1654), 
iv.  220 

John  the  Baptist,  his  arm  preserved,  i. 
97  ;  baptistery  of,  124 

 of  Udine,  paintings  of,  i.  137  n 

Johnson,  Sir  ,  executed  at  Tyburn, 

ii.  310 

 ,  Mr.,  author  of  "  Julian,"  ii. 

194,  387 
Jones,  Sir  Henry,  ii.  62 

 ,  Inigo,  i.  357 

 ,  Sir  William  (1680),  ii.  151 

 ,  Mr.,  of  Gray's  Inn,  lawyer,  ii.  60 

 ,  regicide,  executed,  i.  341 

Jonson,  Dr.,  iv  235 

Josephus,  Flavins,  history  of,  on  the 

bark  of  trees,  i.  227 
Jovius,  Paulus,  museum  of,  i.  93  ;  sepul- 
chre, 189 
Joyce,  Cornet,  iv.  181  n,  183  n 
Joyliffe,  Dr.,  physician,  i.  249,  318,  322 
Julio  Romano,  paintings  by,  i.  56 
Julius  IL  ,  Cardinal  Julian  della  Revere, 

Pope,  his  sepulchre,  i.  129 
Junius,    Patricius,  his   description  of 

Prince  Henry's  collection,  iii.  306  ; 

his  son  Francis,  ib 
Jupiter,  temples  of,  at  Rome,  i.  103; 

at  Terracina,  147 
Just  and  tournament  at  Rome  (1645), 

i.  177 

Justell,  Mons.,  ii.  192,  194,  200  ;  iii. 
300  ;  arranged  the  library  at  St. 
James's,  ii.  311  j  account  of,  387 


Justice,  statue  of,  at  Florence,  i.  188 
Justin,  corrected  by  Isaac  Vossius,  iii. 
190 

Justinian,  gardens  of,  i.  171,  174;  statue, 
174 

Justiniani,  Venetian  Ambassador,  ii. 
245,  247 

Juxon,  Dr.  William,  Bishop  of  London, 
afterwards  Archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
Charles  consults  him  about  the  vacant 
Bishopricks  (1641,)  iv.  79,  82,  98  ; 
noticed,  115  ;  i.  346,  350  ;  portrait, 
iii.  301 

"  Kalendarium  Hortense"  (1664),  &c., 
by  Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  392,  396  ;  iii.  189, 
317 

Keepe,  Henry,  pamphlet  by,  under  the 

name  of  Taylour,  ii.  234  n,  390 
Keffler,  Dr.,  ii.  8 

Keightly,  Thomas,  cousin  of  Mr.  Evelyn, 

i.  39,'285 

 ,  Mrs.,  her  old  age,  ii.  155 

Reiser's  Graft,  at  Amsterdam,  i.  24, 

402 

Kello,  Rev.  Bartholomew,  i.  291  n 

Kemp,  Mr.,  Impropriator  of  South 
Mailing,  i.  246 

Ken,  Dr.  Thomas,  Bishop  of  Bath  and 
Wells,  attends  Charles  II.  in  his  sick- 
ness, ii.  205  and  n  ;  sermons  by, 
against  Romanists,  &c.  (1686-87), 
251,  263,  264,  272  ;  refuses  to  read. 
Declaration  of  Liberty  of  Conscience, 
273  ;  sent  to  the  Tower,  275  ;  tried 
and  acquitted,  276  ;  his  scruples  on 
King  William's  accession,  295  n  ;  de- 
prived, 312  ;  much  beloved  in  his 
diocese,  313  ;  not  the  author  of  "A 
Letter  to  Dr.  Tenison,"  iii.  345  ; 
alluded  to,  ii.  233,  286,  388 

Kendal,  Dr.,  Oxford  Act  performed  by, 
i.  290 

Kendrick,  Alderman  John,  a  fanatic 

Lord  Mayor,  i.  278 
Kensington  Palace  purchased  by  King 

William,    ii.   303  ;    fire    at,   316  ; 

pictures,  &c.,  341 
 ,   Mr.   Wise's  house  and 

gardens  at,  ii.  365  and  n 
Kent,  Anthony  Grey,  Earl  of,  i.  379 

 ,  Countess  of,  ii.  44 

Kent,  rising  in  (1648),  i.  246  ;  iii.  17, 

20,  23,  25  ;  Kentish  men  imprisoned 

(1701),  ii.  365  and  n 
Kepley,  William,  iv.  209 
Keppel,  Arnold  Joost  Van,  Earl  of 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


405 


Albemarle,  commander  of  the  king's 
guard,  ii.  352 
Ker,  William,  Lord,  of  Cessford.  See 
Carr 

Kew,  Sir  H.  Capel's  house,  &e.,  at,  ii. 

122,  188,  272 
Keysler,  John    George,    Distich  on 

Virgil,  from  his  "Travels,"  i.  155  n  ; 

references  to,  206  n,  228  n 
Keys,  Thomas,  executed  for  high  treason, 

ii.  340  and  n 
Kidd,  Captain,  pirate,  ii.  357  and  n 
Kidder,  Dr.  Hichard,  Bishop  of  Bath 

and  Wells,  ii.  322 
Kildare,  Lord,  ii.  54  n,  157 
Kiihgrew,  Thomas,  various  references 

to,  iv.  107,  122,  123,  214,  215,  225, 

226,  288,  296  ;  his  family,  103  n  ; 

witticism  by,  225  n  ;  complaint  against 

him  (1652),  249  n 
 ,  Mrs.  Katharine,  iv.  206  n, 

208 

"  Killing  no  Murder,"  by  Colonel  Titus, 
ii.  38 

Kilmurry,  Lord,  i.  328 

Kilsythe,  Montrose  defeats  Covenanters 
at  (1645),  iv.  168  n 

Kimbolton,  Henry,  Montague,  Lord, 
protests  against  an  order  in  the  Com- 
mons (1641),  iv.  68  n  ;  account  of, 
75  n  ;  faction  meets  at  his  house,  76 

King,  Dr.  Henry,  Bishop  of  Chichester 
(1641),  iv.  82  n  ;  licensed  to  be  absent 
from  Parliament,  106 

King  of  England,  speech  in  1686,  as- 
serting him  to  be  absolute,  ii.  255 

King,  Dr.,  relieved  Charles  II.  in  apo- 
plexy, ii.  204,  205 

 ,  Dr.,  Archbishop  of  Dublin,  ii.  374 

 ,  Edward,  executed  for  high  treason, 

ii.  341  and  n 

 ,  Rev.  Mr.  of  Ashsted,  i.  329 

King's  College  Chapel,  Cambridge,  i.  303 

King's  Evil,  royal  touch  for  (1660),  i. 
338,  339  ;  great  pressure  at  the 
(1684),  ii.  195 

Kuig's  household,  ancient  supply  of,  i. 
343  n 

King-street,  Westminster,  design  of 
Charles  IL  respecting,  ii.  333 

Kingly  office,  act  for  abolishing,  iii.  36 

Kingsmill,  Lady,  iii.  46 

Kingston,  Earl  of,  portrait,  iii.  301 

 ,  Evelyn  Pierrepoint,  Earl  of, 

i.  251  ;  ii.  160,  266,  351 

 ,  Henry  Pierpoint,  Earl  of,  iv. 

135  n 


Kinsale,  surrender  of,  ii.  310;  iii.  319 
Kirby,  seat  of  Lord  ilatton,  i.  302 
Kirby,  Captain,  court-martial  on,  and 

execution  of,  ii.  ;i70  n 
Kircher,  Father  Athanasius,  his  atten- 
tions to  Mr.  Evelyn  at  Home,  i.  108; 
communication  by  Mr.  Evelyn  to  his 
*'Obeliscus  Pamphilius"  (1650-54), 
213,  313  ;  notice  of,  403  ;  alluded  to, 
i.  126,  132,  309 
Kiviet,  Sir  John,  account  of,  ii.  20,  379  ; 
his  proposal  to  wharf  the  Thames 
with  brick,  21,  22,  29  ;  project  rela- 
tive to  draining,  49 
KnatchbuU,  Sir  Norton,  sermon,  &c.,  by, 
i.  375 

 ,    Sir  Thomas,  Commissioner 

of  Privy  Seal,  ii.  303 
Kneller,  Sir  Godfrey,  his  portrait  of  Mr. 

Evelyn,  ii.  239  and  n,  299  ;  iii.  295  ; 

of  Bishop  Burnet,  ii.  299 
Knevett,  Mr.,  iii.  211 
Kuite-swallowers,  i.  26,  358  ;  ii.  105 
Knight,  Mr.,  of  Northamptonshire,  i. 

285 

 ,  Sergeant-surgeon,  ii.  72 

 ,  Mrs.,  singer,  and  mistress  of 

Charles  II.,  i.  332  ;  ii.  18  n,  94  n  ; 

compass  of  her  voice,  94 
Knowle,  Kent,  Duke  of  Dorset's  house 

at,  ii.  85 

Knox,  Dr.  Vicesimus,  and  Rev.  Thomas, 
Masters  of  Tunbridge  School,  i.  393  n 

Kouigsmark,  Count,  procures  Mr. 
Thynne's  murder,  ii.  165,  386 

Labulla,  boiling  fountain  of,  i.  153 
Lac  Tigridis,  drug  so  called,  i.  380 
Lacy,  John,  Comedian,  portraits,  i.  369 

and  n  ;  performance  of,  371 
Ladies,  learned,  enumeration  of,  iii. 

244—246 
La  Dorees,  Mons.,  i.  278 
Lago  d'Agnano,  Naples,  i.  155 
Lago  di  Garda,  i.  223 
Lago  Maggiore,  &c.,  i.  230 
Lake,  Dr.  John,  Bishop  of  Chichester, 
petitions  against  reading  the  Declara- 
tion of  Liberty  of  Conscience,  ii.  274  ; 
sent  to  the  Towei',  275  ;  tx-ied  and 
acquitted,  276  ;  alluded  to,  287  ;  ab- 
sents himself  from  Parliament  (1689), 
295  n 

 ,  Mr.,  a  Commissioner  of  Green- 
wich Hospital,  ii.  343  n 
Lakin,  Daniel,  pamphlet  by,  i.  358  n 
Lambard,  Mr.,  estate  at  Westeram,  i.  286 


406 


GENERAL  IXDEX  TO 


Lambert,  Major- General,  John, besieges 
Pomfret  Castle  (1649),  iii.  15,  36  ;  iv. 
284  n 

Lambeth  Palace,  assaulted  by  a  mob 
(1G40),  i.  13  ;  library,  iii.  35? 

Lamedrati,  sea-horses  sculptured  hy, 
i.  94 

Lamot,  Mons.,  sermon  of,  ii.  267 
Laniplugh,  Dr.,  sermon  of,  ii.  83 
Lamps  of  Licetus,  iii.  99 
Lancaster,  Dr..  vicar  of  St.  Martin's,  ii. 

322,  357,  358 
Lance  of  St.  Longinus,  i.  122  ;  letter 

conceruiug,  227 
Lane,  Sir  Tliomas,  ii.  343  n  ;  subscriber 

to  Greenwich  Hospital,  344  n 

 ,  Mrs.,  loyalty  of,  i.  273,  409 

■  ,  Sir  George,  his  marriage,  iv.  39 

 ,  Sir  Richard,  iv.  1 35  n 

Lauerick,  Lord,  iii.  42  ;  flies  from  Ck)urt 

(1641),  iv.  91,  111 
Laney,Dr.  Benjamin,  Bishop  of  Ely,ii.  35 
Lanfranci,  Giovanni,  works  of,  i.  Ill, 

143,  168,  171 
Langdale,  Sir  Marraaduke,  afterwards 

Lord,  i.  254  ;  iii.  15,  22,  29  ;  iv.  170, 

202,  203 

Langhara,   Sir  John,   letter    to  Mr. 

Evelyn,  iii.  196,  197 
 ,  Lady,  a  kinswoman  of  Mr. 

Evelyn,  i.  306 
Langhern,  Major-General,  iii.  12, 16,  37 
Langton,  Mr.,  iv.  346 
Languages,  modern,  Mr.  Evelyn's  Dis- 
course on,  iii.  261 
Lansdowne,  Lord,  Count  of  the  Roman 

empire,  ii.  202  ;  suicide  of,  366 
Laocoou  and  his  sons,  statue  of,  i.  141 
Lapidaries  at  Venice,  i.  219 
Lashford,  Sir  Richard,  kinsman  of  Mr. 

Evelyn,  ii.  52 
Lassels,  Richard,  his  "  Voyage  through 

Ttaly"  (1670),  quoted,  i.  86—96  n, 

99,  206,  207,  218  n 
Last  Supper,  by  Leonardo  da  Vinci,  i. 

226  ;  in  wax-work,  ii.  72 
Last  Judgment,  by  Michael  Angelo, 

i.  139 

Latin  historians,  list  of,  iii.  163 
Lavaran,  Madame,  singer,  i.  266 
Lavinia,  painting  by,  i.  142 
Laud,  ^Villiam,  Archbishop  of  Canter- 

bm-y,  i.  10  ;  his  palace  attacked,  13  ; 

gift  to  St.  John's  College,  Oxford,  292  ; 

portrait,  iii.  301  ;  Mr.  Wharton's  Life 

of,  340,  343  ;  jubilee  of  the  Jesuits  on 

his  death,  340 


Lauderdale,  Duke,  i.  374,  378;  ii.  58,  99  ; 

iii.  42 ;    his   house   at  Ham,  122 ; 

hbels  against,  30  ;  letters  and  papers 

lent  to,  "bv  Mr.  Evelyn,  and  lost,  iii. 

381  ;  his  library,  309. 
Lam'a,  her  tomb  at  A>'ignon,  i.  79 
Laurence,   Mr.,  president  of  Oliver's 

council,  i.  320 
Laurentius,  Jansen,  Coster  of  Harlaem ; 

his  effigy,  i.  27 
Lam-etto,  Cavalier,  of  Rome,  i.  183 
"  Law  agamst  Lovere,"  a  tragi-comedy, 

i.  372 

Lawi-ence,  Sir  John,  his  pageant  as 

Lord  Mayor,  i.  385 
 ,  Dr.,  master  of  Baliol  College, 

i.  9,  10 

Laws,  a  Scotchman,  a  duel  fought  by, 

ii.  328 

Laws,  municipal,  study  of,  recommended, 

iii.  378 

Lawyers,  &c.,  required  to  renounce 

James  II.,  ii.  342 
Lazzari    (called    Bramante),  palaces 

built  by,  i.  167,  172  ;  chm-ch  buUt  by, 

225 

Lea,  Kent,  Mr.  Bohun's  house,  &c.,  at, 

ii.  94,134,  168,  184 
League  and  Covenant,  abjui'ed,  i.  366 
Leake,  Dr.,  his  dausjhter,  ii.  107 
Leaning  Towers,  i.  89,  92,  185,  192 
Leatherhead,  picture  at  the  Swan  Inn, 

at,  ii.  21  n 
Le  Chat,  Mens.,  physician,  i.  239,  243 
Lechmore,  ^Ir.  Baron,  subscription  to 

Greenwich  Hospital,  ii.  345  n 
Lectures  in  Parish  Churches  sanctioned 

by  Parliament  (1641),  iv.  66  n 
Lee,  Lady,  and  Sir  Henry,  i.  383  ;  Sir 

Thomas,  ii.  151 
Leech,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  i.  32S 
Leeds,  Duke  of,  ii.  346  n  ;  commissioner 

of  Greenwich  Hospital,  335  ;  subsci'ip- 

tion  to  it,  344  n 
Leeds  Castle,  Kent,  prisoners  kept  at, 

i.  398  ;  ii.  4,  18,  28 

Leeward  Islands,  Sir  C.  Wheeler's  in- 
discreet   government    at,    ii.    67  ; 
danger  of,  69 
Le  Febure,  Mons.  chemist,  i.  244 
Legate  of  Bologna,  his  palace,  i.  1 92 
"  Legend  of  the  Pearle,"  by  Mr.  Evelyn, 

ii.  394 

Legg,  Colonel,  ii.  236 

Legge,  Captain  William,  ordered  to  be 

apprehended  (1645),  iv.    164,   167  ; 

alluded  to,  127  n 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


407 


Legge,  George,  Master  of  the  Ordnance, 

ii.  175 

•  ,  Mr.  W.,  of  the  Bedchamber,  ii. 

28,  380 

Leghorn,  account  of,  i.  90,  183,  185  ; 
consulage  of,  ii.  80 

Leicester,  Robert  Sidney,  Earl  of.  Lord 
Lieutenant  of  Ii-eland  (1641),  iv.  85  n, 
106—108,  119,  330  n  ;  house  at  Pens- 
hurst,  i.  282 

■  ,  Robert  Dudley,  (the  great) 

Earl  of,  his  Vase,  i.  306  ;  portrait  of, 

iii.  301  ;  alluded  to,  ii.  172  ;  letters 
and  papers  of,  iii.  380 

Leicester,  city  of,  noticed,    i.    298  ; 

capture  of,  iv.  151  n 
Leicester  House,  London,  notice  of,  ii.  79 
Leighton,  Sir  Elias,  project  of,  ii.  35  ; 

account  of,  381 
Leith  Hill,  Surrey,  i.  3 
Lely,  Sir  Peter,  portraits  by,  i.  328  ; 

ii.  26  n  ;  alluded  to,  53  n,  175 
Le  Neve,  painter,  i.  248,  405 
Lennier,  Jerome,  paintings  possessed  by, 

i.  282 

Lennox,  Duke  of,  i.  360 

Lennox,  portrait  of  the  Duchess  of,  i.  342 

Lent,  ceremonies  of,  in  Rome,  i.  174  ; 
in  Venice,  216  ;  preaching  in  London 
during,  ii.  82  ;  (1665),  observance  of, 
recommended,  iii.  150 

Leonsenas,  Dr.  John  Athelsteinus,  ana- 
tomical preparations  by,  i.  217 

Leopold,  Pi'ince,  his  collection  of  paint- 
ings, i.  188 

Lepanto,  picture  of  the  battle,  i.  139  ; 
battle  of,  iii.  262 

Lepers  in  Holland,  notice  of,  i.  18 

Lepidus,  fountains  of,  at  Rome,  i.  1 1 3 

Lerici,  procession  at,  i.  88 

Lesley,  David,  iii.  38,  44 

Leslie,  Lady  Jane  (Countess  of  Rothes), 
her  marriage  and  issue,  ii.  367  n 

L'Estrange,  Sir  Roger,  i.  312  ;  ii.  90  ; 
some  account  of  his  "  Observatoi'," 
221 ;  notice  of,  i.  412 

Letters,  ambition  of  printing,  iv.  10  ; 
difficulty  of  conveying,  iv.  245,  251, 
263,  270 

Lewen,  Samuel,  and  Sir  William,  ii. 
219  n 

Lewtner,  Lady,  iv.  19,  23 
Leyden,  account  of,  i.  26 
Leyden,  Lucas  Van,  painting  by,  i.  56  ; 

prints  of,  66 
Lian  court.  Count  de,  his  palace,  garden, 

and  pictures,  i.  56 


"Liberty  and  Servitude"  (1644-49),  a 
translation  by  Mr.  Evelyn,  i.  248  ; 
ii.  391,  395 

Libraries,  Foreign,  i.  10,  63,  140,  193, 
226  ;  Oxford,  291,  292;  Cambridge, 
303  ;  in  Pai-is  and  England,  iii.  305 — 
310 

Lichfield,  Lady,  daughter  of  Charles  II., 

ii.  162 
Licola,  in  Italy,  i.  159 
Light,  contrivance  for  reflecting,  i.  55 
Ligue,  Prince  de,  Ambassador  from 

Spain,  i.  340 
Ligon,  Captain,  ii.  34 
Lilburne,  Colonel  John,  iii,  9,  39,  42, 

44,  49,  51,  53  ;  iv.  207,  208 
Lillo,  fort  of,  i.  30 
Lilly,  William,  astrologer,  ii.  354 
Lima,  earthquake  at  (1688),  ii.  275 
Linch,  Sir  Thomas,goveruor  of  Jamaica, 

ii.  57,  80,  105 
Lincoln,  City  and  Cathedral  of,  i.  30 1 
Lincolnshire,  fens  of,  i.  302 
Lincoln's  Inn,  revels  at  (1661),  i.  359 
Lincoln's-inn-fields,  theatre  in,  i.  345  ; 

Mr.  Povey's  house  in,  380 ;  Lord 

Bristol's  house  in,  ii.  58,  62 
Lindsey,  Earl  of,  portrait,  iii.  301 

 ,  Lord,  i.  7,  400  ;  iv.  81  n 

Lion,  gentleness  of  one,  i.  287 
Lionberg,  Mons.,  Swedish  Resident,  ii. 

170 

Lisle,  Sir  George,  put  to  death  by 

Ireton,  i.  276,  315 
 ,  Lord  (son  of  Earl  of  Leicester,  i. 

312  ;  his  house  at  Sheen,  ii.  122 
Littler,  Mr.,  vicar  of  Deptford,  i.  331 
Littleton,  Sir  Charles  (brother  of  Sir 

Henry),  his  house  at  Sheen,  ii.  272 
Livorno,  i.  90 

Livius,  Titus,  reliques  of,  i.  151,  210 

Lloyd,  Sir  Richard,  i.  252,  275. 

 ,  Dr.  William,  Bishop  of  Landaff, 

Peterborough,  and  Norwich,  at- 
tended the  English  Court  in  France, 
i.  271  n;  sermons  of,  ii.  105,  137  ; 
reflections  on  a  sermon  by,  137  ; 
noticed,  349 

Lloyd,  Dr.  William,  Bishop  of  St. 
Asaph,  Coventry,  and  Worcester,  ii. 
149,  155;  petitioned  against  reading 
Declaration  of  Liberty  of  Conscience, 
274 ;  sent  to  the  Tower,  275 ;  tried 
and  acquitted,  276  ;  his  interview  with 
Mr.  Evelyn,  296,  297  ;  his  inter- 
pretation of  prophecies,  307  ;  sermon 
(1689),  on  the  deliverance  of  the 


408 


GEJ^ERAL  IXDEX  TO 


Church  of  England,  301  ;  alluded  to,  i 
ii.  131  n,  142,  144,  227,  244,  286,  I 
296,  307,  309  ;  iv.  263  n  i 
Lloyd,  Mr.  ii.  80 

Loadstone,  a  remarkable  one,  i.  94 
Locke,  John,  Secretary  to  Council  of 

Trade  and  Plantations,  ii.  80,  89  ; 

Reply  to  the  Bishop  of  Worcester,  iii. 

369 

Lockhart,  Lord,  Ambassador  to  France, 

ii.  89  ;  iv.  310—318 
Locks,  notices  of  curious,  i.  293 
Locks  on  river  Brenta  in  Italy,  i.  205 
Lodge,  Edmund,  Norroy  King  of  Arms, 

his  "  Illustrations  of  British  History" 

cited,  i.  363  n 
Lodi,  victory  of  the  French  at,  i.  224 
Loftus,  Mr.,  ii.  141 

Loggan,  R.,  his  portrait  of  Bobart,  i. 
384  n 

Lombardus,  Tullius,  sculptor,  i.  206 
Lombart,  Peter,  engraver,  i.  285  ;  ii. 
26  n 

Lomellini,  church  built  by  the,  i.  87  n 
London,  pestilence  in  (1625  and  1636), 
i.  5,  9  ;  processions  of  Charles  I. 
(1640),  12,  14  ;  tumults,  13  ;  dispute 
about  right  of  electing  Sheriflfs  (1641), 
iv.  55  ;  sickness  in,  60,  70,  88  ;  : 
forfeitui'e  of  Londonderry  from,  61  | 
and  n  ;  tumults  of  the  apprentices,  i 
76  n  ;  Charles's  Act  of  Tonnage  and  ' 
Poundage,  63,  64,  78  ;  Lord  Mayor, 
&c.,  desire  to  attend  the  King  through 
London,  78,  86,  110,  124  ;  an  enter- 
tainment  to  him,  1 32  ;  election  of 
Lord  Mayor  (1641),  82 ;  guards 
doubled  by  Parharaent,  92  ;  Parlia- 
ment treaty  with,  for  soldiers  in  Ire- 
land, 108  ;  on  the  Mihtia,  136  ; 
tumults  (1643),  39,(1648),  246  ;  pro- 
clamation of  peace  in  (1642),  38  ; 
Cross  at  Cheap  destroyed  (1643),  39, 
297  ;  compared  with  Paris  (1644), 
65  ;  pulpits  filled  by  mechanics,  &c. 
(1649),  250  ;  (1656),  316  ;  forcibly 
entered  by  General  Monk,  335  ; 
triumphal  entry  of  Charles  II.,  337  ; 
visit  of  Charles  II.,  338 ;  Lord  Mayor's 
Show,  &c.  (1660),  342,  (1661),  357, 
(1662),  370,  (1664),  385,  (1686),  ii. 
259  ;  the  King's  progress  through, 
before  his  coronation,  i.  347  ;  the 
nuisance  of  smoke  in,  354,  360  ;  fast 
in  (1662),  ib ;  commission  for  regu- 
lating buildings,  &c.  (1662),  362, 
365,  374  ;  present  of  the  City  to 


the  Queen  of  Charles  XL,  363  ;  tumulta 
from  Nonconformists,  367,  370  ; 
plague  (1665),  396,  397  ;  fast  on 
account  of,  396  ;  dreadful  increase  of, 
398  ;  abates,  399  ;  ii.  2  ;  mayor,  &c., 
congratulate  Charles  II.  after  the 
plague,  2  ;  the  great  fire  iu  1666, 
9—15;  iii.  186;  alarm  in,  of  the 
Dutch  having  landed,  ii.  15  ;  survey 
of  the  ruins,  and  plans  for  rebuilding 
the  city,  ii.  16,  394  ;  iii.  188;  fast 
appointed,  ii.  1 7  ;  alarm  on  the  Dutch 
entering  the  Thames,  24  ;  rebuilding 
of  the  city  begun,  43  ;  the  Pope  burnt 
in  effigy,  89  ;  petition  of  the  Corpora- 
tion on  the  Quo  Warranto  against 
their  charter,  177  ;  their  privileges 
diminished,  i6 ;  and  judgment  entered, 
186  ;  inscription  on  the  Monument 
(1685),  225  ;  rejoicings,  &c.,  on  James 
II.'s  birthday  (1686),  258  ;  proceed- 
ings of  Common  Council  on  the 
approach  of  William  III.,  iii.  289  ; 
rejoicings  on  the  accession  of  William 
and  Mary,  ii.  292  ;  charter  of  the  city 
restored,  306  ;  earthquake  felt  at 
(1692),  iii.  329  ;  increase  of  (1696), 
reprobated,  356 
London  Frigate  blown  up,  i,  391,  393; 

ii.  25  ;  iii.  154  ;  a  new  frigate  so 
called,  launched,  ii.  6 

London  House  made  stables  for  horses, 

iii.  33 

London  Institution,  house  of,  in  Old 

Jewry,  ii.  79  n  ;  mansion  erected  for, 

in  Moorfields,  ib 
London,  Mr.  George,  gardener  to  Sir 

Christopher  Wren,  ii.  350  ;  iii.  28i 
 ,  William,  letter  on  his  proposed 

Natural  History  of  Barbadoes,  iii.  257 
Londonderry  surprised  by  James  II.,  ii. 

298  ;  Schomberg  sent  to  its  relief,  300; 

forfeiture  of,  to  Charles  II.,  iv.  61,  86 
Long,  Mr.  Robert,  Secretary  to  Charles 

II.,  iv.  193  n,  194;  brings  charge 

against  Sir  Edward  Hyde,  297  n 
Long-Ditton,   Surrey,  descent   of  the 

Evelyns  of,  Pedigree^  ii.  397 
Longevity,  instances  of,  i.  301 
Longford,  Lord,  Treasurer  of  Ireland,  ii. 

119,  128 

Longinus,  St.,  holy  lance  of,  i.  122;  letter 
concerning  it,  227 

Longtteville,  Duke  of,  ii.  57 

Lords,  protest  of  the  House  of,  against 
the  Commons  (1641),  iv.  68  n  ;  choose 
their  own   Speaker,  99,  119;  pro- 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


409 


ceedings  of,  on  the  Irish  rebellion, 
108  ;  debate  on  excluding  the  Popish 
Peers,  119;  letters  from  Charles  I. 
to  the  Speaker  of  the  (1646 — 47), 
181 

Lorraine,  Duke  of  (1652),  iv.  236,  254, 

255,  319  notes 
Lort,  Mr.,  at  Lincoln's  Inn,  i.  359 
Lothian,  Lord,  alluded  to,  i.  314,  340  ; 

iv.  81  n 

Lottery,  in  1664,  i.  380;  in  1693,  ii. 

326';  state  lottery  (1694),  329,  332; 

frequency  of  lotteries  (1696),  343  ; 

suppression  of  (1699),  352 
Loudoun,  Sir  John  Campbell,  Eai'l  of 

(1641),  iv.  79  ;  in  France  (1642),  337, 

338 

Loudune,  Nuns  of,  impostures  practised 
by,  ii.  50 

Love,  its  excellencies  and  advantages 

considered,  iii.  121 
"  Love  and  Honour,"  a  tragi-eomedy, 

i.  357 

«  Love  in  a  Tub,"  a  play,  i.  379 
Love,  Captain,  duel  fought  by,  ii.  226 
Lovestine,  fort  of,  i.  20 
Louis  XII.,  King  of  France,  equestrian 
statue  of,  at  Blois,  i.  69 

  XIII.,  his  sepulchre,  i.  42 

  XIV.  performsina  masque(1651), 

i.  265  ;  procession  to  Parliament, 
268  ;  his  ambitious  career,  ii.  182, 
197,  323  ;  the  King  and  Dauphin 
alluded  to,  i.  254  ;  ii.  53  n,  255 

Louvre,  at  Paris,  described,  i.  50  ;  re- 
ferred to,  254 

Louyr,  Mr.,  a  painter  at  the  Hague,  iv. 
210 

Lower,  Dr.,  physician,  ii.  333 
Lowman,  Mr.,  of  the  Marshalsea,  i.  398 
Lowndes,  Mr.,  Secretary  to  the  Treasury, 

ii.  335,  345  n 

Lowther,  Sir  John,  ii.  117,  165  ;  sub- 
scription to  Greenwich  Hospital,  344 
Loyola,  Ignatius,  his  burial-place,  i.  107 
Lubicer,  his  skill  on  the  violin,  i.  312 
Lubinus  (Gilhardus),  a  German  critic, 

iii.  131 

Lubnam,  Leicestershire,  iv,,  151 
Lucas,  Sir  Gervas,  iv.  260,  290,  293, 

294,  296—298 

 ,  Lady,  iv.  290,  296 

 ,  Sir  Charles,  iii.  14,  27,  28  ;  put 

to  death  by  Ireton,  i.  276,  315 
  Lord,  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower,  ii. 

23,  303,  311  ;  iii.  70 
  Rev.  Mr,,  ii.  335 


Lucca,  city  of,  account  of,  &c.,  i.  185 

Lucretia,  Signora,  a  Greek  lady,  i.  251 

"  Lucretius,"  first  book  translated  into 
English  verse  by  Mr.  Evelyn,  i,  314, 
391  ;  iii.  72  ;  his  own  remarks  upon 
it,  i.  314  ;  iii.  73,  246  ;  observations 
on  it  by  Dr.  Jeremy  Taylor  ;  iii.  72, 
75,  77  ;  proof  sheets  corrected  by  Dr. 
Triplet,  76  n 

Lucrine,  lake  of,  i.  158 

"  Ludi  Circenses,"  colours  worn  by 
combatants,  iii.  277 

Ludovisio,  Prince,  his  villa  at  Rome,  i. 
109,110,178 

Luke,  St.,  pictures  said  to  have  been 
painted  by,  i.  94,  106,  113,  125;  re- 
liques  of,  207 

Lumley,  Lord,  ii.  1,  226,  266 

 ,  family  of,  i.  329 

Lundy,  James  Campbell,  Lord,  in  the 
French  service,  iv,  337 

Lutes  made  at  Bologna,  i.  194 

Lutterell,  Mr.,  painting  by,  ii,  331 

Luxemburg,  palace  and  gardens,  i,  62 
— 64  ;  surrender  of,  to  the  French, 

ii.  197,  266 

Lynn  P^egis,  notice  of,  ii.  115 

Lyon,  Mons.,  iv.  316 

Lyons,  city  of,  i.  77,  243,  387 

Lyra,  Don  Emanuel  de,  ii.  118 

Lysons's  "  Environs  of  London,"  &c., 

referred  to,  ii.  1  n,  47  n,  48  n 
Lyttleton,  Sir  Edward,  Lord  Keeper,  iv. 

50  n,  52—55,  58,  59,  98 

Macarino,  inlaid  pavement  by,  i.  184 
Maccinigo,  with  Venetian  Ambassa- 

dors  (1685),  ii.  246 
Macclesfield,  Lord,  his  death,  ii.  327 
Macguire,  Lord,  rebellion  and  execu- 
tion of  (1641),  iv,  106  n 
Mackenzie,   Sir   George,  ii,  379  ;  his 
Essay  "  On  Solitude "  answered  by 
Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  21,  306,  392,  396  ; 

iii.  196  ;  Lord  Advocate  of  Scotland, 

ii.  286,  287  ;  founder  of  the  Advo- 
cates' Library,  iii,  193  ;  Letters  to 
Mr.  Evelyn,  193,  202  ;  particulars 
respecting  Scotland  by,  ii.  306 

Mackworth,  Sir  Humphrey,  i,  332  ;  iv. 
234 

Macmahon,  Hugh,  discovery  of  the  Irish 

rebellion  by  (1641),  iv.  108  n 
Maddox,  Mr.,  letter  of  Mr,  Evelyn  to, 

iii.  83 

Madrid,  a  palace  of  the  French  King, 
i.  55,  256 


410 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Maestricht,  a  siege  of,  represented  at 
Windsor,  ii.  92 

MafiFonett,  ,  iv.  274 

Magdalen  College  and  Chapel,  Oxford, 

i.  292,  384 

Magniani,  Marquis,  of  Bologna,  i.  193 
Maim  burg,  Father,  pretended  letter  of 

Duchess  of  York  to,  ii.  167  ;  iii.  255 
Maison,   President,   his    palace,  near 

Paris,  i.  253 
Maison  Rouge,  near  Paris,  i.  59 
Maitland   (ancestor   of  the   Duke  of 

Lauderdale),  letters  of,  iii.  381 

 ,  Lord,  library  of,  iii.  309 

 ,  Sir  Richai'd,  his  collection  of 

Scotch  Poems,  iii.  383 
Makias,  Mrs.  Bathsua,  school  of,  i.  250 
Mai  Albergo,  i.  1 95 
Malamocco,  notice  of,  i.  1 96 
Malata,  or  Mela,  Catta,  effigy  and  notice 

of,  i.  206 

Malcolm's,   "  Londinium   Redivivum " 

referred  to,  i.  288  n 
Mailing,  South,  Church  consecrated,  i. 

5  ;  impropriations,  246 
Malpighi,  Signior,  presents  a  treatise  to 

the  Royal  Society,  ii.  38  ;  notice  of, 

381 

Malta,  earthquake  at  (1693),  ii.  324 
Malvern  Hills,  view  from,  i.  296 
Manchester,  Edward  Montague,  Earl  of, 

Lord  Chamberlain,  i.  343,  385 
 ,  Henry  Montague,  Earl  of, 

Speaker  of  the  Lords  (1641),  iv.  99; 

portrait,  iii.  301 
•  ,  Edward,  Earl  of,  joins  the 

Scottish  army,  iv.  141  n;  mentioned, 

212  n 

Mancini,  Signior,  of  Rome,  i.  166 
Mander,  Dr.  Roger,  Master  of  Baliol 

College,  ii.  351,  362 
Mandeville,  Henry  Montague,  Lord,  iv. 

75  n,  76 

Mann,  Mr.,  Recorder  of  Ipswich,  ii.  Ill 

Manna  at  Naples,  i.  1 62 

Manners,  general  depravity  of  (1690), 

ii.  303,  356  ;  Society  for  Reformation 
of  (1699),  356,  358 

Manning,    Captain,  his    treachery  to 

Charles  IL,  219  n 
Manning  a  ship,  the  phrase,  iii.  15 
Mantegna,  Andrea,  paintings  by,  i.  56, 

364 

Manton,  Dr.,  sermon  of,  i.  327 
Manufactures,  notices  of,  i.   72,  223, 
256 

Manuscripts  in  the  Bodleian,  i.  291 


Manuscripts,  Essay  on,  by  Mr.  Evelyn, 

ii.  392  and  n 

Manwaring,  Dr.  Roger,  Bishop  of  St. 

David's,     ParUament  sequestrates 

(1641),  iv.  55  n 
Maple  tree,  marbling  in  the  wood  of, 

iii.  130 

Marais  du  Temple,  Paris,  i.  49 
Marble,  magazine  for,  at  Lambeth,  ii.  108 
Marcello,  Dr.,  of  Verona,  i.  222 
Marces,  Mons.,  Charles  II.  discharges  a 

debt  to,  iv.  304,  308 
Marchand,  Florian,  the  water- sp  outer, 

i.  263  and  n 
Marcus,  .^milius,  statue  of,  i.  222 
Marden,  Surrey,  Sir  Robert  Clayton's 

seat  at,  ii.  115,  300,  361 
Margaret,  eminent  women  of  that  name, 

iii.  245 

Margate,  Kent,  notice  of  tov/n  of,  ii.  74 
Marine  laws  of  France,  paper  on  the 

severity  of  the,  iii.  262 
Marinella,  Lucretia,  book  by,  in  praise  of 

Women,  iii.  245 
Marius,  Caius,  victory  of,  i.  173,  221, 

222 

Markets,  notices  of,  i.  23,  34,  37,  304 
Mark,  St.,  Piazza  of,  at  Venice,  i.  198 
Marlborough,  John  Churchill,  Lord 
(afterwards  Duke),  dismissed  from 
office  (1692),  ii.  318,  389  ;  deserted 
James  II.,  ib ;  Master  of  Ordnance 
(1701),  363  ;  his  honours,  369  ;  naar- 
riage  of  his  daughters,  350,  369  ; 
death  of  his  son,  370  ;  his  attention 
to  Mr.  Evelyn,  374  ;  his  brother  re- 
ferred to,  376 

 ,  Sarah  Jennings,  Duchess 

of,  i.  361  ;  ii.  94  n,  318 
Marlborough,  town  of,  i.  289 
"  Marmora  Oxoniensia  Arundeliana,  ii. 

30, 105.  See  Arundel,  Evelyn,  Howard 
Marmoutiers,  Abbey  of,  i.  72 
Marne,  famous  bridge  over,  i.  57 
Mai'riages,  numerous  by  one  person,  i. 
25;  of  a  Jew  at  Venice,  217.  Burials, 
&c.,  tax  on,  ii.  336 
Marseilles,  account  of,  i.  80  ;  slaves 

there,  81  ;  referred  to,  iii.  83 
Marshall,  William,  portrait  by,  i.  250  n  ; 
book  of  flowers  painted  by,  ii.  169 

 ,  Colonel,  iii.  10 

Marsham,  Sir  John,  i.  334  ;  his  "  Chro- 

nicus  Canon,''  &c.,  iii.  265  and  n 
Marston  Moor,  battle  of,  iv.  141  n 
Marsys,  Mons.,  his  libel  against  Charles 
L,  iv.  189—191 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


411 


Martio,  Mr.  ii.  367 

Martyn,  Capt.,  iv.  315  ;  offers  himself 
for  Spanish  service  (1656),  309 

Mary  Beatrice  D'Este,  Princess  of  Mo- 
dena,  Duchess  of  York,  ii.  89 

Mary  Magdalen,  her  place  of  penance, 
i.  82 

Marv,  Queen  of  Scots,  her  burial-place, 

i.  *302  ;  her  life,  iii.  383 
]\Iary,  Queen  (consort  of  William  III.), 

ii,  107  ;  married  to  the  Prince  of 
Orange,  117  ;  her  conduct  on  her 
accession  to  the  crown,  ii.  292  ;  her 
cabinets  and  collection  of  China,  325  ; 
her  death  and  funeral,  333  ;  her 
character,  334 

Maseres,  Baron,  tracts  respecting  the 
Civil  War,  i.  425  n 

Mason,  Dr.,  his  house,  i.  283 

 ,  Rev.  John,  noticed,  ii.  329 

Masques,  at  Court  in  France,  i.  265  ;  at 
Lincoln's  Inn,  359  ;  at  Charles  II.'s 
Court,  374,  389  ;  ii.  21 

Massey^  William,  his  "  Origin  and  Pro- 
gress of  Letters,"  referred  to,  i.  291 

Massenet,   ,  iv.  297  n 

Massy,  Sir  Edward,  Governor  of  Ja- 
maica, i.  341 

Masters,  Captain,  in  the  Dutch  Fleet 
Fleet,  i.  392  n 

Mastiff  dogs  draw  pedlars'  carts  in 
Holland,  i.  36 

Mathematical  College,  Mr.  Evelyn's 
scheme,  iii.  116—120 

Matliaei  Horti,  at  Rome,  i.  165 

Maurice,  Prmce,  i.  18  ;  iv.  143.  165  n  : 
222,  267 

Mausoleum  Augusti,  at  Rome,  i.  171 
Maxfield,  — ,  arrested  for  debt,  iii.  44 
Maximilian  II.,  Emperor,  letters  of,  iii. 
380 

Maxwell,  Mr.,  ii.  120  n 
May,  Hugh,  and   Baptist,  architects, 
works  of,  i.  382  ;  ii.  53  n,  54  n,  57, 
78,  140,  169  ;  a  commissioner  for  re- 
pair of  Old  St.  Paul's,  ii.  9 

■  ,  Thomas,  "History  of  the  Long 

Parliament "  referred  to,  iv.  76  n  ; 
94  n,  98  n 
May  29  th,  festival  on,  i.  352 
Maynard,  Mr.,  sergeant,  ii.  151 
•         — ,  Lord,  comptroller  of  house- 
hold, ii.  211 
Maynwaring,  Sir  Arthur,  iv.  60  n,  64 

 ,  Sir  Philip,  iv.  55 

Mazarine,  Cardinal  Julius,  proscribed, 
i.  263  ;  death,  346;  alluded  to,  255, 1 


284;  ii.  353  ;  iv.  175,  236,  239,  26], 
282,  299,  302,  319,  341  notes,  367  ; 
Mazai'ine  Library,  iii.  305 
Mazarine,  Duchess  of,  mistress  of 
Charles  II.,  ii.  108,  210  ;  iii.  251  ;  her 
death,  ii.  353 
Mazzotti,  an  artist  in  Pietra  Commessa, 
i.  190 

Meadows,  Sir  Phihp,  marriage  of,  ii.  346 
Meath,  Bishop  of  (1656),  poverty  of,  i. 
313 

Medals,  ancient,  observations  on  Roman, 

i.  ]  82  ;  utility  of,  as  historical  records, 
iii.  297—299  ;  authors  on,  299,  ii. 
103  ;  coined  at  the  coronation  of 
James  I.  iii.  339  ;  various  collections 
of,  noticed,  i.  110,  163,  178,  214;  iu. 
299—301 

 "  Discourse  of,"  by  Mr.  Evelyn, 

ii.  392,  396  ;  letter  to  his  bookseller 
respecting,  iii.  342  ;  to  Lord  Godol- 
phin  on  clipping  coin,  354 

Mede,  Joseph,  on  prophecy,  ii.  297, 
308 

Medici,  palace  of,  at  Rome,  i.  108,  133 

  Cosmo  di,  Duke,  his  statue  of 

Justice,  i.  92,  188  ;  equestrian  statue 
of,  95 

 Cosmo  II.  improved  the  Palace 

of  Pitti,  i.  92  ;  statue  of,  188 

 ,  Cardinal,  Arabassadoi',  i.  177  ; 

fireworks  at  his  palace,  178 
Medicis,  Marie  de.  Queen  mother,  por- 
trait, i.  22  ;  her  reception  in  Holland 
(1641),  i.  28  ;  notice  of,  72,  253 
Mediterranean,  Evelyn's  voyage  in  the 

(1644),  i.  82 
Meeres,  Sir  Thomas,  ii.  107,  130 
Meggot,  Dr.,  Dean  of  Winchester,  ii. 

233  ;  sermons  of,  7,  195,  256,  262 
Meldrum,  Captain  for  Charles  II.  (1654), 

iv.  300,  309  n 
Melford,  Lord,  pictures  belonging  to, 

sold,  ii.  325 
Mell,  Mr.,  musician,  i.  282,  313 
Mellerav,  Marshal,  intrigues  of,  iv.  256  n, 
261,  277— 281, '283— 292  ;  seizes  on 
English  ships  (1652),  259  ;  claims  a 
fee  from  prizes  taken  for  Charles  II., 
282,  292 

Melos,  Don  Francisco  de,  ii.  23,  81 
Menageries,  notices  of,  i.  32,  52,  117, 

212,  287.    See  Aviai-ies. 
Mennes,  Sir  John,  his  verses  on  the 
Duchess  of  Chevreuse,  iv.  130  n  ; 
loyalty  to  King  Charles  I.,  242  n 
Mentz,  Elector  of  (1654),iv.  224 


412 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Mercator,  Nicholas,  mathematician,  ii. 

9,  378 

Mercers'  Company  (London),  i.  366  ; 

Italian  sermon  at  their  Chapel,  247  ; 

Chapel  of,  burned,  ii.  14 
Merceria,  at  Venice,  i.  198 
Mercure,  Mons.,  performer  on  the  lute, 

i.  244 

"Mercurius  Politicus,"  cited,  iv.  241, 

264,  300,  319  notes 
"Mercurius  Rusticus,"  quoted,  iv.  136  n 
Mercury,  Transit  of  (1664),  i.  384  ;  a 

ring,  said  to  be  a  projection  of,  ii.  24 
Meret,  Dr.,  of  the  College  of  Physicians, 

i.  369,  419 
Merey,  Mons.,  i.  72 
Merick,  Sir  William,  i.  376 
Merode,  ,  iv.  210 

Mei'rick,  Mr.,  of  Parson's  Green,  i.  345 

 ,  Sei-jeant-Major,  sent  to  Ireland 

(1641),  iv.  110  n 
Merton  College,  election  to  the  Warden- 
ship  of  (1661),  i.  346 
Messeray,  Mons.,  Judge  Advocate  of 

Jersey,  i.  339;  iii.  227 
Messerny,  Mr.,  iii.  189 
Meta-Studante,  ruins  of,  i.  115 
Metellus,  sepulchre  of,  at  Rome,  i.  1 66 
Meteor,  one  in  (1642-43),  i.  39;  (1680), 

ii.  154;  (1694),  iii.  339 
Meverell,  Dr.  i.  8 

Mewes,  Dr.,  of  St.  John's  College,  Ox- 
ford, ii.  43 

Michel!,  Robert,  estate  at  North  Stoke, 
ii.  363 

Mickleham,  notice  of,  i.  309 
Middlesex,  James  Cranfield,  Earl  of, 

commissioner  at  Newport,  iv.  185  n 
Middleton,  Lord,  ii.  24,  380  ;  Secretary 

of  State,  199,  266 

.  ,  Colonel,  ii.  60,  61,  383 

■  ,  Sir  Hugh,  New   River  of, 

ii.  255 

 ,  Mrs,,  daughter  of  R,  Need- 
ham,  ii.  183 

 ,  Dr.,  Italian  sermon  by,  i.  247 

 ,  Lieut.-General,  ii.  25  ;  trans- 
ports arms  for  Charles  II.'s  service 
(1653),  iv.  294  n 

Milan,  description  of,  i.  224 — 230  ; 
Cathedral,  224 ;  Church  of  the  Jesuits 
and  St.  Celso,  225  ;  public  buildings, 
ib ;  Ambrosian  library,  226;  Church 
of  St.  Ambrose,  227  ;  Citadel,  &c.,  ib  ; 
Signor  Septalla's  curiosities,  228  ; 
civilities  of  a  Scots  Colonel,  229 

Millennium,  delusion  respecting,  ii.  329 


Militia,  notices  of  (1644),  iv.  1 36—140 
Miller,  Rev.  Mr.,  vicar  of  Effingham, 

&c.,  ii.  323 
Millington,  Sir  Thomas,  ii.  174 
Milton,  John,  allusions  to,  i.  337;  ii.  254 
 ,  Christopher,  brother  of  John, 

ii.  254 

Mingrelia,  women  of,  ii.  146 

Mint,  committee  for  regulating  the,  i. 
376,  378  ;  ii.  4 

Mirandula,  John  Picus,  ii.  131  ;  por- 
trait of,  43 

"  Mii^cellanea  Aulica,"  referred  to,  iv. 
198,  202,  203,  223  notes 

Misenus,  ruins  of  its  city,  i.  160 

Miss,  coui*tezans  so  called,  i.  360 ;  ii. 
63,  379 

Misson,  Francois  Maximilien,  his  New 

Voyage  to  Italy,"  i.  153  n 
Mochi,  Fra.,  statue  by,i.  122 
Models,  notices  of,  various,  i.  25,  55 
Modena,  Duchess  of,  ii.  89  ;  iv.  39 

 ,  Duke  of,  iv.  319  n 

"  Moderate  Publisher,"  journal  cited, 

iv.  269  n 

Modiford,  Sir  Thomas,   Governor  of 

Jamaica,  ii.  59,  61,  93 
Mohun,  Lord,  tried  and  acquitted,  ii.  322 

 ,  Mrs.  Philippa,  iv.  212 

Mole  and  Pharos  at  Genoa,  i.  84,  87  ;  at 

Naples,  150 
Molino,  Signor,  Doge  of  Venice,  i.  215 
 ,  Conde  de,  Spanish  Ambassador, 

i.  395 

Mollen,  famous  for  making  lutes,  i.  194 
Monconys,  Mons.  Balthazar,  ii.  50,  382 
Mondragone,  Palace  of,  i.  1 7  9 
Money,  scarcity  of,  in    England  in 

(1696),  ii.  343 
Monk,  George,  Duke  of  Albermarle,  iv. 

208,  209  ;  his  march  from  Scotland, 

i.  335  ;  breaks  down  the  gates  of  the 

city,  ib  ;  marches  to  Whitehall,  ib  ; 

and  convenes  the  old  Parliament,  ib  ; 

allusions  to  his  conduct,  i.  423,  424; 

letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to,  iii.  156.  See 

Albemarle 
 ,  Dr.  Nicholas,  Bishop  of  Hereford, 

consecration  of,  i.  344  ;  funeral,  359 
Monkeys,  feats  of,  at  Southwark  fair, 

i.  340 

Monmouth,  Sir  James  Scott,  Duke  of, 
i.  253  ;  ii.  51,  81,  92,  94  n,  108  n, 
134,  159,  206  ;  his  return  from  Hol- 
land, and  popularity,  138  ;  proclama- 
tion against,  178  ;  surrenders  himself, 
189  ;  pardoned,  and  banished  White- 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


413 


hall,  1 90  ;  lands  in  Eno;land  and  sets 
up  his  standard  as  King,  225  ;  pro- 
claimed traitor,  ih ;  taken  prisoner, 
226  ;  committed  to  the  Tower  and 
executed,  228  ;  his  base  extraction, 
ih  ;  character,  ih  ;  his  mother,  i.  253; 

ii.  229 

Monmouth,  Duchess  of,  ii.  81, 107,  160, 
228,  249  ;  sermon  by  her  chaplain, 
303 

 ,  Earl  of,  ii.  335 

Monro,  Sir  George,  iv.  212 
Montague,  Henry,  Lord,  purchases  arms 
for  Charles  I.,  iv.  341  ;  alluded  to, 

iii.  10 

 ,  Lord  Viscount,  i.  318  n,  334, 

397,  415 

 ,   Lord,   trial  (1693—1696), 

concerning  estate  left  by  Duke  ot 
Albermarle,  ii.  327,  343,  366;  sub- 
scription to  Greenwich  Hospital,  344  n 

 ,  Mr.,  Chancellor  of  the  Ex- 
chequer, subscription  to  Greenwich 
Hospital,  ii.  344  n.    See  Mountague 

I  ,  Walter,  Abbot  of  Pontoise, 

iv.  75  n,  322  n  ;  attempts  to  pervert 
the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  203,216 

.  ,  Ralph,  Duke  of,  his  palace 

at  Bloomsbury  (now  the  British 
Museum),  ii.  106, 135  ;  described  188  ; 
burnt,  248 

 ,  Mr.  Attorney, his  son  married 

to  Mary  Evelyn  of  Woodcot,  ii.  47  ; 
her  death,  271. 

.  ,  Lady  Mary  Wortley,  ii.  388 

Montalbano,  Dr.,  discoverer  of  phos- 
phorus, i.  193. 

Mont- Alto's  villa,  i.  112 

Monte  Cavallo  a  iRome,  i.  Ill,  134 

Monte  Feltre,  Count  and  Countess,  ii. 
183 

Monte  Pientio,  or  Mantumiato,  i.  98 
Monte  Pieta,  i.  167  ;  in  Padua,  211 
Montefiascone,  notice  of,  i.  100 
Montfoi'd,  the  player,  murder  of,  ii.  322 

 ,  Loi'd,  ii.  48  n 

Montgomery  Castle  declares  for  the 

King,  iv.  145 
Montgomeryshire,  fiery  exhalation  in 

(1694),  ii.  328 
Mont  Louis,  dwellings  of  its  inhabitants, 

i.  71 

Montpelier,   celebrated  for  perfumes, 

&c.,  iii.  83 
Montreuil,  Mons.,iv.  174  ;  deceived  by 

Mazarine,  175  n 
 ,  description  of,  i.  41 


Montrose,  James  Graham,  Marquis  of, 
trial  (1641),  iv.81  ;  Charles  L  deter- 
mines not  to  treat  without  him,  135, 
138  ;  account  of,  92  n,  135  n  ;  defeats 
the  Covenanters  at  Kilsythe,  168  n  ; 
portrait,  iii.  301  ;  alluded  to,  i.  267; 
iii.  42,  380 

Monument  (London),  building  of,  ii. 
156  ;  words  on  against  the  Papists 
erased,  225 

Moody,  Rev.  Mr.,  recommended  for  a 
living,  i.  320 

Moon,  on  the  nature  of  its  light,  i.  32 

Moore,  Dr.  John,  Bishop  of  Ely,  his 
library,  ii.  353 

Moorfields,  its  manufactory  of  camlets, 
i.  278 

Morant,  Rev.  Philip,  his     History  of 

Essex,"  cited,  i.  332  n 
Moray,  Sir  Robert,  letter  to  Mr.  Evelyn, 

iii.  203 

Mordaunt,  Mr.,  acquitted  (1658),  i. 
327 

 ,  Lord  Viscount,  i.  319,  336, 

343,  345,  348,  358,  374  ;  case  between 

him   and   Captain   Taylor,   ii.    19  ; 

letters  to  Mr.  Evelyn,  iii.  132,  243  ; 

Mr.    Evelyn  his  trustee,   ii.  109  ; 

notice  of,  i.  413  ;  ii.  379 
 ,  Lady,  her  charity,  &c.,  ii. 

104,  105,  109,  120  ;  Mr.  Evelyn  her 

executor,  131,  138,  141 

 Lady  Mary,  ii.  94  n,  110 

 Lady,  house  at  Ashsted,  i. 

399  ;  ii.  268 
More,  Sir  Thomas,  portrait  of,  i.  249  : 

iii.  301 
Morgan,  Mr.,  iv.  208  n 

 ,  Captain,  iv.  225 

 ,  Mr.,  botanist,  i.  328 

 ■,  Dr.  Robert,  Bishop  of  Bangor, 

i.  340 

 ,  Col.,  exploits  at  Panama,  ii.  61, 

93 

Morghen,  Raphael,  fine  engraving  by, 
i.  226  n 

Morice,  Mr.,  Secretary,  i  355,  396  ;  ii. 
21 ;  his  library,  i.  377  ;  ii.  22 :  notice 
of,  379 

 ,  Mons.,  professor  at  Geneva, 

i.  242,  243 
Morine,  Mons.,  his  garden  and  collection 

of  insects,  &c.,  i.  65,  265 
Morison,  Dr.,  professor  of  botany,  ii. 

99,  384 

Morlaud,  Sir  Samuel,  his  inventions,  ii. 
26,  64,  113,  176  ;  account  of  him  and 


414  GENERA.L 

his  father,  26  ;  his  house  at  Lambeth, 
159  ;  inventions  to  assist  his  blind- 
ness, &c.,  338 

Morley,  Agnes,  school  founded  by,  i.  5 

 ,  Dr.  George  (Bishop  of  Win- 
chester), with  Charles  II.  in  exile, 
iv.  205,  208,  211;  i.  254,  271  n,  375, 
377,  ii.  104  ;  coronation  sermon  by, 
i.  350  ;  letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to  on 
the  Duchess  of  York's  apostacy,  ii. 
167;iii.  255  ;  the  Bishop's  vindication, 
256  ;  portrait,  301 

 ,  Col.,  a  fi'iend  of  Mr.  Evelyn, 

and  one  of  the  Council  of  State  (1652), 
i.  278,  308  ;  Mr.  Evelyn  attempts  to 
bring  him  over  to  the  King,  334  ;  the 
Colonel  hesitates,  335  ;  procures  par- 
don, 336  ;  Mr.  Evelyn's  negotiations 
with  him,  422 

Morocco,  Ambassador,  Named  Hamet 
(1682),  ii,  161  ;  entertainment  given 
to,  162  ;  admitted  of  the  Royal 
Society,  167  ;  Lord  Howard  made 
Ambassador  to,  ii.  31 

Morosini,  Ambassador  from  Venice  to 
France,  i.  269 

Morrice,  Colonel,  Governor  of  Pomfret 
Castle,  account  of,  iv.  283 

Morris,  Mr,,  scrivener,  ii.  116  n 

Morton,  Countess,  allusions  to,  i.  254, 
262;  iv.  221 

Morus,  Mons.  (Alexander  Morus  ?),  a 
French  preacher,  i.  360 

Mosaics,  i.  124,  125,  129,  134,  142,  173, 
199.    See  Pietra  Commessa. 

Moscow  burnt  (1699),  ii.  354 

Moulins,  brief  account  of,  i.  76 

Moulins,  M.,  sm'geon,  i.  250 

Mountains,  travelling  in  the,  i.  99,  191, 
230—235 

Mountebanks  at  Rome,  i.  168,  182  ;  at 

Venice,  216 
Mowbray,  Lord  (son  of  Earl  of  Arundel), 

i.  214  ;  notice  of,  404 
Muccinigo,  Sign.,  Venetian  Ambassador, 

entertained  by  Mr.  Evelyn  (1668),  ii. 
35  ;  iii.  211  ;  his  entry  into  London, 

ii.  43,  53 
Mulberry  garden,  i.  288 
Mulgrave,  Lord,  ii.  79,  135,  325,  326 
Mummies,  fragments  of,  given  to  Evelyn, 

i.  213 

Mundaims,  philosophers'  elixir  projected 
by,  ii.  374 

"  Mundus  Muliebris"  (1690),  a  poem 

by  Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  215,  396 
Murano,  near  Venice,  account  of,  i,  212 


INDEX  TO 


Murillo,  painting  by,  ii.  325 
Muro  torto  at  Rome,  i,  171 
Murray,  Colonel  Charles,  iv.  233  n,  234  n 

 ,  Mr.  Mungo,  iv,  88,  89  ;  notice 

of,  89  n 

 ,  Mr.  Wm.,  in  the  confidence  of 

Charles  I.,  iv.  54,  63,  69,  73,  96,  107, 

110,  118,  130  n,  353 

— ■  ,  Col.  William,  iv.  167,  168 

 ,  Sir  Robert,  one  of  the  insti- 

tutors  of  the  Royal  Society,  i.  346, 

352  n,  367,  389  ;  ii.  47,  84,  393;  iii. 

348  ;  funeral  of,  ii  84 
Muschamp,  Mr.,  ii.  285 
Musgrave,  Sir  Philip,  i.  254 
Music,  singing,  &c.,  particulars  relating 

to,  i.  20—25,  109—111 
Musical  instrument,  a  new  invention,  i. 

381 

Muscovy    Ambassador,    audience  of 

(1662),  i.  372 
 — ,  Czar  of,  his  conduct  to  the 

English  Ambassador,  i.  373  n 
"Mustapha,"  a   ti-agedy,  by   Earl  of 

Orrery,  i.  391  ;  ii.  18 
Mutiano,  Girolamo,  painting  by,  i.  109 
Mynne,  George,  of  Woodcote,  i.  247  ; 

Pedigree,  ii.  397 

"  Naked  Truth,"  a  pamphlet,  ii.  104 
Nalson,  John,  "  Collection  of  the  Affaii's 

of  State,"  iv.  68  n 
Nantes,  Edict  of,  revocation  of,  ii.  242. 

See  Huguenots 
Nanteuil's  portraits  of  Mr.  Evelyn,  i. 

258,  408 

Naples,  state  of  in  1648,  iv.  349,  350  ; 
inscription  over  the  gate,  i,  148 ; 
account  of  the  city,  149—  163  ;  Castle 
of  St.  Elmo,  &c.,'l50  ;  the  Mole,t6/ 
Cathedral  and  Churches,  151  ;  Monas- 
tery of  the  Carthusians,  ib  ;  Museums, 
152;  Carnival,  ib ;   Vesuvius,  153, 

;  154  ;  Pausihppo,  154  ;  Lago  d'Ag- 
nano,  155;  Grotto  del  Cane,  156; 
Court  of  Vulcan,  ib ;  Puteoli,  &c., 
157,  161  ;  Lake  Avernus  and  cave, 
159;  Cuma,  ib ;  Baiee,  154,  160, 
161  ;  Misenus,  160  ;  Elysian  Fields, 
ib ;  Arsenal,  161  ;  manners  of  the 
people,  161,162;  execution  at,  183; 
etchings  of  views  near,  ii.  396 ;  its 
geology,  iii.  326 

Narbrough,  Sir  John,  Journal  of,  iii. 
340 

Naseby,  battle  of,  iv.  1 47  n ;  Charles 
holds  a  Council  of  War  before,  151  n 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


415 


Nassau-Dietz,  William  Frederick, Prince 

of  (1654),  iv.  215  n,  222  n 
Nassau,  Prince  William  of,  and  his  son 

Maurice,  monuments,  i.  21  ;  iii.  262 
Naudseus,    Gaspar,   "  On  Libraries," 

translated  by  Mr.  Evelyn  (1661),  i. 

357  ;  ii.  391,  395  ;  noticed,  i.  358  ; 

iii.  303,  373 
"  Navigation  and  Commerce"  (1674),  by 

Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  91,  396.  See  Dutch 

War 

Navy,  provided  for  by  Act  of  Tonnage 
and  Poundage  (1641),  iv,  61  ;  state  of 
(1656),  267—270  n,  278  n,  309 

Neale,  Sir  P.,  optician,  i.  314 

 ,  Mr.,  lotteries  set  up  by,  ii.  326, 

332  ;  built  the  Seven  Dials,  &c.,  332 
Neapohtano,  Carlo,  painter,  i.  105,  115 
Needham,  Dr.  Jasper,  i.  317,  335,  413  ; 

funeral  and  eulogy,  ii.  135  ;  iii.  83 
•  ,  Sir  Robert,  and  Lady,  1.  321, 

328,  377 
Needlework,  Landscape  of,  i.  342 
Negroes,  to  be  baptized,  ii.  234  ;  revolt 

of,  in  Barbadoes  (1692),  323 
Negros,   Hieronymo    del,    Palace  at 

Genoa,  i.  85 
Neile,  Sir  Paul,  i.  351 
Neptune,  Temple  of,  i.  158  ;  Rock  of, 

239  ;  launching  of,  ii.  174 
Nero,  Emperor  of  Rome,  vestiges,  &c., 

of,i.  135,  159,  160,  161,  163,  170 
Neubourg,  Marquis  de,enterprise  against 

Ushant,  iv.  271 
Nevers,  brief  notice  of,  i.  244 
Newburgh,  Lord,  ii,  202 
Newcastle,    William    Cavendish,  first 

Marquis  of,  iv.  348  ;  summoned  by 

the  Queen  (1641),  84;  leaves  England, 

141  n  ;  tutor  to  Prince  Charles,  154  n; 

seat  at  Welbeck,  i.  299 
 ,  Duke  and  Duchess  of,  Mr. 

Evelyn  visits  them,  ii.  22,  23  ;  fanciful 

dress  of  the  Duchess,  22,  23  ;  iv,  8  ; 

visits  the  Royal  Society,  ii,  23  ;  the 

Duke's  book  on  Horsemanship,  22  ; 

iii.  246  ;  marriage  of  his  daughter,  ii. 

333  ;  portrait  of  the  Duke,  iii.  301  ; 
on  Mr,  Evelyn's  "Discourse  of  Forest 
Trees,"  226  ;  letters  and  poems  to  the 
Duke  and  Duchess,  244  n ;  panegy- 
rical letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to  the 
Duchess,  244 

New  Hall  (the  great  Duke  of  Bucking- 
ham's), i.  316 

Newmarket,  Charles  II.'s  house  at, 
ii.  48;  stables  and  heath,  48,  49; 


court  at,  and  races  (1671),  63,  67  ; 
revelling,  &c.,  at,  67  ;  collection  for 
rebuilding  Newmarket  after  fire,  186 

Newport,  Andrew,  ii,  138 

 ,   Montjoy  Blount,  Earl  of, 

protests  against  an  order  in  the  Com- 
mons (1641), iv.  68  n  ;  i.  347  ;  pictures 
in  his  possession,  ii.  203  ;  treasurer 
of  the  Household  (1685),  211;  (1689), 
293  ;  alluded  to,  224,  233 

 ,  Viscountess,  ii.  129 

Newport,  King's  farewell  speech  and 
Commissioners  at  (1648),  iv.  185 

"  News  from  Brussels  unmasked " 
(1660),  by  Mr.  Evelyn,  i.  336  ;  ii. 
395 

Newstead  Abbey,  notice  of,  i.  299 
Newton,  Sir  Adam,  monument  of,  i. 
278,  409 

 ,  Sir  Henry,  allusions  to,  i.  278, 

310,  317  ;  his  house  at  Charlton,  285, 
381 

 ,  Mr,,  married   Mr,  Evelyn's 

grandmother,  i.  6  ;  her  death,  263 
Nice,  in  Savoy,  notice  of,  i.  82 
Nice,  Daniel,  his  collection  of  coins,  iii. 
300 

Nicholai,  of  Rome,  base  singer,  i.  183 
Nicholao,  excellence  on  the  violin,  ii, 
94,  137 

Nicholao  del  Abati,  painting  by,  i,  56 
Nicholas,  Sir  Edward,  Secretary  of 
State  ;  his  private  correspondence 
with  Charles  I.  (1641-48),  iv.  47— 
185  ;  Charles  I.'s  testimony  to  his 
worth,  57 ;  desires  to  I'emove  to  the 
country,  60,  70  ;  directions  about 
Collar  of  Rubies,  73,  83,  85,  90,  103; 
urges  Charles  I.'s  return  from  Scot- 
land, 107 — 122  ;  advises  the  King 
about  vacant  Bishopric  ks,  72,  79, 
116  ;  of  treacherous  counsellors,  77, 
94,  97  ;  of  the  Marquis  of  Montrose, 
81  ;  zeal  in  the  King's  service,  89,  91, 
112;  anxiety  about  the  "Incident," 
92-97,  105,  111  ;  his  letters  dis- 
closed, 103  ;  thanks  the  King  for 
destroying  his  letters,  105,  129  ; 
advises  him  to  require  attendance  of 
all  Members  in  Parliament,  109  ; 
King  Charles  promises  to  protect 
him,  112  ;  letters  of  Queen  Henri- 
etta to,  50,  84  ;  ditto  to  direct  Earl  of 
Caernarvon  to  attend  in  Parliament, 
115;  ditto  to  forward  dispatches,  118; 
desires  the  King  to  destroy  or  return 
his  letters  for  his  greater  safety,  115, 


416  GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


117;  advises  him  to  defer  signing 
the  Thirteen  Bishops'  pardon,  123  ; 
his  illness,  124  ;  advises  the  King  to 
receive  the  Hertfordshire  gentry,  127, 
132;  knighted  by  King  Charles  I., 
13"4  n;  letters  of  Sir  R.  Browne  to 
(1642  and  1643),  335—341  ;  his 
opinion  in  a  Council  of  War  held 
December  (1 644),  144 ;  King  Charles  I. 
thankful  for  his  services  (1645),  146 
n  ;  directed  to  put  Oxford  upon  short 
allowance,  148  ;  letter  by  the  King's 
command  sent  to  Sir  Harry  Vane  the 
younger,  172  ;  the  King  again  ac- 
knowledges his  services  (1648),  184  ; 
correspondence  of  Sir  E.  Nicholas 
and  the  Royal  family  after  the  death 
of  Charles  I.,  189—227;  letter  con- 
cerning Marsys's  translation  of  the 
«  Eikon  Basilike,"  189  ;  letter  to  King 
Charles  II.  (1649),  on  his  counsellors, 
191  ;  Charles  II. 's  promise  to,  194; 
letters  of  James  Duke  of  York  to,  for 
money,  199  ;  of  the  same,  on  Charles 
H.'s  esteem  for  Sir  Edward,  200  ;  of 
King  Charles  II.  to  (1652),  ib;  of 
Mary,  Princess  Dowager  of  Orange, 
to,  on  Charles  IPs  affairs  (1653),201 ; 
of  Charles  II.  to  keep  together  his 
friends,  202  ;  of  Ehzabeth  Queen  of 
Bohemia  to  (1654-5),  205—226; 
De  Larry's  character  of,  192  n ; 
arrived  at  Caen,  231  ;  at  Aix-la- 
Chapelle,  205  ;  letters  to,  from  Sir 
Richard  Browne,  335  —  341,  343  ; 
account  of,  iv.  48  ;  alluded  to,  i.  252, 
397;  ii.  90 

Nicholas,  Mr.  John,  son  of  Secretary 
Nicholas,  i.  67,  76 

 ,  Friar,  of  Paris,  chemist,  &c., 

i.  263 

NichoUs,  Colonel,  ii.  60  ;  iii.  240 
Nichols,  John,  his  "  Progresses  of 
Queen  Elizabeth,"  referred  to,  i.  1  n  ; 
his  Literary  Anecdotes,"  iv.  190  n 
 ,  Mr.  Anthony,  iv.  59  ;  Par- 
liament sends  him  to  Edinburgh 
(1641),  i6 

Nicholson,  Dr.  William,  Bishop  of 
Gloucester,  i.  359 

Nicolls,  Mr.,  iv.  233  and  n,  235 

Nicolson,  Dr.  William,  Bishop  of  Car- 
lisle, ii.  368  ;  corresponds  with  Mr. 
Evelyn,  iii.  378,  383,  384 

Nieuporr,  Dutch  Ambassador,  notices 
of,  i.  314  ;  his  account  of  the  Dutch 
East  India  Company,  318  ;  alluded  to. 


322,  330,  332  ;  policy  of  his  nation, 

333 

Nineveh,  remains,  &c.,  of,  ii.  89,  146 
Niobe  and  her  Family,  statues  of,  I 
108 

Nismes,  city  of,  &c.,  iii.  83 

"  Noah's  Ark,"  shop  at  Paris  so  called, 

i.  48 

Noli  me  tangere,  by  Hans  Holbein,  ii. 
147,  386 

Nonesuch  House,  Surrey,  ii,  1,  377 
Norden,  John,  accuracy  of  his  map,  ii. 
171 

Norfolk,  Thomas,  fourth  Duke  of,  letters 
of,  iii.  380 

 ,  Thomas,  fifth  Duke  of,  re- 
stored to  the  title,  i.  359,  364  ;  his 
death,  ii.  118 

 ,  Henry,  sixth  Duke  of,  i.  405  ; 

"  Marmora  Oxoniensis  "  presented  to, 
by  the  University,  ii.  105  ;  marries 
his  concubine,  Mrs.  Bickerton,  118, 
120  n  ;  his  house  and  pictures,  120, 
121,  270  ;  presents  the  Arundelian 
Library  to  the  Royal  Society,  122  ; 
collection  of  pictures,  175  ;  his  skill 
in  horsemanship,  202  ;  letters  to  and 
from  Mr.  Evelyn,  iii.  211,  217  ; 
alluded  to,  ii.  121,  268.    See  Howard 

 ,  Henry,  seventh  Duke  of,  his 

divorce  bill  thrown  out  (1692),  ii. 
319,  322  ;  his  kindness  to  the  Evelyn 
family,  327  ;  succeeds  in  obtaining  his 
divorce  (1700),  358  ;  his  death,  365  ; 
alluded  to,  348.    See  Howard 

 ,  Duchess  of  (Mrs.  Bickerton),  ii. 

118,  120,  270 

 ,  Palace  of  the  Dukes  of  (1671), 

ii.  65,  66 

 ,  Philip,  Cardinal  of,  i.  219,  405 

Normanby,  Marquis  of,  on  death  of 

Charles  II.,  &c.,  ii.  332,  333 
Normandy,  excursion  into,   i.  59 — 62; 

tomb  of  Robert,  Duke  of,  296  n 
North,  Lord,  ii.  105,  108,  170 
 ,  Sir  Francis,  ii.  73  ;  Lord  Chief 

Justice,  133  ;  Lord   Keeper,   170  ; 

character  of,  193  ;  his  death,  232 
 ,  Sir  Dudley,  and  his  brother 

Roger,  ii.  232 
 ,  Dr.  (son  of  Lord),  sermon  of, 

ii.  105,  107 
North  Foreland  Lighthouse,  Kent,  ii.  74 
Northampton,  Earl  of  (1  658-60),  i.  331, 

338  ;  (1669),  ii.  41,  83  ;  (1676),  107, 

Earl  and  Countess  (1688),  277  ;  his 

seat,  ib 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


417 


Northampton,  town  of,  ii.  100,  277—279 
North  West  Passage,  attempt  to  dis- 
cover, ii.  107 
Northumberland,  Earl  of,  portrait  of, 
iii.  301 

 ,  Henry  Percy,  eighth 

Earl  of,  suicide  of,  ii.  180 

 ,  Algernon  Percy,  tenth 

Earl  of,  account  of,  i.  414  ;  his  pic- 
tures at  Suffolk  House,  328  ;  his 
house  at  Sion,  396  ;  alluded  to,  347  ; 
iii.  106  ;  iv.  185  n,  303  n 

 ,    Joceline,  eleventh 

Earl  of,  his  daughter's  marriage,  ii. 
159 

.  ,   Countess   of  (Lady 

Elizabeth  Howard,  wife  of  tenth  Earl), 
i.  343 ;  marriage  of  her  gi'aud  daugh- 
ter, ii.  159  ;  her  death,  374 

.  ,  Countess  of  (widow  of 

eleventh  Earl),  ii.  188  and  n 

 ,   George    Fitz  Roy, 

Duke  of  (  natural  son  of  King  Charles 
II.),  ii.  108,  195;  account  of  him,  199; 
his  horsemanship,  202;  attempted  to 
spirit  away  his  wife,  251 

Norton,  Colonel,  ii.  236 

— — — ,  Lady,  infamous  conduct  of,  to 
Charles  I.,  i.  286 

Norwich,  brief  account  of,  ii.  66 

Norwich,  George  Goring,  Earl  of.  Am- 
bassador to  France,  i.  44  ;  heads  the 
rising  in  Kent  (1648),  246  ;  iii.  14,26, 
27,  28;  tried  before  the  rebels,  i.  248; 
his  house  in  Epping  Forest,  ii.  43, 
173;  alluded  to,  i.  252,  272,  275  ; 
iii.  46 

Norwood,  Colonel,  ii.  81 

Notre  Dame,  Cathedral  of,  at  Antwerp, 
i.  31;  at  Paris,  46  ;  at  Rouen,  60 ;  at 
Marseilles,  81 

Nottingham,  town  of,  i.  299 

Nottingham,  Earl  of,  refused  to  sit  in 
Council  with  Papists  (1688),  ii.  282  ; 
protests  against  the  abdication  of 
James  II.,  291;  sells  Kensington  to 
King  William,  303;  quarrel  with  Ad- 
miral Russell,  322;  resigns  Secretary 
of  State,  326  ;  fire  at  his  house  at 
Burleigh,  374;  alluded  to,  130  n, 
285 

November,  Fifth   of,  forbidden  to  be 

kept,  ii.  244 
Nowel,  Dr.  Alexander,  portrait,  iii.  301 
Nulls,  Sir  John,  iv.  74 
Nuncio  of  the  Pope  at  the  French  Court 

(1649),  i.  254 
VOL.  IV, 


Nuffield,  Surrey,  descent  of  the  Evel}  ns 
of,  Pedigree,\\.  397 

Nutmegs,  jealousy  of  the  Dutch  respect- 
ing, iii.  258 

Nuts  found  by  swine,  &c.,  i.  78 

Oakham,  tenure  of  the  Barons  Ferrers 
at,  i.  298 

Oakwood  Chapel,  endowment  and  repair 

of,  ii.  337,  366 
Oates,  Titus,  conspiracy  discovered  by, 
ii.  125;  iii.  252;  character  of,  ii.  126; 
accuses  the  Queen,  and  several  Po- 
pish peers,  127  ;  evidence  against  Sir 
George  Wakeman,  132  ;  I'eflexions  on 
his  conduct,  152,  220;  a  witness 
against  Lord  Stafford,  151  ;  Loi'd 
Stafford's  remarks  on  his  evidence, 
152  ;  his  knavery  and  imprudence, 
178  ;  tried  for  perjury,  221,  299;  his 
punishment,  222,  224,  226  ;  writ  of 
error  in  the  judgment  of,  297  ;  his 
reviling  book  against  King  James,  341 

Oatlands,  mansion  at,  referred  to,  iv. 
50  n,  60,  70,  75,  91,  96,  99,  106,  114, 
122,  183  n  ;  Queen  Henrietta  resides 
at,  50,  58,  59,  105  n 

O'Beirne,  Sullivan,  Col.,  in  service  of 
Charles  II.  (1653),  iv.  276  n,  277  n  ; 
(1654)  299,  300 

"Obehscus  Pamphilius,  et  .^gyptiacus  '* 
(1650-54).  i.  213 

Obelisk,  of  Octavius  Caesar,  i.  119  ;  of 
Constantine,  125  ;  in  Circus  Caracalla, 
165  ;  brought  from  Egypt  by  Augus- 
tus, 114,  171 

Obligations  and  Tests,  dispensed  with 
(1687),  ii.  265 

Oblivion,  Act  of,  proceedings  upon  the 
(1641),  iv.  56 

O'Brian,  Mortagh,  iv.  300 

O'Brien,  Lord,  ii.  91,  J17  ;  his  widow, 
91  andn 

Octavius  Csesar,  obelisk  of,  i.  1 1 9 

Odart,  Mr.  Latin  Secretary,  ii.  8 

"  Qiieonomis,"  by  Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  394 

Uesters  House,  at  Antwerp,  i.  33 

"  Offices  and  Meditations, "  by  Mr. 
Evelyn,  ii.  394 

Offley,  Mr.  Thomas,  groom-porter,  i. 
247,  284,  328 

 ,  Dr.,  Rector  of  Abinger,  ii.  1 3  ; 

sermon  of,  337  ;  his  gift  to  Oakwood 
Chapel,  ib 

Offley  family,  ii.  355 

Ogilbv,  John,  on  the  Progress  of  Charles 
n.*(166]),  i.  348  u 

E  E 


418  GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Ogle,  Thomas,  of  Pinchbeck,  his  daugh- 
ter Anne,  ii.  100  n,  101 

 ,  Lady,  widow  of  Lord,  I'e-marriage 

to  Mr.  Thynne,  ii.  159,  161,  165,  386 

Oglethorpe,  Mr.,  duel  fought  by,  ii.  370 

Ogiiiati,  Count,  ii.  48 

Old  Bailey,  man  pressed  to  death  at  the, 
i.  283 

Old  Jewry,  Sir  Robert  Clayton's  house 

in  the.  ii.  79  n 
Oldenburg,  Anne,  Countess  of,  letters  of, 

iii.  380 

 ,  Henry,  Secretary  to  Royal 

Society,  confined  in  the  Tower,  ii.  27, 
380  ;  letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to,  16  n  ; 
alluded  to,  iv.  105,  393  ;  iii.  207 

Oleine,  Count,  his  palace  at  Vincenza, 

i.  220 

Oliva,  Padre,  General  of  the  Jesuits,  ii. 
132 

Oliver,  Peter,  miniatures  of,  i.  246,  308, 
342,  352 

Olivetani,  Padri,  church  of,  i.  210 

Olonne,  Count  d',  i.  268 

O'Neale,  Captain  Daniel,  iv.  263  n  ; 
his  danger  from  Parliament,  76,  and 
n  ;  arrested,  78  n  ;  committed  to  the 
Gatehouse,  95  ;  Parliament  examines, 
94,  127—129 

•  ,  Mr.,  built  Belsize  House,  ii. 

106 

Onion,  Spanish,  iii.  206 
Onocratylus,  or  Pelican,  i.  389 
Onslow,  Arthur,  his  seat  at  West  Clan- 
don,  i.  320  ;  ii.  52  ;  iii.  30  n 
 ,  Denzil,  his  house  at  Purford, 

ii.  158 

 ,  Sir  Richard,  ii.  313,  348,  351, 

363;  subscription  to  Greenwich  Hos- 
pital, 345  n  ;  contested  elections  for 
^Surrey,  367,  375  ;  duel  with  Mr. 
Oglethorpe,  370  ;  noticed,  iii.  18,  20, 
330,  331 

Onslow,  Earl  of,  i.  320  ;  ii.  158  n 

Onufrio,  Cardinal,  of  Rome,  i.  168 

Opdam,  Admiral,  iv.  210 

Opera  at  Venice  (1645),  i.  204  ;  at  Mi- 
lan, 229  ;  at  the  Court  in  Paris,  265  ; 
in  England,  331  ;  ii.  90 

Optics,  letter  on,  iii.  207 

Orange,  town  and  principality  of,  i.  79 

Orange,  Henry  Frederick,  Prince  of, 
ii.  114 

■  ,  William,    Prince  of,  i.  401  ; 

ii.  52,  116,  117;  marries  Princess 
Mary,  116;  accusation  of  Deputies  of 
Amsterdam,  194  ;  forces  sent  by,  to 


James  IL  (1685),  230.  See  Wil- 
liam IIL 

Orange,  Princess  of,  sister  of  Charles  IL, 
i.  28,  341,  343,  364  ;  her  death,  344 

 ,  Prince  of  (1641 ),  his  protection, 

of  the  Queen  Mother,  iv.  67;  his 
death,  i.  26  ;  referred  to,  i.  15;  iv. 
195,  199,  227,  329 

 ,  Mary,  Princess  Dowager  of, 

letter  to  Sir  E.  Nicholas  on  Charles's 
aflfairs  (1653),  iv.  201  ;  letter  of  the 
States  to  (1655),  226  ;  references  to, 
206,  214  n,  222 

Oranges  raised  in  England,  ii.  28,  135, 
361  ;  iii.  243 

Ordination  of  Ministers  in  France  (1650), 
i.  258 

Organs,  notices  of,  various,  i.  24,  25,  97, 

145,  172,  225,  292,  372 
Orias,  Prince  d',  palace  and  garden  of, 

i.  86 

Orleanes,  Mons.,  iv.  316 

Orleans,  Duke  of,  i.  269 ;  iv.  243,  345, 

347,  388  ;  governed  bv  De  Retz 

(1554),  319  n 
 ,  Henrietta,  Duchess  of,  iv.  205, 

244  n 

 ,  Duke  of  (temp.  Hen.  V.),  i. 

281  aud  n  ;  ii.  91 

 ,  Gaston  Jean  Baptiste,  Duke 

of,  his  palace,  &c.,  i.  62 — 64  ;  ii.  260 

Orleans,  account  of,  i.  67,  244 

Ormond,  James  Butler,  Marquess,  after- 
wards Duke  of  (1649),  iii.  43;  (1654), 
iv.  322  n,  348—350 ;  attempt  to  pervert 
the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  216  n  ;  his 
estates  restored,  i.  339  ;  on  the  na- 
tural history  of  Ireland,  357  ;  Chan- 
cellor of  Oxford,  and  created  Doctor, 

ii.  42  ;  anecdote  respecting,  97;  lays 
down  his  commission,  352  ;  restored, 
ib  ;  alluded  to,  i.  256,  263,  328,  339, 
351,  359,  365,  391  ;  ii.  144 

 ,  Duchess  of,  ii.  109 

Orrery,  Richard  Broghill,  Earl  of,  plays 
by,  i.  391  ;  ii.  18  ;  his  mansion  burnt, 

iii.  319 

Osborne,  Sir  Thomas  (afterwards  Earl 
of  Danby,  Marquess  Carmarthen,  and 
Duke  of  Leeds),  Lord  Treasurer,  ii. 
84  ;  strictures  on,  86  ;  his  adminis- 
tration, 162  ;  his  imprisonment,  191  ; 
released,  194  ;  alluded  lo,  i.  262  ;  ii. 
117,  302,  303  ;  account  of,  i.  408 

Osiris,  insci'iptions  concei'ning,  i.  100  ; 
statue  of,  107 

Ossory,  Thomas  Butler  (Earl  of),  Lord, 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


419 


his  horsemanship,  i.  256  ;  adventure 
of,  256,  257  ;  averse  to  attacking  the 
Smyrna  fleet,  ii.  69,  145  ;  a  younger 
Brotherof  the  Trinity  House,  82 ;  Mas- 
ter, 98;  commands  forces  in  Holland, 
119;  his  expedition  to  Tangier,  43; 
death,  144;  character  of  him,  ib;  Mr. 
Evelyn's  letter  to  the  Countess,  iii. 
254;  alluded  to,i.  339  ;  ii.  116,  137  ; 
his  daughter,  108 

Ossory,  James  Butler,  Earl  of  (son  of 
the  great  Earl),  i.  256  ;  ii.  1 68  ;  his 
marriage,  170,  242  ;  his  mansion  de- 
stroyed, 310  ;  account  of,  i.  407 

Ostend,  notice  of,  i.  37 

Otter-hunting,  i.  359 

Ottobone,  Cardinal  Pietro,  elected  Pope 
(Alexander  VIIL),  ii.  301 

Oudart,  Mr.,  confidence  of  Charles  I. 
and  II.  in,  i.  381  ;  iv.  183  n,  195 

Oughtred,  Rev.  William,  mathematician, 

i.  285  ;  iii.  67  ;  conversation  with  Mr. 
Evelyn,  i.  309 

Ouseley,  Sir  Gore,  i.  93  n 

 ,  Sir  Charles,  i.  312 

Outram,  Dr.,  Vicar  of  St.  Margaret's, 

ii.  137 

Ovens  of  portable  iron,  ii.  8 

Ovid,  Metamorphoses  of,  in  mezzo- 
relievo,  i.  181 

Owen,  Dr.  John,  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph 
(1641),  iv.  99  n 

•  ,  Dr.  Morgan,  Bishop  of  LandafF 

(1641),  iv.  99  n 

 ,  Sir  John,  i.  251,  406 

— ,  Dr.  Richard,  a  sequestered  mi- 
nister, i.  248,  249,  277,  283,284,  286, 
287,  306,  328,  381 

 ,  Dr.  John,  the  Independent,  i.  290 

 ,  Mrs.  Amy,  of  Eltham,  corresponds 

with  Mr.  Evelyn,  iv.  41,  42 

Ox,  remarkable  one,  i.  250 

Oxford,  Aubrey  de  Vere,  Earl  of,  his 
mistress,  i.  359,360  ;  ii.  18;  alluded 
to,  i.  373,  376  ;  ii.  51;  notice  of,  i. 
419 

Oxford  besieged  (1645),  iv,  145,  147 — 
149,  167,  170,  174;  surrendered,  176; 
visit  of  Mr  Evelyn  to  (1654),  i.  290  — 
293;  the  Act,  290;  Bodleian  Library, 

291  ;  Anatomical  School,  St.  John's, 

292  ;  Christ  Church,  Magdalen,  Phy- 
sic-garden, ib  ;  visit  to  (1664),  383  ; 
Theatre,  All  Souls,  Magdalen,  384  ; 
Ashmolean  Museum  given  to,  322, 
328  ;  ii.  119  ;  Court  and  Parliament 
held  at  (1665),  i.  399;  gift  from,  to 


wounded  sailors,  ii.  7;  the  Arundelian 

Marbles  procured  for,  29,  30,  41  ; 
Decree  of  Convocation,  formally  re- 
turning Mr.  Evelyn  thanks,  30 ;  thanks 
to  Mr.  Howard,  31;  Encaenia  on  the 
completion  of  the  Theatre,  39 ;  Terrae 
filius,  40 ;  the  Act,  40,  41  ;  Doctor's 
degree  conferred  on  Mr.  Evelyn,  &c., 
42  ;  visit  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to  (1675)  99; 
Dr.  Plot's  curiosities,  ib;  Parliament 
at  (1681),  155;  reception  of  William 
III.  at  (1695),  337 

Packer,  Mr.,  his  seat  and  chapel  at 
Groomsbridge,  i.  281  ;  ii.  1,  91,  188; 
his  daughter's  fine  voice,  204 

Paddy,  Sir  William,  portrait  of,  i.  369 

Padua,  described,  i.  205 — 2 1 9 ;  inscription 
over  a  gate,  206  ;  tomb  at  St.  Lo- 
renzo, ib  ;  St.  Antony's  Church,  ib; 
Convent  of  St.  Justina,  2o7  ;  Great 
Hall,  210;  Monte  Pieta  Schools,  211; 
Garden  of  Simples,  ib;  nocturnal  dis- 
orders at,  215  ;  Lectures  and  Hos- 
pitals, 216 

Pageant  at  the  Lord  Mayor's  Show 
(1660),  i.  342;  on  the  Thames  (1 662), 
367.    See  London 

Paget,  Lord,  Ambassador,  ii.  322 

Paine,  Captain,  i.  275 

Painters  and  Sculptors  in  Rome,  i.  182; 
in  Florence,  190  ;  on  adding  their 
names  to  portraits,  iii.  295 ;  avarice  of 
English  painters,  379 

Painters'  Hall,  i.  386;  ii.  7 

"Painter's  Voyage  of  Italy"  (1679), 
cited,  i.  137  n,  226  n,  228  n 

Painting,  old  Roman,  described,  i.  133 

*'  Painting,  Perfection  of,"  by  Mr.  Eve- 
lyn, ii.  35,  391,  396 

Painting  on  the  face,  first  used  by 
females,  i.  288 

Palace  of  the  Pope  at  Monte  Cavallo,  i, 
110,  134 

Palais  Cardinal,  at  Paris,  i.  66 ;  royal 

masque  at,  265 
Palais  (Exchange),  at  Paris,  i.  48 
Palais  Royal,  Paris,  i.  49 
Palais,  Isle  du,  Pai'is,  i.  48 
Palazzo  Barberini,  at  Rome,  i.  107  ; 

Medici,  at  Rome,  108  ;  !Maggiore,  at 

Rome,  128  ;  Ghisi,  at  Rome,  134  ; 

Caraffa,  at  Naples,  152  ;  Vecchio,  at 

Florence,  92 — 94 ;  delia  Cancellaria, 

at  Rome,  167 
Palladio,  Andrea,  Works  of,  i.  207,  210, 

220,  221 

2   E  E 


420  GENERAL 

Pallavicini,  Cardinal  Sforza,  works  of, 
iii.  112 

Palma,  Jacopo,  paintings  by,  i.  56,  249 
Palmer,  Sir  James,  i.  248 

 ,  Jeffrey,  iv.  135  u;  portrait  of, 

iii.  301 

 ,  Dudley,   of  Gray's    Inn,  his 

curious  clocks,  &c.,  i.  353  ;  member 

of  Royal  Society,  iii.  293 
Pamphili,  John  Baptista,  elected  Pope 

(Innocent  X.),  i.  98 ;  palaces  of  his 

family,  1G8 
Pamphilio,  Cardinal,  i.  118,  177 
Panama,  expedition  of  Colonel  Morgan 

to,  ii.  61 

Paimmre,  George  Maule,  second  Earl 

of,  iv.  182  n 
PanciroUus,  Guido,  on  a  Roman  corpse, 

i.  147 

"  Panegyric,  poetical,  on  King  Charles 

XL's  Coronation,"  by  Mr.  Evelyn,  i. 

351  ;  ii.  391,  396 
Pantheon  at  Rome,  i.  169 
Paolo  Veronese.  See  Cagliari 
Paper,  from  China,  i.  379;  process  of 

manufacturing,  ii.  121 
Paper-office,  ravages  committed  in,  iii. 

379 

Papillion,  Mr.,  i.  314 

Papillon,  Mr.,  ii.  177 

Papin,  Denis,  his  Digestors,  ii.  166; 
notice  of,  386 

Papists,  laws  enforced  against,  iv.  127, 
334  n  ;  conspiracy  of  (1696),  banished 
ten  miles  from  London,  ii.  339  ;  dis- 
possessed of  estates  (1700),  359.  See 
Roman  Catholics 

Paplewick,  view  from,  i.  299 

Paradise,  banqueting  house  so  called, 
i.  364;  an  exhibition  of  animals,  ii.  88 

Paris,  description  of  (1 643-4),  i.  44—67; 
(1646-7),  245  ;  (1649),  252—259  ; 
(1650),  262—274;  Pont  Neuf,  44; 
Cathedral  of  Notre  Dame,  46;  Jesuits' 
Church  and  College,  47;  the  Sorbonne, 
ih  ;  the  Exchange  and  Palais,  48;  St, 
Chapelle  and  Isie  du  Palais,  ih  ; 
Marais  du  Temple,  St.  Genevieve, 
Palais  Royale,  49  ;  Hotel  de  la  Cha- 
rity, &c.,  49,  256;  Jardin  Royale,  49; 
Bois  de  Vincennes,  50  ;  the  Louvre, 
%h;  tlie  Palace  of  the  Tuilleries,  ib; 
its  gardens,  51  ;  St.  Germains-en- 
laye,  52,  54  ;  Count  de  Liancourt's 
palace  and  pictures,  55,  56  ;  Fon- 
tainebleau,  57,  58  ;  palace  of  Luxem- 
burg, 62  ;  gardens,  63;  view  of,  from 


INDEX  TO 

St.  Jacques'  steeple,  64 ;  St.  Innocent's 
Churchyard,  65  ;  Mons.  Morine's  gar- 
den, ih  ;  Palais  Cardinal,  66,  254  ; 
muster  of  the  gens  d'armes  of,  66  ; 
President  Maison's  Palace,  253; 
audience  of  the  English  Ambassador 
(1649),  254  ;  St.  Stephen's  Church, 
255  ;  Masquerades  at,  256  ;  Madrid, 
55,256  ;  ordination  of  English  Divines 
at  (1650),  258  ;  Samaritan  or  Pump 
at  Pont  Neuf,  ih  ;  Convent  of  Bonnes 
Hommes,  263  ;  Friar  Nicholas,  ih  ; 
Torture  at  the  Chatelet,  264  ;  Opera 
at  the  Palais  Cardinal,  265  ;  cere- 
monies on  Corpus  Christi,  266  ;  pro- 
cession of  Louis  XIV.  to  Parliament, 
268 ;  audience  of  English  Ambas- 
sador, 269  ;  King's  gardens,  270 ; 
Mark  Antonio  the  enameller,  273  ; 
parliamentary  proceedings  (1648),  iv. 
345—350  ;  besieged  in  1649  and  1652 
by  Prince  of  Conds,  i.  249,  279  ;  re- 
joicings on  the  reported  death  of 
William  III.  (1690),  ii.  309 
Paris,  Archbishop  of,  house  at  St.  Cloes, 

i.  52 

Park  at  Brussels,  i.  35 ;  at  Pisa,  90  ;  at 

Hampton  Court,  364 
Park,   John  James,  his  "History  of 

Hampstead  "  referred  to,  i.  380  n 
Parker,  Dr.  Samuel,  Bishop  of  Oxford, 

ii.  256  ;  his  death  and  character,  271 
 ,  Matthew,  Archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury, iii.  380 

 ,  William,  works  of,  iii.  109 

Parker's  almanack  quoted,  iii.  324 
Parkhurst,  Sir  Robert,  ii.  158 

 ,  Dr.,  master  of  Baliol  College, 

Oxford,  i.  10 
Parliament,  opening  and  dissolution  of 
(1642),i.l2— 14;proceeaingsof(1641), 
iv,  49 — 57,  68 ;  respecting  the  garrison 
of  the  Tower,  51  ;  orders  Recusants 
to  be  disarmed,  51,  60,  108,  119,  126, 
334  n  ;  refuses  Irish  regiments  to 
Spain,  53  n,  54  n,  66  ;  sequesters  Dr. 
Roger  Manwaring,  55  n  ;  sequesters 
pay  of  Col.  Wilmot,  56  ;  House  of 
Peers  orders  ballad  against  Queen 
Mother  to  be  burnt,  57  ;  takes  ex- 
ception at  the  King's  pardon,  58  ; 
adjournment  of, 5 9 — 61,  65,  67,85,  90; 
proceedings  on  Charles's  answer  to 
the  Parliamentary  Commission,  59 
and  n  ;  on  the  Act  of  Tonnage  and 
Poundage,  51  n,  61  n,  63,  64,  74,  88  ; 
on  forfeiture  of  Londonderry,  61,86  ; 


THE  DIARY  AND 


CORRESPONDENCE. 


421 


House  of  Peers  orders  Sir  J.  Penning- 
ton to  delay  going  to  Ireland,  ()2  ; 
Committees  of  both  Houses  meet,  64, 
66  ;  order  gari'isons  of  Carlisle  and 
Berwick  to  be  paid,  65  ;  directions  to 
Lord  Admiral,  64  ;  declai'ation  of, 
against  superstitious  rites,  65  ;  pro- 
ceedings of  the  Committees,  66  ; 
difference  between  Committees  of 
both  Houses  respecting  the  Church, 
&c.,  68  n  ;  order  concerning  the 
Crown  jewels  in  1646,  69  n  ;  inquiry 
of,  into  the  Royal  revenue,  74  ;  un- 
popularity of,  75  ;  proceedings  at  a 
conference  of  the  Committees,  83  ; 
removed  from  London  on  account 
of  the  plague,  88,  .00 ;  proceedings  of,  on 
news  of  the  "Incident,"  91,  97  ;  Par- 
liament meets,  92  n  ;  orders  of,  con- 
cerning Berwick,  94  and  n  ;  proceed- 
ings against  Sir  J.  Berkeley,  94,  99  ; 
corresponds  with  the  Commissioners 
in  Scotland,  ib  ;  proceedings  con- 
cerning Bishops'  votes,  95,  97,  102  ; 
order  about  jurisdiction  of  Archbishop 
of  Canterbury,  98  ;  chooses  Speaker, 

99,  119;  debate  in  the  Commons  about 
Counsellors,  80,  89,  100,  101,  114  ; 
holds  a  conference  about  the  Prince's 
education,  105  ;  dislikes  the  creation 
of  new  bishops,  99  n,  102,  106  ; 
members  of,  commanded  to  attend, 

100,  109,  116,  120,  125  ;  proceedings 
of,  on  the  Irish  RebeUion,  106 — 114  ; 
treats  with  the  city  of  London  about 
soldiers  in  Ireland,  108;  considei's  of 
dissolving  Capuchin  Convent,  73,  109; 
sends  troops  against  the  Irish,  112; 
Charles  sends  letters  on  Irish  Rebel- 
lion to  the  Committee,  ib  ;  considers 
of  Instructions  to  English  Commis- 
sioners at  Edinburgh,  116,  120  ;  pro- 
ceedings upon  the  Remonsti'ance  on 
state  oi  the  Kingdom,  117,  121,  125, 
130,  133  ;  proceedings  respecting 
Irish  Rebellion,  119,  122,  125,  127  ; 
plot  against,  126,  129  ;  affronts  the 
Venetian  Ambassador,  127  ;  proceed- 
ings about  the  impeached  Bishops, 
123,  128  ;  intercepts  letters  of  Mr. 
Crofts  and  Duchess  of  Chevreuse, 
130;  examines  Colonel  Goring,  ib  ; 
march  of  the  army  under  Sir  William 
Waller,  1 36  ;  persons  sitting  at  \Vest- 
minster  not  fit  to  be  considered  a 
Parliament,  144  ;  besieges  Oxford 
(1645),  145  n,  149  n  ;  the  King's 


contempt  for  the,  157  ;  successes  of 
their  armies  (1646),  179— 181 ;  Crom- 
well dissolves  the  Long  Parliament, 
208  n,  275  and  n  ;  (1648),  surprised 
by  ths  Rebel  Army,  i.  247 ;  sumratmed 
by  Cromwell  in  1656,  317  ;  opened 
by  Charles  II.  (1661),  351  ;  fast  held 
by  the,  360  ;  prorogued  by  Charles 
IL  (16G5),  391;  subsidy  granted  by, 
to  the  King  (1671),  ii.  58  ;  Roman 
Catholic  Lords  excluded  (1678),  127  ; 
elections  (1685),  influenced  by  the 
Court,  212,  219,  223  ;  speech  of  King 
James  II.  on  his  accession,  222  ;  pro- 
ceedings of  (1685),  244  ;  steadfastness 
of  its  Protestant  members,  262  ; 
(1687),  prorogued,  264  ;  debate  in 
the  Lords  respecting  Regency,  290 ; 
precipitate  conduct  of  the  Commons 
(168.9),  294;  prorogued  and  dissolved 
(1690),  302;  proceedings  on  discovery 
of  conspiracy  against  William  III. 
(1695),  339  ;  Parliament  (1705),  376  ; 
Mr.  Evelyn's  sentiments  on  Parlia- 
mentary Reform,  iii.  357 
"  Parliamentary  Debates"  referred  to, 
iv.  90  n 

'*  Parliamentary  History"  referred  to, 

iv.  66,  74,  78,  92,  95,  102,  120  notes 
Parma,  Duke  of,  triumphal  ai'ch  of  the, 

i,  131  ;  his  collection,  143  ;  his  palace 

Caprarola,  184 
Parmensis,  Battista,  i.  56  ;  drawings  of 

222 

Parquiou,  letters  of,  iii.  380 

Parr,  Dr.  Richard,  funeral  sermon  on 

Dr.  Breton,  ii.  68  ;  iv.  31  ;  alluded 

to,  ii.  59  ;  visit  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to,  252 
Parson's  Green,  Lord  Mordaunt's  house 

at,  i.  345  ;  ii.  141 
Pai-sons,  Mr.,  iv.  172 
Pasquin,  remains  of  the  statue  of,  i.  168 
Passignano,  Domeuico  Cresti,  painting 

by,  i.  56 

Passion,  instance  of  violent,  i.  85 
Passports,  i.  29,  31,  218,  231,  260 
Paston,  Sir  Robert  (Earl of  Yarmouth), 

i.  313,  318,  395,  413 
Patriarchs,  Eastern,  subscriptions  to  our 

Confessions,  i.  370 
Pati-ick,  Dr.  Simon,  Dean  of  Peter- 
borough, ii.  245  ;  I3ishop  of  Ely,  312, 
382  ;  sermons  of,  36,  44,  258 

 ,  Rev.  Father,  letter  of  Mr. 

Evelyn  to,  on  the  Eucharist,  iii.  231 
Pau,  Mons.,  Ambassador,  iii.  38 
Paul,  St.,  his  burial  place,  i.  123 ;  relics 


422 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


of,  136,  143  ;  port  of,  1G5  ;  eflBgy  of, 
169 

Paul  ITI.,  Pope,  statue  of,  i.  124  ;  shrine 
of,  170 

Paul  v..  Pope,  chapel  of, i.  1 1 3;  fountain 

of,  145 
Paul,  Chevalier,  i.  268 
Paule,  Mr.,  agent  of  the  Elector  Palatine 

in  France,  i.  255 
PauUo,  Jul,  bust  of,  i.  210 
Pausilypus,  «&.c.,near  iNaples,  i.  154 
Pawls,  Mons.,  iv.  242,  339 
Pawlett,  John,  Marquis  of  Winchester, 

iv.  84 

Peace  with  Holland,  proclaimed,  ii.  28 
Peake,  Sir  John,  Lord  Mayor  (1687), 
ii.  269 

Pearls,  notices  of  large  ones,  i.  93,  169  n 
Pearson,  Dr,  John,  Bisliop  of  Chester, 
ii.  81,  97  n  ;  his  "  Biblia  Polyglotta," 

i.  283  ;  alluded  to,  308,  352 

Peat,  or  Turf,  use  of,  proposed  (1667), 

ii.  25,  26 

Peckham,    Sir    Henry,  feast   at  the 

Temple,  ii.  43 
Peckham,  Sir  T.  Bond's  house  at,  ii. 

107,  159 

Peiresk,  Nicolaus  Claudius  Fabricius, 
Lord  of,  iii.  85 

Pelicans,  account  of,  i.  21,  389 

Pelhsson,  his  "  History  of  the  French 
Academy,"  ii.  24  n 

Pemberton,  Lord  Chief  Justice,  ii. 
133  n,  187 

Pembi'oke,  Philip  Herbert,  Earl  of. 
Governor  of  the  Isle  of  Wight,  iv. 
109  n ;  father  of  the  Countess  of 
Caernarvon,  115  n  ;  Commissioner  at 
Newport,  185  n  ;  iii.  29  ;  seat  near 
Aldermaston,  i.  289  ;  seat  at  Wilton, 
294;  fire  at,  ii.  374  ;  (1696),  Lord 
Privy  Seal,  342  ;  subscription  to 
Greenwich  Hospital,  344  ;  alluded  to, 
i.  291,390;  iii.  197 

Penitents,  procession  of,  on  Good  Fri- 
day, i.  176 

Penn,  Sir  William,  impeached,  ii.  33 ; 
notice  of,  380  ;  blasphemous  book  by 
his  son,  i38 

 ,   Admiral  William,  i.  306  ;  iv. 

267  n 

Pennant,  Thomas,  his  "  Journey  to  the 
Jsle  of  Wight"  cited,  iv.  131  n 

Pennington,  Sir  John,  iv.  242  n  ;  his 
voyage  to  Ireland  stopped,  62  n 

 ,  Isaac,  iv.  62 

Penshurst,  brief  notice  of,  i.  282 


Pepper,  Guinea,  iii.  206  ;  Jamaica,  259 
Pepys,  Samuel,  Secretary  to  the  Admi- 
ralty, cut  for  the  stone,  ii.  39  ;  Clerk 
of  the  Acts,  55 ;  twice  Master  of  the 
Trinity  House,  106,  230  ;  committed 
to  the  Tower,  129,  130  ;  accused  of 
being   a   Papist,   and   of  treachery 
(1684)   12!)   n  ;    possessed  Dean's 
"  Art  of  Shipbuilding,"  164  ;  accom- 
panies the  King  to  Portsmouth  (1685), 
232  ;  impostures  of  the  Saludadors 
confessed  to,  ib  ;  his  conversation  with 
James  II.  respecting  Charles  II.  being 
a  Cathohc,  &c.,  237—239  ;  iii.  279  ; 
portrait  of  Mr.  Evelyn  painted  for, 
ii.  299  ;  iii.  294  ;  his  remonstrance 
against  suspicions  of  him,  ii.  306  ; 
sent  to  the  Gatehouse,  308  ;  enlarged, 
309  ;  his  house  at  Clapham,  362,  370  ; 
his  death  and  character,  370,  371  ; 
his  library,  371  ;  iii.  304  ;  allusions  to 
him,  ii.  92,  107,  288,  304,  310  ;  iii. 
383  ;  letters  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to,  ii. 
37  n  ;  iii.  175,  178,  180,  260,  267, 
276,  279,  294,  313  ;  letters  of  Pepys 
to  Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  236 ;  iii.  279,  312  ; 
(on  his  escape  from  shipwreck,  256) ; 
his  "  Diary  and  Memoirs"  refei'red 
to,  i.  394  n.    See  Evelyn. 
Percy,  Henry,  Lord,  Chamberlain  to 

Charles  II.,  iv.  296,  298 
 ,  Henry   (Ijrother   to   Earl  of 


Northumberland),  ii.  148;  proceedings 
in  Parliament  concerning  (1641),  iv. 
56,  58  n,  59,  106 
— .  ,  Lord, iii.  106,  107;  Lady  Eliza- 
beth, ii.  374  n 
Perelle,  engraver,  i.  256 
"Perfect  Passages"  (1652),  a  journal 

cited,  iv.  240  n,  256  n,  257  n 
Perfumes,  &c.,  Moutpelier  famous  for, 
iii.  84 

Perfuming  rooms,  singular  method  of,  in 

Germany,  i.  311 
Perigueux,  city  of,  account  of,  i.  82 
Perishot,  Mons.,  collection  of,  i.  56 
Perkins,  Sir  William,  executed,  ii.  340  ; 

absolved  at  Tyburn,  341 
Pernee,  notice  of,  i.  274 
Perpetual  motion,  ii.  34 
Perrier,  Francis,  his  book  of  "  Antique 

Statues,"  i.  259 
Persepolis,  ruins  of,  ii.  145 
Persian  habit,  i.  192  ;  adopted  at  Court 

(1666),  ii.  17,  18 
Perspectives,  remarks  on,  by  Honorati 

Fabri,  iii,  207 


THE  DIARY  AND 


CORRESPONDENCE. 


423 


Perugino,  Pietro,  paintings  by,  i.  93, 105, 
172,  184 

Peruzzi,  Baldassare  (called  Baldassare 

da  Sienna),  i.  135 
Peter,  St.,  his  burial-place,  i.  123,  142  ; 

relics  of,  123,  136 
Peter  the  Great  occupied  Mr.  Evelyn's 

house,  l7it7'oduction,  i.  xxv.  ;  ii.  349. 
Peterborough,  notice  of,  i.  302 
 ,  Henry  Mordaunt,  Earl 

of,  i.  345  n,  358  ;  ii.  211,  319  ;  sale 

of  lands  to  pay  debts  (1676),  109, 

110  ;  mai'riage  of  his  daughter,  110 
 ,    Countess    of,    iii.     39  ; 

house  at  Rvegate,  i.  308  ;  alluded  to, 

319,  327,  358 
Peterhouse,  Cambridge,  i.  304 
Peters,  Hugh,  a  rebel,  i.  248;  iv.  294  ; 

executed,  i.  341 
Petit,  Mons.,  of  Rome,  i.  101 

 ,  Old,  paintings  of,  i.  248 

Petitot,  John,  enamel  by,  i.  342 

"  Petra  Glossa,"  found  at  Sheerness,  ii. 

34 

Petrarch,  Francisco,  MS.  of,  i.  140 
Petre,  Lord,  committed  for  Popish  plot, 

ii.  129 
Petrifactions,  i.  21  4 
Petrified  human  body,  i.  110,  178 
Petrifying  spring,  i.  73 
Pett,  Phineas,  his  skill  in  ship  building, 

i.  17,  375  ;  built  the  first  frigate,  ii. 

304  ;  epitaph  at  Deptford,  i.  375  n 
Petty,  Dr.,  his  Glottical  College,  iii.  131 
 ,  Sir  William,   improvements  of 

shipping,  i.  358  ;  ship  with  two  keels, 

378,  387  ;  map  of  Ireland,  ii.  96  ;  his 

character,  95 — 97;  account  of,  i.  417 
Peyton,  Sir  Thomas,  i.  260 
Phidias  and  Praxiteles,  horses  of,  i.  110 
Phihp  IV.,  King  of  Spain,  rumour  of  his 

death,  iv.  251 
Phillipp  and  Montgomery,  this  title  first 

used,  iii.  47 
Phillips,  Father,  iv.  75  n,  204  n  ;  refuses 

to  be  sworn  on  English  Bible,  109  n  ; 

Queen  Henrietta  intercedes  for  him, 

114  n 

 ,    Edward,  preceptor    of  Mr. 

Evelyn's  son,  i.  377,  390  ;  iii.  196  ; 
preferred  by  his  recommendation,  ii. 

115  ;  "  Lives  of  John  and  Edward," 
by  Mr.  Godwin,  i.  377  n 

 ,  Mrs.  Catherine,  her  tragedy  of 

<' Horace,"  ii.  32,  38, 381 ;  iii.296;iv.9 

Philosophic  Society.  See  Gresham  Col- 
lege, Royal  Society 


Philosophers'  Elixir,  projection  of,  ii, 
374 

Philosophy,    discoveries   in,    by  Mr. 

Boyle,  iii.  348 
Phipps,  Sir  William,  governor  of  New 

England,  ii.  322  n 
Phlegrsean  Fields,  i.  156 
Phosphorus,  various  kinds  of,  i.  193 
Physicians,  College  of,  i.  369  ;  ii.  173 
Piacentino,  Giulio,  painting  by,  i.  167 
Piazza,  Navona,  i.  168,  182  ;   of  St. 

Mark,  atVenice,  198;  of  St.  Anthony, 

at  Padua,  206  ;  at  Brescia,  223  ;  at 

Milan,  225  ;  at  Leghorn,  90  ;  Piazza 

Judea,  at  Rome,  136 
Picardy,  the  Regiment  of  (1650),  i.  262 
Piccadilly  paved  (1662),  i.  365 
Pichini,  Signor,  his  collection,  i.  103 
Pictures,  numerous  at  Rotterdam  Fair, 

i  20  ;  auction  of,  at  Whitehall,  ii.  325 
Pierce,  Edward,  paintings  by,  i.  294  ; 

notice  of,  411 
 ,  Dr.,  President   of  Magdalen 

College,  i.  317,  376  ;  letters  respecting 

Cressy's  reply  to  his  sermon, &c.,  376; 

iii.  139,  141  ;  sermons  at  Whitehall, 

ii.  118,  128 
Pierpoint,  Evelyn,  his  marriage,  ii.  266, 

388 

 •  ,  a  Commissioner  at  Newport 

(1648),  iv.  185  n 
Pierrepoint,  Mrs.,  married  to  Mr.  Cheny, 

ii.  303,  320 
 ,  Hon.    William,  his  wife, 

Lady  Pierrepoint,  daughter   of  Sir 

John  Evelyn,  i.  251  ;  ii.  266,  388  ; 

her  death,  351 
 ,  Mr.,  house  at  Nottingham, 

i.  299  ;  near  Pontefract,  300 
Piers,  Dr.  William,  Bishop  of  Bath  and 

Wells,  iv.  99  n 
Pietra  Commessa  (inlaid  marble),  i.  94, 

97,    118,  123,  124,  143,  181,  186, 

188,  207,  303;  artists  in,  at  Florence, 

190 

Pietramala,  a  burning  mountain,  i.  191 
Pietro,  Signor,  his  Memoirs,  iii.  211,212 
 ,  Signor,  musician,  ii.  148,  213, 

216 

Pilgrims,  lodging  of,  in  Rome,  i.  167 
Pine,  Queen,  from  Barbadoes,  i.  353  ; 

King,  ii.  34 
Pintado,  room  hung  with,  i.  399 
Piqudelio  (Piccadilly),  paving  of  (1662), 

i.  365 

Pisa,  city  of,  account  of,  i.  89,  185 
Pisano,  Pietro,  paintings  by,  i.  127 


424- 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Piscina  Mirabile,  account  of  the,  i.  160 

Pismire,  memory  of,  iii.  89 

Pistoj a,  notice  of,  i.  186 

Piten,  a  Jesuit,  ii.  284 

Pitti,  Palace  of,  at  Florence,  i.  92 

Place,  Mr.,  bookseller,  letter  of  Mr. 
Evelyn  to,  iii.  360 

Plaet,  dangerous  passage  of  the,  i.  30 

PJague,  in  London,  Sac,  ravages  of, 
i.  5,  9,  37 ;  iv.  88,  90  ;  (1665),  i.  396 
—399;  ii.  1—3,  8,  9,  16  ;  iii.  165  ; 
facts  in  consequence  of,  i.  396 

Plantations,  Foreign  Council  for,  ap- 
pointed (1671),  ii.  55,  57,  58  ;  pro- 
ceedings of,  58—62, 68,  69,  73, 77,  78, 
81,  85,  88,  89  ;  constituted  a  Council 
of  Trade  also,  78,  80,  93 

Plan  tine,  Christopher,  shop  of,  i.  33 

Plants,  &c.,  Spanish,  iii.  205 

Plaster  used  for  floors,  i.  85 

Platts,  Sir  Hugh,  Treatise  of  Metals, 
iii.  365 

Plays  and  Theatres,  at  Rome,  i. 174,  177 ; 
at  Venice,  204;  in  Milan,  229;  in  Paris, 
265;  in  England,  i.  369—373  ;  ii.  34 
—38 

Plessis  Du,  house  of  the  French  King, 

i.  72 

Plessis,  Mons.  Du,  riding-school  of,  i.  66 
Pliny,  references  to,i.  88,  100,  108,  169  ; 
death  of,  154  ;  statue  of  E.  M.  Pliny, 

222 

Plot,  Dr.  Robert,  account  of,  ii.  384;  his 
natural  curiosities,  99  ;  his  projected 
"  History  of  Staffordshire,"  ib;  secre- 
tary of  Royal  Society,  ii.  161  ; 
applied  to  Mr.  Evelyn  for  an  account 
of  himself  for  Wood's  "  Athen.  Oxon." 

.  iii.  264,  321 ;  letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to, 
iii.  335  ;  letter  of,  in  answer,  337  ; 
"  History  of  Oxfordshire "  cited,  i, 
382  n 

Plots,  references  to  various,  iv.  92,  98, 

106,  125,  129 
Plume,  Mr.,  sermon  of,  ii.  17 
Pluto,  Temple  of,  i.  159 
Plymouth,  breakwater  at,  i.  87  n 
Plymouth,  Charles  Fitz-Charles,  Earl  of, 

ii.  135 

Po,  river,  notice  of  the,  i.  195 
Pocock's  "  Century  of  Arabic  Proverbs," 

iii.  104 

Poggio  Imperiale,  at  Florence,  i.  186 
Poignant,  Mons.,  at  Paris,  his  collection, 
i.  266 

Poland,  incursion  of  the  Swedes  into, 
310  ;  iv.  220—223,  304 


Poland,  King  of,  Embassy  to  Cliarles  IT.,  i* 
340  ;  raises  the  siege  of  Vienna,  ii.  186 

Poleman's  "  Novum  Lumen  Medicum," 
iii.  131 

Polemburg,  Cornelius,  paintings  of,  i,  56 
"  Political  Discourses,"    &c.,  by  Mr. 

Evelyn,  ii.  394 
Pollaivola,  Antonio,  sculpture  by,  i.  121 
Pollard,  Sir  Hugh,  i.  370  ;  iv.  154  ; 

death  of,  ii.  19,  86 
Poll  Tax,  i.  341 ;  ii.  298 
Polydore,  paintings  by,  i.  282,  369 
Polythore,  a  musical  instrument,  i.  354 
Pomegranate,  a  hardy  tree,  iii.  206 
Pordage,  Mr.,  his  excellent  voice,  ii.  203 
Pomfret,  Mr.,  his  "  Life  of  the  Countess 

of  Devonshire,"  i.  366  n 
Pons  Milvius,  i.  174 
Pont  Neuf,  at  Paris,  i.  44,  258,  259 
Pont  St.  Anne,  Paris,  i.  45 
Pont  St.  Esprit,  at  Valence,  i.  79 
Pontanus,  Joh.  Jov.,  chapel  of,  i.  151 
Pontaq.  or  Pontac,  Mons.,  account  of, 

ii.  180,  326,  387 

Ponte,  Francisco  da  (the  elder  Bassano), 
paintings  by,i.  56,  109,  163  ;  ii.  128 

 ,  Giacomo  da  (II  Bassano),  paint- 
ings by,  i,  164,  202  ;  ii.  325,  341 

Ponte  Sisto,  sermon  at,  i.  136 

Pontefract  Castle,  i.  300  ;  siege  of  (1648), 

iii.  15,  27,  39,  42,  43  ;  iv.  283  n 
Pontius  Pilate,  Palace  of,  i.  78 
Pontoise,  in  Normandy,  i.  59 
Pontormo,  or  Poutorno,  paintings  of,  i. 

93,  189 

Pope,  Palaces  of,  Monte  Cavallo,  i.  Ill, 
134  ;  Vatican,  127,  137—142  ;  Chapel 
in  the  Vatican,  139  ;  Armoury  of, 
141  ;  procession  to  St.  John  de 
Lateran,  107,  130—132  ;  his  alms, 
140;  his  tribute  from  Naples,  161; 
procession  on  the  Annunciation,  172  ; 
on  Lady  Day,  &c.,  175  ;  various  cere- 
monies of  the,  175 — 178 

Pope,  Walter,  verses  by,  ii.  95  n. 

Popery,  Charles  I.  suspected  of  encou- 
raging, iv.  71,  72,  161 

Pophara,  Colonel,  iii.  46  ;  house  of,  i. 
289 

Porcelain,  chimes  of,  i.  24 
Porcupine,  description  of  one,  i.  330 
Pordenone,  Giovanni  Antonio  Licinio, 

paintings  of,  i.  188 
Porphyry,  statue  in,  i.  91 
Porta,  Baccio  della  (called  Fra  Barto- 

loraeo  di  San  Marco),  painting  by, 

i.  187 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


425 


Poi'ta,  Giacomo  della,  works  of,  i.  107, 
179 

Porter,  Enrlymion,  i.  250 
Portland,  Dorsetshire,  earthquake  at^  ii. 
339 

Portland,  Jerome  Weston,  Earl  of,  iv. 

69,  109  n,  130,  145 
 ,  Richai'd  Weston,  Earl  of. 

Lord  Treasurer,  ii.  67,  345  n  ;  iv. 

332  and  u 

Portnian,  Sir  William,  Duke  of  Mon- 
mouth taken  by,  ii.  226 

Portraore,  David  Collyer,  Earl  of,  ii. 
120  n,  248,  385 

Portraits,  collected  by  Lord  Clarendon, 
ii.  36  ;  iii.  295,  301 

Portsmouth,  siege  of  (1 642),  i.  38  ; 
James  IPs  visit  to  (1685),  ii.  232 
—236 

Portsmouth,  Duchess  of  (Mile.  Que- 
rouaille),  account  of,  ii.  53  and  n  ; 
her  apartments  at  Whitehall,  102, 
187;  Morocco  Ambassador  enter- 
tained there,  162,  163  ;  visited  in 
her  dressing-room  by  the  King,  187  ; 
her  apartments  burnt,  311  ;  alluded 
to,  ii.  63,  98,  206,  210 

Portugal,  King  of,  Joam  IV.  (1644),  iv. 
136  ;  Alphonso  VI.  (1683),  death  of, 
ii.  189 

Portugal,  earthquake  in  (1699),  ii.  356 
Portugallo,  Arco,  in  Rome,  i.  168 
Portuguese  Ambassador  (1661),  i.  353  ; 

entry  into  London  (1679),  ii.  129 
Portus  Herculis,  i.  82  ;  Julius,  158 
Postage  of  Letters,  curious  particulars 

of,  iv.  239  and  n,  258  n 
Positive,  Sir  (Sir  Robert  Howard),  ii. 

211,  387 
Pott,  Sir  George,  his  son,  i.  332 
Potts,  John,  a  Commissiouer  at  Newport, 

iv.  185  n 

Povey,  Mr.,  his  house  in  Lin  coin's- inn- 
fields,  i.  380  ;  near  Brentford,  ii.  8  ; 
alluded  to,  i.  372  ;  ii.  32,  104  ;  notice 
of,  ii.  377 

Poule,  Henry,  manager  against  Viscount 

Stafford,  ii.  151,  152 
Poussin,  Nicholas,  i.  55,  183,  259  ;  ii. 

203 

Powell,  Sir  John,  Justice  of  the  King's 
Bench,  displaced,  ii.  276  ;  subscription 
to  Greenwich  Hospital,  345  n 

■  ,  Capt.,  i.  205  ;  present  to  Mr. 

Evelyn,  212,  314 

"  Power,  Essays  on  the  Balance  of," 
ii.  364  n 


Powis,  Mr.  Baron,  subscription  to 
Greenwich  Hospital,  ii.  345  n 

Poyer,  Colonel,  his  loyalty  and  death, 
iii.  8  n,  12  n,  37,  48 

Pozzo,  account  of  his  collection,  i.  129 

Pozzuolo,  i.  157 — 159,  IGl 

Pratoline,  villa  of  Duke  of  Florence,  i. 
190 

Pratt,  Mr.,  Architect,  i.  308  ;  a  com- 
missioner  for  repair  of  Old  St.  Paul's, 
ii.  9  ;  built  Lord  Allington's  at  Horse- 
heath,  48  ;  Clarendon  House,  iii. 
177  n 

Pi'ayer,  Common,  disused  in  the 
English  churches,  i.  250  ;  prohibited, 
306  ;  resti'icted  allowance  of,  308  ; 
used  again  in  England,  339  ;  ii.  45  ; 
Reformation  of  and  order  for,  i.  366 
Praxiteles,  sculptures  by,  i.  209 
Prerogative  Office,  writing  of  Mr.  Hoare 
at,  i.  252 

Presbyterians  in  Holland,  notice  of,  i. 

22  ;  of  Scotland,  character  of,  ii.  306  ; 

disliked  by  Charles  II.,  iv.  195 
Pressing  to  death  inflicted,  i.  282 
Preston,   Lord,  ii.  266  ;  Secretary  of 

State,  283  ;  tried  and  condemned, 

311  ;  released,  313 
Preston  Beckhelvyn,  manor  of,  i.  247, 

308 

Pretvman,  Sir  John,  house  at  Dryfield, 
i.  295 

 ,  Mr.,  uncle  of  Mrs.  Evelyn,  i. 

246,  249,  290,  295,  307  ;  ii.  255  ;  iv. 

342 

Price,  Sir  Herbert,  i.  349 

■  ,  Dr.  John,  "  History  and  Mystery 

of  Charles  II's  Restoration,"  i.  425  n 
Prideaux,  Dr.  Humphrey,  ii.  87,  384  ; 

editor  of  "  Marmora  Oxoniensia," 

105 

 ,  Dr.  John,  iv.  72 ;  made  Bishop 

of  Worcester,  82  n 

Pride's  Purge,  iv.  185  n 

Friestman,  Mr.,  subscription  to  Green- 
wich Hospital,  ii.  344 

Primaticcio,  Francisco,  paintings  by,  i. 
56,  58 

Prince  of  90  guns,  i.  395  ;  ii.  75 
Prince  Frigate,  burned,  ii.  6,  7 
Printing  House,  the  King's,  at  Paris,  i. 
50 

Printing-types  procured  by  Sir  Henry 
Savill  for  his  "  Chrysostom,"  iii. 
300 

Prints,  collection  of,  recommended,  iii. 

304 


426  GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Pritchard,  Dr.  John,  Bishop  of  Glou- 
cester, sermon  of,  ii.  104 

Privateer  of  Charles  11.  (1649),  i.  2o2 

Privy  Council,  various  proceedings  of, 
and  notices  relating  to  the  (1641),  iv. 
77,  80,  87—89,  103,  106,1  11,  127  ;  at 
Oxford,  143,  144,  150  ;  improvement 
of,  recommended  to  Charles  II.,  192  ; 
adopted,  194 

Privy  Seal,  commission  for  executing 
the  office  of  (1685),  ii.  247  ;  proceed- 
ings of  (1686-7),  247—256,  261, 
262 

Prizes,  Royal,  taken  by  Cruizers  of 

Charles  II.,  iv.  259—292 
Procession,  of  the  Pope  to  St.  John  de 
Lateran,  i.  98,  130  ;  of  the  Conser- 
vatori,  136  ;  of  the  Zitelle,  136,  175  ; 
of  the  Viceroy  of  Naples,  152  ;  of 
the  Pope  on  the  Annunciation,  172  ; 
of  ditto  in  Lent,  175  ;  of  Penitents  at 
Rome  on  Good  Friday,  176  ;  of  Lewis 
XIV.  to  Parliament,  268  ;  funeral  of 
Ireton,    275  ;    of   Cromwell,    330  ; 
Coronation,  &c.  of  Chai'les  II.,  347 — 
350  ;  aquatic  procession  in  honour  of 
Catherine,  Queen  of  Charles  II.,  367 
Proger,  Mr.,  notice  of,  iv.  122  n 
Pi'ophecies,  interpretations  of,ii.  297, 307 
Pi'osdocimus,  St., Bishop  of  Padua,  i.  207 
Protestant  French  Church  at  Charen- 
ton,  i.  57 

Protestants  of  France,  i.  239,  270  ;  per- 
secution of.   See  Huguenots,  Savoy, 
Vaudois,  Waldenses. 
Prouse,  Mr.  a  mad  Fellow  of  Bahol 

College,  i.  10 
Proverb  on  the  women  of  Venice,  i.  203 
Proverbs,  beautiful  MS.  of  the,  i.  291 
Prujean,  Sir  Francis,  account  of,  i.  354 
Pryce,  Sir  John,  Governor  of  Mont- 
gomery Castle,  iv.  145 
Prynne,  VVilham,  I'eview  of  Dr.  Cosins' 
"Offices,"  i.  270;  speech  on  evil  coun- 
sellors, iv.  120  n 
Puckering,  Sir  Hen.,  his  seat  at  War- 
wick, i.  297 
Pule,  Mr.,  his  fine  voice,  ii.  349 
Puleston,  Judge,  iv.  284  n 
Pulsone,  Scipione    (called  Gaetano), 

paintings  by,  i.  128 
Pulteney,  Sir  William,  ii.  39,  303,  381 
Punteus,  Jo,,  mountebank,  i.  353 
Pui'ford,  Mr.  Denzil  Onslow's  house 

at,  ii.  158 
Purgatory,  gates  of,  i.  157 
Puteoli  (*Pozzolo),  i.  157—159,  161 


Putney,  schools  at,  i.  250  ;  drawings 
about  by  Mr.  Evelyn,  251  ;  etchings 
of,  ii.  396 

Putti  (boys'  heads),  paintings  of,  i.  248, 

253,  259 

Pye,  Sir  Walter,  i.  251 ;  seat  of,  293 

 ,  Sir  Robert,  iv.  86 

Pym,  John,  iv.  75—78  n,  108  n  ;  op- 
poses the  removal  of  Parliament  from 
London,  90  ;  plot  against,  126 ;  cha- 
racter of,  by  Clarendon,  126  n 

Quakers,  the  new  sect  of,  i.  315 
Queen    Mother,    INIaria   de  Medicis, 

Dowager  of  France,  satirical  ballad 

on,  iv.  57  ;  her  leaving  England,  57, 

61,  62,  67  ;  referred  to,  161 
Queensberry,  Duke  of,  ii.  221 
Quercei,  Jacopo,  sculpture  by,  i.  96 
Querico,  St.,  notice  of,  i.  98 
Querouaille,  Mons.,  and  his  lady,  ii.  98. 

See  Portsmouth 
Question  given  in  the  Chatelet  at  Paris, 

(1650),  i.  264,  265 
Quine,  James,  letters,  iii.  338,  344 
Quinquina,  brought  into  use  by  Mr. 

Tudor,  ii.  332 
Quintin   Matsys,  the    Blacksmith,  a 

painting  by,  i.  249 
Quintinye's  "  Treatise  on  Orange  Trees," 

translated  by  Mr.  Evel}  n,  ii.  396,  iii. 

332,  337 

Quinze- Vingts,  Hospital  of  the,  at  Paris, 
i.  49 

Rabiniere,  Admiral,  his  death,  ii.  76 
Racing  at  Rome,  i.  174 
RadcUffe,  Sir  George,  i.  254,  255 
Radicofani,  notice  of,  i.  98,  184 
Raffaelle  (Raffaelle  Sanzio,  di  Urbino), 

paintings  by,  i.  56,  58,  59,  93,  97, 

106,  133,  134,  137,  163—189,  193, 

222,  225,  259,  352,  364  ;  ii.  109,  175; 

architecture  of,  i.  190  ;   his  burial 

place,  170 
Ragny,  Mr.,  iv.  346 
Rainbow,  Dr.,  sermon  by,  i.  342 
Rains  remarkable,  i.  248,  321,  360 
Rainsborough,    Colonel,    sent  against 

Pontefract  Castle,  iv.  284  n  ;  killed,  ib. 

Rainsford,  ,  tmal  alluded  to,  iv.  169 

Raleigh,  Mr.  Carew,  son  of  Sir  Walter, 

i.  329 

 ,  Sir  Walter,  i.  285  ;  his  cordial, 

369  ;  portrait,  iii.  297,  301 
Rand,  Dr.,  notice  of,  i.  8,  319 
Randolfe,  letters  of,  iii.  380 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


427 


Ranelagh,  Earl  of,  liis  subscription  to 
Greenwich  Hospital,  ii.  344  n 

•  ,  Lady,  ii.  307  ;  her  death, 

317,  iii.  352 
Rapinus,   Renatus,  translation  of  his 

book  on  Gardens,  ii.  8)  n 
Rasp-house  at  Antwerp,  i.  23 
Ratcliffe,  Sir  George,  iv.  302  n 

 ,  Mr.,  i.  263 

Rattle-snakes  of  Virginia,  i.  322 
Raven,  a  white  one,  i.  330 
Ravensbourn  Mills,  Deptford,  ii.  33 
Ray,  Dr.,  his  book  on  Fishes,  ii.  250  ; 
noticed,  387 

 ,  Mr.  (Rea),  on  the   culture  of 

flowei's,  ii.  393 
Reading,  Sir  Robert,  ii.  120,  192 
"  Reason  in  Brute  Animals,"  by  Mr. 

Evelyn,  ii.  392 
Rebellion,  breaking  out  of  the  Irish,  i.  38 
Reccij,  Andrea,  niezzo-relievo  by,  i.  206 
Recusants,  Parliament  orders  the  dis- 
arming of,  &.C.  (1641),  iv.  52  n,  60, 
109,  119,  126,  334  n 
Red  Lion  inn,  at  Guildford,  i.  286 
Reeves,  Dr.,  sermon  by,  i.  361 

 — ,  famous  for  perspective,  i.  278 

Regalia  of  the  Pope,  i.  1 39 
Regency,  debate  respecting  (1 689), ii.  290 
Reggio,  Sign.  Pietro,  musician,  ii.  198 
"  Rehearsal,"  by  Duke  of  Buckingham, 
ii.  67 

**  Religion,  History  of  the  True, "  by 
Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  394 

Remonstrance  of  the  House  of  Com- 
mons (1641),  proceedings  upon,  iv. 
117,  119,  125,  130,  133 

Rencia,  Anna,  singer,  i.  205,  216 

Rennes,  Parliament  of,  ari-ests  a  servant 
of  Charles  IL  (1659),  iv.  322 

Retz,  John  Francis  Paul  de  Gondi, 
Cardinal  de,  intrigues  of,  iv.  319  n 

Revels  in  the  Middle  Temple  (1642), 
i.  38  ;  (1667),  ii.  32  ;  Inner  Temple 
(1697),  348  ;  at  Lincoln's  Inn  (1661), 

i.  359;  at  Court  (1661),  ib  ;  (1668), 

ii.  32 

Revenue,  Royal,  examined  by  the  Par- 
liament (1641),  iv.  74 

Review,  of  the  Gens  d'Arraes  at  Paris, 
i.  66  ;  in  Hyde  Park  (1663),  374 

Revolution  of  1688,  distracted  Councils 
at,  ii.  287 

Reynaldo,  Prince,  ii.  89 

Reynolds,  Dr.  Edward,  Bishop  of  Nor- 
wich, sermon  by,  i.  322  ;  his  conse- 
cration, 344 


Reynolds,  Colonel,  iii.  52 

Rheni,  Guido,  paintings  by,  i.  109,  128, 

143,  173,  193,  282 

 ,  Caval.  Giuseppe,  i.  113,  125 

Rheymes,  Col.  Bullein,  i.  385,  ii.  76 
Rhinoceros,  the  first  in  England,  ii.  199 
"  Rhodes,  Siege  of,"  an  opera,  i.  359 
Rhodomante,  Sign.  Paulo,  of  Venice, 

i.  196 

Rialto,  at  Venice,  i.  197 

Rich,  Sir  Robert,  subscription  to  Green- 
wich Hospital,  ii.  344 

 ,   Mr.,    feast  at  Lincoln's  Inn,  i. 

390 

 ,  Earl  of  "Warwick,  iii.  1 5 

 ,Sir  Edward,  iii.  251 

 ,  a  rebel,  i.  313 

Richard,  St.,  an  English  King,  epitaph 

at  Lucca,  i,  185 
Richard  III.,  King  of  England,  tomb  of, 

i.  298 

Richards,  Mr.,  iv.  260,  290,  292,  295 
Richardson,  Sir  Thomas,  Chief  Justice, 
i.  7  n 

■  ,  Rev.  Richard,  letter,  iii. 

386 

 ,  fire-eater,  feats  of,  ii.  79 

Richelieu,  town  of,  i.  74 

Richelieu,  Armand  du  Plessis,  Cardinal 
Due  de,  his  villa  at  Rueli,  i.  53  ;  at 
Richelieu,  75  ;  Palais  Cardinal,  254; 
prophecy  respecting  the  Stuarts,  iv. 
312  ;  his  life  noticed,  312,  315  ;  al- 
luded to,  1 75  n 

Richett,  Mr.,  engraver,  i.  284 

Richmond,  James  Stuart,  Duke  of, 
funeral  (1641),  i.  15 

—  ,    James    Stuart,    Duke  of 

Lennox  and  Duke  of  (1641),  his 
character,  iv.  69  n  ;  noticed,  50  n, 
80,  87—92,  113,  114,  124,  129,  135, 
140—144 

 jCharles  Stuart,  Duke  of  (1663), 

i.  374,  ii.  91  ;  dies  ambassador  to 

Denmark,  91  n,  102 

 ,  Duchess  of,  iv.  33 

 ,  Duke  of,  natural  sou  of  Charles 

II.,  ii.  162,  195,  199 
 ,  Countess  of,  mother  to  Henry 

VII.,  i.  303 
Riding  schools  at  Paris,  i.  66,  256 
Rilie,  Sir  Hugh,  i.  255 
Ringingborough,  Colonel,  iv.  180 
Rings,  inflammable,  i.  182 
Roane,  notice  of,  i.  77,  243 
Roberts,  Dr.  William,  Bishop  of  Bangor, 

iv.  99  and  n 


428 


GENERAL IXDEX  TO 


Robin  Hood's  Well,  i.  300 

llobinson,Sir  Johu,i.  314,  373;  pageant 
of,  370  n 

Roclie  Corb^,  Castle  at,  i.  73 

Roches,  of  Poictiers,  Catherine  de,  iii.  245 

Rochester,  John  Wilmot,  Earl  of,  a 
prophaue  wit,  ii,  53 

— — — ,  Laurence  Hyde,  Earl  of. 
Commissioner  of  the  treasury,  ii.  138  ; 
a  favourite  at  Court,  169  ;  made  Earl, 
170  ;  his  daughter  mai'ried,  ib  ;  Presi- 
dent of  the  Council,  199  ;  alluded  to, 
204  ;  Lord  Treasurer,  211  ;  his  oppo- 
sition to  William  and  Mary,  293  ; 
Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  3b" 3 

 ,  Countess  of  (1664—1686),  i. 

383  ;  ii.  217,  255 

Rochester,  City  of,  bequests  to  the,  i. 
386  n 

 ,  Deanery  of,  vacated  (1641), 

iv.  83 

Rogers,  Dr.,  Consul  in  Padua  University, 

i.  211  ;  account  of,  ii.  169;  Harveian 

oration  of,  ib 
Rohan,  Mademoiselle  de,  iv.  339  n 
Rokeby,  Mr.  Justice,  subscription  to 

Greenwich  Hospital,  ii.  345  n 
Rolsies,  notice  of  the,  i.  82 
Roman  Catholics  (1678),  banished,  iii. 

251  ;  machinations  of  (1686-7),  ii. 

253,  261,  263 
Roman  Medals  found  near  Bansted,  i .  329 
Roman  Money,  observations  on,  i.  182 
Roman  Painting  at  Cardinal  Borghese's, 

i.  133 

Roman  Temple  at  Leicester,  i.  298 
Romano,  Julio,  paintings  by,  i.  1 39,  282; 

ii.  341 

,  ,  Paris,  i.  113 

Roma  Soterrdnea,  account  of,  i.  176 
Roma  Triumphans,  at  Tivoli,  i.  181 
Rome,  description  of,  and  events  in, 

(1644-5),  i.  101—146,163—183,  228; 
Farnese  Palace,  102,  143  ;  temples  of 
Peace,  Jupiter,  Romulus,  Faustina, 
103;  arch  of  S.  Severus,  the  Capitol, 
104—106  ;  AraCoeli,  106  ;  Barberini 
Palace,  107  ;  Jesuits'  Church,  ib  ; 
Medici  Palace  and  Gardens,  108,  133; 
Chiesa  Nova,  108,  132,  136  ;  Prince 
Ludovisio's  villa,  109  ;  Signor  Ange- 
loni's  study,  110,  163  ;  Monte  Cavallo, 
and  the  Pope's  Summer  Palace,  110, 
134  ;  Dioclesian's  baths,  Fontana  delle 
Therme,  and  Church  of  St.  Susanna, 
111;  Church  of  Maria  della  Vittoria, 
and  Mont  Alto's  Villa,  112;  Churches 


of  SS.  Agnes  and  Constanza,  ih  ;  Via 
Felix,     ;  St.  Maria  MagLiiore,  113,  j 
114;  St,  Prudentia,  and  Praxedeis,  I 
114  ;  arch  of  Titus,  115  ;  Sta.  Maria  ^ 
Nova  and  Amphitheatre  of  Vespasian, 
115;  arch  of  Constantine,  116;  St. 
Gregorioand  Villa  Borghesi,  117, 118, 
133,  178  ;  St.  Peter's  and  Obelisk 
dedicated  to  Julius  Csesar,  118 — 124  ; 
Crypt  of  St.  Peter's,  135  ;  Baptistery 
of  St.  John,  124  ;  Seala  Sancta  and 
Obelisk,  1 25  ;  St.  John  de  Lateran, 
124  —  128  ;  collection   of  Cavali6ro 
Pozzo,  129  ;  St.  Pietro  in  vincolis,ti  ; 
procession  of  the  Pope  to  St.  John  de 
Lateran,  1 30;  fireworks,  131 ;  Jesuits' 
College,    132  ;    collection    of  H. 
Vitellesco,  ib ;  Ghisi  Palace,  1 34,  1 63 ; 
St.    Mary's,    135  ;   ceremonies  on 
Christmas  Eve,  ib  ;  Zitelle,  Ghetto, 
and  ceremony  of  Circumcision,  136  ; 
the  Vatican,  1 1 8, 1 37— 1 42 ;  St.  Paul's, 
142  ;  Trie  Fontana,  143  ;  St.  Cecilia's, 
163;  Temples  and  Mons  Testaceus, 
164  ;  St.  Maria  in  Navicula,  Horti 
Mathaei,  165;  St.  Sebastian's,  166; 
Hospital  of  Pellerini  della  S.  Trinita, 
167  ;  Palace  of  Cardinal  Spada,  ib  ; 
Piazza  Navona,  168  ;  Church  of  the 
Capuchins,    ib  ;     Pantheon,    169  ; 
Monasteries,  170;  Mausoleum  Augusti, 
171  ;    St.  Andrea  della  Valle,  ib  ; 
Trajan's  Column,  172  ;  St.  Cross,  of 
,      Jerusalem,  172;  St.  Lawi'ence,  173; 
Carnival,  1 74  ;   Pope's   portions  to 
the  Zitelle,  136,  175  ;  Roma  Sub- 
;      terranea,   176  ;   Opera    by  Prince 
Gallicano,  177  ;  Frascati,  179  ;  Cas- 
cade of  the  Anio,  181  ;  Roman  coins 
and  medals,  182  ;  extent  of  Rome, 
183  ;  drawings  made  between  Rome 
,      and  Naples  by  Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  396 
;  Romney,  Lord,  his  offices,  ii.  338,  363  ; 
f      subscription  to  Greenwich  Hospital, 
,       344  n 

,  Ronquillo,  Don  Pietro,  visit  of  Mr. 
i  Evelyn  to,  ii.  155 
;  Ronsard,  Pierre  de,  his  burial  place,  i.  73 
;  Rooke,  Admiral  Sir  George,  squadron 
e  of,  ii.  340  ;  Spanish  galleon  taken  by, 
369  ;  subscription  to  Greenwich  Hos- 
I,      pital,  344  n 

I,   ,  Laurence,  pendulum  invented 

e      by,  ii.  9  ;  account  of,  378 
I,  Rookwood,  at  Low  Layton,  Essex,  i.  332 
I,   Rookwood,  Sir  T.,  ii.  64 
s  Rose,  Mr.  (King  Charles's  gardener), 


THE  DIARY  xVXD  CORRESPONDENCE. 


429 


painting  of,  i.  353  n  ;  his  "  English 
Vineyard  Vindicated,"  ii.  395 
Roses,  instances  of  dislike  to,  ii.  47 

 -,  essence  and  oils  of,  iii.  110 

Ross,  tutor  to  Duke  of  Monmouth,  ii. 
229  n 

Rosse,  Lord,  divorce  of,  ii.  45 

 ,  Alexander,  divine  and  poet,  i. 

252,  284  ;  notice  of,  406  ;  letters  to 

Mr,  Evelyn,  iii.  56,  57 
Rosso  (old),  gallery  painted  by,  i.  59 
Rothem,  Sir  J.,  iii.  377 
Rotheuhamer,  painting  by,  i.  249 
Rotheram,  Sir  John,  Serjeant,  ii.  322, 

327,  341 

Rotherhithe,  di-eadful  fire  at  (1699),  ii. 
353 

Rotiere,  Mons,,  his  excellence  in  graving, 

ii.  119,  385 

Rotterdam,  the  fair  at  (1641),  i.  20 
Rouen,  account  of,  Cathedral,  i.  60  ; 

Church  of  St.  Ouen,  ib 
 ,  Archbishop  of,  palace  at  Gaillon, 

i.  59 

Roupel,  Mons.,  of  Paris,  i.  285 

Roxalana  (Mrs.  Davenport),  an  actress 
so  called,  i.  359,  ii.  379 

Royal  Excliange,  London,  built,  ii.  89 

"  Royal  Slave,"  a  play,  i,  421 

Royal  Society,  origin  of,  iii.  347 ;  shows 
Charles  II.  an  eclipse  of  Saturn,  i. 
351  ;  incorporated,  354,  367  ;  mace 
and  arms,  367,  368  ;  first  anniversary, 
377  ;  the  King's  pi'esent  to  the,  379  ; 
statutes  prepared,  386  ;  allusions  to 
the  Society  in  1665,  iii.  167  ;  meet  at 
Arundel  House,  ii.  20,  89 ;  Cowley's 
poem  on,  iii.  194  ;  Ai'undel  Library 
presented  by  Mr.  Howard,  ii.  20,  38, 
122  ;  iii.  306  ;  Mr.  Evelyn  presents 
Tables  of  Veins,  Arteries,  and  Nei'ves, 
i.  217  ;  ii.  31,  367;  College  for,  de- 
signed at  Arundel  house,  32;  Mr. 
Evelyn's  2;ift  of  bricks,  33  ;  History 
of  the  Silkworm  given  to  the,  38  ; 
Mr.  Evelyn  chosen  Secretary,  80  ; 
meets  again  at  Gresham  College,  89  ; 
regulations  respecting  electing  Fellows, 
162  ;  Roman  urn  pi'esented  to,  242  ; 
experiments  relative  to  earthquakes, 

iii.  325 

Royalty,  or  Masquerade,    at  Telling 

(1654-5),  iv.  224 
Royston,  Richard,  iii.  68,  74,  1 14 
Rubens,  Sir  Peter  Paul,  paintings  by, 

i.  31,  34  ;  ii.   325  j  his  Views  in 

Genoa,  i.  85 


Rubies,  King  Charles  I.'s  collar  of,  iv- 

69,  74,  83.  85,  90,  98,  103,  178 
Rudyard,  Sir   Benjamin,  iv.    133  n  ; 

opposes  sending  the  Iinsh  regiments 

to  Spain,  54  n 
Ruell,  Richelieu's  palace  at,  i.  53 
Rufus,  William,  coin  of,  iii.  344 
Rugini,  Signer,  of  Venice,  his  collection, 

i.  214 

Rump  Parliament  dispersed,  i.  333  ; 
dissolved  by  Monk,  335 

Rupert,  Prince,  references  to,  i.  345, 
346,  362  ;  ii.  5,  24,  51  ;  iv.  136,  232, 
236  n,  276  n,  340  n,  351  ;  Charles  I.'s 
directions  to,  before  the  battle  of 
Marston  Moor,  140  ;  letters,  to  Earl 
of  Essex  about  pass  for  Royal  Com- 
missioners to  Parliament  (1644),  143; 
to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas,  on  the  royal 
cause  (1645),  153  ;  forced  to  quit 
Bath,  153,  156  ;  surrenders  Bristol, 
162 — 165  ;  Charles  I.'s  proceedings 
against,  in  consequence,  163;  quarrels 
with  Lord  Digby  about  defeat  at  Sher- 
bourne,  165  n  ;  naval  proceedings  for 
Charles  IL  (1651),  353  ;  (1652),  237 
and  n,  256,  257  ;  (1653),  267,  268  n  ; 
governed  by  Sir  E.  Herbert,  270  n  ; 
Master  of  the  Horse  (1653),  274  n, 
298  n ;  is  nearly  drowned  in  the 
Seine,  282  ;  allusions  to,  concerning 
prizes  to  Charles  IL,  iii.  39,  44,  51  ; 
iv.  256,  257  n,  267  n,  274  n,  279,  280, 
283,  287,  293,  294,  296 

Rush  worth,  John,  his  "  Historical  Col- 
lections" referred  to,  iv.  61,  68,  73 
notes 

Russell,  Lord  William,  apprehended,  ii. 
178  ;  tried  and  condemned,  179  ;  be- 
headed, 182,  189,  2-28 

 ,  Colonel  (uncle  of  Lord),  ii.  183 

 ,  William,  embalming  practised 

by,  ii,  165 

 ,  Admiral,  Edward,  Earl  of  Ox- 
ford, quarrel  v.ith  Lord  Nottingham, 
ii.  322  ;  put  aside,  323  ;  restored,  326 

Russell,  Catholic  Bishop  of  Cape  Verde, 
i.  358 

Russell  family,  possessions  of,  in  Blooms- 
bury,  i.  389  n 

Russian  Ambassador,  entrance  of  (1662), 
i.  370,  371  ;  audience  of,  372  ;  takes 
leave,  374  ;  curious  waterfowl  pre- 
sented by,  to  Charles  II.,  389  ;  audi- 
ence of  (1667),  ii.  28,  29,  (1681) 
160 

Rustate,  Tobias,  benefactions  of,  ii.  142 


430  GENERAL 

Rutland,  John  Manners,  Earl  of,  iv.  1 80  n 
"  Rutler's  Work  on  Bees  "  noticed,  iii.  76 
Ruvigne',  Henry  de,  Marquis,  Earl  of 
Galway,  account  of,  ii.  257  ;  alluded 
to,  265,  301  ;  his  son,  257  n 
Rycaut,  Sir  Paul,  ii.  244 
Rye,  Sussex,  embargo  at  (1652),  i.  279 
Ryegate,  Lady  Peterboi'ough's  house  at, 
i.  308 

Rye-house  Plot  detected,  ii.  178  ;  de- 
claration concerning,  183  ;  thanks- 
giving, ib 

Ryswick,  seat  of  the  Prince  of  Orange, 

i.  21 

Sacheverell,  Mr.,  manager  on  Lord 

Stafford's  trial,  ii.  151 
Sacraments   disused    in    the  English 

churches,  i.  250 
Sacristy  at  St.  Denis,  i.  42 
Sadlington,  Captain,  iv.  276  and  n 
Saffron  brought  from  Greece,  iii.  259 
Saffron  Walden,  Essex,  famous  for  saf- 
fron, i.  305  ;  ii.  49 
Sailor,  fortitude  of,  under  amputation, 

ii.  72 

St.  Adriano  at  Rome,  i.  103 

St.  Agues  at  Rome,  i.  1 12 

St.  Alban's,  Henry  Jermyn,  Earl  of,  i. 
339,  356,  366 ;  ii.  2  ;  house  at  By- 
fleet,  121  ;  account  of  him  (1683), 
184  ;  porti-ait,  iii.  301 

 ,  Duke  of  (sou  of  Charles 

IL),  ii.  195,  199 

St.  Ambrose  at  Milan,  i.  227 

St.  Ambrosio  at  Genoa,  i.  87 

St.  Angelo,  notices  of,  i.  163,  249 

St.  Anne,  London,  ii.  264 

St.  Anthony  at  Padua,  i.  206 

St.  Bartholomew  at  Rome,  i.  164 

St.  Baume,  i.  82 

St.  Bernard  at  Rome,  i.  1 1 1 

St.  Carlo  at  Rome,  i.  1 1 3 

St.  Catharine  of  Sienna,  i.  97 

St.  Catharine's  cell  at  Sienna,  i.  1 84 

Sta.  Cecilia,  church  and  bath,  at  Rome, 
i.  164 

St.  Chapelle,  Paris,  i.  48  ;  at  Bourges, 

76  ;  at  Bourbon  I'Arehambaut,  t6 
St.  Christopher,  colossal  statue  of,  i.  46 
St.  Clement's  Church,  London,  ii.  200 
St.  Clere,  Kent,  descent  of  the  Evelyns 

of,  Pedigree,  ii.  397 
St.  Clere,  Mous.,  of  Paris,  collections  of, 
i.  259 

St.  Cloes,  house  of  Archbishop  of  Paris 
at,  i.  52 


INDEX  TO 

St.  Cloud,  Paris,  referred  to,  i.  253 

Sta.  Constanza  at  Rome,  i.  112 

St.  Croix  at  Orleans,  i.  68 

St.  Cross  at  Rome,  described,  i.l73  ;  at 

Lucca,  185 
St.Denys,  Paris,  i.  42—44,252 
St.  Dominic  at  Naples,  i.  151  ;  at  Floi'- 

ence,  192 

St.  Francis,  Genoa,  i.  87  ;  at  Siemia,  98 
St.  Genevieve,  Paris,  i.  49 
St.  George's,  Hanover-square,  ii.  314 
St.  Germain,  Naples,  natural  stoves  of, 

i.  156 

St.  Germain,  Mons.,  i.  257 

St.  Germains,  English  Court  at,  i.  245, 

253  ;  referred  to,  267 
St.  Germain's  en  Laye,  i.  52,  54,  257 
St.  Giovanni,  Baptistery  of,  i.  89 
St.  Giovanni  e  Paula,  i.  128 
St.  Gratian,  Tours,  i.  71 
St.  Gregorio  in  Monte  Celio,  i.  116 
St.  Gregory,  by  St.  Paul's,  London,  i. 

308  ;  iii.  66  n 
St.  Honore,  Island  of,  i.  82 
St.  Innocent's,  Paris,  i.  65 
St.  James's  Chapel,  i.  360 
St.  James's  Church,  Piccadilly,  ii.  201 
St.  James's,  library  at,  ii.  338,  iii.  305 
St.  James's  Park,  skating  in,  i.  372  ; 

collection  of  rare  beasts  and  fowls  in, 

389  ;  iii.  136 
St.  James's   possessed  by   the  rebels 

(1650),  i.   260  ;    improvement  of 

(1662),  365 
St.  Jean,  Lyons,  i.  77 
St.  John,  Church  of,  at  Genoa,  i.  87  ; 

at  Bologna,  193 
St.  John's  College,  Oxford,  i.  292 

 ,  Cambridge,  i.  303 

St.  John  di  Laterano,  Church  of,  at 

Rome,  description  of,  i.  124 — 128  ; 

procession  of  the  Pope  to,  &c.,  130 — 

132,  176 
St.  John,  Lord,  ii.  39 

 ,Sir  Walter,  i.  383 

•  ,  son  of  Sir  Walter,  murder 

by,  ii.  202 

 ,  regicide,  i.  302 

Sta.  Justina,  Church  of,  at  Padua,  i.  207 
St.  Laurence  at  Rome,  i.  173 
St.  Lawrence  at  Genoa,  i.  87;  at  Flo- 
rence, 189 
St.  Leger,  Lady,  antipathy  to  roses, 

ii.  47 

St.  Lorenzo  at  Padua,  i.  206 
St.  Mai'garet,  Island  of,  i.  82 
Sta.  Maria  Maggiore,  at  Rome,  i.  1 1 3, 135 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


431 


Sta.  Maria  sopra  la  Minerva,  at  Rome, 

i.  136,  172 

Sta.  Maria,  at  Venice,  i.  209 

Sta.  Maria  in  Navicula,  i.  165. 

Sta.  Maria  della  Pieta  nel  Colisseo,i.  116 

Sta.  Maria  Schola  Graeca,  i.  164 

Sta.  Maria  della  Ilotonda,  i.  169 

Sta.  Maria  della  Vittoria,  at  Rome,  i.  1 12 

Sta.  Maria  Nova,  at  Rome,  i.  115 

St.  Mark,  at  Rome,  i.  172;  at  Venice, 

Piazza,  198  ;  Church,  199  ;  Tower, 

202 

St.  Martin,  Tours,  i.  71 

St.  Mary's,  Oxford,  ii.  40 

St.  Maurice  in  Switzerland,  i.  237 

fet.  Michael,  Island  of,  near  Venice,  i.  212 

St.  Michael  in  Bosco,  at  Bologna,  i.  193 

St.  Nicholas  in  Carcere,  i.  166 

St.  Paul's  Cathedral  (old).  King's  statue 

at,  thrown  down,  i.  251 ;  surveyed  for 

repairs,  ii.  9  ;  destruction  of,  by  the 

great  fire  of  London,  9—13 
St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  deanery  vacated 

(1641),  iv.  83  ;  carving  of  Gibbon  in, 

ii.  57  n  ;  choir  finished,  332  ;  opened 
for  public  service,  348  ;  pubhc  library 
recommended  at,  iii.  309;  made  stables 
for  horses,  33 

St.  Paul's,  Church  of,  near  Rome,  i. 
142 

St.  Peter's  at  Rome,  piazza  before,  i. 
118  ;  description  of,  120—124  ; 
chapels  in,  120  ;  ecclesiastical  mem- 
bers of,  124  ;  dimensions,  194  ;  crypt, 
135 ;  service  on  Good  Friday  and 
Easter  Day,  175,  176 

St.  Peter's  at  Geneva,  i.  242 

St.  Pietro  d' Arena,  i.  88 

St.  Pietro  de  Vincoli,  at  Rome,  i.  106, 
129 

St.  Praxedeis  at  Rome,  i.  1 1 4 

St.  Prudentia,  at  Rome,  i.  1 1 4 

St.  Ruth,  General,  slain,  ii.  315 

St.  Sabina,  at  Rome,  i.  164 

St.  Saviour,  at  Aix,  i.  80 

St.  Sebastian's,  at  Rome,  i.  128,  166 

Sto.  Spirito,  at  Florence,  i.  92 

St.  Stephen's,  at  Bourges,i.  75  ;  at  Pisa, 

89  ;  Paris,  ii.  255 
St.  Susanna,  Church  of,  at  Rome,  i.  1 1 1 
St.  Thomas's  Hospital,  Southwark,  i.  386 
St.  Victoire,  at  Aix,  i.  ^1 
St.  Vincent's  Rock,  Bristol,  i.  290 
Sala  del  Conclave,  i.  138 
Saladine,  Mons.,  i.  239—243 
Salisbury  Cathedral,  i.  294  ;  Plain  and 

City,  ib  ;  Stonehenge,  295 


Salisbury,  Earls  of,  their  palace  at  Hat- 
field, i.  39  ;  William  Cecil,  Earl  of, 
iv.  185  n 

Sallust,  Caius  Crispus,  his  viridarium 

and  gardens, i.  109,  111 
Salt-houses  at  Rome,  i.  164 
Saltpetx-e,  commission  for  regulating,  &c., 

ii.  7  ;  mine  of,  iv.  61 

Salt  water,  rivulet  of,  at  Pistoia,  i. 
186 

Salvatico,  Dr.,  of  Padua,  i.  215,  218 
Saludadors  of  Spain,  impostures  of,  ii. 
233 

Salviati,  Francisco   Rossi,    called  II 

Salviati,  works  of,  i.  102,  168 
Salutation,  picture  of  the,  i.  187 
Samai'itan  fountain  at  Paris,  i.  258 
Sampion,  Mount,  i.  233,  236,  237 
Samuel,  Mr.,  architect,  ii.  48 
San  Bernardo,  mountain  of,  i.  230 
Sancroft,  Dr.  William,  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  ii.  244,254,  256,257,  269, 
299,332;  sermon  of,  3;  aCommissioner 
for  repair  of  Old  St.  Paul's,  9 ;  a  Com- 
missioner for  Ecclesiastical  Affairs, 
256  ;  refuses  to  sit,  257  ;  required  to 
publish  a  declaration  of  abhorrence  of 
the  invasion,  284  ;  meeting  of  Bishops 
at  Lambeth,  286  ;  Mr.  Evelyn's  letter 
to,  281,  287  ;  protests  against  the 
crown  being  given  to  William  III., 
293  ;  refuses  to  attend  Parliament 
(1689),  295;  conversation  with  (1689), 
296  ;  deprived,  301,  312,  313  ;  advice 
to  Dr.  Beveridge,  312 
Sanctuary,  man  entex's   St.  Martin's 

chui'ch  for,  ii.  265 
Sanders,  Captain,  ii.  235 
Sanderson,  Sir  William, ii.  107,  384 

 ,  Dr.    Robert,    Bishop  of 

Lincoln,  sermon  of,  i.  334  ;  portrait, 

iii.  301 

Sands,  ti-avelling,  account  of,  ii.  115 

Sandwich,  Edward  Montague,  Lord 
Admiral,  Earl  of,  i.  395—397;  ii. 
46  ;  his  courage,  i,  399  ;  ii.  6,  33  ;  at 
Madrid,  36 ;  President  of  Commission 
of  Trade,  58—61  ;  death  at  battle  of 
Solebay,  75  ;  character  of,  75,  76  ; 
funeral,  77  ;  letters  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to, 
on  Spanish  horticulture,  iii.  201,  205; 
portrait  of,  iii.  301 

Sandwich,  town  of,  i.  388 

Sandys,  Edwin,  Archbishop  of  York, 
letter  of,  iii.  380 

Sandys,  Rev.  Mr.,  ii.  357 

Sansoviuo,  Jacopo,  sculpture  by,  i.  168, 


432  GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


170,  201,  202,  206  ;  Piazza  of  St. 

Mark  by,  199  ;  his  burial  place,  ib 
Santa  Clara,  Fra.  de,  miracle  related  by, 

ii.  233 
Sapienzaat  Rome,  i.  171 
Saracin,   ^NIous.,  goldsmith,  of  Paris, 

1.51,  403 

Sarto,Del(  AndreaVannucchi),  paintings 
by,  i.  59,  93,  187,  188,  189,  328  ; 
burial  place,  187 

Saturn,  eclipse  of,  &c.  (1660),  i.  351 

Saville,Sir  George  (Marquis  of  Halifax), 
son  of  Sir  Henry,  i.  369 

.  ,  Sir  Henry,  i.  369  ;  types  pro- 
cured by,  for  his  edition  of  "  Chry- 
sostom,"  destx'oyed,  iii.  300  ;  MSS.  of, 
307 

 ,  Mr.  Henry,  Vice-chamberlain, 

ii.  45,  211 

 ,  Countess  of  Monte  Feltre,  ii. 

183 

Saul,  Mrs.,  letter  to,  from  Mrs.  John 

Evelyn,  iv.  36 
Saumeurs,  Mons  ,  i.  253 
Savona,  town,  cape,  and  passage  of, 

i.  83 

Savoy,  persecuted  Christians  of,  collec- 
tions for,  i.  308  ;  ii.  302 

Savoy,  Duke  of,  his  persecution  of  Pro- 
testants, ii.  253,  302  ;  remits  his 
cruelties,  307 

Savoy  Hospital,  sick  and  wounded  lodged 
at,  i.  394 ;  ii.  8  ;  French  Church  of 
the,  45 

Saxe-Gotha,  Duke  of,  ii.  258 
Say  and  Sele,Winiam  Fiennes,  Viscount, 
iv.  185  n 

Sayes  Court,  Deptford,  Mr.  Evelyn's 
house,  i.  246—250,  282—284,  343, 
351,  353,  374  ;  garden  at,  i.  293  ;  ii. 
175,  193  ;  let  to  Peter  the  Great,  349; 
to  Lord  Carmarthen,  364 

Sayers,  John,  iv.  224 

Scala  Saucta,  at  Rome,  i.  194 

Scaliger,  Joseph,  ii.  175  ;  his  burial 
place,  i.  26 

 ,  Julius  Csesar,  statue  of,  i.  222  ; 

his  eulogy  of  Verona,  ib 

Scaligeri,  "Princess  of  Verona,  monu- 
ment of,  i.  222 

Scaraniuccio,  Italian,  performance  at 
Whitehall,  ii.  102 

Scarborough,  Dr.  Sir  Charles,  i.  283  ; 

ii.  45  ;  library,  334  ;  notice  of,  i.  409 
Scawen,  Sir  William,  M.P.  for  Surrey, 

ii.  375  n 

Scheld,  curious  notices  of  the,  i.  33 


Schomberg,  Frederick, Duke  of,  Marshal, 

ii.  300  ;  iv.  250  ;  death,  ii.  308 
Schonaich's  Protestant  nunnery,  iii.  131 
Schools,  various  notices  of,  abroad,  i. 

26,  32,  171,  211,  243  ;  in  England,  i. 

250,  290.  See  University 
Schotti,  Gaspar,  a  scholar  of  Father 

Kircher,  i.  108  ;  notice  of,  404 
Scipio,   Publius  Cornelius  Africanus, 

statue  of,  i.  75 
Sclater,  Edward,  cui'ate  of  Putney,  ii. 

252  n 

Sconvelt,  Nicholas,  famous  for  his  lutes, 
i.  194 

^'  Scornful  Lady,"  performance  of,  i.  345 

Scotch  Army,  employed  against  Irish 
Rebels  (1541),  iv.  122,  125  ;  enters 
England  (1644),  135  n,  136  ;  besieges 
York,  141  n  ;  in  Wales  (1645),  155  ; 
promise  given  by  the  King  I'especting, 
174  ;  exacted  by  King  Charles  on 
going  to  them,  183 

Scot,  Major,  i.  336 

 ,  regicide,  executed,].  341 

Scotland,  King  Charles  I.'s  expedition 
to  (1641)  iv.  49  n ;  his  reception 
there,  50  ;  negotiations  with  the  Par- 
liament of,  51  n  ;  Parliamentary 
commissioners  sent  to,  56,  59  n,  65, 
66,  75  n,  91  ;  notices  concerning  Par- 
liament of,  70,  78 — 81  ;  treaty  for, 
135  ;  proceedings  concerning,  139  ; 
intrigues  of  Finance  with,  173  ;  dis- 
pute with  the  English  independents, 
233,  234  ;  King  Charles  II.'s  expedi- 
tion to  (1650),  194  n  ;  various  tidings 
from  (1651),  352, 353  ;  Commissioners 
for  the  Union  of,  ii.  55  ;  conduct  of 
theBishopsof  (1689), 287;  declaresfor 
William  and  Mary,  297  ;  Scots  Com- 
missioners offer  the  Ci'owu  on  condi- 
tions, 298  ;  Episcopacy  again  voted 
down  in,  300  ;  Pi'esbyterians  of,  306 

Scots  troops  in  France  (1648),  iv.  337  ; 
(1650)  i.  260  ;  Parliament  against 
their  settling  in  Darien,  ii.  358 

Scott,  Sir  Edward,  iii.  319 

 ,  Sir  Thomas,  and  his  seat  Scott's 

Hall,  i.  375 

 ,  Lady  Catherine  (daughter  of  Earl 

of  Norwich),  i.  252,  260,  406 

Scotus  de  la  Marca,  painting  by,  i,  369 

Scribes  in  St.  Innocent's  Church-yard, 
i.  65 

Scriptures,  notices  of  ancient  copies  of 

the,  i.  92,  140,  243,  308 
Scriveners,  Company  of,  ii.  116  u 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


433 


Scroope,    Adrian,  regicide,  executed, 
i.  341 

 ,  Lady,  ii.  188 

Scrope,  Sir  Andrew,  i.  373 
Scudamore,  Mr.,  i.  252,  284 
Sculptors,  in  Rome,  i.  182  ;  in  Florence, 
190 

"Sculptura,"  by  Mr.  Evelyn  (1662),  i. 

344,  346,  364  ;  ii.  392,  396 
Sea,  destruction  by,  in  Holland,  i.  17 
Sea-coal,  project  of  charring,  i.  316 
Seas,  Dominion   of,  and   Fishery,  iii. 

267—271 

Sebastian's,  St.,  edict  against  the  British, 

iv.  317,  318 
Second  sight,  instance  of,  ii.  233 
Sedan,  a  town,  i.  28 
Sedans  introduced  into  England,  i.  162 
Sedley,   Sir   Charles,  ii.   248  n  ;  his 
daughter  Catherine,  Countess  of  Dor- 
chester, 84  n,  248 
"  Sedum  Arborescens,"  i.  159 
Seeds,  the  imbibition  of,  iii.  254 
Selden,  John,  his  "  Titles  of  Honour," 
i.  309  ;  executor  of,  ii.  28  ;  portrait, 

iii.  301  ;  library,  306  ;  on  the  Act  of 
Oblivion,  iv.  56 

Seleniscope,  i.  285 

Self-denying  Act,  contest  about,  ii.  322 
Sembrador,  brought  out  of  Spain,  ii.  36 
Senate,  or  State  House  at  Delft,  i.  21  ; 

at  Amsterdam,  22  ;  at  Antwerp,  32  ; 

at  Brussels,  34  ;  at  Sienna,  96  ;  at 

Lucca,  185  ;    at  Venice,   201  ;  at 

Brescia,  223 
Senatan,  Mons.,  of  Paris,  i.  264 
Sensitive  Plant,  experiments  on,  i.  353 
Senten,  Bastian,  gallantry  of,  iii.  240 
Septalla,  Signor,  collection  of,  i.  228 
Septuagint  l^criptures  noticed,  i.  309 
Sepulchral  Monuments,  i.  Introduction, 

xxxiv.— xl.,  160-174,  254  ;  ii.  364 
"  Seraphic   Love,"   remarks    on  Mr. 

Boyle's,  iii.  121—126 
Sermon,  in  blank  verse,  i.  390  ;  an  hour 

and  a  half  long,  ii.  1 40  ;  old-fashioned 

sermon,  181 
Sei'moneta,  Da  (Girolamo  Siciolante), 

painting  by,  i.  128 
Seven  Dials,  building  of,  ii.  332 
"  Severall  Proceedings,"  a  journal  (1652), 

iv.  253,  258,  276  notes 

Severus,  Lucius  Septimius,  Emperor  of 

Rome,  arch  of,  i.  104  ;  baths,  164 
Sewers,  Commission  of,  i.  330,  373 
Sextons,  remarkable  instance  of  lon- 
gevity in,  i.  301 
VOL.  IV. 


Sextus  Empiricus,  iii.  88 

Sextus  IV.,  Pope,  his  statue,  i.  124 

Sextus  v.,  horses  on  Monte  Cavallo,  re- 
paired by,  i.  Ill  ;  aqueduct,  ih ; 
chapel,  113;  Constantino's  pillar  re- 
erected  by,  126  ;  Vatican  partly  built 
by,  137  ;  destroys  the  Septizonium, 
165  ;  Augustine  Obelisk  set  up  by, 
171  ;  statue  of  St.  Peter  on  Trajan's 
column,  172 

Seymour,  Mr.,  i.  308 

 — ,  Mr.    Conyers  (son   of  Sir 

Edw^ard),  killed  in  a  duel,  ii.  353 

 ,   Mr.,    impeaches    Earl  of 

Clarendon,  ii.  31 

 ,  Mr.,    speech   on  elections 

(1685),  ii.  223 

'  ,  Sir  Edward,  ii.  325  ;  notice 

of,  366 

 ,  Francis,  Lord,  summoned  by 

the  Queen,  iv.  84;  notice  of  the  family, 
1 02  n  ;  his  house  at  Marlborough,  i. 
289  ;  referred  to,  iv.  135  n,  143 

Sfrondseti,  Cardinal  Francisco,  church 
built  by,  i.  163 

Shaen,  Sir  James,  ii.  105 

Shaftesbury,  Anthony  Ashley  Cooper, 
Earl  of,  ii.  36,  70,  80,  84  ;  president 
of  Council  for  Plantations,  78,  80  ; 
anecdote  of  Lord  Cliffoi'd  related  by, 
87,  88  ;  crafty  conduct  of,  ii.  1 80 

Shakspeare,  William,  illustration  from, 
i.  169  ;  portrait  of,  iii.  301 

Sharp,  Mr.  Samuel,  surgeon,  ii.  79  n 

■  ,  Dr.  John  (Ai-chbishop  of  York), 

noticed,  ii.  388  ;  preaches  against 
Romanists,  255,  257;  sermon  before 
the  Commons  (1689),  291  ;  other  ser- 
mons of,  328,  341 

Shaw,  Sir  John,  house  at  Eltham,  i.  380; 
iv.  42,  43 

Shawsey  Island,  iv.  272  n 

Sheen,  Abbey  of,  ii.  122,  272 

Sheep,  remarkable  one,  i.  287 

Sheerness,  arsenal  at,  ii.  6  ;  fortified, 
25,  71  ;  curiosities  dug  up  at,  34 

Sheldon,  Dr.  Gilbert,  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  i.  376  ;  Theatre,  &c.,  at 
Oxford,  built  by,  384  ;  ii.  39  ;  alluded 
to,  i.  359,  368,  370,  375,  397  ;  ii.  7, 
35,  39,  73,  77  ;  monument,  361 ;  por- 
tx-ait  of,  iii.  301 ;  sermon  of,  i.  345 

— — — ,  Mr.  Edward,  ii.  327 

 ,  Ralph,  collection  of  coins,  ii. 

200  ;  iii.  300 

 ,  Mr.  (nephew  of  Archbishop), 

his  house,  ii.  121 

F  F 


434  GENERAL 

Sheldon,  Mrs.  Mary,  iii.  108  ii 
Sherard,  Lord,  ii.  47 
Sheere,  Mr.  Duncomb's  house  at,  ii.  110 
Shei'iffs  pf  Counties,  their  retinue,  i.  6  ; 

of  London,  disputes  on  the  choice  ot 

(1641),  iv.  55  n  ;  bill  for,  HI 
Sherlock,  Dr.  William,  ii.  244 
Sherwin,  Mr.,  trial  with  Sir  Walter 

Clarges,  ii.  3G0 
Sherwood  Forest,  account  of,  i.  299 
Ship  of  96  guns  built  by  Cromwell,  i. 

307 

Ship-building,  art  of,  ii.  164  ;  plans  for 
improving,  i.  358,  367,  378,  386  ;  ii. 
83,  95 

Siiips,   curious  models  of,  i.  25  ;  at 
Venice,  208  ;  captured  (1665),  3.>7  ; 
destroyed  in  war  &e.,  391,  393  ;  ii.  6, 
7,  25  ;  ibr  protecting  commerce,  iv.  61 
Shipwreck,  wonderful  story  of  a,  i.  84 
Si'irley,  James,  his  "  Young  Admiral," 

i.  370 

 ,  Mrs.,  i.  332 

Shish,  Mr. ,  vessel  built  by,  i.  32 ;  account 

of,  ii.  142;  vessel  built  by  his  sou,  174 
Shoes,  various  fashions  of,  ii.  44 
Shooter's  Hill,  mineral  w-aters  at,ii.  354 
Shore,  Sir  Bartholomew,  ii.  211  n 
Short,  Dr.,  consulted  by  Charles  IL,  ii. 

332 

Shotover,  Sir  Timothy  Tyri'ell's  house 

at,  i.  383  ;  ii.  99 
Shrewsbury,  Charles  Talbot,  Earl  of,  ii. 

135  ;  portrait  of,  iii.  301 
 ,  the  abandoned  Countess  of, 

ii.  67,  133 

 Duke  of,  a  Commissioner 

for  Greenwich  Hospital,  ii.  335  ;  his 
subscription,  344  n  ;  retires  from 
Lord  Chamberlainship,  360 

Shute,  Mr.,  iv.  72  and  n  ;  "  Sidney 
Papers  "  referred  to,  204  n 

Sibbaid,  Sir  Robert,  ii.  255  u 

Sibylla  of  Cuma,  i.  159 

Siciliano,  Jacomo,  painting  by,  i.  112 

Sick  and  Wounded,  and  Prisoners  of 
War,  Commissioners  appointed,  i.  385; 
their  seal  &c.,  386  ;  proceedings  of 
the  Commissioners  (1664-1673),  386 
—399  ;  ii.2— 88  ;  iii.  166—186 

Sidney,  Lord,  offices  in  Ireland,  ii.  309, 
311,  326  ;  noticed,  389 

 ,  Algernon,  appi'ehended,  ii,  178; 

beheaded,  190  ;  character  of,  180  ; 
alluded  to,  194  ;  story  of,  229  u 

 ,  Sir  Philip,  i.  282  ;  portrait,  iii. 

301 


IXDEX  TO 

Sidney,  Lady  Dorothy  (Waller's  Sacha- 
rissa),  i.  282  and  n 

 ,  Colonel  Robert,  alleged  father 

of  the  Duke  of  Monmouth,  ii.  229 

Sienna,  Baltazzar  di,  arch  by,  i.  96 

Sienna,  account  of,  i.  96 — 98,  184  ; 
towers  of,  96  ;  courts  of,  ih  ;  Uni- 
versity, ih  \  Church  and  Cathedral,  97, 
184  ;  Hospital,  97  ;  St.  Francis' 
Church  &c.,  98 

Siglitsman  at  Rome,  i.  102 

Silhon,  M.,  work  of  mentioned,  iii.  72 

Silk  stockings,  engine  for  weaving, 
i.  351 

Silver,  bells,  i.  25  ;  bedsteads  and  tables, 

86  ;  lamps,  95 
Simon,  Father  Richard,  his  "  Histoire 

Critique,"  iii.  264 
Simons,  Abraham,  medal  engraver,  &c., 

i.  285 

Simson,  Mr.,  agate  cup  in  his  possession, 
i.  307 

Singers  in  Rome,  i.  183 
Sion,  Switzerland,  i.  235 
Sion,  Earl  of  Northumberland's  seat, 
i.  396 

Sirani,  Isabella,  painter,  i.  1 93,  404 
Sissac,  Marquis  de,  loss  of  at  play,  ii. 
107 

Skaits,  introduction  of,  into  England, 
i.  372 

Skinner,  Dr.  Robert,  Bishop  of  Bristol 

(1641),  iv.  99  and  n 
Skippon,  Sir   Philip,  his  account  of 

Wotton's  early  talents,  ii.  130  n 
 ,  Serjeant-Major-General,  Philip, 

iii.  17,  20,  25,  29  ;  iv.  110  n 
Skipwith,  Sir  Fulmar,  iv.  135  and  n 
Sky,  remarkable  appearance  in  (1643), 

i.  39 

Slauiug,  Sir  Nicholas,  marriage,  i.  370 
Slaves  at  Marseilles,  i.  80,  81 ;  at  Leg- 
horn, 90 

Slayer,  Di".,  chemical  experiment  by,  ii. 
245 

Slingsby,  Sir  Arthur,  goes  to  Paris,  i. 
252  ;  his  lottery,  380  ;  character  of, 
381  ;  governor  of  Portsmouth,  ii. 

236,  378 

 ,  Mr.,  Master  of  the  Mint,  i. 

368  ;  Commissioner  for  repair  of  Old 
St.  Paul's,  ii.  9  ;  his  house  at  Burrow 
Green,  47  ;  Secretary  to  Council  for 
Trade,  59  ;  a  lover  of  music,  94, 
137  ;  alluded  to,  i.  371 ;  ii.  47,  107, 
119,  135,  200,  378  ;  his  decayed  cir- 
cumstances, 270 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


435 


Sloane,  Sir  Hans,  Secretary  to  Royal 
Society,  ii.  350,  389  ;  his  collection, 
312 

Small-pox,  ravages  of  (1 646),  i.  238, 239  ; 

(1660),  341  ;   (1685),  ii.  212,  215; 

(1694),  333 
Smith,  Capt.,  iv.  120  ;  his  gallantry  at 

battle  of  Edge-hill  (1642),  104 

 ,  Sir  Jer.,  bravery  of,  ii.  83 

 ,  Mr.  Robert,  marriage  of,  i.  282 

 ,  Mr.  (Commissioner  of  Trea- 
sury), his  subscription  to  Greenwich 

Hospital,  ii.  344 
 ,  Mr.  John,  Speaker  of  the  House 

of  Commons,  ii.  376 
 ,  Dog,  benefactor  to  Surrey,  iii. 

342 

 ,  Mr.,  speech  on  election  of  offi- 
cers, iv.  100  aiid  n 
Smithfield,  woman  burned  in  (1652), 

i.  278 

Smyrna  Fleet,  attack  on  (1672),  ii.  69, 
75  ;  earthquake  at  Smyrna,  ii  280 

"  Smyrna  Imposter,"  the  author  of,  iii. 
241 

Smyth,  Capt,  iv,  272,  300,  309  ;  taken 
prisoner  by  the  rebels,  309  n 

Snake,  Virginian  rattle-snake,  i.  322 

Snape,  Andrew,  King's  farrier,  father  of 
Dr.  Snape,  ii.  1 74 

Snatt,  Edward,  school-master  at  South- 
over,  i.  5  ;  letter  to  Mr.  Evelyn,  iii.  95 ; 
his  son  a  nonjuring  clergyman,  ii. 
341 

Sneiders,  paintings  by,  i.  56 
Snow  s  in  the  Alps,  i.  234 
Snow'-Avater,  its  effects  in  the  Alps,  i. 
232 

Soames,  Sir  William,  Ambassador  to 

Constantinople,  ii.  232 
Society  for  Propagating  the  Gospel,  ii. 

368 

Soiret,  Mons.,  iv.  220,  223 

Solan  geese,  notice  of,  i.  390 

Soldiers,  spoliations  of  the  Parlia- 
mentary, i.  301 ;  quartering  of,  in  pri- 
vate houses,  ii.  230 

"  Solitude,  Essay  on,"  by  Sir  George 
Mackenzie,  answered,  ii.  21,  306,  392, 
396 

Solomon,    Proverbs    of,  exquisitely 

written,  i.  291 
Somers,  John,  Lord,  made  Lord  Keeper, 

ii.  324  ;  subscription  to  Greenwich 
Hospital,  344  ;  elected  President  of 
the  Royal  Society,  350  ;  charge 
brought  by  Parliament  against,  357 ; 


seals  taken  from  him,  360  ;  his 
talents,  ib  ;  continued  President  of 
Royal  Society,  363  ;  trial  of,  365  ;  his 
"  Collection  of  Tracts "  referred  to, 
iv.  108  n 

Somerset,  Lord  John,  i.  101,  167,  403 

 ,  Duke  of,  estate  left  to,  ii. 

374 

 ,  Duchess  of,  letter  of,  iii.  380 

 ,  Lady  Anne,  ii.  65 

"  Somner's  Saxon  Dictionary,"  iii.  104 

Sorbiere,  Samuel,  noticed,  iii.  144 

Sorbonne,  Paris,  account  of,  i.  47 

Soul,  its  immortality,  iii.  98 

Sourdiac,  Marquis  de,  iv.  271 

South,  Dr.  Robert,  ii.  40,  256,  381  ; 
sermons  of,  i.  377  ;  ii.  118 

Southampton,  Thomas  Wriothesley, 
Earl  of,  his  attendance  required  in 
Parliament  (1641),  iv.  124  ;  notice  of, 
i.  413;  portrait,  iii.  301  ;  alluded  to, 

i.  314,  381,  389  ;  ii.  86  ;  iv.  95,  100, 
117,  125  n,  137,  140,  143,  144,  149, 
153,  179 

 ,  Duke  of,  ii.  108  n 

Southampton  House,  Chapel,  ii.  47 
Southcott,  Sir  John,  i.  267 
Southover,  Sussex,  Free-school  at,  i.  5 
Southwark  Fair,  i.  340;  ii.  322 
Southwell,  Sir  Robert,  on  "  Water,"  ii. 
98;   Envoy  to  Brandenburgh,  142, 
384  ;  President,  &c.,  of  Royal  So- 
ciety, ii.  310,  326,  350  ;  iii.   381  ; 
letter  by,  274 
Soutman,  Peter,  engraving  by,  i.  226  n 
Souvray,  Commandeur  de.  Ambassador, 
iv.  350 

Sovereign,  Ship  of  War,  built,  i.  1 7  ; 

ii.  339 

Spa  Wells,  Islington,  ii.  255 
Spada,  Cardinal,  palace  of,  i.  167 
Spain,  Queen  of,  catafalco  of,  i.  168 
Spain  and  Portugal,  umpii-age  between, 
ii.  4 

Spain,    expected    war  with  England 

(1656),  iv.  317  n 
Spanheim,  Ezekiel,  ii.  103,  384  ;  iii. 

375 

Spanish  Ambassador  at  Venice,  i.  218  ; 
in  England,  ii.  395  ;  his  house,  demo- 
lished, 285,  388 

Spanish  Galleon,  weighed  up  near 
Hispaniola,  ii.  266;  taken  at  Vigo,  369 

Spanish  Plants  and  Trees,  iii.  201,  205 

Sparrow,  Bishop  Anthony,  sermon  of, 
ii.  82 

Speed,  John,  his  Map  of  Surrey,  ii.  1  n 
r  F  2 


436 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Spelman,  Mr.  (grandson  of  Sir  Henry), 

i.  343 

Spencer,  George  John,  Earl,  i.  361  n 
 ,  Lord  (son  of  Earl  of  Sunder- 
land), intended  marriage  of,  ii.  156  ; 
character,  279  ;  alluded  to,  310;  his 
marriage,  333 ;  library,  352  ;  letters 
of  Mr.  Evelyn  to,  iii.  293  ;  his  Lord- 
ship's tour,  336 

 ,Mr.,  i.282,  314  ;  sons  of,  267 

 ,  Lady  Anne,  marriage,  ii.  270, 

279  ;  alluded  to,  iii.  284  ;  death  of,  315 

 ,  Charles,  younger  son  of  Earl 

of  Sunderland,  (afterwards  Earl),  ii. 
279,  369 

 ,  Martha,  married  Mr.  Evelyn's 

son,  ii.  139 

 ,  Robert,  ii.  42,  99 

 ,  Colonel,  i.  340 

 ,  Mr.,  iii.  30  ;  iv.  346 

Spenser,  Edmund,  his  porti'ait,  iii.  301 
Spilbergh,  J.,  view  by,  ii.  20 
Spin-house  at  Amsterdam,  i.  22 
Spinola,  Marquis,  river  cut  by,  i.  36  ; 

gardens,  87  ;  letters,  iii.  380 
Sports  of  Geneva  in  Switzerland,  i.  241, 

242 

Spragge,  Admiral,  his  expedition,  ii.  69 
Sprat,  Dr.  Thomas,  Bishop  of  Rochester, 

ii.  41,  382  ;  his  preaching,  101,  137, 
150,  174,  191,  220  ;  Dean  of  Chapel 
Royal,  248  ;  Commissioner  for  eccle- 
siastical affairs,  256  ;  resigns,  279  ; 
his  form  of  prayer  on  the  Prince's 
birth,  276  ;  letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to, 

iii.  144 

Spring  Gardens,  i.  251,  288,  327  ;  new 

Spring-garden,  353,  417 
Springs  at  Tours,  i.  73 
Spie  Park,  Sir  Ed.  Baynton's,  i.  293 
Squirries,  at  Westerham  in  Kent,  i.  328 
Stafford,  William  Howard,  Viscount,  i. 

266  ;  ii.  46 ;  antipathy  to  roses,  47  ; 

committed  for  Popish  plot,  129  ;  trial, 

46,  150  ;  behaviour  on  his  trial,  154  ; 

beheaded,  46,  155 
 ,  P.,  Superior  of  English  Jesuits, 

i.  167 

Stag,  remains  of  a  gigantic  one.  i.  71 
Staircase,  at  Chambourg,  i.  69  ;  in  the 

Vatican,  141 
Staly,  executed,  ii.  127 
Stamford,  Mayor  of,  addresses  King 

Charles  I.,  iv.  1 34  n 
Standish,  Dr.,  ii.  231 
Standsfield,  John  and  Eleanor,  Pedigree, 

ii.  397  ;  i.  5,  286 


Stanhope,  Lord,  i.  258,  262 

 ,  Lady,  ii.  106 

 ,  Dr.  Geoi'ge,  discourses  of,  ii. 

328,  338 

Stanhope,  Mr.,  Gentleman  Usher,  ii.  47 
Stanley,  Mr.,  i.  334  ;  killed  in  a  duel,  ii. 
250 

Stapylton,  Sir  Robert,  translator  of 
Juvenal,  i.  288,  410 

 ,  Col.,  Governor  of  St.  Chris- 
topher's, ii.  73 

Stai'-Chamber,  proceedings  of,  against 
London,  iv.  61  n  ;  suspension  of 
Bishop  Williams  by,  83  n 

Starkey,   ,  Lord  Clarendon's  esti- 
mate of,  iv.  217 

Stationers'  Companv,  their  great  lo?s, 

ii.  13  ;  iii.  188 

Statues  and  Sculptures,  names  and 
notices  of  various,  i.  42 — 49,  85 — 99, 
102—129,  184-203,  209—211  ;  ii. 
54—57,  270 

Statutes,  legal,  to  be  printed  in  English, 

iii.  35 

Staughton,  Sir  Lawrence,  his  proposals 
to  Miss  Evelyn,  iii.  333 

"  Staves,"  Mr.  Evelyn's  letters  respect- 
ing, iii.  220,  225,  246  ;  fragment  by 
Mr.  Evelyn  on  this  subject,  225  n  ; 
ii.  392 

Stawell,  Sir  Edward,  i.  267 

Stenwick,  Henry,  paintings  by,  i  34,  56, 

248,  249,  288 
Stephen,  King  of  England,  his  tomb,  i. 

296 

Stephen,  Mr.  Attorney,  ii.  99 
Stephens,  William,  sermon  on  30th  of 

January,  ii.  357 
 •,  Mr.,  cousin  of  Mr.  Evelyn,  i. 

252,  253,  295,  317 

 ,  Mr.,  iv.  349,  351 

Sterne,  Di\   Richard,  Archbishop  of 

York,  ii.  321,  389 
Stewart,  Dr.,  Dean  of  St.  Paul's,  i.  267, 

271  ;  iv.  135  ;  his  death,  i.  272  ;  iv. 

243 

Stidolph,  Sir  F.,  house  at  Mickleham,  i. 

309 

 ,  Lady,ii.  119 

Stillingfleet,  Dr.  Edward,  Bishop  of 
Worcester,  ii.  272,  318  ;  his  library, 

352 

Stoake,  North  Sussex,  estate  at,  ii.  363 
Stokes,  Dr.,  i.  305,  315  ;  perpetual  mo- 
tion, ii.  34 

 ,  dancing-master,  book  by,  i.  1 1 

Stola  Tybertina  (at  Rome),  i.  164 


THE  DIAEY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


487 


Stone,  Sir  Robert,  i.  20 
Stone,  operation  for  the,  i.  256 
Stonelienge,  description  of,  i.  295 
Stonehouse,  Sir  John,  marriage,  ii.  138, 
139 

 ,  Lady,  320 

"  Stones,  Discourse  on,"  by  Mr.  Evelyn, 
ii.  392 

Stoope,  Monsieur,  speech  of,  i.  338 
Storm,   (1652),  i.  281  ;  (1662),  362  ; 

(1687),  ii.  266  ;  (1689),  299;  (1690), 

302 

Stoves,  of  St.  Germain,  i.  156  ;  of  Ger- 
many, 310  ;  for  green-houses,  iii,  331 

Stowell,  Sir  J.,  iii.  37 

Strada  del  Corso,  i.  168,  170 

Strada,  Faraianus,  i.  132  ;  notice  of,  404 

Strada  Nova,  at  Genoa,  i.  87 

Strada  Pontificia,  i.  168 

Strada  Romana,  at  Sienna,  i.  97 

Strade,  Count  de  la,  liberal  conduct  of, 
i.  275,  277 

Stradling,  Sir  William,  i.  20 

 -,  Dr.,  ii.  376 

Strafi'ord,  Thomas  Wentworth,  Earl  of, 

i.  254  ;  his  trial  and  execution,  15; 
alluded  to,  iv.  95,  108  n,  121,  329  n 

•  ,  Lord,  son  of  the  preceding,  i. 

266,  267,  409 
Strangeways,  Sir  John,  supports  Chas.  I., 

iv.  101 

Straw,  for  brick-making,  ii.  146 
Strawberry  Hill,  painting  at,  i.  353  n 
Streeter,  Robert,  paintings  by,  i.  380  ; 

ii.  55,  79,  134,  169  ;  tormented  with 
the  stone,  94  ;  notice  of,  382 

Streets,  &c.,  of  London,  commission  for 

regulating,  &c.,  i.  363,  365,  374 
Strickland,  Sir  Thomas,  ii.  62,  383 

 ,  Mr.  Walter,  iii.  38  ;  iv.  333 

Stringfellow,  Mr.,  minister  of  Trinity 

Chapel,  ii.  315,  327,  332,  337 
Strood,  Sir  Nicholas,  i.  382 
Stroode,  Col.  Lieutenant  of  Dover  Castle, 
i.  388 

Stuart,  Lady  Catherine,  ii.  91  n 
 ,  Mrs,  Frances,  the  celebrated 

beauty,  ii.  91  n 
 ,  James,  Regent  of  Scotland,  iii. 

380 

Stubbe,  Henry,  hostile  to  Royal  Society, 

iii.  204 
Sturbridge  Fair,  i.  304 
Subterranean  rivers,  i.  240 
Suburbs  of  Paris,  i.  45 

Suckling,  Sir  John,  proceedings  against, 

iv.  51 


Sudarium  of  St.  Veronica,  i.  122,  175 
Suffolk,  Thomas  Howard,  Earl  of,  i. 

305 

 ,  Countess  of  (1674),  ii.  94 

Suffolk  House,  near  Charing  Cross,  i. 

305,  328,  412 
Suidas,  antient  MS.  of,  ii.  352 
Sulphur,  manufactory  of,  i.  157 
Sun,  eclipse  of  (1652),  i.  278  ;  (1699), 

transit  of  Mercury  before,  ii.  354  ; 

1664,  i.  384 
Sunderland,  Earl  of,  his  widow  (1652), 

i.  282 

 ,    Lord,    Ambassador  to 

Spain  (1671),  ii.  62  ;  and  France 
(1672),  79  ;  his  seat  at  Althorp,  100 ; 
Vorsterman's  view  of  it,  118  ;  Secre- 
tary of  State,  135  ;  iii.  250  ;  his  con- 
duct respecting  Lord  Ossory,  ii.  143  ; 
sunk  by  gamins:,  156  ;  President  of 
the  Council,  245,  250  ;  Commissioner 
for  Ecclesiastical  affairs,  256  ;  Knight 
of  the  Garter,  266  ;  marriage  of  his 
daughter,  270  ;  the  seals  taken  away 
from,  282  ;  meditates  flight,  285, 286; 
his  return  from  Holland,  312  ;  his 
library,  334  ;  entertains  William  IIL, 
338  ;  obnoxious  to  the  people,  ib ; 
alluded  to,  i.  314  ;  ii.  176,  203,  232, 
350,  376 

 ■   (Ls^dy    Anne  Spencer), 

Countess  of,  ii.  63,  79,  104,  105,  127, 
1 35, 1  36, 1 42  ;  (match  for  her  son  pro- 
posed by,  156),  183,  203,  220,  258, 
260,282,  300,  312,  342;  letters  to  Mr. 
Evelyn,  iii.  250—253  ;  letters  of  Mr. 
Evelyn  to,  inclosing  a  catalogue  of 
religious  books,  iii.  284  ;  on  Virtue  in 
Youth,  290  ;  on  the  death  of  her 
daughter,  315  ;  on  his  own  publica- 
tions, 317 

Superstition,  instances  of,  iv.  62,  102, 
312  notes 

Superstitious  rites  prohibited,  iv.  65  n 
Suppei',   Paschal,  represented  in  wax- 
work, ii.  73;  of  Leonardo  da  Vinci, 
i.  226 

Surrey,  address  to  the  Parliament(l  648), 

i.  246  ;  iii.  18  ;  to  the  King  (1681),  ii. 

157  ;  (1697),  348 
Sussex,  separate  Sheriff  given  to,  i.  2  ; 

address  to  the  King  (1660),  338 
Sussex,  Thomas  Sackville,  Earl  of,  iv. 

143,  157 

 Thomas    RatclifFe,     Earl  of 

(temp.  Q,.  Eliz.),  i.  316 
 ,  James  Saville,  Earl  of,  i.  347 


438 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Sussex,  Countess  of,  ii.  94  n  ;  daughtei' 

of  Charles  II.,  108,  162 
Sutton,  Sir  Edward,  ii.  3G 
Sutton  in  Shore,  Mr,  Hussey's  house, 

ii.  52,  158. 
Swallowfield,  Berkshire,  ii.240;  iii.  281 
Swann,  Sir  William,  iv.  216 

 ,  Lady,  iv.  218 

Swart,  Capt.,  in  navy  of  Charles  II., 

iv.  272 

Swearinn;,  declaration  against  set  forth, 
ii.  358 

Sweate,  Dr.,  Dean  of  the  Arches,  i.  376 
Sweden,  Cecilia,  Princess  of,  iii.  380 
Swiss  Guards  of  France,  i.  268 
Switzerland,  travelling  in,  i.  232 — 242  ; 
vexatious  adventure  in,  234  ;  snow  in 
the  mountains  of,  235  ;  fertility  of, 
ib ;  the  Rhone  and  Rhine,  235,  238, 
242,  243  ;  Chamois  goats,  236  ;  Mar- 
tigni,  237  ;  persons,  manners,  and 
language  of  the  Swiss,  236—243  ;  St. 
Maurice,  237  ;  Lake  of  Geneva,  238 
— 242  ;  sports  of  the  Campus  Mar- 
tins, 241 
Sydenham,  wells  at,  ii.  1 02 
"  Sylva,  or  Discourse  of  Forest  Trees," 
by  Mr.  Evelyn,  i.  369,  370,  378  ;  2d 
edition,  ii.  44  ;  3d  edition,  392  ;  other 
editions,  392,  395  ;  allusions  to  the 
work,  iii.  226,  317  ;  thanked  for  it 
by  Charles  II,,  i.  384  ;  referred  to, 
ii.  26 

Sylvius,  Sir  Gabriel,  ii.  20,  1 17, 175 ;  his 

mission  to  Denmark,  224 
Synagogue  at  Amsterdam,  i.  22.  See  Jews. 

Taafe,  Theobald,  2d  Viscount,  iv,  253 
Taberna  Meritoria  of  the  Romans,  i.  135 
Tacco,  Peitro,  statue  by,  i.  95 
*' TaxuTrAota,  Uepi."  by  Isaac  Vossius.  iii. 
278 

Talbot,  Sir  Gilbert,  Master  of  the  Jewel- 
house,  i.  367  ;  alluded  to,  ii.  79  ;  iii. 
240,  243 

.  ,  Sherrington  (son  of  Sir  John), 

killed  in  a  duel,  iii.  226 

Tangiers  given  to  the  English  (1661), 
i.  358;  expedition  to,  ii.  143 

Tapestry  at  Hampton  Court,  i.  364  ;  at 
Duchess  of  Portsmoutli's,  187 

Targoni,  altar  by,  i.  127 

Tarare,  notice  of,  i.  77 

Tarente,  Henry  Charles  de  la  Tremouille, 
Px'ince  of,  iv.  205  and  n 

 ,  Emilia,  of  Hesse  Cassel,  Prin- 
cess of,  iv.  205  and  n  ;  portrait,  210 


Tatham,  John,  pageants  by,  i.  357  n, 
367  n,  370  n,  385  n 

Taunton,  siege  of,  iv.  147  n 

Tax  money  from  Scotland,  robbery  of 
(1692),  ii.  322 

Taxes  during  the  Usurpation,  i.  310 

Taxus,  or  Deadly  Yew,  i,  185 

Taylor,  Bp.  Jeremy,  Mr.  Evelyn's 
spiritual  adviser,  i.  307  ;  his  work  on 
"Original  Sin,"  309,  313  ;  iii.  74; 
disputes  with  M.  le  Franc,  i.  313 ;  his 
"  Cases  of  Conscience,"  319  ;  iii.  71  ; 
sermons  of,  i.  287,  307,  326  ;  vai'ious 
allusions  to,  313,  320,  326  ;  ii.  139  ; 
iii.  65,  69,  70,  86  ;  letters  of  Mr.  Eve- 
lyn to,  on  his  imprisonment  (1654), 
iii.  65  ;  on  the  depressed  state  of  the 
Church  (1655),  66  ;  on  retiring  from 
ttie  world, and  his  "Lucretius"  (1656), 
72  ;  to  the  lieutenant  of  the  Tower  on 
his  behalf,  86  ;  with  a  present  (1657), 
93;  to  christen  his  son,  96  ;  letters 
of,  to  Mr.  Evelyn,  commending  his 
piety  (165.5),  78  ;  on  the  state  of  the 
Church  &c.,  69  ;  thanking  him  for 
his  hospitaUty  (1656),  71  ;  on  his  own 
circumstances,  74  ;  on  his  literary 
works,  76  ;  on  the  loss  of  his  chil- 
dren (1657),  91  ;  thanking  him  for 
a  present,  94  ;  on  christeniug  his  son, 
97;  on  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  98; 
on  the  loss  of  his  son  Richard  (1658), 
102;  on  the  offer  of  a  lectureship, 
104  ;  on  literary  subjects,  109,  112  ; 
on  essence  of  Roses  (1656),  111  ;  on 
the  state  of  the  Church,  126;  on  Mr. 
Evelyn's  writings  (1660),  127;  on  the 
same  (1661),  134 

Taylor,  Capt.,  case  against  Lord  Mor- 
daunt,  ii.  19 

 ,  Charles  II. 's  agent  in  Germany, 

Sir  Edward  Hyde's  opinion  of,  iv.. 
247 

Teignmoutli,  French  troops  landed  at 

(1690),  ii.  309 
Tempesta,  Antonio,  work  of,  i.  125 
Temple,  Sir  Purbeck,  ii.  336  ;  death  of, 

337,  358 

 ,  Lady  Purbeck,  trial  with  her 

nephevv,  Mr.  Temple,  ii.  343;  her  fu- 
neral, and  property,  358 

 ,   Sir    William,    his   house  at 

Sheeue,  ii.  122,  272  ;  alluded  to, 
130,  161 

 .,  Mrs.,  ii,  272 

Temple  Bar,  human  qu  irters  set  up  at, 
ii.  341 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


480 


Temple,  Inner,  revels  at,  ii.  348 
Temple,  Middle,  revels  at,  i.  38  ;  ii,  32 
Temple,  Marais,  'Ju.  at  Paris,  i.  49 
Tendring,  John,  works  of,  iii.  109 
"  Teneriffe,  Peak  of,  relation  of  the,"  by 

Mr.  Evelyn,  i.  346 
Tenison,  Dr.  Thomas,  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  Vicar  of  St.  Martin's,  ii. 
150;  character  of,  174,  314,315; 
library  founded  by,  194,  227,  315;  iii. 
307  ;  sermons  of,  ii.  196,  211,  220, 
251,  264,  280,  314,  324  ;  chapel  in 
Conduit-street  opened  by,  314  ;  Bp. 
of  Lincoln,  318  ;  a  Trustee  for  the 
Boyle  Lecture,  318,  327,  374  ;  on  the 
author  of  "  Whole  Duty  of  Man,"  321 ; 
tabernacle  near  Golden-square  set  up 
by,  323  ;  Abp.  of  Canterbury,  333  ;  a 
Commissioner  for  Greenwich  Hospital, 
335  ;  visit  of  Mr.  Evelyn  at  Lambeth, 
336;  subscription  to  Greenwich  Hospi- 
tal, 344  n;  opinion  respecting  proceed- 
ings against  Bp.  Watson,  345  ;  cor- 
respondence with  Mr.  Evelyn,  iii.  323, 
325,  339,  340,  343,  345,  376,  377, 
399  ;  alluded  to,  ii.  195,  219,  264, 
277,  318,  324,  332,  338,  352 
Terella,  notice  of,  i.  308 
"Terra,"  by  Mr.  Evelyn  (1675),  ii.  98, 
392,  396 

Terracina,  formerly  Anxur,  i.  147 

Terra  di  Lavoro,  i.  149 

Terrasso,  Marco,  lapidary,  i.  219 

Terringham,  Colonel,  iv.  153 

Test,  sacramental,  ii.  83,  84  ;  doubts  re- 
specting taking  it,  127,  244  ;  remarks 
on  Test,  296,  298 

Testaceus,  Mons.,  at  Rome,  i.  164 

Testament,  New,  in  vulgar  Latin,  MS., 
ii.  344 

Teviot,  Earl  of,  i.  378 

Teviotdale,  Lord,  a  Scotch  nobleman,  i. 
378  ;  ii.  135 

Terry II,  Mr.,  Mrs.  Evelyn's  letters  to, 
iv.  14,  15.    See  «  Tyi-ill  " 

Thames,  river,  frozen  over  (1648),  i. 
248  ;  triumphant  pageant  on  the, 
367  ;  fog  on  the,  ii.  53  ;  design  of 
wharfing  from  the  Temple  to  the 
Tower,  20,  21  ;  frozen  over,  i.  372  ; 
ii.  333  ;  amusements  upon  it,  192 — 
194 

Thanet,  Countess  of,  iii.  347 
Thea  Root,  ii.  306 

Theatre,  curious  model  of  one,  i.  55  ; 
Marcellus  at  Rome,  107  ;  at  Vi- 
cenza,  219 


Theatres  recommended  to  be  closed 
during  Lent,  iii.  151.    See  Plays 

Theobaldi,  building  by,  i.  225 

Theobald's  Palace  in  Hertfordshire,  iv. 
131,  1.32 

Thetford,  town  of,  ii.  Ill 

Thicknesse,  James,  of  Baliol  College, 

i.  9;  travels  with  him,  40,  75,  214 
Thistlethwait,  Dr.,  Sermon  of,  ii.  79 
Thistleworth,    seat   of    Sir  Clepesby 

Crewe,  i.  246 

Thomas,  Dr.  William,  Bp.  of  Wor- 
cester, ii.  295 

Thomond,  Lord,  house  at  Newmarket, 

ii.  48 

Thomson,  ,  his  report  of  a  battle 

in  Scotland,  iv.  21 1 
Thornhill,  Mr.,  i.  310 
Thorp,  Baron  (1649),  iv.  284  n 
Thorpe,  seat  of  the  regicide  St.  John, 

i.  302 

Thou,  President  Fran9ois  Augusta  de, 

i.  257 
Thrisco,  Mr.,  i.  334 

Throckmorton,  Sir  William,  letters  of, 

iii.  380 

Thuilieries,  Palace,  i.  50  ;  gardens,  51 
Thurland,  Sir  Edward,  ii.  33,  100  ;  iii 
74,  75,  91  ;  a  Trustee  for  the  sale  Oi 
Albury,  63  n  ;  letters  of  Mr.  Evelyn 
to,  63  ;  his    Treatise  on  Prayer,"  87; 
about  a  travelling   tutor  for  Lord 
Percy,  106 
Thurnheuser,  a  German  chemist,  i.  94 
Thynne,  Lady  Isabella,  painting  of,  i. 
249 

 ,  Mr.,  his  marriage,  ii.  160,  286  ; 

mui'der  of,  165  ;  his  monument  in 

Westminster  Abbey,  ih 
 ,  Mr.,  ii.  245 

"  Thrysander,"  a  Dramatic  piece,  by 
Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  394 

Tickenhall,  notice  of,  iv.  140  and  n 

Tilbury  Fort,  built,  ii.  71 

Tillotson,  Dr.  John,  ii.  35  ;  sermons  of 
(on  the  Papists,  126,  259),  220,  293; 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  312,  313; 
his  "  Rule  of  Faith,"  iii.  192;  allusions 
to,  ii.  41,  174,  316 

Tintoretto,  II  (Giacomo  Robusti),  paint- 
ings by,  i.  202,  210.  282  ;  ii.  54,  341 

Tippin,  Mr.,  Sermon  by,  ii.  325 

Tirel,  Colonel,  iv.  336 

Tithe  Ale,  i.  302 

«  Titles  of  Honour,"  by  Selden,  i.  309 
Titian    (Tiziano   Vecelli   da  Cadore), 
paintings  by,  i.  34,  56,  93,  133,  163, 


440 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


188,  189,  198,209,  249,  261,  328  ;  ii.  i 

128,  U7,  203,  341  ;  tomb  of,  i.  210  | 
Titus,  triumphal  arch  of,  i.  115  ;  baths 

and  statues  fx'om,  129  ;  drawings  of 

his  Amphitheatre,  259 
Titus,  Col.  Silas,  author  of  «  Killing  no 

Murder,"  ii.  38,  59,  151,  276,  382 
Tiviot,  Lord,  a  Commissioner  of  Privy 

Seal,  ii.  247;  iii.  286 
Tivoli,  i.  180 

Todd,  Rev.  H.  J.,  his  edition  of  «  Milton," 

i.  310;  ii.  73 
Toledo,  Peter  di,  i.  156  ;  Palace  of, 

158 

Toleration,  universal  declaration  of 
(1672),  ii.  71 

Tombs,  Mr.,  his  garden,  i.  288 

Tomson,  M.,  a  merchant  of  Genoa,  i.  84 

 ,  Jesuit,  i.  379 

Tong,  Dr.  Ezrael,  Popish  conspiracy 
discovered  by  him,  ii.  1 25  ;  his  "  Mo- 
dern Practice  of  the  Jesuits,"  i.  388 

Tonnage  and  Poundage,  Act  of,  i.  339  ; 
iv.  51  n,  74  ;  Navy  provided  for  by, 
61  and  u  ;  allowance  to  merchants  by, 
supplied  by  Charles  L,  63,  64  ;  neces- 
sity of,  for  the  exigencies  of  the  King, 
88 

Tooke,  Benjamin,  letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn 

to,  iii.  342  ;  admitted  to  a  share  in  the 

"  Sylva,"  366 
Torrington,  Earl  of,  imprisonment  of 

(1690),  ii.  308  ;  account  of,  388 
Torre  d'Asinello,  account  of,  i.   192  ; 

measure  of  the,  194 
Torre  della  Pallada,  i.  223 
Torso  of  Amphion  and  Dirce,  i.  102 
Torture,  the  punishment  of,  i.  264 
Totes,  in  Normandy,  notice  of,  i.  60 
Tournon,  Castle  at,  i.  79 
Tours,  the  city  of,  i.  71—74,  299 
Tower  of  London,  garrison  re-inforced 

(1641),  iv.  51  ;  during  the  great  fire, 

ii.  13 

Towers,  Dr.  John,  Bishop  of  Peter- 
borough, iv.  99  n 

Townsend,  Marquis,  seat  of,  i.  39  n ; 
created  earl,  3i7 

Trade,  Council  of,  iii.  355.  /See  Plantations 

Tradescant,  John,  Museum  and  family 
portraits  of,  i.  321,  414  ;  ii.  120 

Trained  Bands  keep  guard  over  London, 
iv.  92  ;  guard  the  Parliament,  98 

Trajan,  Column  of,  at  Rome,  i.  172; 

iii.  262 

Transubstautiation,  Mr.  Evelyn  on,  iii. 
231  i 


I  Travels  in  France  and  Italy,  hints  for, 
I     iii.  83,  107 
Travers,  Mr.,  King's  surveyor,  ii.  325 
Treacle,  its  manufacture,  i.  333 
Trean,  merchant,  his  pictures,  i.  248 
Ti'eaty  of  Oxford,  Charles  I.  Memorial 

for  the,  iv.  140 
Treby,  Sir  George  (Lord  Chief  Justice), 
ii.  151,  187,  386  ;    subscription  to 
Greenwich  Hospital,  344  n  ;  his  death, 
363 

Tredagh,  prepares  against  Irish  Rebels 

(1641),  iv.  121 
Tree  in  the  centre  of  France,  i.  75 
Trees,  their  vegetative  motion,  iii.  129 
Trelawney,  Sir  John,  Bp.  of  Bristol, 
ii.  274  ;  sent  to  the  Tower,  275  ; 
acquitted,  276 
Tremellius,  Emanuel,   Letters  of,  iii. 
380 

Trenchard,  Sir  John,  Secretary  of  State, 
ii.  324 

 ,  Mr.,  apprehenle  l  for  a  plot, 

ii.  178  ;  enlarged,  190 
Tresham,  Judge,  iii.  17 
Ti'esoro  di  San  Marco,  i.  201 
Tres  Tabernse,  i.  146 
Trevor,  Sir  John,  ii.  59  ;  subscription  to 

Greenwich  Hospital,  345 
Trie  Fontana,  Church  of,  i.  143 
"  Tribuna,"  a  splendid  cabinet  so  called, 

i.  93 

Trinita  del  Monte,  at  Rome,  i.  1 7  0 
Trinitv,  Platouists  MSS.  concerning  the, 

ii.  337 

Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  i.  303 
Trinity  Chapel,  Conduit-street,  ii.  314  ; 

first  sermon  in,  ih 
Trinity  House,  incoi'porated,  i.  361  ; 
great  dinner  at,  391  ;  Corporation  of, 
re-assembles  after  the  plague,  ii.  6  ; 
their  alms-houses,  58  ;  election,  82, 
83  ;  festival  of  the,  60  ;  account  of  a 
meeting  (1685),  230 
Triplet,  Dr.  Thomas,  i.  314  and  n;  letter 

to  Mr.  Evelyn,  iii.  75,  76  n 
Triumphal  Arches  in  Rome,  i.  131 
Trollop,  Mrs.,  marriage  of,  ii.  148 
Trout,  excellent  in  the  Rhone,  i.  238  ;  at 

Huugerford,  290  ;  spearing  of,  295 
Truffles,  earth-nuts,  i.  78 
Trumball,  Sir  William,   subscribes  to 

Greenwich  Hospital,  ii.  344 
Tudor,  Mr.,  Quinquina  introduced  by, 

ii.  332 
Tufton,  Sir  John,  i.  308 
j  Tuke,  Sir  Brian,  porti-ait,  ii.  122 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


441 


Tuke,  Sir  Charles  (Son  of  Sir  Samuel), 

birtli,  ii.  62  ;  death  and  character  of, 

309  ;  ill.  103 
 ,  George,  marriage,  i.  314  ;  alluded 

to,  320,  331  ;  play  by,  372,  373  ; 

letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to,  iii.  108 
 ,  Col.  Sir  Samuel,  notice  of,  ii.  381  ; 

his  proselytism   to   the   Church  of 

Rome,  iii.  108  ;  at  Paris,  i.  253  ; 

harangue  on  behalf  of  Papists,  338  ; 

sent  to  break  the  marriage  of  the 

Duke  to  the  Queen  Mother,  341  ; 

sent  to  Paris  on  the  death  of  Card. 

Mazarine,  346  ;  his  marriage,  379  ; 

ii.  34  ;  christening  of  his  son,  62  ; 

speech  on  behalf  of  the  Papists,  81  ; 

letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn  to,  on  the  fire  of 

London,  and  on  the  death  of  his  wife, 

16  n,  iii.  186  ;  from  Mrs.  Evelyn  on 

a  promised  visit,  iv.  11;  his  second 

marriage,    ib ;   his  death,  23,   24  ; 

aUuded  to,  i.  336,  378  ;  ii.  65 
 ,  Lady,  ii.  82,  90,  195,  217,  220, 

letters  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Evelyn  to,  iii. 

333  ;  iv.  23 
Tulliola,  daughter  of  Cicero,  i.  147 
Tully,  Dr.  George,  suspended,  ii.  255, 

388 

"  Tully's  Offices,"  an  early  printed  book, 
ii.  352 

Tunbridge  Free-school,  i.  393 
Tunbridge  Wells,  beauties  of,  i.  279, 
281,  354 

Turburville,    evidence    against  Vise. 

Stafford,  ii.  151 
Tureune,  Marshal,  iv.  265  n,  294  n 
Tui'gu,  Marshal,  iv.  280 
Turk  christened  at  Rome,  i.  172 
Turk,  a  rope-dancer  so  called,  i.  321 
Turkey  Fleet  destroyed,  ii  327 
Turks,  costly  equipments  of,  ii.  202 
Turner,  Dr.  Francis,  Bp.  of  Ely  ;  Dean 
of  Windsor,  ii.  175'  ;  sermon  by  when 
Bp.  of  Rochester,  195  ;  other  ser- 
mons,  200,    250  ;    petition  against 
Declaration  of  Liberty  of  Conscience, 
273  ;  sent  to  the  Tower,  275  ;  tried 
and   acquitted,  276  ;   at  a  meeting 
respecting    the    Succession,     286  ; 
deprived,  311,  312;  at  Bp.  White's 
funeral,  349;  alluded  to,  195,  244 

 ,  Dr.  Thomas  (brother  of  Bp.  of 

Ely),  sermon  by,  ii.  246 

 ,  Sir  Edward,  Lord  Chief  Baron, 

ii.  93,  384 

 ,  Mr.,  a  friend  of  Mr.  Sliugsby, 

ii.  47 


Turnham  Green,  Sir  John  Chardine's 

house  at,  ii.  374 
Turquoise,  a  remarkable  one,  i.  94,  188 
Tuscany,   Prince   of,    visit  to  Royal 

Society,  ii.  39 
 ,  Duke  of,  his  singular  trade, 

ii.  93 

Twickenham  Park,  Lord  Berkeley's 
seat,  ii.  105 

Twisden,  Sir  Roger,  i.  398  ;  letter  of 
Charles  II.  to  Mrs.  Twisden,  iv.  196 

Twyford,  council  at,  iii,  384 

Typography,  invention  of,  i.  27 

"Tyrannus,' or  the  Mode"  (1661),  by 
Mr.  Evelyn,  i.  359  ;  ii.  392,  395  ; 
anecdote  relative  to,  ii.  17 

Tyrconuell,  Earl  of,  powers  given  to,  in 
Ix'eland,  ii.  254,  258  ;  appointed  Lord 
Lieutenant,  ii.  261  ;  Ireland  endan- 
gered by  his  armv,  291,  294  ;  alluded 
to,  308,  310  ;  iii.  281,  285 

Tyrill,  Sir  Timothy,  and  Mr.,  marriage  of, 
i,  275  ;  iii.  308  ;  house  at  Shotover,  i. 
383  ;  ii.  99 ;  Mrs.  Evelyn's  letters  to, 
iv.  14,  15 

Tyson,  Dr.  Edward,  anatomist,  iii.  184, 
264  and  n 

Vag.4,  Perino  del,  paintings  by,  i.  59, 

259  ;  his  burial-place,  170 
Valence,  city  of,  i.  79 
Valenciennes, proceedings  against  (1656), 

iv.  315 

Valois,  Marguerite  of,  novels  of,  iii.  245 
Vamber,  near  Paris,  i.  256 
Vanbeck,  Barbara,  a  hairy  woman,  i. 
321 

Vanbrugh,  John,  ii.  336,  389 
Vanderdall,  painting  by,  i.  22 
Vauderborcht's  portrait  of  Mr.  Evelyn, 

i.  15  ;  notice  of,  400 
Vander  Douse,  Mr.,  ii.  175  ;  letter  of 

Mr.  Evelyn  to,  iii.  1  37 
Vandervoort,  Mr.,  of  Venice,  his  books, 

i.  217 

Vandyke,  Sir  Anthony,  paintings  by, 
i.  248,  288,  328  ;  ii.  37  n,  128,  203, 
272,  325,  341  ;  full  length  portrait  of 
himself,  ii.  1 09 

Vane,  Sir  Harry,  Secretary  to  Charles 
I.,  iv.  92  ;  his  confidence  in,  62  n  ; 
confined  in  Carisbrook  Castle,  i.  317, 
413  ;  referred  to,  as  Mr.  Treasurer, 
iv.  55,  67—70,  80,  87,  89,  97—104, 
107,  111—113,  116 

 ,  S'r  Henry,  jun.,  a  Privy  Couti- 

sellor,  ii.  276  ;  letters  to,  iv.  172 — 


442  GENERAL 

174;  alluded  to,  ii.  32G  ;  iv.  100, 
185  n 

Vane,  Sir  Walter,  iii.  240 

Vauui,  Francisco,  picture  by,  i.  164 

 ,  Curtius,  i.  127 

Van  Tromp,  Admiral  Martin  Happertz, 

ii.  20  ;  iv.  27G  n 
Varennes,  Mons.  de,  intendant  Marquis 

de  Castleuau,  iv.  292,  293 
Vapari,  Giorgio,  paintings  by,  i.  168, 

188 

Vatican,  ceremony  of  conferring  Cardi- 
nal's hat,  i.  118  ;  description  of,  137 
— 142  ;  library,  140  ;  ceremonies  at, 
175 

Vaubecour,  Mons.,  iv.  349 

Vaucluse,  notice  of,  i.  89 

Vaudois,  persecuted  Protestants  of  the, 

i.  308  ;   ii.  302  ;   restored  to  their 

country,  307  ;  received  by  German 

Princes,  351 
Vaug;han,  John,  Lord  Chief  Justice,  ii. 

28  ;  portrait  of,  iii.  301 
Vauxhall,  Sir  Samuel  Morland's  house 

at,  ii.  26  n  ;  159  n 
Vavasor,  Mons.,  iv.  142 
Ubaldino,  letters  of,  iii.  380 
Udine',  Da'  (Giovanni  ISanni),  painting 

by,  i.  137  n 
Veau,  M.  de,  his  academy,  i.  66 
Veins,  Arteries,  and  Nerves,  tables  of, 

i.  217,  250  ;  lent  to  College  of  Phy- 
sicians, 283  ;  presented  to  the  Royal 
Society,  i.  217  ;  ii.  31,  367 

Velletri,  town  of,  i.  146 

Vendome,  Duke  of,  a  brother  of,  ii.  176; 
iv.  256,280 

Venetian  Ambassador,  Parliament  af- 
front to,  iv.  127  ;  entry  into  London 

ii.  341 

Venice,  description  of,  i.  195—204,208— 
210,  212,  213—218;  the  bagnios,  196; 
origin  of  Venice,  ih;  Gondolas,  Rialto, 
197  ;  Fondigo  de  Todeschi  ;  Merce- 
ria,  198  ;  Piazza  of  St.  Mark  and 
Clock  over  the  Arch,  ib  ;  Church  of 
St.  Mark,  199  ;  Reliquary,  200  ; 
Exchange,  Senate-hall,  &c.,  201  ; 
Mint,  202  ;  Tower  of  St.  Mark,  ib  ; 
citizens,  &c.,  203,  204  ;  the  Opera, 
204  ;  the  Arsenal,  207  ;  execution, 
208  ;  churches,  209  ;  islands,  210  ; 
glass  manufactory,  212  ;  Sign.  Ru- 
gini's  collection,  214  ;  the  Carnival, 
216  ;  Operas,  ib  ;  the  Ghetta,  217  ; 
lapidaries,  218  ;  policy  of  Venice  with 
respect  to  Vincenza,  220  ;  gondola 


INDEX  TO 

sent  from,  to   Charles  II.,  i.  363  ; 

consulage  of,  ii.  80 
Venice,  States  of,  Envoy  of  Charles  II. 

ill-treated  by,  iv.  249,  250 
Venipont,  John,  Campanile  built  by, 

i.  89 

Venn,  Capt.,  suppresses  tumults  (1641), 
iv.  76  n 

Venus,  statues  of,  i.  134,  169,  189 
Venus  of  Corregio,  ii.  326 
Venuti,  Marcello,  paintings  by,  i.  172 
Vere,  Sir  Horace,  and  Fi'aucis,  portraits 

of,  iii.  301 
Verneuille,  Henri,  Duke  of,  i.  395 
Verney,  Mr.,  a  cousin  of  Mr.  Evelyn, 

ii.  198 

 ,  Sir  Edward,  killed  at  battle  of 

Edgehill,  iv.  104 

Vernon,  i\lr..  Secretary  of  state,  ii.  360 

Verona,  description  of,  i.  221,  222;  am- 
phitheatre, 221  ;  remains  of  former 
magnificence,  222  ;  Count  Giusti's 
villa,  ib  ;  Scaliger  s  praises  of,  ib 

Veronica,  St.,  altar,  i.  122  ;  her  suda- 
rium,  122,  175 

Verrio,  Signor  Antonio,  ii.  135;  liis  gar- 
den, 133  ;  fresco  painting  by,  at  Eus- 
ton,  65  ;  at  Windsor,  119,  133,  175, 
231  ;  at  Cashiobury,  140  ;  Chiswick, 
175  ;  Montague  House,  188  ;  Ashted, 
196;  Whitehall,  260  ;  character  of 
his  paintings,  176  ;  settle  at  St. 
James's,  257 

Verrochio,  Andrea,  statue  by,  i.  209 

Verulam,  Fraucis  Bacon,  Lord,  i.  380  ; 

iii.  348 

Vespasian,  Titus   Flavins,   Temple  of 

Peace  built  by,  i.  103  ;  amphitheatre 

of,  116  ;  sepulchre,  165 
Veslingius,  Dr.  John,  of  Padua,  i.  211, 

215,  21  7  ;  ii.  31  ;  account  of,  i.  404 
Vesuvius,  Mount,  i,  153;  eruption  of 

(1696),  ii.  340  ;  views  of,  etched  by 

Mr.  Evelyn,  396 
Via  Felix,  at  Rome,  i.  112 
Via  Pia,  at  Rome,  i.  112 

Vicfort,  ,  iv.  224 

Vienna,  siege  of,  raised  (1683),  ii.  186 

Vienne,  account  of,  i.  78 

Vignola,  Giovanni  Barozzio  de  architect, 

i.  107,  184  ;  his  works,  iii.  361 
Villa- Franca,  notice  of,  i.  82 
Ville-fi'ow,  in  Flanders,  i.  34 
Villiers,  Lord  Francis,  slain,  i.  247 
Vincennes,  Bois  de,  i.  50 
Vincent,  Sir  Fi*ancis,  ii.  313 
Vincenza,  account  of,  i.  219;  Hall  of 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


443 


Justice,  Theatre,  ib  ;  Piazza,  Palaces, 
220  ;  Count  Ulmarini's  garden,  ib 
Vinci,  Lionardo  da,  paintings  by,  i.  56, 
59,  93,  193,  225,  328  ;  ii.  109;  his 
Ccena  Domini  at  Milan,  i.  226  ;  his 
death,  ib 

Viner,  Sir  George,  his  carving  by  Gib- 
bon, ii.  57 

 ,  Sir  Robert,  banker,  ii.  129,  385 

Vineyards,  various  notices  of,  i.  42,  59, 

73,  149,  223 
Viol  d'Araore,  a  musical  instrument,  ii. 

137 

"  Virgilius  Evangelizaus,"  by  Alexander 

Rosse,  i.  284 
Virgilius  jNIai-o,  Publ.,  ancient  MSS.  of, 

i.  140  ;  his  tomb,  154 
"Virgin  Queen,"  by  Dryden,  ii.  21,379 
Virginian  rattle-snake,  i.  322 
Visse,  Mons.,  concert  at  his  house,  i.  262 
Vitellesco,  Hippolito,  his  statues,  i.  132 
Viterbo,  account  of,  i.  100,  184 
Vitruvius,  statue  of,  i.  222 
Ulefield  Oxenstiern,  Count,  Cornelius, 

iii.  146 

Ulmarini,  Count,  his  garden,  i.  220 
Union,  a  fine  sort  of  pearl,  i.  169 
University  of  Leyden,  i.  26  ;  of  Paris, 

45 ;  of  Orleans,  68  ;  of  Bourges,  77 ; 

of  Valence,  79;  of  Aix,  80;  of  Sienna, 

96;  of  Padua,  211  ;  of  Oxford,  visits 

to,  290—293 
University  College, Oxon,repairof,ii.  100 
Upcof-,  Mr.,  his  literary  assistance,  i. 

Advertisement,  ix.  x.  403 
Uphill,  Mrs.,  actress,  ii.  18,  379 
Voiture,  Vincent,  his  merit  as  a  Writer, 

iv.  10 

"  Volpone,"  a  play,  i.  369 
Volterra,  F.,  church  built  by,  i,  170 
Volterra,  Di  (Daniele  Ricciabelli),  paint- 
ings by,  i.  167,  170 
Volumes,  ancient  form  of  making,  i.  140 
Vossius,  Isaac,  ii.  81,  103,  lOo,  383  ; 
Justin  corrected  by,  iii.  190  ;  notes 
and  treatises  of,  alluded  to,  278  ;  his 
library,  306,  308 
Vosterman,  Lucas,  painting  by,  ii.  113 
Upman,  Mr.,  ii.  107 
Upnor  Custle,  fortified,  ii.  24,  77 
Uppingham,  Rutland,  notice  of,  i,  293 
Vrats,  Col.,  assassin  of  Mr.  Thynn,  exe- 
cuted, ii.  1  65 
Urban  VIII.,  Pope,  public  works  of,  i. 
122,  138,  140,  169  ;  his  monument, 
124  ;  statue,  146 
Ursino,  Fulvio,  museum  of.  i.  102 


Ushant,  Isle  of,  enterprise  against,  iv.  272 
Usher,  Dr.  James,  Archbishop  of  Ar- 
magh, ii.  69  ;  iv.  83  ;  sermons  of,  ii. 
250,  251,  277  ;  ii.  159  ;  conversation 
with  Mr.  Evelyn,  i.  308  ;  his  Annals, 
iii.  164  ;  library,  308  ;  his  daughter, 

i.  383  :  prophecy  of,  alluded  to,  ii. 
244  ;  Life  and  Letters,  252  ;  Dr.  Parr 
his  chaplain,  69,  159 

Vulcan,  Court  of,  i.  156  ;  temple  of,  157 
Vulpone,  references  to,  iv,  137,  151,  159 
Uxbridge,  Treaty  of  (1644),  iv.  135  n  ; 
fast  on  occasion  of,  136  and  n  ;  Com- 
mon Prayer  refused  to  be  read  in 
the  Church  of,  ib  ;  Charles  I.'s 
remarks  and  directions  concerning, 
136 — 140  ;  his  memorial  concerning 
Religion  and  the  Militia,  140 

Wade,  Capt.,  court-martial  on,  ii.  370  n 
Waggons  drawn  by  dogs,  i.  36 
Wainsford,  Mr.,  i.  263 
Wake,  Dr.  William  (Archbishop  of  Can- 

terburv),  ii.  365,  388  ;  sermons  of, 

261,  264 

Wakeman,  Sir  George,  his  trial,  ii.  131, 
220 

Waldegrave,  Sir  Henry,  created  a  peer, 

ii.  249 

Waldenses,  destruction  of,  ii.  297 

Waldrond,  Dr.,  ii.  72 

Wales,  James,  Prince  of,  son  of  James 
II.,  birth  of,  ii.  275,  276,279;  James 
II.  calls  council  to  testify  his  birth, 
282 ;  sent  to  Portsmouth  with  treasure, 
285  ;  portrait  of,  319 

Walker,  Sir  Edward,  Garter  King  of 
Arms,  notice  of,  ii.  383  ;  anecdote  of 
Lord  Clifford,  88 ;  alluded  to,  348  n, 
368  ;  iv.  141  u 

 ,  portrait  of  Mr.  Evelyn  by,  i. 

247  ;  alluded  to,  261 

 ,  Dr.  Obadiah,  tutor  to  Mr.  Hill- 
yard's  sons,  i.  249,  273  ;  thanks  Mr. 
Evelyn  for  procuring  Arundelian 
Marbles,  ii.  30;  letter  on  that  subject, 
31  ;  University  College  repaired  by, 
100  ;  Master  of  University  College, 
252  ;  perverted  several  young  gentle- 
men, 253  ;  licence  to  print  popish 
books  refused,  254  ;  Treatise  on  Me- 
dals, 347  n 

 ,   Mr.,  additions  to  medals  in 

Camden,  iii.  354 

 ,  Dr.  (of  Londonderry),  death  of, 

ii.  308  ;  notice  of,  388 

 ,  Rev.  Joshua,  letter,  iii.  382 


444  .  GENERAL 

Walker,  Clement,  History  of  Inde- 
pendency" cited  iv.  136  u 

Wall,  John,  account  of,  i.  46 

Waller,  Edmnnd,  in  Italy  and  France, 
.i.  218,  219,  244,  245,  255  ; 'child  of, 
262,  267  ;  his  return  to  England,  274; 

*  a  commissioner  of  trade,  59  ;  portrait 
of,  iii.'301  ;  alluded  to,  i.  255,  282, 
,    318  ;  iv.  74,  75  n         ,  ' 

 '- — ,Sir  Hai'dress,-his  daughter,  ii.  95 

'  ,  Richard,  of  Groomsbridge,  i. 

281  n  ^. 

 , ,  Mr.,  talents  of,  ii.  .329 

 Mr.,  of  the  Royal  i^ociety,  iii. 

381  ' 

— ■■  ,  Edward,  supports  Charles  I's 

rights,,  iv^  101  •  ■ 
 ,  Sir  William,  l^iis  army,  i.  38  ; 

iv.  135   n,'  136   n';.  pursues  King 

CharleS'I.  from  Oxford,  l41  n 
W^llgrave,  Dr.,  physician,  ii.  94,  195, 

203 

Wailis,  Dr.  John,   mathematician,  i. 

352,  38^,  416  ;  ii-  41 
Walls,  of  Genoa,  i.  87 

Wallops,  ,  iv.  146 

Walnut  tree,  marbling  in  the  wood  of, 

iii.  130 

Walsh,  Peter,  Romish  Priest,  ii.  248 
Walsingham,  Sir  Francis,  portrait  of, 

iii.  297,  301  ;  letters,  380 
Walpole,  Hoi-atio,  Earl  of  Orford,  his 

"  Anecdotes  of  Painting"  i-eferred  to, 

i.  331  ;  ii.  53,  54;  iii.  81 
Walter,  Sir  William,  ii.  157 
Walters,  Mrs.  Lucy,  ii.  108  n,  Sec 

Barlow. 

Walton,  Brian,  Bishop  of  Chester,  his 

"  Biblia  Polyglotta,"  i.  283 
Walton  Heath,  Komau  Antiquities  found 

on,  i.  329  n 
Wanstead  House,  Sir  Josiah  Child's, 

ii.  173 

War,  Prisoners  of,  Treaty  for  exchang- 
ing (1665),  i.  393  ;  expense  of,  ib 

War.    See  Dutch  War 

Warburton,  Capt.  iii.  282,  283 

Warcupp,  Mr.,  iii.  31 

Ward,  Sir  Patience,  subscription  to 
Greenwich  Hospital  ii.  345  n 

 ,  Dr.  Seth,  afterwards  Bishop  of 

Salisbury,  i.  290  ;  ii.  176  ;  account  of, 
i.  410 

 ,  Lord  Chief  Baron,  subscription 

to  Greenwich  Hospital,  ii.  345  n 

 ,  Mrs.,  solicits  an  Order  of  Je- 

suitesses,  i.  183 


INDEX  TO 

* 

Warley  Magna  Essex,  Manor  of,  i.  250, 

310;  iii.  63 
Warner,   \  officiated  at  Touching 

for  the  Evil  (1688),  ii.  284 
 ,  Dr.  John,  Bishop  of  Rochester, 

iii.  65  n  ;  iv.  99  n 
Warr,  Mr.,  iii.  359 
Warren,  Di\,  sermon  of,  ii.  259 
Warrington,"Lord,  deafh  of  (1693),  ii. 
•  327 

Warwick,  Guy,  Earl  of.   Arms,  Grot, 

Chapel,  &c.,  of,  i.  297 
 ,  Charles  Rich,  Earl  of  (1661), 

i.  347 

 ;  Robert  Rich,  Earl  of,  made 

Commander  of  the  Fleet,  iv.  63  n  ; 
protests  against  an  order  of  the  Com- 
mons, 68  n  ;  character  of,  106  n  ; 
referred  to,  242  n 

Warwick,  Sir  Philip,  i.  340,  376—378  ; 

ii.  101  ;  letter  to  Mr.  Evelyn,  iii.  169; 
Mr.  Evelyn's  answer  to,  171  ;  account 
of,  i.  415  ;  iv.  62,  175,  183,  208  notes 

Warwick,  Castle  and  Town  of,  i.  297 
Warwick,  The  Constant,  frigate,  ii.  304  ; 

iii.  44 

Warwickshire,  address  to  Charles  II. 

(1660),  i.  338 
Wase,  Christopher,  account  of,  i.  274  ; 

recommended  by  Mr.  Evelyn,  278  ; 

ii.  38 

Washing  of  head,  &c.,  benefit  from,  iii. 
209 

Water-works,  by   Mr.  Winstanley,  at 

Chelsea,  ii.  343 
Water-works  and  Fountains,  notices  of 

various,  52—63,  86—100,  108—118, 

142—167,  178—181,  297—304 
Watson,  Dr.  Thomas,  Bishop   of  St. 

David's,  suspended,  ii.  345  ;  deprived, 

354 

Watts,  Mr.,  Keeper  of  Apothecaries' 

Gardens,  ii.  230 
Way-wiser,  description  of  that  instru- 
ment, i.  320,414 
Weathercocks,  fixed  on  trees,  ii.  72 

Webb,  ,  his  paintings,  i.  248 

 ,  John,  architect,  i.  357 

 ,  Mr.,  letter  to  Parliament  inter- 
cepted, iv.  115 
Weese-house,  at  Amsterdam,  i.  23 
Welbeck,  Marquis  of  Newcastle's  seat, 
i.  299 

Welsh,  resemblance  of  Breton  language 
to,  ii.  98 

Wenman,   ,   a  Commissioner  at 

Newport,  iv.  185  u 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


445 


Wens,  of  the  inhabitgints  of  the  Alps,  i. 
232 

Wenterton's  work  ort  Aptiorisms,  iii.  95 
Wentvvorth,  Lord  (1649),  i.  253,  275  ; 

iv.  154  n,  207--209,  213,  217,  250  ; 

sketch  of,  iv.  220  ii 

 ,  Lord  (1663),  i.  374 

 ,  Lady  Hemnetta,  mistress- 

of  Duke  of  Monmouth,  ii.  94  n,  228  , 
Wessell,  Mr.,  of  Bansted,  M.P.,  ii.  36Z 
West  Clandon,  Surrey,  seat  at,  ii.  52 
West  Horsley,  Surrey,  seat  at,  i.  285, 

397 

West,  pardon  granted  to  (1685),  ii.  247 
Westfield,  Dr./i'homas,  Bishop  of  Bristol, 
iv.  82  n 

Westminster  Abbey,  burial  of  Cowley 
in,  ii  27  ;  deanei'y  vacant,  iv.  83  » 

Westminster  Hall,  shops  formerly  in, 
i.  21n 

Westminster  School,  exercises  of  boys  at, 

i.  352 

Westminster,  Medical  Garden  at,  i.  328 

 ,  sickness  in  (1641),  iv.  70 

Westmoreland,  Lord,  death  of,  ii.  327 
 ,  Richard,  Lord  High  Trea- 
surer, portrait  of,  iii.  301.    See  Port- 
land. 

Weston,  Elizabeth  Joan,  a  learned  lady, 

ii.  37  n 

 Mr., his  election  for  Surrey, 

ii.  367 

Westeram,  estate  at,  i.  286 
Wethei'born,  Dr.,  physician,  i.  335 
Weybridge,  Duke  of  Norfolk's  house  at, 

ii.  120,  121 
Whale  taken  near  Greenwich,  i.  327  ; 

another,  ii.  352 
Whaley,  Colonel,  i.  323 
Wharton,  Lord,  ii.  53 
 ,  Sir  George,  mathematician, 

ii.  7 

 ,  Mr.   Henry,  his  "Life  of 

Archbishop  Laud,"  iii.  341,  343 

.  ,  Philip,  Earl  of,  protests,  iv. 

68  n 

Whartan  House,  Nottinghamshire,  i. 
299 

Wheeler,  Sir  Charles,  governor  of  St. 
Christopher's,  ii.  62  ;  his  removal  re- 
commended, 67  ;  an  executor  of 
Viscountess  Mordaunt,  138 

 ,  Sir  George,  ii.  192  ;  account 

of,  191,  259 

 ,  Paul,  musician,  i.  313 

Whips,  harmony  produced  by  smacking, 

iii.  278 


Whispering  Gallery  at  Gloucester,  i.  296 
Whistler,  Dr.,  F.R.S.,  ii.  105,  171,  173, 

384^  , 

Whitbread,  Thomas,  Jesuit,  anecdote 
■  of,  ii.  126  n 

White,  Bishop,  recommends  Dr.  Cosids 
to  Charles  L,  i.,  270,  271 
 ,  Dr.  Thomas,  Bishop  of  Peter- 
borough, sermon  of,  ii.  25 1  ;  petitions 
against  Declaration  of  Liberty  of 
Conscience,  273  ;  sent  to  the  Tower, 

.  275  ;  tried  and  acquitted,  "276  ;  at  a 
meeting  of  Bishops  on  the  Revolu- 
tion, 287 

—  :,  Dr.,  Bishop  of  Norwich,  his 

funeral,  ii.  349 

 ,  Mr.,  philosopher  of  Paris,  f. 

266,  408.        ■  \ 

 ,  Mr.,  nephew  -of  the  preceding,- 

ii.  67      '     ■  - 

 ,  Robert,  engraver,  ii.  174  ;  iii. 

343  ' 

Whitefoord,  ,  iv.  162 

Whitehall,  Charles  I.  at  (1641),  iv.  131, 
132  ;  affray  at,  102  n  ;  occupied  by 
the  Rebels,  i.  246,  248,  260  ;  state  of, 
312;  goods  pillaged  from,  restored, 
338  ;  paintings  at,  369  ;  design  for 
rebuilding,  385  ;  ball  and  play  at  the 
theatre,  ii.  55  ;  Charles  Il.'s  library 
at,  146,  159;  Popish  oratory  at,  212  ; 
new  Chapel  at,  opened  for  the  Popish 
service,  260  ;  Queen's  apartments, 
261 ;  fire  at,  311 

Whitelocke,  Bulstrode,  i.  278  ;  his 
"  Memorials  of  English  Affairs,"  iv. 
95,  133,  141,  147,  152,  166,  175,  220, 
283  notes 

Whitfield,  Sir  Ralph,  i.  40 

Whitsuntide,  neglect  of,  i.  288 

Whittal,  Tom,  and  his  brother,  anec- 
dote of,  iii.  210 

Whittle,  Mr.,  King's  surgeon,  his  sister, 
ii.  148 

"Whole  Duty  of  Man,"  Dr.  Chaphn 
supposed  to  be  the  Author,  ii.  321 

Wiburn,  Sir  John,  governor  of  Bombay, 
ii.  221 

"  Widow,  The,"  a  lewd  play,  i.  361 
Wight,  Isle  of,  treaty  of,  i.  247 
Wilbraham,  Mr.,  ii.  175 
Wild,  Dr.,  Bishop  of  Londonderry,  ser- 
mons by,  i.  308,  311,  317,  318,  330  ; 
account  of  him,  334 

 Sir  William,  Recorder,  ii.  93,  384 

Wild  House,  Spanish  Ambassador's  re- 
sidence, ii.  156,  285,  388 


446 


GENERAL  INDEX  TO 


Wilkins,  Dr.  John,  Bishop  of  Chester, 

i.  291,  378  ;  his  mechanical  genius, 
•292  ;  notice  of  him,  311,  410;  al- 
luded to,  312—314,  396;  ii.  4.5,  393 n; 
conseci'ated  Bishop  of  Chester,  35  ; 
letter  to  Mr.  Evelyn,  iii.  76  ;  letters 
of  Mr.  Evelyn  to,  iii.  129,  192 

Wilkinson,  Dr.,  iii.  92,  93 

William  I.,  King  of  England,  tomb  of, 
at  Caen,  i.  62 

William  III.,  his  landing  reported,  ii, 
280  ;  manifesto  of,  284  ;  landing  of, 
ib  ;  his  progress  to  London,  285  ; 
James  II.  invites  him  to  St.  James's, 
286  ;  iii.  288  ;  proceedings  thereupon, 

ii.  286;  Convention  votes  the  Crown 
to  him  and  the  Princess,  288  ;  his 
morose  temper,  290 ;  Prince  and 
Princess  declared  King  and  Queen, 
291  ;  proclaimed,  292  ;  his  conduct 
on  his  accession,  294, 295  ;  coronation^ 
295  ;  his  birth-day  and  anniversary 
of  landing  at  Torbay,  301  ;  resolves  ; 
to  go  in  person  to  Ireland,  302  ;  sets 
out,  306  ;  buys  Kensington  of  Lord 
Nottingham,  303  ;  his  victory  at  the 
Boyne,  308  ;  embarks  fur  Holland, 
324  ;  progress  into  the  North,  337  ; 
fireworks  on  his  return,  338  ;  enter- 
tained at  Althorp,  ib  ;  conspiracy  to 
assassinate,  339  ;  subscription  to 
Greenwich  Hospital,  344 ;  entry  into 
London,  348  ;  his  death,  367;  allu- 
sions to,  309—312,  322;  iv.  222 

Williams,  Dr.  John,  Bishop  of  Chiches- 
ter, ii.  333,  338  ;  letter,  iii.  359 

 ,  Dr.  John,  Bishop  of  Lincoln, 

made  Archbishop  of  York,  iv.  82  n, 
116,  129  n  ;  draws  up  pardon  of  the 
impeached  Bishops,  123  ;  portrait,  i. 
303 

 ,  Count,  iv.  203  and  n 

Williamson,  Sir  Joseph,  offices  held  by, 

ii.  20,  38,  52,  68  ;  account  of  him,  i. 

386;  ii.  90,  379  ;  alluded  to,  26,  54  n, 

95  n,  104,  171  ;  President  of  Royal 

Society,  117 

 ,  Mr.,ii.  26 

Williamstadt,  account  of,  i.  30 
Willoughby,  Lord,  of  Parham,  i.  328  ; 

Governor  of  Barbadoes,  ii.  73 
Wilmot,  Col.,  proceedings  against,  iv. 

56,  58  n 

 ,  Henry,  Lord,  i.  253,  273  ;  iv. 

253  n  ;  created  Earl  of  Rochester, 
257  n  ;  ambassador  to  Germany,  248 
and  n,  258  ;  account  of,  i.  406 


Wilson,  Mr.,  killed  in  a  duel,  ii.  328 
Wilton,  seat  of  the  Earl  of  Pembroke, 
i.  294  ;  fire  at,  ii.  374 
I  Wimbledon,  Earl  of  Bristol's  house  at, 
i.  361 

Wimmenom,  Mons.  de,  iv.  210 
Winch,  Sir  Humphry,  i.  387  ;  a  Com- 
missioner of  Trade,  ii.  59,  80,  130 
Winchelsea,  ruins  of,  i.  279 
Winchelsea,  Heneage  Finch,  Earl  of,  i. 
339  ;  alluded  to,  310  ;  ii.  43  ;  seat  at 
Burleigh,  i.  298 
Winchester,  Bishop  (1685),  miracles  re- 
lated by,  ii.  233 
Winchester,  notice  of,  i.  38  ;  royal  pa- 
lace built  at,  ii.  186,  235  n  ;  Cathedral 
of,  ib 

Winchester,  Jchn  Paulet,  Marquis  of, 
iii.  37  ;  iv.  146 

■  ,  Marchioness  of,  ii.  151 

Wind,    tempestuous    (1658),  i.  329; 
(1662),  362  ;  (1703),  ii.  372 
;  Windham,  Mr.,  office  in  the  exiled  Court 
of  Charles  II.,  iv.  278  and  n,  351  ; 
alluded  to,  i.  373 

 ,    Sir   Thomas,  enjoins  his 

children  to  be  loyal,  iv.  154  n 
 ,  Colonel,   defended  Bridge- 
water  for  the  King,  iv.  154  n 

 ,  Mr.  Justice,  ii.  133  n 

Windsor,  Lord,  ii.  53 
Windsor  Cnstle  and  Chapel,  notice  of, 
i.  288  ;  Charles  I.'s  burial  place,  ih; 
offering  of  Knights  of  the  Garter,  ii. 
51  ;  improvements  by  Pi'ince  Rupert, 
ib;  installation  at,  60;  statue  erected, 
1 42  ;  improvements  about  the  Castle, 
175;  painting  in  the  hall,  231  ;  al- 
luded to,  320 
Windsor  Forest,  deer  in,  attacked,  iv, 

60  ;  King  Charles's  directions,  64 
Wine,  of  Orleans,  i.  68  ;  Dutch  bishop 
killed  by,  100  ;  at  Caprarola,  184  ;  at 
Bologna,  194  ;  at  Venice,  215 
Winnington,  Sir  Francis,  ii.  151 
Winstanley,  Henry,  waterworks  by,  ii. 
343;  built  the  Eddystone  Light-house, 
ib,  n 

Winstanley,  William,  his  "  Loyal  Mar- 
tyrologie,"  cited,  iv.  105  n 

 ,  engraving,  by,  i.  361  n 

Winter,  Sir  John,  on  charring  sea-coal, 

i.  316;  iii.  77 
Winter,  fatal    one   (1648),    i.    248  ; 
severity  of  (1658),  327  ;  paper  on  the 
effects  of  the  winter  of  1 683,  ii.  196 
Wirtemburg,  Prince  of  (1646),  i.  217 


THE  DIARY  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 


447 


Wise,  Henry,  his  house  at  Brompton 

Park,  ii.  329,  366 
Wiston,  Nottinghamshire,  iv.  146  and  n 
Witches,  increase  of,  in  New  England, 

ii.  323 

Withers,  an  ingenious  shipwright,  ii.  83 

Withering,  ,  iv.  67,  69 

Wi things,  Mr.  Justice,  ii.  190 

Woldingham  Church  and  Parish,  ii.  116 

Wolley,  Rev,  Dr.,  i.  271,  273 

Wolsey,  Cardinal  Thomas,  i.  292 ;  ii. 
37  n  ;  his  burial  place,  i.  291  ;  birth- 
place, 315 

Wolves  in  France,  i.  60,  69,  274 

Woman,  hairy,  i.  321 ;  gigautic,  302  ;  ii. 
38,  74  ;  marks  on  the  arm  of  one,  50 

Women  in  Venice,  the  dresses  of,  i.  203; 
painting  first  used  by,  288  ;  on  the 
duties  of,  iv.  31 

Wood,  Anthony  a,  letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn 
to,  on  his  "Athene  Oxonienses,"  iii. 
321 ;  references  to  that  work,  i.  303  n; 
334  n  ;  370  n  ;  376  n 

 ,  Sir  Henry,  his  marriage,  i.  272 

Woodcote,  Surrey,  descent  of  the  Eve- 
lyns of,  Pedigree,  ii.  397  ;  referred 
to,  i.  399  ;  ii.  45 

Woodstock  Palace,  destruction  of,  i.  382; 
iv.  136 

Woodward,  Dr.  J  ,  letters,  iii.  367,  368 
Woolwich,  battery  erected  at,  ii.  24 
Worcester,  Henry  Somerset,  Marquis 

of,  ii.  46,  173  ;  iv.  349 
Worcester,  battle  of,  i.  270  ;  iv.  200 

 ,  notice  of,  i.  296 

Worcester  House,  Strand,  i.  343,  382 
Worcester  Park,  ii.  2 
Worksop  Abbey,  notice  of,  i.  299 
World,  on  the  Eternity  of  the,  iii.  89 
Worsley,  Dr.,  on  Plantations,  ii.  68  ; 

death  of,  89 
Wotton,  Sir  Henry,  his  "  Elements  of 

Architecture,"  ii.  395 
 ,   Dr.    William    (son   of  Rev. 

Henry),  his  talents  when  a  child,  ii. 

130  n  ;  sermon  by,  331  ;  alluded  to, 

347,  389  ;  iii.  360  ;  letters  of  Mr. 

Evelyn  to,   iii.   346,  390  ;  on  his 

"  Sylva,"  363  ;  from  Dr.  Wotton  to 

Mr.  Evelyn,  352,  353,  370,  371,  385, 

387,  388,  398.    See  Evelyn 
 ,  Lord,  project  of  draining,  ii.  49 ; 

his  house  at  Hampstead,  106 
Wotton,  Surrey,  mansion  of  the  Evelyn 

family,  i.  245, 249,  251,  263,  381,  397 ; 

described,  i.  3  ;  improvements  at,  39, 

277  ;  ii.   347  ;  hospitality   of  Mr. 


George  Evelyn,  347  n,  348  ;  views 
of,  i.  1  ;  ii.  396  ;  descent  of  the 
Evelyns  of,  PcdUjrce,  ii.  397  ;  Dr. 
Bohun  presented  to  the  living,  364  : 
MS.  works  of  Mr.  Evelyn  there,  392 
—  394 

Wray,  Captain,  afterwards  Sir  William, 
i.  219,  223,  229,  233,  234,  243,  244 

Wren,  Sir  Christopher,  his  early  talents, 
i.  291,  293  ;  Theatre  at  Oxford  built 
by,  384  ;  ii.  39  ;  a  Commissioner  for 
repair  of  Old  St.  Paul's,  9  ;  his  plan 
for  improvement  of  London,  iii.  188  ; 
verses  by,  ii.  95  n  ;  Ashmolean  Mu- 
seum built  by,  120  ;  christening  of 
his  son,  129  ;  St.  Paul's,  Monument, 
and  50  churches,  building  by,  156  ; 
President  of  the  Royal  Society,  160  ; 
design  of  Chelsea  College,  166  ;  Com- 
missioner for  Green wicli  Hospital, 
335,  342,  344  n  ;  letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn 
to,  iii.  154  ;  alluded  to,  i.  383  ;  ii.  54 
n— 56,  104,  117,  145,  194,  350,  iii. 
366 

 ,  Dr.  Matthew,  Bishop  of  Ely,  i. 

345,  386  ;  iii.  37  ;  iv.  99  n 
 ,  Matthew,  son  of  Bishop  of  Ely, 

i.  318,  386 

Wrestlers,  ancient  statues  of,  i.  134 
Wrestling   Match  before  his  Majesty 

(1661),  ii.  21 
Wright,  Chief  Justice,  ii.  276 
 ,  Michael,  paintings  bv,  i.  331, 

369  ;  ii.  85  ;  alluded  to,  i.  379  ;  ii.  283 
 ,  Sir  Edmund,  made  Lord  Mayor 

by  Parliament  (1641),  iv.  55  n 
 ,  Dr.  Robert,  Bishop  of  Coventry 

and  Lichfield,  iv.  99  and  n 

 ,  Travels,  i.  153  n 

Wrighte,  Sir  Nathan,  Lord  Keeper,  ii. 

360  and  n 

Wriothesley,  Thomas,  Earl  of  South- 
ampton, daughter  of,  ii.  188 

Wych,  Sir  Cyril,  President  of  Royal 
Society,  ii.  189  ;  married  a  niece  of 
Mr.  Evelyn's,  320,  355  ;  Lord  Justice 
in  Ireland,  326  ;  alluded  to,  iii.  370 

 ,  Lady,  wife  of  Sir  Cyril,  and  niece 

of  Mr.  Evelyn,  ii.  320,  355,  357 

Wyche,  Sir  Peter,  letter  of  Mr.  Evelyn 
to,  on  the  English  language,  iii.  159 

Wye,  Mr.,  rector  of  Wotton,  his  death, 

ii.  363 

Yakborough,  Sir  Thoma?,  ii.  179,  387 
Yarmouth,  Sir  Robert  Paston,  Earl  of, 
I     i.  395 


448 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


Yachts  first  used  in  England,  i.  354  •  i 
Yew  Tree,  deadly  species  of  the,  i.  185  ; 

large  one,  375  ;  on  planting  it,  iii.  274 
York,  City  and  Minster,  i.  300  ;  siege 

of,  iv,  141  n,  142  ;  Mayor  of,  speech 

to  Charles  I.,  134  . 
York,  Frederick,  Duke  of,  pays  the  fine 

at  Oaliham,  i.  298  n 
York  House,  Strand,  i.  310  ;  ii.  72 
"  Young  Admiral,"  a  play,  i.  370 
Young,  Captain,  capture  by,  i.  318  ; 

death  and  character  of,  ii.  326 
Youth,  advice  to,  iii,  85  ^ 

Zachary,  of  Genoa,  anecdote  of  his 
shipwreck,  i.  84 


Zecca,  or  Mint  at  Venice,  i.  202 
Zeland,  a  captured  vessel,  i.  396 
Zenno,  Signor,  Venetian  Ambassador, 

ii.  246  ;  alluded  to,  247 
Zinnar  Tree,  quality  of,  ii.  1 84 
Zinzendorp,  Count  de,  ii.  175 
Zitelle,  procession  of,  at  Rome,  i.  1 37  ; 

account  of,  175 
Zolern,  Francisca,  Princess  of  (1654), 

iv.  216  and  n 
Zucchero,  Frederico,  paintings   by,  i. 

102,  170,  184  ;  his  burial  place,  170 
Zulestein,  Mons.,  ii.  53 
Zulichem,  Mons.,  account  of,  i.  347,  381  ; 

alluded  to,  351,  381  ;  iii.  209 


THE  END. 


BRADBURY  AND  EVANS,  PRINTERS,  WHITEFRIARS. 


r^^ASHBURN'S  < 

\Bindery  &  Old  Book  Shop/ 
(  Sprir.R  St.  at  Mill  ) 
^^MEWPORT.  R.  I.  r 


