# Clear (non-cipher) words of Cobham letters ff.70r-72v, from Bourdeau harley287/READING.md (CC BY 4.0), italic cipher readings removed


Deciphered words in ; grades H/C/M as in README Conventions.



 "... What effect this message will work I know not, but doubt the worst, and therefore do
wish and think it expedient , for I
am persuaded . Some  would be necessarily
thought upon, for  mind to have any. That the same  do voluntarily bring it, and that only so long as they ..., there is  stirring
here. The present  will be  for the  of so large a  by the half at the
least. The last  five weeks
longer, as the  tells me ... The Duke is expected within a day or two to be at Bruges. The  unto  is said to be almost ended, and will be  he hath ready prepared, being some of them ."



 " hereabout ,
  make such  , and
the  coming to  doth  somewhat  . And in mine opinion  is fit to be
 through some  . Which being once , the  being already
abandoned of , cannot  a    together . My
greatest  is that in all  I am  furnished of  to  for the more
 . And from Flushing I hear  by reason that the 
is dangerous and  . I pray your honour to think upon these: 
doth assure us of  makes account so long as we remain in any  the
King's possession . By my servant William I wrote in my private letter a special motion for   where we might better stand on terms for her Majesty's honour, this place being subject to all
inconveniences ... send away the  ."



 Clear account of Grenier's intrigue and the Latin tag , then: "In my opinion  , and when all  , there would be  .  .   sted his sonne  in the government of his
patrimony in Italy."



 "There are new companies lately added to the old garrison  , which were very strong before. This drawing of his forces by land so near, and the   to    , make us  : we think it  . Also we pray your    ."



 " laboured his own dispatch and would fain have had , but I, fearing that under  , did let him
understand what we had generally written unto my Lord; and  soever he  our
letters  ... As by the  of   in your letter of the 16 March I perceive  ; for mine own part I would think myself most unhappy to be a  . Touching , if they shall be delivered over , I am of
another opinion for the reasons sent in my last by my man William ... things standing as they do, , and then what dishonour and disfavour will it be for her Majesty.  is a ,
and hath means and will to  . " — Captain Edward de Barney was a prisoner at
Ostend in March 1588 .



 "... hath assured means to a special service,  being  as I wrote unto you. I am
satisfied touching 500 ...  no man shall draw ..." .
