# VHS Collections II (1871) p.192, archive.org collectionsofver02vermuoft djvu text (OCR, whitespace normalised, fetched 6 Oct 2026 by R12-CLINVHS); heading as printed, then the letter to 'Defiance.'; the print ends there, no postscript.
dimand Papers, H. — Sir Henry Clinton to General Haldimand. Intelligence. 27th October, [1781.] As for affairs at Cornwallis' army jcm must not be offended if I tell you I cannot give you any satisfactory accounts. Tliose I have received are such as induce me to believ^e His Lordship is very much crowded on every side. How it will turn out L#ord on ly knows. A short time will determine the point. As to the disposition of the Vermonters it is almost as difficult to satisfy you about them as it is about Lord Cornwallis for their minds will be actuated entirely by the southern affairs. But if the leading men in Vermont should agree to any thing that favor ed Canada T am perfectly satisfied the populace would oppose it. I was favored with your letter of the 19th of July by the Matross of the artillery. There are now no hopes of recovering the army of the conven tion by exchange, the rebels having had nothing in view by the negociation they proposed for that purpose but to still the clamors of their own officers prisoners with us. I am disappointed in my expectations of a re-inforcement from the West Indies. However I sent you three regiments, one of which was British, which, had they arrived, would, with the 650 recruits and artillery from Europe, have amounted to rather more than your demand. They sailed under convoy of the Renown, but unfortunately met with a violent storm which dispersed the fleet and damaged the ships. The Renown has since returned here with seven companies and some convalescents of the 44th, and some part of the regiment of Louisburg, but the whole of the regiment of Knyphausen and the remainder of the British are missing. From the present situation of affairs Georgia will be exposed to great danger unless South Carolina is reduced. Having there fore no alternative left, I shall detach a considerable armament for that purpose. I hope your Indians will be prevailed upon to threaten the frontiers of Niagara in great force, which will ope rate in favor of the southern move, while a considerable fleet may probably be employed to co-operate in the Chesapeake. I have received your dispatches by the Defiance. 
