# Collections of the Vermont Historical Society vol. II (Montpelier 1871), pp.198-199, "H. -- Sir Henry Clinton to Gen. Haldimand, New York, Nov. 6 [or 12], 1781": archive.org collectionsofver02vermuoft _djvu.txt (OCR, unedited; lines 11858-11902), fetched 2 Oct 2026 (GAPS8). The page header "199" and two footnotes fall inside the excerpt.
forward  to  meet  the  enemy. ^ 

H. — Sir  Henry  Clinton  to  Gen,  Haldimand. 

New  York,  Nov.  6  [or  12],  1781. 
Sir : — I  received  your  several  dispatches  by  His  Majesty's  ship 
Garland,  and  as  there  was  a  Packet  upon  the  point  of  sailing  for 
Europe  when  they  arrived,  I  transmitted  to  the  Minister  a  copy 
of  your  letter  of  the  1st  of  October,  of  your  Proclamation,  and 
of  the  letter  marked  A.,  not  having  had  time  to  prepare  copies  of 

^  Note  hy  editor  of  Memoir  of  Stark.  —  Vermont  was  not  at  this  lime  a 
state.  The  fourteenth  cannon  was  however  fired,  as  a  compliment  to  her 
good  services  in  the  war,  and  a  hope  that  she  might  soon  become  a  state 
of  the  union. 

^Memoir  of  Stark,  285.    ^Same,  290. 


G-overnor  Chittenden  to  General  Washington.  199 

the  whole  ;  but  they  shall  be  sent  by  the  next  opportunity,  and 
also  laid  before  Admiral  Digby  (who  is  joint  commissioner  with 
me)  as  soon  as  he  arrives  in  town. 

You  will  not  expect  more  from  me  by  this  conveyance  respect- 
ing your  measures  with  the  leaders  of  Vermont,  than  a  general 
declaration  of  my  confidence  in  your  endeavours  to  separate  that 
district  from  the  revolt,  and  my  wish  for  its  success. 

The  extent  of  the  expectations  of  the  people  and  of  your  prom- 
ise to  meet  them,  will,  I  apprehend,  make  it  necessary  for  the 
Crown  to  resort  to  Parliament,  for  the  truth  is  that  the  powers  of 
the  present  commissioners  extend  only  to  granting  pardons  and 
restoring  provinces  or  districts  to  the  King's  Peace,  and  this  alone 
is  the  reason  of  my  sending  to  the  Secretary  of  State  these  trans- 
actions, and  I  hope  you  will  find  no  difficulty  in  preventing  our 
enemies  from  practicing  upon  the  jealousies  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Vermont  before  the  result  of  the  public  deliberation  can  be  trans- 
mitted. 

P.  S.  General  Arnold  says,  Monsieur  du-Calvert,  Pere  Flo- 
quet,  Messieurs  Hay,  Cord,  Freeman  and  Watts  were  friends  to  the 
Rebels. 

