# Birch 1742, "The fame letter decypherd" (OCR verbatim, djvu lines 23349-23422)
'The  f ami  letter  decypher  d. Sir, IT  is  impoffible  for  me  to  ferve  the  lord  proteftor  confiderably,  without  being  at  Lon-  vol.  xxiv. don  my  felf,   thofe,  whom  it  will  be  neceflary  for  me  to  employ  towards  the  quafh-  p.  337, ing  of  this  general  rifing,  being  fuch  troops,  as  I  am  fure  will  not  aft  for  me  at  this diftance,  or  without  my  perfonal  putting  them  to  it.  On  the  other  fide,  I  find  an  unwilling- nefs  in  your  friend,  to  give  me  leave  to  be  there,  which  I  conceive  muft  needs  proceed from  one  of  thefe  two  confiderations ;  either  becaufe  he  apprehends  I  may  have  fome defign  of  engaging  againft  him  in  this  general  rifing,  and  fo  make  the  pretext  of  having fomething  to  lay  to  him,  only  to  render  my  felf  the  more  capable  of  doing  him  harm  j  or elfe,  that  perhaps  the  receiving  me  now  might  well  caufe  a  diflatisfaftion  in  fome  of  his own  party.     To  fatisfy  therefore  both  which,  the  propofition  I  Ihall  now  make  to  him  is, that  he  will  admit  of  me  to  be  his  prifoner  at  London,  till  thofe  troubles  be  over,  and till  I  fhall  have  \tt.  him  fee,  by  the  fervice  I  intend  to  do  him,  whether  I  be  worthy  of his  favour  or  no.     This  is  a  demand,  which  as  I  am  confident  was  never  yet  made  to  any body,   fo  which  your  friend  cannot  refufe,  it  being  that,  which  anfwers  all  objeftions  in relation  to  him,  and  wherein  no  body  can  run  a  hazard  but  my  felf ;  and  yet  too  I  am enough  confident  of  your  friend's  noblenefs  and  generofity,  to  believe  I  do  not  run  any  great hazard  in  it ;  neither  alTuring  my  felf  he  is  very  uncapable  of  ufing  any  body  ill,   that really  does  him  a  fervice ;    and  being  moft  certain  I  fliall  in  this  be  able  to  do  him one,  not  of  an  ordinary  nature.     I  hope  at  leaft  this  will  \tt  you  fee  I  am  ingenuous, and  that  I  have  no  double  meaning  in  what  I  profefs ;  but  that  my  intention  is  really  to ferve  your  friend,  and   to  depend  entirely  hereafter  upon  his  favour  as  long  as  I  live. I  writ  you  a  long  letter  by  the  laft  poft  but  one,  but  the  packet  boat  being  gone  before I  had  made  an  end  of  it,  1  was  forced  to  hire  a  boat  on  purpofe  to  carry  it  to  mr.  Thomas "Whit's  at  Dover,  defiring  him  to  fend  it  to  you  with  all  fpeed.     In  that  letter  I  infifted very  much  upon  the  having  fome  aflurance  from  your  friend,  that  my  fervice  fliould  not be  forgotten ;  but  the  time  now  prefles  too  much   to  admit  of  any  farther  delays,  the news  you  wrote  me  word  of  in  your  laft,  of  Charles  Stuart's  coming  into  England,  being moft  certainly  true.    Wherefore  what  is  to  be  done  ought  .to  be  done  quickly.     I  fliall therefore  defire  you  to  ftiew  this  letter  to  your  friend,  and   to  let  me  know  his  pleafure, vs^hich  way  he  would  have  me  to  take  to  give  myfelf  up  to  be  his  prifoner  ;   for  I  am  ab- folutely  refolved  upon  it,  knowing,  that  otherwife  the  fervice,  that  I  Ihould  do  him,  would be  but  lame,  and  unfatisfaftory  both  to  the  lord  proteftor  and  myfelf;  and  being  as  certain, as  it  is  poffible  to  be  of  any  thing  that  is  not  already  happened,  that  this  way  I  fliall  be  able to  break  the  whole  defign.     The  only  conditions  I  fliall  afk  before  hand  of  him  are  thefe ; firft,  that  I  may  be  a  prifoner  in  fome  place  in  London,  where  I  may  have  the  honour  fome- times  to  fee  the  lord  proteftor,  and  to  give  him  an  account  of  what  more  of  the  parti- culars of  this  defign  fliall  come  to  my  knowledge ;   and  next,  that  no  body  but  the  lord proteftor,  your  felf,  and  col.  GofFe  may  know,  that  I  come  thither  with  an  intention  of being  made  a  prifoner  ;  for  if  the  cavaliers  knew  of  it,   I  fliould  be  lefs  able  to  ferve  the lord  proteftor  in  it.     Thefe  are  all  the  conditions  I  fliall  afk  for  myfelf  before  hand,  expeft- ing  no  grace  from  your  friend,  no  not  fo  much  as  the  faving  of  my  life,  if  I  do  not  give him  proofs  of  my  ufefulnefs,  as  well  as  my  affeftion  to  his  fervice.     I  defire  the  bufinefs be  carried   fo,  that  every  body  may  be  in  doubt,  whether  my  defign  in  coming  over  be to  endeavour  to  make  my  peace  with  the  lord  proteftor,  or  elfe  to  be  engaged  againft  him in  this  g^eral  rifing.     Wherefore  I  think  it  very  unfit,  it  Ihould  be  known,  that  it  was  I, who  pafled  at  Dover  by  the  name  of  Nevell ;  and   confequently  improper  for  me  to  go that  way  ;  fo  that  I  conceive  it  were  beft  for  me  to  take  a  boat,  which  fhould  carry  me direftly 28o  STATE     PAPERS     OF A.  D.   1654.  direftly  from  hence  to  London,  or  Gravefend-,  there  meeting  one  the  lord  proteftor  fl^al! L/^VNJ  appoint  me,  I  fhall  tell  him,  I  am  come  to  fpeak  to  the  lord  proteftor ;  upon  which  he may  have  order  to  conduft  me  to  him  ;  after  which  the  lord  protestor  may  make  me  be a  prifoner,  as  being  dillatisfied  with  the  difcourfe  I  have  held  to  him. In  fine,  let  your  friend  refolve,  which  is  the  bell  way,  and  I  fhall  punftually  obey  his orders ;  only  I  muft  conjure  you  to  be  fpeedy,  for  it  concerns  you  perhaps  more  than you  are  aware  of.     I  am  moft  entirely, Sir,  your  moft  humble  and  faithfull  fervant, March  20.  1 654. S. If  there  be  any  in  the  army,  that  have  had  correfpondence  with  Overton,  have  an eye  upon  them  -,  for  I  am  moft  certain,  that  he  and  Charles  Stuart  were  agreed  before he  was  a  prifoner.  Hull  is  as  Hkely  a  place  as  any  for  Charles  Stuart  to  land  at.  I  am  fure it  is  to  be  in  Yorkftiire.
