# Birch 1742, "The fame letter decypherd" (OCR verbatim, djvu lines 23065-23144)
The  fame  letter  decypherd. Sir, THIS  is  the  5th  letter  I  have  written  to  you  without  receiving  any  anfwer,  which  Vol.  xxiy. gives  me  a  greater  trouble  than  it  is  poffible  for  me  to  exprefs,  not  imagining  the  P-  324- reafon  why  you  fhould  not  think  fit  at  leaft  to  let  me  know  your  fenfe  of  what  I  offered to  you.  The  propofition  I  made  laft  was  to  come  and  make  myfelf  the  lord  proteftor's prifoner,  it  being  impolTible  for  me  to  ferve  your  friend  fo  well  at  this  diftance,  as  I  am fure  I  could  do  if  I  were  in  London  -,  which  you  may  eafily  conceive,  if  you  confider,  that in  defigns  of  this  nature  the  refolutions  change  every  day,  and  confequently  that  nothing can  be  of  greater  advantage,  than  to  be  duly  advertifed  of  every  thing  that  pafTes.  I fuppofe  there  can  but  be  two  objeftions  againft  my  admittance  now  into  England  ;  one  an apprehenfion  of  my  engaging  in  this  general  rifing,  and  the  other  a  fear  of  diffatisfying fome  of  your  friend's  own  party,  by  ufing  me  too  well  at  firft  j  both  which  without  doubt this  propofition  does  fufhciently  anfwer.  I  confefs,  the  more  I  examine  it,  the  more  I wonder  what  reafon  your  friend  can  pofTibly  have  not  to  confent  to  it,  fince  it  does  not admit  of  the  leaft  Ihadow  of  danger  or  inconvenience  to  him  ;  and  methinks  too  he  fhould not  look  upon  me  as  a  man  fo  abfolutely  run  out  of  my  wits,  as  that  I  fhould  voluntarily throw  myfelf  into  fuch  a  condition,  without  being  confident  at  leaft  to  be  able  to  make ,  a  gain  of  it,  which  I  cannot  expedi  to  do,  but  by  doing  the  lord  proteftor  fervice.  So that  in  my  judgment  this  propofition  ought  to  make  him  conclude,  I  find  myfelf  able  to do  him  fervice,  as  well  as  that  I  have  a  defire  to  do  it.  It  is  true,  if  the  lord  protedtor were  already  thoroughly  informed  of  the  bottom  of  this  general  rifing,  I  confefs  then  my intelligence  would  be  of  no  ufe  to  him.  But  I  am  fure,  that  it  is  not  the  cafe  ;  the  moft  con- fiderable  perfons,  and  thofe,  whofe  appearing  in  this  bufinefs  would  be  moft  dangerous  to him,  being  upon  my  certain  knowledge  not  taken  notice  of.  And  although  all  things  feem hufhed  for  a  time,  yet  except  thofe  perfons  be  fecured,  it  will  certainly  break  out  again. There 27^ STATE     PAPERS     OF A.  D.  1654.  There  is  a  flying  report  at  Paris,  that  the  lord  protestor  intends  to  make  a  progrefs  over Ly^/"\J  England  ;  if  that  be,  I  am  afraid  he  is  not  well  advifed,  at  leaft  before  London  be  dif- armed.  Then  indeed  fuch  a  journey  might  be  ufeful,  but  before  that  very  deftruftive. You  know  that  city  will  ever  give  law  to  the  whole  kingdom.  As  long  as  you  are  mafter of  it,  you  will  eafily  quell  all  other  oppofition,  but  a  little  diforder  there  might  prove very  ruinous.  Sir,  give  me  leave  to  be  a  little  pofitive  in  this  bufinefs,  becaufe  I  know  more of  it,  than  I  am  confident  either  you  or  your  friend  do,  or  perhaps  than  any  body  what- foever,  that  is  not  deeply  engaged  in  it.  And  if  you  look  upon  it  as  a  thing  quite  blown over,  you  are  infinitely  miftaken.  I  know  an  infallible  way  to  prevent  it.  I  came  to  the knowledge  of  it  thus.  At  my  landing  here  I  met  upon  the  key  one  that  knew  me,  who finding  me  ftealing,  as  he  thought,  from  England,  took  it  for  granted,  that  I  had  been  ia England  about  thefe  defigns  ;  which  I  perceiving  by  queftions  he  made  me,  was  glad  to fee  that  miftake  in  him,  by  which  means  I  got  out  all  he  knew,  being  one  who  lay  here employed  about  this  bufinels.  I  here  fet  down  the  fubftance  of  my  former  letters,  hum- bly afking  your  pardon  for  fending  it  you  in  fo  blotted  a  flieet  of  paper.  All  I  Ihall  beg  of you  is,  that  you  will  be  pleafed  to  let  me  know  your  friend's  anfwer  in  it  as  foon  as  poffi- bly  you  can.  If  he  approves  of  this  1  propofe  to  him,  I  fhall  then  only  defire  thefe  two things  of  him,  which  are  both  in  order  to  his  fervice  ;  the  firft,  that  no  body  may  know of  my  defign  in  this  journey,  but  he,  yourfelf,  and  colonel  GofFe  •,  and  the  next,  that  I may  be  a  prifoner  fomewhere  in  London,  both  to  be  able  to  employ  fuch  inftruments  as will  be  ufeful  towards  the  ravelling  out  of  this  bufinefs,  and  the  better  to  communicate  to your  friend  all  that  Ihall  come  to  my  knowledge.  I  confefs  I  am  not  able  to  imagine  a reafon,  why  this  propofition  fhould  be  reflifed  ;  however  I  hope  at  leaft  the  having  offered it  will  not  make  your  friend  the  lefs  kind  to  me  ;  and  though  he  fhould  not  think  fit  to make  ufe  of  it,  yet  that  notwithftanding  he  will  be  pleafed  to  favour  me  fo  far,  as  not to  let  any  body  know  what  it  is  that  I  have  propofed  to  him.  Sir,  though  my  ftay  here hitherto  has  not  been  unufeful  to  me,  yet  it  would  be  fo  for  the  future,  the  party,  that  was fo  knowing  in  this  bufinefs,  being  no  more  in  this  place.  Befides  this  air  doth  not  very  j well  agree  with  me,  having  twice  fallen  fick  fince  my  being  here  ;  fo  that  I  fhould  be  un-  j willing  to  ftay  here  any  longer  than  to  know  your  friend's  pleafure,  how  he  would  have me  difpofe  of  myfelf.     Your  fpeedy  anfwer  in  this  will  extremely  oblige,  fir, Calais,  ^^  March,  Your  moft  humble  j ^  ^*'  and  moft  faithful   fervant, William   Stamford. Charles  Stew,  is  ftill  at  Middleburgh  private. I  writ  to  you  a  long  letter  in  cypher,  which  I  defired  mr.  Thomas  Whit  at  Dover  to fend  you,'  and  another  by  the  fame  addrefs.  As  I  faid,  pray  be  pleafed  to  let  me  know whether  you  have  received  them  or  no.
