00086749 


D-St6® FIs -GITHS-GISH-GICWR 
: BOMBAY BRANCH ? 


4 OF THE 
% ROYAL ASIATIC reer 
TOWN HALL, BOMBAY. 


NRSC BLS BOOS 2 SSOP VHOS 


Digitized with financial assistance from 


on 11 March, 2020 


A,.SELECTION 


EROM THE 


DESPATCHES, TREATIES, AND 
OTHER PAPERS 


OF THE 


MARQUESS WELLESLEY, K.G. 


DURING HIS GOVERNMENT OF 


EDITED BY 
SIDNEY J. OWEN, M.A. 
Reader tn Law and History, and Tutor at Christ Church 


Reader in indian Law and History m'the University UY Oxford 
Formerly Professor Uf History in the Liphinstone College, Bombay 


WITH AN APPENDIX, A MAP OF INDIA, AND EIGHT PLANS OF 


£6749 


"REDIT A NORRIS AURORA, DIEMQUE REDUCIT’ 


BATTLES AND SIEGES 


Oxford 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 


M DCCC.LXXVI1 


(All rights reserved} 


TN 


PREFACE. 


NEARLY twenty years ago, .the Rise of the British Empire 
in India was suggested as a subject of special study in the 
combined Honour School of Law and Modern History at 
Oxford.! Several causes for some time retarded the adoption 
of this suggestion, About eleven years since, Orme’s great 
work was substituted for Mr. Mill’s history, which had been 
previously recommended; and I tried the experiment of 
lecturing upon it to a very small class, This was so far suc- 
cessful, that when, in 1868, the original Teachership of Indian 

' Law, intended for the Selected Candidates for the Indian Civil 
Service, and which had been for some time renewed from year 
to ycar, was established provisionally for a longer period, the 
claims of British India in the Law and History School were 
recognized ; and the Vice-Chancellor of the day, in his official 
speech at the close of the Academical year, noticed the appoint- 
ment of a Reader? in Indian Law and History. From that 
time I lectured regularly on Orme, and the class grew more 
numicrous. , 

When, on the rearrangement of our University examination 
system, the Schools of Law and History were separately 
constituted; and the Historical Board, acting under the 


1 This suggestion was, I believe, due to Mr. Boase, to whose extensive knowledge 
and untiring zeal the cause of Modern History in the University is so deeply indebted. 
By a curious coincidence, I was about the same time introducing the study of Thucy- 
dides (in Dale’s translation) among the Brahmins, Purvoes, and Parsecs of Bombay. 

71 did not discover, until some years later, that, in the Latin Statute, the word 
equivalent to Reader had only been inserted in one place. Thus my legal persona is 
still rather equivocal, Reader, however, has always been the name adopted in the 
English proceedings of Congregation and Convocation, previous to the Decree of last 
year, which was ambiguous, 


vi PREFACE. 


New Statute, proposed a group of subjects for special and 
minute study; British India, from 1784 to 1806, formed one 
of those subjects. Lord Wellesley’s Despatches accordingly 
became an‘essential part of this course. But though a portion 
only of what he wrote, or even published, on his Indian ad- 
ministration, the contents of the five bulky volumes edited by 
Mr. Montgomery Martin were far too voluminous for the 
student; and those volumes had long been out of print. 
Copies however were to be found at the Bodleian, and in 
some College Libraries; and the increasing demand for them 
produced ‘second hand’ copies through the booksellers. The 
Board did me the honour of entrusting to me the task of 
specifying those documents with which the student ought to 
be familiar. An official list of these was accordingly published 
in the University Gazette, and incorporated into the official 
pamphlet on the Examination Statute and the instructions of 
the Boards of Studies. But both examiners and students 
experienced and complained of the inconvenience attending 
this arrangement; and frequently expressed a wish to have 
the papers required in a more accessible, compact, and sys- 
tematic form. Such is the origin of this undertaking. 

But though primarily intended to supply a local want, it is 
hoped that it will serve also a more general purpose. Like 
Wellesley himself, it goes forth from Oxford; but like him, 
it is intimately connected with the interests and the pursuits 
of the great world without. Not only the historian and the 
Indian administrator, but the statesman, the diplomatist, the 
soldier, the political economist, the ‘educationalist,’ even the 
student of English literature, are—or ought to be—all interested 
in the conduct and the utterances of 


‘the majestic Lord, 
‘That broke the bonds of’ 


‘Tippoo and the Mahratta in the East; and prepared the way 
for breaking those of the Corsican in the West ; saved, extended, 
and organized British India; struck a fatal blow at the trading 
monopoly of the Company; instituted the magnificent scheme 


PREFACE, vii 


of Fort William College; and expounded and vindicated his 
measures in State Papers, which as literary compositions, de- 
signed for a practical purpose, are models of such handiwork, 
and the study of which is in itself a manifold and invaluable 
training for thé young aspirant to distinction in a School of 
Modern History. 

The responsibility involved in the task of selection is by no 
means a light one. It is, indeed, often far easier to determine 
what to adopt, than what to reject. So rich in lessons of 
political wisdom, and in able and instructive discussions of great 
problems, are the compositions of Lord Wellesley; that in spite 
of the bulk of this volume, I am inevitably reminded of Lord 
Clive’s strong exclamation, when taxed with helping himself 
too freely to the treasures of the Nawab of Bengal. I can at 
least say, that no pains have been spared to make these disjecta 
membra of a great and scholarly statesman as representative as 
possible; and by the omission of minor, occasional, and per- 
sonal matters, tentative measurcs, and reduplicated instructions, 
to gain space for exhibiting the administration in its broader 
bearings, mature form, and natural sequence. 

A careful reperusal of the entire correspondence has led to 
the rejection of a few pages included, in the former list, and 
to the insertion of many short but important extracts, which, 
on reconsideration, it seemed undesirable to sacrifice. 

The documents have been arranged, for clearness and facility 
of reference, under distinct heads. To each paper has been 
prefixed a very short note of its contents; and a running 
analysis, along the top of the pages, has been added, indicating 
at once the chicf subject of cach page, and the general and 
connected drift of the whole paper. Thus, an Index, which 
must have either added unduly to the size of the volume, or 
caused the omission of valuable matter, has been avoided; 
though it may be well to add that this was not an after- 
thought, but was designed before the selection was made. 

The Appendix is intended to illustrate the Despatches, partly 
by supplying additional accounts of events; but more by the 
quotation of thoughtful and critical passages, which delineate 


viii : PREFACE. 


the,Governor General’s policy, either as a whole, or in some of 
its details, according to the estimate of those, whose opinions, 
on various accounts, are well worth attention. 

By the great kindness of His Grace, the present Duke of 
Wellington, I have been thus enabled to enrich this collection 
with the terse and masterly Paper, which forms the Introduction, 
and with many other documents, the interest and value of which 
will be seen at a glance; and which, as well as the Map of 
India, are all taken, by His Grace’s permission, from the 
Supplementary volumes of the Wellington Despatches. Such 
extracts might, with obvious advantage, have been much more 
numerous. And I hope hereafter to give a fuller explanation of 
the great part played by the hero of Assye, as right-hand 
councillor of the Governor General, and as an administrator 
in Mysore. 

In the Survey, prefixed to the Selections, an attempt has been 
made to exhibit the policy of Lord Wellesley in its true re- 
lations with the circumstances of the time, both in India and 
in Europe. How baseless is the hazy fancy, which represents 
Indian history as a stream apart from the main current of world 
story, will appear in the course of the Survey, and in many 
other parts of the volume. Such a fancy ought not to be enter- 
tained by readers of the Bible, Herodotus, or Gibbon. And it is 
productive of very mischievous results, both intellectually and 
politically. But besides a knowledge of the state of Europe in 
Wellesley’s day; a general acquaintance with the condition and 
revolutions of India, from the rise of Sivaji onwards, is essential 
to one, who would view the Governor Gencral’s conduct (espe- 
cially as regards the Mahrattas) in its proper light. I accordingly. 
delivered, and soon afterwards published, a course of Lectures 
introductory to the British Period,’ to which I venture to refer 
those who may be disposed to complain, that I have taken for 
granted much,which ought to have been established on historical 
evidence, and made enigmatical allusions, where detailed ex- 
planations would have been more appropriate. Those Lectures 


+ India on the Eve of the British Conquest. Allen & Co. 1872. 


PREFACE, iX 


indeed ended with an account of the battle of Paniput, in 1761. 
But the interval between that time and Welleslcy’s, so far as 
native history is eoncerned, has been spanned, in a very in- 
teresting volume, by Mr. H. G. Keene.’ In another course of 
Lectures I have traversed the corresponding space of Anglo- 
Indian History; and should it seem worth while to print them, 
they will, I trust, be found to justify many remarks in the 
Survey, which may at present seem obscure or questionable. 

To His Grace the Duke of Wellington my warmest acknow- 
ledgments are due, for the very liberal permission to incorporate 
in the present volume both the excellent historical Map of India, 
and the Papers from the Supplementary Despatches ; as well as 
to the Marquess of Salisbury, Secretary of State for India, who 
kindly allowed the use of all public documents relating to 
Lord Wellesley’s administration, so far as the rights of Govern- 
ment over them extend; also to Alfred Montgomery, Esq., for 
his most obliging offer to place at my disposal all the Mar- 
quess’s papers in his possession; and to the Principal Librarian 
and Mr. E. A. Bond at the British Museum, and to Dr. Rost 
and Mr. Waterfield at the India Office, for their kind and ready 
assistance in instituting a search after missing papers. I am 
beholden also to Mr. Murray, of Albemarle Street, for his 
courtesy in causing the Plate, from which the Map of India was 
originally engraved, to be promptly hunted up. 

It would not be right to conclude without onc more explana- 
tion. The lamentable want of interest in the affairs of India 
which, in spite of our great stake in that country, and the 
constant residence there of so many of our friends and relatives, 
notoriously prevails throughout all classes of educated English- 
men, is, I have long becn convinced, mainly duc to the systematic 
exclusion of Indian history, as a branch of general study. While, 
on the other hand, many years expericnce of its attractivencss 
(when the really valuable parts of it are carefully brought under 
their notice) not only to young men, but to both boys and girls, 
is, to my mind, a very hopeful and encouraging circumstance. 


1 The Fall of the Moghul Empire. By Henry George Keene. Allen & Co. 1876. 


x PREFACE. 


But among the objections to its introduction at Oxford was 
the question :— How are you'to find examiners willing and com- 
petent to test your pupils? I had myself no fears, at the time, 
on this ground. And the sequel has amply justified. my con- 
fidence. Fhe New Statute empowers examiners to call in 
assessors, to adjudicate upon out-of-the-way subjects. But, in 
this case, it has only once (I believe) been necessary~to do se. 
And the character of the papers during the last four years, 
with which I have had absolutely nothing to de, proves that, 
whatever may be said of the examiners by ill-informed and 
captious eritics, they have recognized and well fulftlled their 
obligations ; risen with the new emergencies of their position ; 
and taking even more trouble than the Statute required them 
to do, have placed Indian history on its proper footing, and in 
its due relations to other subjects. 


CONTENTS. 


PREFACE . ‘ é : . 5 : ‘ ; ; 


Survey or Lorp WELLESLEY’s ADMINISTRATION . 
Synopsis oF Despatcues, &c.  . ‘ : : : . 


EXpLaNaTION OF THE Prans . : : ‘ ; ; 


Inrropuction. ‘Memoranpum on Marquess WELLESLEY’s Go- 


VERNMENT OF InptA,’ BY THE DuKE oF WELLINGTON . 


SELECTIONS FROM THE WELLESLEY DESPATCHES . ’ , 


APPENDIX 


SELECTIONS FROM THE WELLINGTON DespaTCHES . 


Siz T. Muwnro’s CorresponpDENCE 


” ” 


MiscetLangous Extracts . ‘ 3 ; ‘ ‘ 


Map and Pians 


Ixxiii 


— 762 


763 


789 
798 


yee 


eed 


VPage 27, 


» 126, 


line 13. 


8. 


30. 
I. 
26. 


1. 
16, 
4. 


ERRATA. _,, 
(i? . , 
For ‘ practical’ read ‘ practicable’ 
Insert ‘Major-General Baird’ to &c. 
For ‘ on’ read ‘in’ 
For ‘ Merriott’ read ‘ Marriott’ 
. For ‘ valuable’ read ‘vulnerable’ 
Read «Omrao’ 
For ‘ measure’ read ‘ measures’ 
Before ‘ Resident’ insert ‘ Acting’ 
For ‘1803? read ‘1804’ 
Before ‘ Lake’ insert ‘ Lord’ 
For ‘appears’ read ‘appear’ 
For ‘rest’ read ‘ rests’ 
For ‘employments’ read ‘employment’ 
For ‘ means of’ read ‘ means by’ 
Before ‘ Wellesley’ insert ‘Arthur’ 


Nore.—The motto in the title-page, applicable to Marquess Wellesley's administra- 
tion, as a whole, was (I understand) placed by him on Fort William College. 


SURVEY OF 


LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION. 


~ (BY THE EDITOR.) 


I. MYSORE. 


Mahometan Mysore had been for more than thirty years a constant 
source of alarm and danger to the Madras Government, and of per- 
plexity and expense to Calcutta and Leadenhall Street. Indeed, Hyder 
and Tippoo were names of fear to the British nation itself. The most 
conscientiously pacific of Governors-General had been compelled to 
make war upon the Sultaun. And the policy which, when the turbulent 
Mysorean had been virtually conquered, and was at our mercy, had 
spared him, and allowed him to resume his place among the Princes of 
India, had been much canvassed at the time. His hereditary leaning to 
the French, and his readiness to throw in his lot with them, were as 
decided and notorious as his irreconcileable and fanatical hatred of English- 
men, When, in the course of the long agony of Pitt’s miserably conducted 
war on the Continent, it appeared that Tippoo was preparing, with French 
aid, to resume hostilities against us, and that Buonaparte was on his way 
to Egypt with a view to co-operate in conquering England in India; 
the calmest and most constant mind might well entertain misgivings, 
and be inclined to applaud the prompt and vigorous initiative of the 
Governor-General against a local enemy, who might otherwise turn out 
to be an imperial danger of no trifling importance. 

The elaborate establishment, in the Governor-General’s Minute, of 
the casus belli; the comparatively moderate and defensive nature of the 
demands which, in the first instance, it was proposed to extort from the 
Sultaun; his patent and coarse devices to evade the issue and stultify 
our preparations, till the chapter of accidents might befriend him, and 
bring the French in force to his assistance; the panic fear at Madras of 
even attempting to concert defensive measures; the Governor-General’s 


xiv SURVEY OF LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION. 


lucid and forcible exposition of our ‘critical, not alarming’ state; the 
ability, energy, and rapidity, with which he rehabilitated our alliance 
with the Nizam, completed the arrangements for a war, in which the 
army was to be, to a great extent, its own base, and should be enabled, 
in the Napoleonic fashion, to strike at once at the enemy’s capital, and 
end the contest by ‘a single, distinct, and definite operation’; the cordial 
and useful co-operation of the Nizam’s forces, reformed on Wellesley’s 
model, and directed by his military brother ; the two victories of Seedasere 
and Malvelly ; the uninterrupted and comparatively expeditious progress 
of the vast armaments to the scene of their ‘certain triumph’; the 
steady and methodical conduct of the siege; the swift and completely 
successful assault; the absence of unnecessary carnage; the fortunate 
death of the Sultaun; the prompt submission of his family, his servants, 
and of the country generally; the consummate skill with which the 
delicate and difficult problem of the partition and settlement of the 
conquered territories was solved, stated, and executed; lastly, the 
obvious, signal, and at the moment unqualified advantages resulting from 
the whole undertaking :—all combined to win golden opinions at home 
from every class of critics in favor of such an achievement on the part 
of one so recently entrusted with so novel and arduous a charge. Lord 
Mornington himself plainly conceived that he had herein gained no 
ignoble spolra opima. Again and again he reverts to the conquest of 
Mysore, as Cicero did to the suppression of Catiline’s conspiracy. And 
the just pride which he felt in the reduction of Tippoo’s power, and the 
confidence with which he counted on public approval in England, 
appear most clearly in the fact that, when doing what he feels will be 
most unpalatable to the Directors, he appeals to them by the memory of 
this event. He dates the Regulation for the establishment of Fort 
William College on the anniversary of the capture of Seringapatam. 
His classical mind might revert to Manlius. If you are inclined to 
’ condemn me for betraying your commercial constitution, remember— 
I saved you from Tippoo ! 

How much he was indebted for his success to the counsels and 
co-operation of his brother Arthur may be inferred from a paper in the 
Appendix, and is illustrated at large in the Duke of Wellington’s Des- 
patches. Colonel Wellesley’s animated description of the order of march 
is also a valuable historical document, full of local colouring. And, as a 
ridiculously mythical narrative was circulated of the check which the 
Colonel sustained in the night attack at Seringapatam, it was thought 
well to give the authentic accounts of that incident. The pith of the 
matter is summed up in the following characteristically simple and 
straightforward words:—‘As I could not find out the post which it 
was desirable I should occupy, F was obliged to desist from the attack, 
the enemy also having retired from the post.’ 


MYSORE, XV 


The Governor-General’s Minute deserves attention, not only with 
reference to its immediate occasion, but as the starting point of a new 
policy, and the manifesto and justification of that policy. The sense of 
insecurity, and the positive expense entailed by the constant fear of war 
in India; the double peril of French aggression from within and without; 
the necessity of rescuing the Nizam from the Mahrattas, and placing him 
permanently under British protection; the exposed condition of our 
North-West frontier, and the imminence of Afghan invasion; the 
formidable power of Scindia, and the desirableness of counteracting his 
influence at Poona, perhaps even of coercing him by arms; the policy 
of attempting to bridle the whole Mahratta League through the medium 
of a more intimate and predominant alliance with the Peishwa; the 
hopeful prospect of a pacified India, regulated and controlled by a wise 
and ‘moderate’ British Power :—such are the chief features of the more 
general view thus early matured in the mind of the Governor-General, 
and expounded: with his usual clearness, and with perhaps some un- 
consciousness of the obstacles to its realization. The subjoined passage 
seems to contain the key to his whole system of dealing with native States; 
and though its full import might not be at once apparent, it at least gives 
no uncertain sound as to the obvious tendency of his wishes and exertions’, 
How much, as regarded the Mahrattas, he counted without his host, will 
appear in the sequel. But, by the very announcement of such a scheme, 
he gave a pretty clear indication that a Mahratta war was by no means 
unlikely to follow a successful one with Tippoo. 


1 ‘While we prevent our allies from weakening themselves by repeated contests, we 
may expect that such an interference in the disputes of the native powers, so far from 
tending to foment divisions, and to occasion war, will prove the best security for the 
general tranquillity of India, as well as the most solid pledge of our disposition to pre- 
serve that blessing from interruption. ILowever comprehensive and intricate-the pro- 
posed system may appear at the first view, it will soon be evident to all the powers of 
Tndia, that the fundamental principle of our policy is invariably repugnant to every 
scheme of conquest, extension of dominion, aggrandisement, or ambition, either for 
ourselves or for our allies. Consistently with this principle, it is our right and duty 
to restore the vigour and efficiency of our defensive alliances ; but beyond the limits of 
this principle, we entertain no project of altering the condition, of reducing or of 
raising the power of any established state in India. On the other hand, the same 
principle justifies and demands our firm resistance to the intrusion of any foreign 
power which shall attempt to acquire a preponderant influence in the scale of Indian 
politics, to the prejudice of our defensive alliances, and of our just interests, The 
establishment of our subsidized force at Poonah and Hyderabad will afford effectual 
means of guarding, not only against any such intrusion, but against the undue growth 
of any native power, While we possess so formidable a force in the centre of India, 
no such event can happen without our knowledge and consent,’ 


xvi SURVEY OF LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION, 


II. THE NIZAM. 


_A rebellious offshoot of the Mogul Empire, the Nizam’s power had 
always been overshadowed and threatened by the Mahrattas,) Nizam-ul- 
Mulk himself had been more than once humiliated by the Peishwa, and 
had been all along his tributary. Protected for awhile by BuSsy’s brilliant 
ascendancy in the Dekkan; allied at a later period with the English, 
though for a short time their opponent in the first war with Hyder; the 
Nizam had never been able to throw off the Mahratta claim to choufe, 
a convenient pretext for indefinite fiscal exaction and political interference.) 

The exigencies of the war with Tippoo had induced Lord Cornwallis to 
strain his conscience so far as to write a letter, which was to have the 
binding force of a Treaty, to allay the fears of the feeblest member of the 
Tripartite Alliance, lest he should be devoured by the Mahrattas while 
engaged against the common enemy. Sir John Shore’s non-intervention 
policy almost occasioned this disastrous result, and brought about the 
dominant influence of a French corps at Hyderabad. Lord Mornington’s 
first Treaty with Nizam Ally, and the skilfully combined and energetic 
measures that followed in execution of it, averted the latter danger, and 
converted the Nizam into a really serviceable ally in the Mysore war. 
But the second Treaty went much further, and sounded the warning note 
of still more momentous changes in our political relations. It formally 
undertook the defence of the Nizam against all enemies, including the 
Mahrattas ; and in consideration of large territorial cessions, it omitted 
the previous restrictions against the employment of the subsidiary force 
on minor occasions of internal trouble. 

It could hardly be expected, considering the antecedents, that the 
Mahrattas, whoever might wield the effective power at Poonah, would ever 
peaceably agree to forego the claim to choute. Nor, whatever may have 
been the case as to the mode and results of its exaction, could it be 
called in itself an unjust one, as the Duke of Wellington seems to imply 
in his answer to Lord Castlereagh. Thus, though on general and over- 
ruling grounds its abolition might be necessary; such a demand almost 
unavoidably involved a war with the Mahrattas, whenever that people 
should have the courage to undertake one. But Wellesley hoped that 
they would not; and that éhus British mediation might befriend our 
ally, and deliver him permanently from a burden which was not only 
humiliating, but grievous and dangerous. In this hope he was deceived, 
as he had been in Tippoo’s case, and as Europeans are very apt to be 
when they count confidently on natives acting in accordance with what 
we conceive to be their obvious interest. 


THE CARNATIC. OUDE. XVil 


III. THE CARNATIC, 


Much what Ireland was to the English Government, the Carnatic had 
long been to the Anglo-Indian rulers ;—a scene of perpetual misgovern- 
ment, oppression, and discord ; a constant source of danger; a tempting 
prize to our enemies ; a scandal to the English name ; a slough of despond, 
which, in a series of wars, absorbed treasure and troops, without corre- 
sponding advantage, or any assured prospect of permanent improvement. 
The -cessation of the double government, and the annexation of the 
province by the Company, had long been recommended, and was much 
desired by the Directors and the Ministry, as Mr. Dundas’s letters testify. 
But this the Nabob, backed by his European advisers and creditors, 
stoutly resisted, appealing to Treaties, and taking his stand on his tech- 
nical right to the séa/us quo. This was a dangerous line, under the 
circumstances, to adopt towards Lord Wellesley, who slew him—or 
rather his successor—with his own weapon. However little the papers 
discovered at Seringapatam may satisfy Mr. Mill’s severe tests; they 
clearly enough proved both a technical breach of Treaties, and a 
violation of their spirit and object. And besides the intolerable nuisance 
of such a state-of affairs as prevailed in the Carnatic, and for which the 
Company was indirectly responsible ; there could be no reasonable doubt 
that Mahomed Ali, who was in fact our creature, and not even the 
eldest son of the family, had played treacherously and most mis- 
chievously into Hyder’s hands in our earlier wars; or that his son only 
followed the traditional practice in associating himself with our most 
determined enemy. Whatever shortcomings there may have been in the 
later administration of the Carnatic by the English, the measure which 
the Declaration (prepared by Lord Wellesley, though issued by Lord 
Clive) announces and justifies, is broadly distinguishable both in principle 
and policy from cases which, though liable to be confused with it, may 
be freely condemned without disputing the propriety or necessity of this 
change. 


Iv. OUDE. 


Of all Lord Wellesley’s proceedings, his dealings with the Nabob 
Vizier of Oude are apt, at first sight, to seem most harsh and arbitrary. 
A careful consideration of the circumstances may much modify, if not 
altogether ea the impression. The distressing voluminousness of 
the materials is undoubtedly a difficulty in the way of the enquirer. The 
present object has been to supply such documents as are requisite to 
place the matter, in its essential characteristics, fairly and with sufficient 
fulness, before the reader. That the Nabob was an independent 
Sovereign, cannot be maintained in the face of the facts of history, The 

b 


Xvili SURVEY OF LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION. 


Duke of Wellington’s short Memorandum in the Appendix shews the 
vital importance to the Company’s Provinces of the defence of Oude, 
and the origin and character of this obligation on the part of the English 
Government. Sir James Craig shews that, in the opinion of the 
responsible military authority, while the danger of invasion was great, 
the Nabob’s own army was not only a heavy drain on his exchequer, 
but a real and formidable peril to our Government. Mr. Dundas 
strongly recommends the dispersion of these rabble corps. The most 
doubtful point perhaps was the claim to increase the subsidiary corps 
indefinitely, at the discretion of the English Government. The increasing 
probability of a rupture with the Mahrattas, while it might be a plea for 
the liberal exercise of this pretension, might also make that exercise 
practically ruinous to Oude. The Treaty, of course, settled this as well 
as other points; but only after the resort to very severe pressure, the 
.mission of Mr. Henry Wellesley, a controversy which it is painful, even 
in the light of later events, to read, and the obstinately resisted and 
ineffectual endeavour to accomplish what had been done in the Carnatic. 
The rectification of our military frontier, and the territorial isolation of 
the Nabob, were not only parts of a larger scheme, but in themselves 
measures of obvious importance, especially at such a crisis. The Nabob 
continued to amass treasure. But the English intervention cannot be said 
to have much improved, in the long run, the condition of the country. 
The dissatisfaction of the Directors with Mr. Henry Wellesley’s appoint- 
ment was 4 chief cause of the alienation between them and Lord Wellesley. 


V. MAHRATTAS, 


We now enter on the most memorable and characteristic chapter of 
Lord Wellesley’s administration, The Mysore war was the closing act of 
anold drama. The Treaty of Bassein was the prelude to a new tragedy. 
That we took up arms against Tippoo to ward off serious, inveterate, 
and imminent perils, was sufficiently obvious, and was generally admitted 
in England. The expediency, and still more the necessity of the Treaty 
of Bassein, even apart from its almost immediate consequence, the war 
with Scindia and the Rajah of Berar, was a matter of grave question, and 
deep misgivings. The rapid and uniformly brilliant course of the contest 
exactly conformed to the Governor-General’s carefully elaborated plan, 
fully justified his anticipations, enhanced his reputation and that of the 
British troops, and thus half-disarmed the critics of his previous policy. 
But it did not prevent them from hesitating to admit the advantages of 
the general result, or from adverting to the total change of our position 
in India which it involved, the magnitude and complication of the new 
obligations which we had contracted, and the difficulties and dangers that 
must beset even the attempt to fulfil them at all adequately. 


MAHRATTAS. xix 


And when the war with Holkar followed close on the pacification 
with the other Mahratta chiefs; and he’who had so lately been repre- 
sented as a needy and desperate adventurer inflicted upon our arms the 
greatest humiliation they had experienced since thie destruction of Baillie’s 
corps; and in spite of the heroic defence of Delhi, the great victory of 
Deeg, the breathless cavalry chase along the Doab, and the rout of 
Ferruckabad, contrived to alienate from us our recent and spontaneous 
ally, the powerful Rajah of Bhurtpore; and with his aid prolonged the 
contest, and rekindled anew, far and wide, the smouldering embers of 
disaffection and predatory licence, thus producing a series of sporadic 
encounters of a petty and inglorious, but perplexing, wearisome, and in 
their genera] tendency dangerous character ; when, moreover, four vehe- 
ment assaults by Lake’s victorious army were successfully resisted at 
Bhurtpore, and Scindia shewed an unmistakeable disposition to try once 
more the fortune of war against us:—then was the feast of croakers! 
Then Lord Wellesley’s supporters waxed faint ; and the vehement tide 
of public opinion in England condemned the rash, ambitious, and war- 
loving statesman ; and floated out the good old nobleman who had first 
broken Tippoo’s power, to die in the futile attempt to reverse an order 
of things, which he had himself materially, however involuntarily, contri- 
buted to bring about. 

The fact is, the line which Wellesley pursued in his Mahratta negotia- 
tions was'a bolder and more original one than had ever been adopted, or 
probably conceived, by any European statesman in India, Dupleix per- 
haps excepted. Though it naturally commended itself to his capacious 
mind and sanguine and benevolent temper, it was also, to a considerable 
extent, forced upon him by recent circumstances: he was led on from 
step to step by the course of events, and the falsification of his too con- 
fident hopes of the efficacy of his pacific expedients. The objections 
to his policy were obvious, plausible, and weighty. In working it out 
he was confronted, and driven at times to over refinements, by em- 
barrassing facts, deeply rooted prejudices, mistimed or misinterpreted 
restrictions. He was hastily judged, and condemned by the event of a 
partial and temporary collapse. He was weakened and discouraged at 
last by the consciousness of hesitating and half-hearted support from the 
Ministers, virulent and vulgar opposition in the Court of Directors, and 
ill-informed public clamour; and, acting on his brother Arthur’s advice, 
he threw up the game when on the point of winning it, lest the cards 
should be rudely snatched out of his hands. His work was mutilated; 
but it could not be effaced. And when the stress of the Napoleonic war 
was over, and local anarchy had produced a counterpart of the state of 
affairs around the shores of the Levant in Pompey’s days, Lord Hastings 
resumed and completed his great predecessor’s interrupted task. 

I shall endeavor to justify these remarks, and to exhibit, as fairly as 

ba 


xX SURVEY OF LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION. 


possible, the principal considerations which seem to have influenced the 
views of Lord Wellesley and his opponents respectively. 

On the one hand, there was a strong and not unnatural prejudice 
against a close connexion with thé Mahrattas. They were at once tur- 
bulent, warlike, unscrupulous, and notoriously jealous of our interference 
in their concerns. They had played us false more than once ; and though 
the Peishwa was pledged to help us against Tippoo, so far from doing so 
on the last-occasion, he had behaved, according to Wellesley, almost as 
an enemy. Now that Tippoo was no more, what had we to gain by an 
alliance with this people? We need hardly fear their attacking us; and 
if they were disposed to do so, they were quite capable of forgetting 
friendly professions, and ignoring Treaty stipulations. While to associate 
ourselves intimately with the Court of Poona, the home of a Prince at 
once weak, wily, treacherous, and exorbitant in his latent pretensions ; 
the focus of interminable political intrigues, the scene of incessant revolu- 
tions, would be the surest way to become hopelessly entangled in ‘the 
labyrinth of Mahratta politics,’ and to be compelled to take a side, and 
thus plunge into war. And with what result? There was an unpleasant 
memory of the perplexities and disasters of our former hostilities with 
the same people in Warren Hastings’ time. And we could not be sure, 
that in spite of the subsequent increase of our power, we might not 
again be unsuccessful, at least for a time. For Mahadajee Scindia had 
assiduously developed his military resources, and the reputation of his 
disciplined battalions and formidable artillery was great. While the old 
awe of the Mahratta cavalry had by no means passed away from the 
general mind. To side with one party would probably unite the rest 
against us; other States might join them; and they might call in the 
French to their assistance. If, on the contrary, we waged successful war, 
we might be hardly less endangered by our very triumph. Might we not 
overtax our strength and our resources in endeavoring to secure and 
administer our conquests, and to keep watch and ward over the restless 
ocean which we had for awhile dominated? Afole sua ruit Roma, was 
not to be forgotten, And might not we too come to resemble the 
Oriental river, that loses itself in the sands? Especially as both the 
nature of the case, and the voice of experience attested, that once launched 
on such an indefinite career of intervention and consequent hostility, it 
was by no means clear, where we might be able to stop. Might it not 
be our case to ‘find no end, in wandering mazes lost?” Thus much as 
to the abstract question. 

But special and contemporary facts also gave much additional force to 
such reasoning. The Peishwa only concluded the alliance in the pre- 
scribed form at the eleventh hour, and then as a prs aller, in his dire 
extremity. And could we trust him to abide by it? If it wag not neces- 

sary to us, for self-defence, still more, if it involved the issucs of war and 


MAHRATTAS. XXi 


probable conquest, was it not, though the Court might save the letter of 
the law by authorizing it, still a breach of the spirit and intention of the 
Act of Parliament? Was not the Company already heavily in debt, and 
bent on retrenchment and liquidation? Must not even a short and 
successful war, over so vast an area, be a very costly one? And though 
the Company had too often been dragged into hostilities, and become a 
sort of Sovereign against its will; did not this circumstance tell in favor 
of abstaining from connexions that might lead to a repetition of such a 
diversion of its energies from their original and proper destination, and 
of its resources from their imperative object of squaring the account, and 
paying’ a good dividend? Lastly, was this a time to occasion extraor- 
dinary demands for money and men, when every shilling and every 
soldier were most urgently required to rescue the British Empire itself 
from impending ruin? When cash payments were suspended, and 
Buonaparte was threatening invasion? Such was one side of the case, 
by no means (it may be thought, even when thus sketched) a weak 
one. : 

On the other hand, it is impossible to appreciate justly Lord Wellesley’s 
Mahratta policy without estimating how far he was influenced by the 
lessons of the past, the political circumstances of the time, and the 
remoter and more general considerations which his combined utterances 
indicate, Like Dupleix, he knew that whatever might be thought or said 
in favor of the Company’s commercial privileges, its trade, apart from the 
salt and opium monopoly, was a losing concern. Like Dupleix, he 
assumed office when the finances of his employers were embarrassed, and 
when war must embarrass them, for the time, still further. Like Dupleix 
again, he sought by the exercise of political influence, by the sagacious, 
steady, and commanding ascendancy of cultivated genius, by the reputa- 
tion of European character and established warlike fame, both to throw 
a magic and irresistible spell over the native mind, to strengthen the 
position of the Company as an Asiatic power, and to relieve its finances 
by making the native Princes themsclves defray the expenses of the 
troops by which they were to be overawed, But unlike Dupleix, he was 
no mere bold and fundamental revolutionist in this course. The British 
Empire in India was already a great fact, and a substantive portion of the 
Empire at large; and Wellesley, though bound to attend to trade, not 
only maintained frankly, forcibly, and consistently, that trade could not 
flourish unless his political duties were fully discharged, but esteemed the 
latter altogether paramount, and held that his chief business was to 
defend, consolidate, and improve the British Indian Empire~as an 
integral and vitally important part of the parent State. This consideration 
seems to me really the key to his whole policy—as a statesman; though 
as a man, (if a distinction may be drawn in thought where in the appli- 
cation of the motives there was nonce) the claims of humanity, and the 


xxii SURVEY OF LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION. 


duty of pacifying, and ameliorating the social condition of India generally, 
were powerful ancillary influences in determining his course. 

Now, as to the past, he’ knew too well that British India had been 
constantly endangered both by the restless and unprincipled ambition of 
native powers, of recent origin and alarmingly sudden development; by 
the abstinence of the Company’s Government from timely intervention, 
or by equally casual, awkward, violent, and abortive attempts to check 
this danger; by the frequent interposition of the French, long after Coote 
had conquered Lally ; by the isolated position and straggling frontiers of 
the Company’s territories, or of others which they were bound to defend ; 
by the extent of seaboard that was still in native hands, and invited a 
landing hostile to us; and by the impossibility of ensuring, at all times, 
the command of the sea, so as to prevent such a landing and co-operation 
with our native enemies. A Mahratta confederacy against us was always 
on the cards; and after the destruction of Tippoo, both the removal of 
one whom they had always feared and hated, and our own aggrandise- 
ment through that event, gave additional incentives to such a stand against 
our growing and now singly menacing power. 

The complex, fanatical, and irreconcileable antagonism of England and 
revolutionary and Napoleonized France, the prodigious and alarming 
progress made by the latter power towards subduing Europe, the military 
genius and intriguing spirit of Napoleon, and his fixed idea of conquering 
England in India, together with the French faction already so powerful in 
Scindia’s dominions, and their control over Shah Allum, whom Buonaparte 
would delight more suo to use as a political tool, presented at the time a 
combination of dangers, which, but for Wellcsley’s vigilance then, and 
Trafalgar and the French Emperor’s Spanish policy afterwards, might 
well have proved overwhelming. The expense of guarding against these 
dangers must have been enormous; and Wellesley knew too well what 
had happened more than once, when we were caught unprepared in the 
tornado of Indian warfare, reinforced by Gallic blasts. Eis orderly mind 
meanwhile was disturbed, his humane spirit vexed, by the spectacle of 
the prodigal waste of life, the artificial sterility, and the infinite social 
misery, resulting from the perpetual anarehy of native India, since the 
strong hand of the Mogul Emperors had been paralyzed by the establish- 
ment and expansion of Mahratta predatory power. ‘Thus various motives 
combined to induce him to interpose, and attempt to apply, if possible a 
peaceful, if not a short and sharp, but in the end effectual remedy for dis- 
orders of such magnitude, whether actual or contingent. Security, humanity, 
economy itself, were all to be provided for by the same means, 

The details of the arrangements which commended themselves to his 
mind necessarily differed, to a certain extent, with circumstances. But 
the general idea of a strict alliance with the Peishwa was tempting on 
Many accounts, and promised at least alternative advantages of the 


MAHRATTAS. XXiil 


greatest consequence. While it must not be forgotten, that it was part 
of a more extensive scheme, he undoubtedly regarded it as the prin- 
cipal, and (so to speak) parental agent in that scheme. Poona and its 
vicinity would no longer be a battlefield of contending Mahratta factions. 
Thence would not again go forth, with all the authority of ‘the executive 
head of the Mahratta confederacy,’ a decree and an armament for the 
repetition of the Kurdlah performance, the political extermination of the 
Nizam, and the establishment of Mahratta influence, if not direct rule, on 
our Carnatic frontier. The Jong Mahratta western seaboard would be 
closed against the French. We should be peaceably strengthened in 
Guzerat, where a French landing had been pronounced by General 
Stuart even more dangerous than at Fort William itself. And in Bundle- 
cund we might thus obtain a footing, which would turn the flank of 
Scindia and Perron in Hindostan, fortify our exposed frontier on the 
North West, and secure our water communications. The moral influ- 
ence of the Peishwa’s alliance also would be considerable, though 
Wellesley undoubtedly overrated it. Technically it was of great value. 
And though it did not in the end prevent the great chieftains standing 
out against our influence; it materially propitiated many smaller chiefs, 
and conciliated the Mahratta population of the Peishwa’s territories, even 
when he was himself disposed to resent the too dictatorial tone of his 
new friends. If it was important to preclude the French from turning to 
account the Emperor's name, not less important was it to avail ourselves 
of the Pundit Purdhan’s more real authority. 

Wellesley seems to have hoped, that his own activity, the divisions and 
mutual jealousies of the Mahratta chiefs, the fear of the English arms, 
the impossibility of their obtaining timely and effectual aid from France, 
his solemn warnings, and perhaps, to a certain extent, even his ingenious 
argumentations, might avert an actual appeal to arms, And, in such a 
case, he would probably, by successive Treaties and repeated strokes of 
diplomatic dexterity, have greatly improved the original position, and 
effectually trammelled the other chiefs in a network of stipulations tend- 
ing to disarm them by degrees, establish over them the peaceful supremacy 
of the British Government, and enclose British India in a cordon of sub- 
sidized forces. But if this expedient failed, and war was to be the word, 
he did not shrink from the issue. For while the question of expediency 
was determined by considerations already mentioned, the justice of a war 
which he regarded as ultimately defensive, he did not doubt; and he 
felt perfectly confident of the rapid and complete success of our arms. 
And victory would give him at once what must otherwise be the tardier 
fruit of diplomacy. His own repeated and emphatic statements belie 
the idea that he expected war from the first. But he must all along have 
contemplated it as a not very improbable contingency. When war became 
certain, he drew a plan, the comprehensiveness of which, as a scheme 


xxiv SURVEY OF LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION. 


of occupation and conquest, startled Lord Castlereagh, and made him 
almost despair of our ability to meet its military requirements. But 
Wellesley felt, that it was both easier, safer, and more economical 
to garrison permanently even this large area, than to keep up, at our 
own cost, a force adequate to cope with the augmented and united 
power of enemies, whom our inaction had fostered, emboldened, and 
combined. 

T have said that the proposed subsidiary alliance with the Peishwa was 
part ofa more general scheme of diplomatic connexion with the native 
States, for the pacification of India under British hegemony. Though 
the three greatest Mahratta chiefs declined to be thus reduced, without a 
struggle, to a practically dependent condition; it must not be forgotten, 
that Wellesley had with him the sympathies, not only of a vast part of 
the population which had long groaned under Mahratta extortion, but 
especially of the older and more regular powers, notably the Rajputs, 
who had been submerged (so to speak) in the deluge, of which Sivaji had 
first opened the flood-gates. Zhey were only too happy to be comprised 
in any plan, which should promise their restoration to the peaceful, 
flourishing, and half-independent state, in which they had long lived 
under the Mogul Empire. Bhopal, Gohud, and other petty principalities 
were equally desirous of English protection. The Nizam, the Guikwar, 
Mysore, and Coorg, were already enjoying it. Travancore was indcbted 
to it for preservation ; and has since presented a favorable specimen of 
the good effects of Wellesley’s system, when judiciously carried out. 
The smaller Sikh States were anxious to be guaranteed against the 
Mahrattas on the one hand, and the Afghans on the other, and already 
had reason to fear the rising ambition of their own great tribesman. A 
similar disposition was shown in Bundlecund, and in the Rajah of 
Berar’s eastern territories. And the Jat Rajah of Bhurtpore himself was 
fain to enter into the system; and though tempted to abandon it by the 
arts of Holkar,’and the unwonted spectacle of a serious English reverse, 
he soon reverted to his original mind. 

Thus, though it might be feared lest the cords of alliance should be 
snapped by their very extension ; they were, in fact, strengthened as they 
advanced, and were half-woven beforchand in the hearts of both chiefs 
and peoples. 

Several strong objections, however, were urged at the time, or after- 
wards, against Wellesley’s policy both in Mahratta affairs, and in its more 
general application. 

The charge, that in concluding a Treaty which led directly to war, he 
broke the law, may be dismissed very briefly. Castlereagh fully acquits 
him of this charge. As to the letter, the previous sanction of his pro- 
ceedings by the Directors settles the matter, and satisfies the Act. And 
though their later tone, and that of the Secretary of the Board of Control, 


MAHRATTAS. XXV 


was to a certain extent opposed to this sanction, such retractations came 
too late; and being based upon general reasonings, inconclusive in 
themselves and inapplicable to the circumstances, naturally had little 
weight with him, and neither did nor could undo the past, nor arrest the 
swift march of events. Especially as the Governor-General had acted 
with the full concurrence of his Council, and muradile dictu | considering 
his later line, Sir George Barlow had volunteered a detailed argument in 
favor of the propriety and necessity of concluding the Treaty, which 
will be found in its place in these Selections. As to the spirit and inten- 
tion of the Act, another paper, by the Governor-General himself, also 
printed in this volume, will be seen to throw much light on the matter, 

‘though it refers more to earlier transactions, And though he had no 
desire to violate that spirit (for I believe him to have been perfectly sincere 
in his disclaimer of ‘irregular ambition’), yet he felt bound to interpret 
the Act freely, and with reference to altered circumstances; he had given 
early intimation that such was his view and intention ; and he held, that 
he could neither defend British India, nor secure to the country generally 
that eventual exemption from the evils of war, which the Act was in- 
tended to promote, unless he asserted that supremacy which events had 
forced upon us, and which his brother, in the Introductory Paper, openly 
claims as already our own. 

If, again, he may seem to have been too careless of the cost of such a 
widespread contest, however this suspicion may have affected the close 
of his administration, and the views and conduct of his successors, it 
must be remembered first, that both wars were, in his eyes, inevitable, 
and that those could hardly deem them otherwise, who had maintained 
the necessity of war with France in 1493, into which Pitt himself had 
been driven by the great Philo-Indian, Edmund Burke; secondly, that 
Wellesley, like Pitt, did not anticipate a long war, and that much of the 
cost of the Holkar campaign would have been spared, had the Governor- 
General’s instructions been more exactly followed; thirdly, that he looked 
to increased and permanent resources to retrieve the temporary sacrifices 
incurred in obtaining them; and lastly, as I have already obs@fved, that 
his aim was, by spending freely but not recklessly at the moment, to save 

“the much more serious expense of constant defensive armaments, and a 
more formidable and costly contest in the end. 

Again, it has been maintained that he underrated his enemy, at least 
in the case of Holkar. The truth is, as before, he anticipated prompt 
success, and his admirable arrangements justified the anticipation. But 
besides Fawcett’s inexcusable carelessness and consequent mishap, at the 
outset, Monson’s disaster disturbed all the Governor-General’s plans, 
And that disaster was obviously due, in a great measure, to the neglect 
of his provident and explicit counsels. He disapproved of detached 
corps, each too weak to defend itself, or force a junction with the other, 


XXVi SURVEF OF LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION. 


Thus the proportions of Monson’s corps, and that officer’s advance 
beyond the Mokundra pass, were both distinctly opposed to this wise 
recommendation. He urged that Monson should be reinforced with 
European infantry. And the want of such a reinforcement was certainly 
one of the principal causes of the catastrophe. The Rajah of Bhurtpore’s 
defection, the renewed disturbances elsewhere, and the disposition of 
Scindia to resume hostilities, were the natural consequences of this really 
great reverse, though not so great as natives were inclined to pronounce 
* it. But Wellesley, from first to last, fully understood the nature of the 
case, and never wavered in his estimate of it. India could not be pacified 
at one stroke. But the first had been mortal to Mahratta military pres/ige. 
The second was turned aside fora moment, but foramomentonly. Deeg, 
Ferruckabad, and the defence of Delhi, though they did not at once 
produce their full effect on minds preoccupied with Monson’s failure, were 
eloquent facts. Lake’s precipitate and over-confident attempts to scramble 
into Bhurtpore without proper appliances, regular approaches, the sys- 
tematic taking off of the defences, and a feasible entrance, were most 
unfortunate, and drew forth renewed cautions from the clear-sighted 
Governor-General. But they also opened the Rajah’s eyes, and led him 
to give up the contest and dismiss Holkar. And Ae was rapidly run 
down in the Punjab, without daring again to look the English army in 
the face, as indeed he never had dared to do. The waiters on Providence 
could not be blind to such lessons, though the master spirit of the war no 
longer animated the Government, and the hasty and timid pacification 
ignored the completeness of the reduction of Holkar’s power. But in 
one of his last Despatches, Wellesley was able to show that, in spite of all 
drawbacks, the defensive alliance system had answered, on the whole, well, 
in the course of his second Mahratta war, and had both diverted from 
Holkar, and converted to our use, a considerable proportion of the 
military resources of the country. This ig the best answer to Mill's 
strictures. 

Another objection is raised by Castlereagh, and no doubt occurred to 
many other English statesmen. However ingenious the conception of 
the system in the mind of the original projector, however skilful its 
manipulation by the master’s hand, however vigilantly supervised by his 
penetrating and indefatigable scrutiny, how would it fare in other hands? 
Would it be easy, or even possible, to secure not only one successor, but 
a series of Governors-General capable of appreciating and carrying on so 
artificial and delicate an arrangement? Could it dispense with that rare 
combination of qualities, which made the character and administration of 
Lord Wellesley so remarkable? Breadth of view and firm grasp of details, 
untiring devotion to business, fortitude, readiness, and tact, nice dis- 
crimination, and lofty impartiality in the selection of agents, strong moral 
ascendancy over them, combined with a rare faculty for organization and 


MAHRATTAS. XXvii 


luminous exposition? If such a man, or a series of such men, could 
be found, would the changes and chances of English political life, and the 
narrow prejudices of the Directors, admit of their employment? And 
what would become of the system in wzable hands? This was a grave 
consideration ; nor can it be said that it has been proved to have been 
the offspring of a visionary fear. Wellesley, no doubt, felt that sufficient 
unto the day was its own evil; that his plan, as conducted by himself, 
was at least a timely palliative, if not a radical cure, for immediate and 
urgent evils. If later dangers required its readjustment, later wisdom 
must resolve the new problem. Meanwhile, though in such a case it 
could not be said, ce n'est gue le premier pas qui coute, he had at least done 
much to consolidate and perpetuate his scheme, and to clear the way for 
his successors. The two great difficulties of native connexion were, the 
delicacy of the Resident’s position and functions, and the tendency of the 
subsidy to fall into arrears, and thereby necessitate undue interference on our 
part, and the ruinous expedients to which the native Prince was apt to 
resort, in order to meet the demand. As to the second point, the 
territorial cessions, granted once for all in lieu of subsidy, made the 
arrangement self-acting, and averted the danger. As to the first point, 
not only did he, by precept and example, impress the existing generation 
with his own conceptions of the appropriate mode of exercising the 
functions in question, but he relied on the College of Fort William to 
train a race of civilians, who should be equal to the task. Nor in leaving 
India did he renounce the charge of watching over the destinies of the 
Empire he had done so much to extend and strengthen. His ante- 
cedents, his abilities, his knowledge, and his position at home, might well 
justify a sanguine hope, that his influence would avail much to maintain 
the vitality and healthy action of the system which he had instituted. Other 
urgent cares indeed soon engrossed his attention in Europe. But he 
never lost his interest in India. And his ‘school’ sustained his credit, 
and continued his work, with good effect, in the East. 

Lastly, a still more serious, fundamental, and permanent objection, 
was urged against the subsidiary alliance system, which comes to us 
endorsed by the high authority, and expounded in the forcible language 
of Sir Thomas Munro. The native Prince being guaranteed in the 
possession of his dominions, but deprived of so many of the essential 
attributes of sovereignty, sinks in his own esteem, and loses that stimulus 
to good government, which is supplied by the fear of rebellion and 
deposition. He becomes a rot fainéant, a sensualist, an extortionate 
miser, of a careless and lax ruler, which is equivalent in the East to an 
anarchist. The higher classes, coerced by external ascendancy, in turn 
lose their self-respect, and degencrate like their master: the people groan 
under a complicated oppression which is irremediable. Thus, in spite of 
the Resident’s counsels and attempts to secure good government, the 


XXViili SURVEY OF LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION. 


back of the State, so to speak, is broken; the spirit of indigenous 
political life has departed; the native community tends to dissolution ; 
and annexation is eventually the inevitable remedy for its helplessness 
and chronic disorders. 

Or again, the Prince resents his dependent condition: he kicks 
against the pricks; he violates some or other of the stringent con- 
ditions under which he occupies the musnud; he intrigues against the 
English government, or he murders its officers, or envoys from other 
States, whose safety it has guaranteed; and he must be punished. His 
consequent irritation presently expresses itself in fresh acts of contumacy ; 
and he must be coerced anew. And thus again, little by little, or at 
one fell stroke, his dominions are annexed, and his subjects pass directly 
under British rule. This, it will be obvious, is by no means a fancy 
picture: while, though it would be most unfair to assume, that Wellesley 
deliberately contemplated such a general consummation, it cannot be 
supposed that he could shut his eyes to the possibility of its occurrence. 
Probably while he devised and applied the system as an indispensable 
remedy for actual evils, he regarded it as an important experiment, which 
he hoped might answer its ends better than the objection assumes it was 
capable of doing; but which, if it did not, might eventually be replaced 
by immediate and avowed English dominion. He had a strong sense 
of the actual degradation and personal demerits of too many native 
Princes: he saw little hope of their ever becoming good rulers, or of 
their people enjoying peace and prosperity, without his aid: license either 
party might have, but hardly manly energy or virtuous enterprise. Ile 
had also strong faith in the possibilities of English control in improving 
the administration, though he was hopeless of it in some cases, where 
inveterate maladies seemed to defy all remedial appliances. If the native 
Governments, then, were remediable, and capable of being traincd into 
tolerable working instruments for political and social purposes,—good! 
If not, sooner or later, but not until the experiment had been fairly tried, 
and circumstances, and public opinion in India and im England were ripe 
for the change, let them give place to our better organized, better 
principled, and more beneficent sway, 

There was, however, one means, as pointed out by Sir Thomas Munro, 
which might postpone, if not avert, this consummation—the appointment 
of a native Dewan. And this expedient Wellesley gladly adopted, where 
he could find such an agent duly qualified. Poornca he at once em- 
ployed in Mysore, and with good effect. The Nizam’s Minister he 
cordially supported. And, on the other hand, he did his utmost to re- 
place Scindia’s infamous father-in-law by a more constitutional and 
respectable adviser. But at that time, and under the circumstances of 
the day, such advisers were not too plentiful. The Sir Salar Jungs, the 

‘Sir Madhava Raos, and other eminent and enlightened native statesmen 


MAHRATTAS, Xxix 


are the growth of a state of things, which had not then arisen, though 
Wellesley did much to hasten its advent. And, after all, though history 
confirms too strongly the reasonableness of Munro’s fears ; they were at 
least exaggerated. In spite even of the free handling of native States by 
Lord Dalhousie, the Nizam, Mysore, three of the greater Mahratta 
Powers, the Rajput States, Bhopal, Travancore, and many more, which 
were less intimately connected than these with Wellesley’s history, still 
survive, and are destined, it may be hoped, to a career of indefinite 
improvement, as integral but unannexed, and to a certain extent self- 
governing members of the great Anglo-Indian Empire. 

But Munro’s remarks suggest, or rather require, a few more words of 
explanation. When, after predicting, half a century beforehand, the 
Sepoy mutiny, as the result of the general establishment of our pacific 
sway, he adds :—‘ But even if we could be secured against every convul- 
sion, and could retain the country quietly in subjection, I doubt much if 
the condition of the people would be better than under their Native 
princes’;—his words may well startle us, but should neither be mis- 
understood, nor received too implicitly, nor assumed as conclusive of 
what would have been his own view at the present day. That a political 
machinery which supplied, however imperfectly, a career for honest 
official exertion, and thus sustained the self-respect and active powers of 
the office holders, was preferable so far to one, which, by excluding the 
citizen of a whilom native State from office, tended to debase and asser- 
vilize him, was one side of the question. But there was another side. 
And Munro would hardly have denied, that the liberty to do only evil 
continually was a questionable advantage over a state of peaceful industry 
and external prosperity, though associated with a timid and cringing 
temper. And that Mahratta ascendancy amounted to little else, that but 
for the English it tended to become universal, and that there was no 
hope of any constructive, wise, and beneficent political development from 
such a quarter, are indisputable truths, confirmed by the express testi- 
mony of the highest authority on Mahratta history and character, Captain 
Grant Duff. The Rajputs were a fine, manly, chivalrous race. But was 
it the English rule which, in their case, depressed the spirit of Princes 
and people alike, and drove them to cry in agony for a paramount Power 
to curb the oppressor, and let them freely enjoy their patriarchal life and 
institutions? Was not the appeal made to the English against the 
Mahrattas?_ The ‘Moguls’ were a proud people at Hyderabad. But 
did either the Nizam or his subjects escape political and social degrada- 
tion from the same organized anarchy, until Wellesley came to their 
assistance? What had happened to the Rana of Gohud and his subjects, 
and to so many more victims of the pestilent enterprise and devastating 
power of this political preuzre ? this herd of lean kine, which devoured 
everything, yet itself remained ever meagre and moribund? 


XXX SURVEY OF LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION, 


Again, if the population in the British provinces was debased and 
servile, other causes than the character of British rule had long previously 
contributed to produce this result. Munro judged chiefly, in all probability, 
from Bengal, which though less familiar to him was notoriously the seat 
of such a race, and from the Carnatic, with which he was intimately 
acquainted. As to the former, it would be a waste of words to do more 
than refer to Macaulay’s well-known picture, and to add, that the village 
system, the best guarantee of native independence and self-respect, had 
Jong been undermined there. As to the Carnatic, no one who knows its 
history, and the character of Mahomed Ali’s rule, will much wonder at the 
want of an elastic and enterprising spirit among its miserable inhabitants. 

But Wellesley’s aim was to introduce a better state of things. And 
though he was not hopeful of native agency in high places then, and 
would hardly have coincided now with the extreme view, which favors 
the introduction of representative institutions and popular government ; 
yet he undoubtedly anticipated a great improvement in the character of 
the people; and by the lofty and beneficent spirit of his administration, 
by his judicial institutions, by his elaborate provision for the education of 
the civilians, (whereby sympathy with native life, customs, and character 
would be promoted, and would create corresponding and elevating sym- 
pathy on the other side), by encouraging Christian missions as far as his 
position permitted him, by causing the Scriptures to be translated into 
native languages, and by other means, he certainly pursued a course well 
calculated in time to exalt the people above ‘this mere animal state of 
thriving in peace’; though he knew too well, that man must live before 
he can live such as he ought to be; and that there is a time for all 
things, among others, even for the too obtrusive ascendancy of a domi- 
nant race. 


VI. DEFENCE OF THE INDIAN EMPIRE, 


I have ventured to say, that the key to Wellesley’s whole policy seems 
to have been, his sense of the necessity of securing and consolidating the 
Anglo-Indian Empire, as an integral and very vulnerable part of the 
British Empire at large. The papers arranged under this head will, it is 
hoped, fully bear out that view, which is further illustrated in other parts 
of this volume. The Governor-General’s first task, both in time and in 
urgency, was to reduce the powerof Tippoo, and to prevent the combination 
of his forces with those of the French. And this required his arrange- 
ments with the Nizam, and the attempt to enlist the Peishwa in the same 
cause. The fall of Tippoo was shortly followed by the annexation of 
the Carnatic Payen Ghaut; which, together with the corresponding 
treatment of Tanjore (in which Lord Mornington only obeyed orders 
from home), gave us the full command of the Coromandel seaboard, and 


DEFENCE OF THE INDIAN EMPIRE, XXxi 


so diminished the danger of a hostile landing on that coast. Our ex- 
posed frontier towards Oude, noted by the Duke of Wellington in his 
short Memoir on the Vizier’s dominions; -the relaxed discipline of the 
troops, and the hopeless misrule, of the same Prince; the power and 
doubtful disposition of Scindia; the ambition, the military strength, and 
the wide-spread influence of Perron; the turbulent feebleness of the 
Sikhs; the restless enterprise and avowed designs of the Afghan Sovereign, 
and the memory of the Paniput campaign :—all combined to make the 
Governor-General anxious on the subject of our North-West confines. 
His apparently harsh conduct towards the Nabob Vizier is, as has been 
already said, mainly explicable on this ground. 

But though he thus turned the danger close at hand into a bulwark, it was 
not in his nature to ‘rest and be thankful’ at such a stage, or to await pas- 
sively more remote perils. He did not at that time succeed in prevailing upon 
Scindia to return to Hindostan, for the defence of his ill-cemented and dis- 
turbed territories there, or in effecting a cordial league with him against the 
common enemy beyond the Attok gorge. But, adopting a policy analogous 
to that which Gibbon ascribes to the Byzantine Emperors, he dissipated 
the storm which was gathering on the Afghan mountains by a diplomatic 
discharge through the medium of Mehdi Ali Khan; and, following this 
up by Malcolm’s Persian mission, he both secured India from a repetition 
of the Abdali inroads, and obviated the more distant contingencies of 
invasion from Central Asia, Russia, or France. How, besides breaking 
the military power of the Mahrattas, and gaining the moral advantage of 
the Peishwa’s alliance, he acquired by virtue of that alliance the control of 
the Western seaboard from Goa (which he garrisoned by friendly 
arrangement with the Portuguese Government) ,to the Nerbudda; 
strengthened the position of the Company in Guzerat; and occupied 
Bundiecund ; and how his first Mahratta war gave him Cuttack, the only 
part of the coast not in our hands, or under our influence'; has been 
already stated. 

The eushanasia to which he sought to consign the Emperor and his latent 
but formidable claims, will demand a few words later on. Before we leave 
the coast of India, and follow him in the more distant perspective of his 
provident care for the thorough accomplishment of his main object, three 
other illustrations of his many-sided activity may be properly noticed. 
First, the regular and constant supply of an adequate amount of Euro- 
pean troops, he, of course, felt to be most essential. In estimating that 
amount, he seems certainly to have overstated it, as resulting from the 
principles which he laid down, or rather the facts which he assumed 
as the basis of his calculation. But both his own statements, a letter 


* Canara had been acquired when Mysore was conquered, and Travancore was our 
dependent ally. 


XXXii SURVEY OF LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION. 


of Lake’s (here reproduced), on the newly-conquered territory in the 
North-West, and other circumstances shew, that he did not exceed the 
estimate proposed by his military advisers. And, on the other hand, 
it is notable, that however freely he sanctioned, in the stress of the 
Mahratta war, the temporary enrolment of irregular troops; and 
however embarrassing (as Lord Cornwallis states in his letters to Lake 
and the Directors) were the financial demands thus caused ; he steadily 
refused to tolerate the employment of Pindaries; and would, no doubt, 
had he remained to superintend the fortunes of a thoroughly pacified 
India, have devised expedients for economising the charge of our 
European army. Secondly, in his various Treaties and partitions of 
territory, he took great pains, both by disentangling the intricacies of 
joint or commingling holdings among the native chiefs, and by the 
abatement of Mahratta choufe, &c., to avert the occasions of renewed 
quarrels and disturbance; and he rectified frontiers, in a military sense, 
with minute care, so as to make both us and our staunch dependents as 
defensible as possible, and to give no advantage either to an open 
enemy, or to a doubtful and treacherous ally. Thirdly, with his usual 
thoroughness and foresight, he explored and expounded, in a long letter 
to Lord Hobart, a variety of ways in which French influence, if not 
blocked at once by diplomatic stipulations and legal provisions, might 
again insinuate itself into India. This document is interesting, and very 
characteristic of the writer, and his point of view. But its length has 
reluctantly compelled me to give only its conclusion, which however will 
be found very suggestive. 

But Wellesley’s defensive and anti-French precautions were not con- 
fined to the Indian Continent. Given the assumption, that ‘Ceylon 
was a bulwark of our Indian Empire,’ it was as natural that he should 
claim full authority over our settlement there, as that the commandant 
of a threatened stronghold should insist upon the control of an adjacent, 
though detached outwork. In his double capacity he argues the matter, 
of course, upon commercial and administrative, as well as on purely 
political and military grounds. But it is obvious that the latter class of 
considerations was uppermost in his mind, And much as circumstances 
have since changed, it may still be a practical question whether, in view 
of our extended dominion along the Eastern and Buddhist shores of the 
Bay of Bengal, his reasoning is even now out of date. 

The islands of Mauritius and Bourbon had becn, from the time of 
Labourdonnais to Tippoo’s last quest of assistance from that quarter 
against us, the advanced base of our European enemics in their warfare 
on the Indian Continent, as well as in the Indian seas. Jyven when 
destitute of the means of assailing efficiently our established power, 
their inhabitants had done a brisk and profitable business in the way of 
privateering, as the Governor-General’s figures shew. Long before his 


DEFENCE OF THE INDIAN EMPIRE. XXX 


time, I find in a valuable military memoir of our last war with Hyder Ally 
by Captain Innes Monro, a scheme for reducing these islands. Wellesley 
himself suggested such an operation at an early date. That, from the 
Admiral’s objections, and the long delay in advancing them, he was 
afterwards prevented from executing such a plan, was a matter of serious 
concern to him, and an occasion of severe argumentative remonstrance 
with the gallant, but narrow-minded sailor. As that remonstrance is not 
confined to Indian grounds, but rests directly upon imperial con- 
siderations, and the general conduct of the Anglo-French war all over 
the world, it has been placed under a separate head. And it tends to 
confirm the idea, that the Empire at large was Wellesley’s constant care, 
and India as an integral portion of thatEmpire. The Government, I may 
add, sided with him against the Admiral in this matter. 

Again and again he shews clearly how strong was his conviction, that 
the Governor-General of an Empire essentially maritime in its origin, in 
so large a part of its frontier, and in the requirements for its preservation, 
ought to have the disposition of the fleet in the Eastern waters. One of 
his sharpest rebukes to the Madras Government is on occasion of their 
presuming to interfere with his provisional initiative, and exclusive power 
of suggestion, as to the movements of the ships. He directs General 
Harris’s attention, with evident complacency, to the fact that, unlike 
Cornwallis, he can, during the Mysore war, rely upon the presence of the 
fleet off the Western coast, the result of such a suggestion, approved by 
the Admiral. 

Wellesley’s plan for the occupation of the French islands and the Cape 
is further worthy of note, as an illustration of his habit of not only devising 
and recommending expeditions in a general way, Hut carefully weighing 
the details of their prosecution. Thus, while the Cape was to be 
conquered from England, the Mauritius and Bourbon, like Abyssinia 
in our own time, were to be assailed from India; which in fact was 
the course eventually adopted in the respective cases. 

Foiled in his design upon the islands, the indefatigable and far- 
sighted ruler turned to another scheme, which also he had previously 
recommended, a scheme, unlike the others, of co-operation with a 
Western force. And this, the ‘Red Sea Expedition,’ actually took place. 
Mr. Goldwin Smith, indeed, has said that it did nothing. From his 
immediate point of view, and so far as martial achievements on the spot 
were concerned, this is, of course, literally true. But Mr. Goldwin 
Smith would probably be the first to admit, that as an indication of our 
diffusive energy and confidence in the East, and as a counterblast to 
Buonaparte’s vapouring letter to Tippoo and gasconading demeanour 
in Egypt, Baird’s meanderings with a sepoy army in that country, were 
by no means an idle military promenade ; and were well calculated to 
impress strongly not only the Oriental, but the French, and especially 

c 


XXXIV SURVEY OF LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION. 


the Gallo-Corsican imagination. A gun may not be fired in time ; but it 
is nevertheless 2 formidable weapon. Reserved strength, as the ex- 
Professor of Modern History at Oxford well knows—and exemplifies- 
is no small element of reputation and influence. 

Cicero’s speeches do not differ more in style from Czsar’s plain 
narrative, than the sonorous periods and elegant phraseology of Lord 
Wellesley from the masculine simplicity and strong common sense of 
Wellington’s Memoirs. But, as the Governor-General constantly 
adopted, adorned with literary skill, and executed with congenial 
determination, the views of his illustrious brother; so, in thi’ case, 
General Stuart’s unpretending but most important and suggestive paper 
seems to have supplied and justified, in the Governor-General’s mind, 
the combination of measures which have now been reviewed. It thus 
forms, by anticipation, an epitome of Wellesley’s general programme for 
the defence of our Indian Empire. And it is the best answer to the 
imputation that, in working out this programme, he was indulging in 
what he himself happily calls ‘irregular ambition’; and again, that 
however regular as well as fixed was his design of averting serious 
and manifold dangers, ¢haf amounted to a gratuitous passion for 
domination. 

_ As regards the Emperor, and the danger of his pretensions being 
employed against us by our enemies, especially by the French, the 
Governor-General carefully considered his course, and has fully explained 
the grounds and the details of his final determination. His reasons 
are plausible. But in a Lecture delivered and published last year’, 
I ventured to doubt whether, on the whole, that determination wag the 
best that could have been adopted. I shall not here repeat what was 
then urged. But I may add, that the connexion of Tippoo’s family soon 
afterwards with the Vellore mutiny might have shewn the danger of 
leaving such a state prisoner enthroned in the Mogul capital?; and that 
the letter of Sir Thomas Munro in the Appendix, on the subject of the 
Peishwa, tends to confirm the view, that the Company should have either 
assumed the office of the Emperor, or taken a commission from him. 


1 Anglo-Indian Rule Historically Considered. James Parker and Co., Oxford and 
London. 

2 Since the Lecture was printed, I have been favoured with the copy of a letter 
written by 2 military officer, in high political employment at the lime, to the Governor- 
General, Lord Ellenborough, warning that nobleman of the danger of allowing the 
‘King of Delhi’ to reside in the imperial city, The warning was disregarded; and 
the natural and disastrous consequence in due time followed, 


MISCELLANEOUS DESPATCHES, XXXV 


VII. MISCELLANEOUS DESPATCHES. 


The papers included in this section refer to subjects commented on 
elsewhere. But it seemed better to give them entire, and as they were 
written, than to cut them up, and relegate the fragments to their several 
heads. Speaking generally, they may be regarded as the connecting link, 
and the informal and confidential line of communitation) between the 
Council Chamber of Calcutta and the Board of Control. “Dhus they 
consist partly of Dundas’s personal approval, no doubt with Pitt’s assent, 
of the Governor-General’s measures } partly of suggestions which were 
the germ, and the anticipatory sanction of arrangements, carried out 
according to circumstances, and with modifications and developments, 
by the Governor-General; partly of expositions and vindications of his 
own more original proceedings; and occasionally, as in the excursive 
disquisition on the Supreme Court and its influence, and in the statement 
of facts militating against the hope of much increasing the revenue by 
direct taxation or by remittances, of friendly antagonism to Dundas’s 
views. Without reverting to the separate topics, one general circum- 
stance may be here noticed and exemplified, which is very prominent 
throughout these letters. This is, the Governor-General’s readiness to 
accept responsibility, his independent mode of acting, his resolve to 
be, though an accountable ruler in the end, still in the meantime a ruler 
indced, and not an ornamental figure-head of the State-ship, or a pliant 
instrument of misgovernment. 

Thus he asks the question—IIow is he to understand the principle 
previously laid down, that the landing of a considerable French force 
would justify war with Tippoo? But he does not await Dundas’s reply, 
though it tutns out to be in entire accordance with his own interpretation 
of the words. Again, he requests Dundas’s sentiments on the projected 
annexation of the Carnatic. But he frankly adds :—‘1 shall not wait for 
the communication’ of those sentiments, ‘if the season should appear to 
me to be favorable for the great measure, &c.’ He introduces the 
Bengal institutions into the Circars, though his correspondent thinks the 
time not ripe for them; and he does not hesitate to establish the Per- 
manent Scttlement on the Coromandel Coast, ‘ without previous reference 
to the Court of Directors.’ So too, he demolishes without mercy, in the 
last letter of these Sclections, the Admiral’s alleged scruples against 
engaging in an expedition to reduce the French islands, without previous 
instructions from England. Thus again, satisfied of the expediency of 
the step, and relying on the intimations in the original framework of the 
Supreme Government, that such a change was contemplated as desirable 
in the future, he separates its ordinary judicial functions from that 
Government, and constitutes the Sudder Courts as a distinct institution, 

ca 


XXXVi SURVEY OF LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION. 


and on a scale adequate to the occasion. In like manner he reorganizes 
the administrative machinery of the Supreme Government, and substitutes 
for ill-paid and inferior clerks of departments an imposing and costly, 
but also a really efficient Secretariat. 
But he goes further in the same direction. To improve the system 
‘would avail little, unless the men who were to work it were properly 
qualified, and selected according to their respective capacities. There 
was no fear that he would fail to employ and place judiciously the best 
men that he could find for each task ; and experience abundantly proved 
how penetrating was his scrutiny, how impartial his choice, how anima- 
ting his example and countenance, how formidable and judicially just 
and appropriate was his censure. But in spite of all that Cornwallis had 
‘effected for its purification and improvement, the Civil Service was still 
encumbered with no inconsiderable proportion of inefficient, and with 
some corrupt men. Seniority and actual position had their natural and 
conventionally too forcible claims. Men who had done good service 
once, were unwilling or unable to retire when no longer useful. Others, 
in the Madras Presidency, were, on the contrary, worth more, and could 
earn more, if they quitted the service, than its local rules allowed them. 
The civilians generally were below the standard of cultivation requisite 
for the difficult, delicate, and diversified political functions arising out of 
the development of the Anglo-Indian Empire ; and too many who aspired 
to be statesmen were, in training-and proficiency, but dull traders. And 
Jastly, in spite once more of Cornwallis’s constant and uncompromising 
protests against such practices, there was too much disposition at home, 
both among the Directors and the Ministry, to interfere with the patron- 
age of the service, and thus both directly to impair its efficiency by blind 
favor at a distance instead of calm and discriminating local selection 
according to merit and proved capacity, and to discredit and enfecble the 
authority of the Indian Governments, more particularly that at Calcutta. 
For all these evils, except the last, which to a mortifying extent baffled 
even Ais endeavours, and to which his early determination to resign was 
not a little due, Wellesley devised prompt and trenchant remedies, most 
unpalatable to his employers, and which combined with other circum- 
stances to make them desire his resignation or recall. Vigilantly to 
superintend future appointments was, of course, his primary expedient. 
Nor was he the man to whom—as even to Cornwallis—the Prince of 
Wales himself seems to have dared to propose jobs, or to recommend 
obviously incompetent persons. Thus, by a process of exhaustion, the 
specific gravity of the inefficient would graduajly deposit them below 
their betters; or leave them, at least, stranded and shelved at such @ 
moderate elevation as seniority claims, hopes of their improvement, and 
some consideration for their original disadvantages, might combine to 
procure for them. 


MISCELLANEOUS DESPATCHES.* XXXvii 


But Wellesley was not disposed to leave them long in peace even 
there. He announces to Dundas a plan, which he is determined to 
adopt at once, for buying them out, and compelling them to retire, as 
Cornwallis had recommended in the case of officers in the army—to 
England. Besides the mere cost of this proceeding, which however 
he suggests will be more than saved in the end, the narrow views and 
sordid temper of those, who had first inflicted them on the service, are 
thus visited upon the pockets of the Directors and the Proprietors. 
Their original sin finds them out. The ‘curse’ of nepotism ‘comes 
home to roost.’ And thus, again, a significant warning and a salutary 
check are transmitted from beyond sea, well calculated to diminish bad 
nominations of ‘writers,’ and to irritate the disappointed and alarmed 
patrons. 

To propose a general scheme of retiring pensions for the whole 
service, and to extend to Madras Cornwallis’s system of higher regular 
‘salaries and stricter prohibitions against irregular sources of emolument, 
were obvious corollaries from the previous measures, and not less un- 
acceptable to many of the Directors, 

It may be remarked incidentally, that the determined exclusion of all 
Englishmen, not in the service, from Oude, for which Wellesley incurs 
the wrath of Mill, was not only connected with the contemporary objec- 
tion to European colonization (partially explained on political grounds 
by the Duke of Wellington, in the Memoir on Bengal, and previously by 
Cornwallis); but was intended to prevent the recurrence there of such 
scandalous transactions between the Government and unofficial English- 
men, as had Jong embarrassed the Anglo-Indian Government, and had 
precipitated the annexation of the Carnatic. 

If the arrangements for increasing the efficiency of the Civil Service 
which have already been noticed were likely to be unwelcome to his 
employers ; what had the Governor-General to expect in the case of the 
comprehensive and costly project of the College at Fort William? Con- 
fidently as he writes, he probably anticipated something of the reception 
which awaited that great design. And thus, besides his forcible, enlight- 
ened, and exhaustive pleading, his bold four de force in pressing into the 
service the sermonizing and inquisitorial passage from the Directors’ own 
Despateh (conceived in so widely different a spirit), the almost senti- 
mental challenge of their approval by the memory of the Conquest of 
Mysore, and his endeavor to obviate the financial objection, in the first 
instance, by taxing the Service itself for the institution, from which it was 
to reap sO many benefits; he again stcals a march by establishing the 
College at once ; and thus, morcover, when the time comes for suspending 
and controverting the orders for its suppression, he is able to appeal to 
the experience of its good working, as a strong argument for its preser- 
vation and integrity. 


XXXViii SURVEY OF LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION. 


In the matter of the Private Trade, again, he made a temporary 
experiment almost coincidently with Dundas’s advocacy in England of 
the same step. This reaching the ears of the shrewd Scotchman in an 
unofficial manner, he urges Wellesley to persevere and repeat the expe- 
riment, in the teeth of the Directors and in defiance of their counter- 
orders, and promises support from the Board of Control. This it will 
be seen Wellesley does; and follows up the blow by another exhaustive 
battery of statistics and arguments, such as could hardly fail to flutter the 
Volscians of Leadenhall Street. 

Reverting to political examples of the same tendency to insist upon 
the initiative, and realize the technical nomenclature of his Government 
as ‘Supreme,’ his communications with Lord Clive, and the distinction 
which he draws between public and private correspondence, are import- 
ant. He will tolerate no disobedience, no cavilling, no remonstrance, 
or even hesitation as to the exact execution of his behests, in the public 
and officially recorded letters. But he is not only ready and anxious to 
explain his plans and the reasons for them privately to the Governor of 
Madras; but he will esteem reciprocal private communications of Lord 
Clive’s views a favor. Very similar is his tone in’ omitted letters to 
General Harris, when in charge of the same Government, and to Sir J. 
Craig. And while he was much angered by the transmission to himsclf 
of Mr. Webbe’s Memorial, written for General Harris, and treats it with 
lofty and scornful zzcurta ; this did not prevent his employing that useful 
officer in important charges, when he became more conformable, nor his 
attesting warmly the valuc of his services on his rather sudden death. 

Again, he is emphatic on the propriety of abolishing the very sem- 
blance of any authority on the part of the Supreme Court ‘over the 
person of the Governor-General. He says expressly, ‘No power in 
India should appear to be co-ordinate with the Government, and still less 
to rival or to control it.’ At the same time he dwells much, as will be 
mentioned presently, on the constitutional checks otherwise imposed on 
the power of the Governor-General. 

The subsequent formation of the Indian navy at once obviated and 
justified his claim to control the operations of the fleet in the East. 
But this was not the only case in which he felt his position, as a 
Company’s officer, disadvantageous. Great as had become the name of 
the Company, the name of the King was still greater. Hence he found 
it necessary, as Cornwallis had already done, to protest against the 
mischievous consequences of Royal interposition in the affairs of India, 
not only in the matter of embassies, but in the correspondence of the 
Prince of Wales with the Nabob of the Carnatic, and the irregular and 
adventitious importance given to individuals by their being supposed to 
reflect, in some measure, the beams of Royal favor. He also insists that, 
though a civilian, he ought to bear a military commission from the 


SUPREME AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, XXXIX 


Crown ; and the Captaincy-General of the Royal troops was accordingly 
conferred on him. 

Lastly, it may be observed, that his exposition to Governor Duncan, 
of the latter’s relations to his Council, is at once characteristic —mu/atis 
mutandis—of the tendency which I have been tracing as his own principle 
of action; and is perhaps neither more nor less disputable, than the 
propriety of his equally characteristic delegation of his own actual or 
assumed powers, independent of Azs Council, successively to Harris, to 
General Wellesley, and to Lake; a proceeding which, in the second case,. 
the Directors so strongly resented. 


VIII. SUPREME AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS. 


The first of the papers included in this section is one of the most 
notable and characteristic of the whole series. Its exordium is typical 
both of the writer, and of the position which the Merchant Princes had 
now attained, and which Wellesley was determined to compel them to 
recognise in all its amplitude and onerousness. ‘We have not hesitated,’ 
he says, ‘to consider the extensive and valuable possessions to the 
Government of which the Company have succeeded, as a great Empire. 
To view those possessions in any other light, must, we are persuaded, 
always lead to the most erroneous conclusions as to the principles of 
policy by which they ought to be governed.’ 

Thus, without ignoring commercial interests, and in the very act of 
specifying his duty of supervising trade and providing the investment 
as one department of his diversified charge, he lays down at starting 
what may be called a political premiss, which boldly challenges, and 
sweeps away at a stroke as irrelevant, all such objections to the measures 
which he is about to announce, as are grounded on purcly mercantile 
considerations. 

Next, we have here a clear and impressive account of the Supreme 
Government, and the several functions which it at that time discharged: 
or controlled. Not less interesting and valuable is the historical retro- 
spect, suggested rather than worked out; the significant hints, so to 
speak, of the various phascs which that Government had, according to 
the circumstances of successive periods, assumed, and the gradual con- 
struction of the complex and somewhat unwicldy engine. 

We here also see a new and striking illustration of the Governor- 
General's turn for organization and systematic development. Here, as 
elsewhere, he is engaged in unravelling a tangled skein, and weaving it 
into a symmetrical and abiding pattern, Ile is steadily bent on getting 
tid of confused and therefore inadequately discharged duties, and hap- 
hazard expedients, and on making all parts of the State machine work 
effectively, because their functions are duly ascertained and appropriately 


x] SURVEY OF LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION. 


distributed. So it is with him throughout. He loves not to trust to 
the chapter of accidents, or the fortunate contingencies of exceptional 
ability and energy. Whether in amending the terms of native alliances, 
in disentwining the co-ordinate and conflicting claims of native Princes 
over the same area, in rectifying our own military frontiers, in ascertaining 
the principles which were henceforth to regulate the treatment of the 
French in India, in discussing the Admiral’s obligations to co-operate 
in Indian expeditions, the Governor-General’s proper mode of dealing 
with local Governors, or theirs with their Councils, or in urging the 
removal] of every plea for setting up the Royal authority against that of 
the Company and its supreme officer;—the same tendency to certification, 
explicit adjustment, systematic arrangement on general and permanent 
principles, is observable. 

Again, the reforms specified and justified in this Despatch are, as I 
have already said, very sweeping and fundamental, and well calculated 
‘to stereotype the quasi-sovereign character of the Company in India. 
The Constitution of the Sudder Courts, the development of the Secre- 
tariat, the institution of a provisional pension list, in declared anticipation 
of a more general measure, the rudimentary plant of the College shortly 
afterwards established, must have fallen upon Dundas himself like so 
many thunderclaps. And it is curious, and not unamusing. to compare 
the calm and authoritative tone of conviction, in which the Governor- 
General insists upon the immediate urgency of these great measures, 
with the pointed language of the Secretary of the Board of Control, 
deprecating the vehement and costly reformatory ardor of his enthusiastic 
correspondent'. 

Far deeper, of course, was the dissatisfaction, decided henceforth and 
unremitting the hostility, of many of the Directors. But Wellesley did 
not shrink from the issue. And though the indirect and unmagnanimous 
revenge, by which they sought to drive him to resign, galled him to the 
quick, and drew forth his long and able protest to Mr. Addington; and 
though, but for the Mahratta crisis, he would have gratified his opponents 
sooner than he did by quitting their service: yet he was justified in 
assuming that the circumstances of the case, the course of events, and the 
obvious advantages resulting from the operation of his institutions, would 


' «T am well aware, says Dundas, ‘that valuable improvements may still be made 
upon many of our Indian concerns, and I know that many of those improvements will 
likewise lead to expense. I am likewise aware that it is natural for men of ardent minds 
to wish the rapid execution of improvements which they reckon to be valuable and 
important, but in the present state of our finances, I have no hesitation in being of 
opinion that we had better for some time remain stationary and postpone for a while 
even desirable improvements, if they are to lead to immediate expense. In short, my 
present creed with regard to India is, that nothing new is to be attempted without 
weighing well every rupee it will cost.’ 


SUPREME AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS. xli 


(except in the case of the College on its original scale) vindicate him in 
the end, and tend to perpetuate his arrangements. 

But the most remarkable feature of this Despatch remains to be con- 
sidered. This is the bold and ingenious representation of the Supreme 
Government of India as not only pervaded by the spirit, but assimilated 
to the form, of the British Constitution. It is, of course, easy to establish 
particular, if more or less fortuitous, analogies between them both in their 
history, and in their character. Thus, Arnold described the Norman 
domination in England as that of an army of occupation in a conquered 
country. And the similar origin and nature of our hold on the Indian 
Provinces of the Company naturally tended to reproduce the high-handed 
proceedings and unscrupulous arrogance of the Anglo-Norman Kings 
and Barons. While, in each case, the lapse of time, and the accession 
of rulers whose enlightened talent for civil organization and desire to 
improve the condition of the people led them to soften the harsher 
aspects of the régime, alike favored the advent of .‘the reign of law.’ 
Then came Acts of Parliament in the one case; and in the other, 
Regulations were multiplied. The establishment of the Courts at West- 
minster may be not inappositely compared to Wellesley’s constitution of 
the Sudder Courts, offshoots from the Anglo-Indian Council, as the 
former were from the Curia Regis. As again, diplomatic relations with 
foreign States were so long and so jealously guarded by the English 
Government from direct popular interference, and as the prerogative of 
peace and war was tenaciously affected by the personal Sovereign even 
after the Revolution; so Wellesley insists on the Governor-General in 
Council exercising such a prerogative, unimpaired by native intervention. 
And the popular complaints and Parliamentary petitions of early days in 
England are, in a way, comparable to the proposals for remedial Regula- 
tions, which the local magistrates are to lay before the Supreme Govern- 
ment, as the result of careful enquiry in their respective districts. And 
Parliament secures responsible government at home, as the Governor- 
General is obviously responsible to more than one controlling authority. 

All this is true enough. And much more might be added in the same 
Strain, And though some of his less favorable critics might be inclined 
to think, that Wellesley indulged in such an analogical vein less for the 
sake of extenuating the rule of the sword, than for the purpose of en- 
hancing his own importance, and investing himself in a quasi-kingly 
majesty; still such a disposition was not ill calculated to deepen the 
sense of moral responsibility, and to steady the steps of the Ruler in eS 
exercise of his inevitably large discretion. 

But how completely the analogy failed—and still fails—in the most 
essential particulars, I have attempted to shew in a Lecture already 
referred to, A single sentence of this Despatch is enough to prove how 
superficial was the resemblance between the two political structures, and 


xiii SURVEY OF LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION. 


how, after all, Wellesley’s specific for India was one which in the West 
certainly sounds essentially despotic— ‘ Everything for the people, nothing 
by them.’ He says:—‘There is no change in our situation in this 
country, which can be supposed, in which it would be expedient to 
admit any part of our native subjects to participate in the legislative 
authority with the Governor-General in Council.’ 

It is impossible to determine how far such an opinion might have 
been modified by later experience. Probably Wellesley would have cori- 
templated with heart-felt satisfaction a great federation of Native States, 
enjoying considerable freedom of internal administration, under the pre- 
siding control of a Viceroy, the representative of British Imperialism. 
He would also probably have pronounced the opening of the Civil 
Service to natives, regularly educated in our own way, both a just and a 

_ Politic proceeding. Nor would he probably have hesitated to admit into 

its higher grades carefully selected and well tested native gentlemen of 
ability and integrity. But I cannot conceive that he would have regarded 
the attempt to set up popular institutions, after the English pattern, 
otherwise than as political suicide on our part, and as a short cut to 
anarchy, and the revival of the state of things, from which he toiled so 
long and so hard to deliver India. 


IX. FINANCE AND TRADE. 


Some remarks, which properly belong to this section, have been made 
elsewhere. Others, which naturally occur, would require more space 
than can here be afforded. But a few circumstances seem to demand 
mention. In particular, it does not appear casy to determine, in some 
cases, how far Wellesley’s language expresses, I will not say exactly his 
true, but his independent and full sentiments. As Dean Milman shows 
that the orthodox scholastic philosophy displayed great mental activity 
within a prescribed area, and on the condition of not contravening 
certain foregone conclusions ; so the Governor-General appears to take 
for granted important points, which would be now denied, and which 
were not beyond question in his own day. Thus, that the Company's 
exclusive privileges, generally speaking, ought to be continued, European 
colonization to be prevented, and a sinking fund maintained for liqui- 
dating the Indian debt, sound somewhat strange in our modern ears, 
and would not have received by any means universal recognition at the 
time. 

In these and similar cases he may have simply written as he thought. 
Or again, he may have accepted these da/a only provisionally; and 
pending his advocacy of what would now be pronounced by political 
economists more enlightened measures. For, again to compare him to 


TRADE AND FINANCE, xiii 


the scholastics, it will be seen that not only does he appeal to the 
tribunal of reason, and so indirectly prepare the way for the subversion 
of mere authority and precedent; but he directly and deliberately attacks 
certain parts of the established system; and by the tendency of his 
arguments, and the obvious import of his facts, may seem, by a sort 
of lime-juice writing, to have invalidated much which he does not repudiate, 
and to have gone far towards shaking the whole fabric. Thus his 
objections to European colonization, like his brother’s in the Memoir on 
Bengal, are political rather than commercial. And while he talks of the 
sinking fund, it is pretty clear, both that he regarded the alarm about the 
growth of the Indian debt as needless and extravagant; and that he 
looked to the stimulus to be imparted to commercial enterprise by a 
more liberal treatment of private traders, to the extension of our 
commercial relations both in and out of India, and to the increased 
resources of the Government through his conquests and subsidiary 
alliances, for diminishing the debt, and turning the deficit into a surplus 
in the end. And as to the monopoly itself, not only did his Private 
Trade regulations scriously interfere with it; but if, as his brother says, 
and he does not deny, the Company traded at a loss; and if, as he 
shews, the Company is quite unable either to absorb the homeward 
trade of Calcutta, or to accommodate the independent merchants with 
British shipping, while it prohibits the employment of Indian vessels for 
that purpose; it does seem as if, whatever he says about the im- - 
propricty of infringing the exclusive privileges of the Merchant Princes, 
he leaves them much in the unenviable position of the dog in the 
manger. ; 

Elsewhere, indeed, he gocs further, and speaks very plainly, though 
not to the Directors. Unless, he argues, they are prepared to sink mere 
mercantile considerations, and administer the country as enlightened and 
beneficent Sovereigns; the Company’s dominions ought to be transferred 
directly to the Crown. Such a statement is quite in accordance with the 
general and paramount view which I have said he took of his own posi- 
tion ; and is silently implied in the opening passage already quoted from 
his Despatch on the Supreme Government. And considering how little 
he conceived the Directors capable of doing what he insisted upon, he 
may scem to be practically advocating, or at least preparing the way 
for, the destruction of the Company altogether. This, however, would 
probably be pressing his words too far, even as to government. While, 
as to trade, there was a contemporary view, which Cornwallis in offering 
suggestions on the renewal of the Charter combats, but which Wellesley 
might have accepted, that the Company should be deprived of its terri- 
tories, but should be allowed to subsist on ils older footing, as a privi- 
leged trading institution. Whatever* may have been his sentiments on 
the general subject, he certainly dealt a very effectual blow at particular 


xliv SURVEY OF LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION, 


restrictions, which had hitherto been deemed inseparably connected with 
the Company’s chartered rights. His encouragement of India-built 
shipping, his statistics on that subject, and his reasons for allowing the 
independent merchants and shipowners to adjust their mutual relations, 
unimpeded by the irritating and wastefal intervention of the Company’s 
officers, were hardly reconcileable with his professed desire to preserve the 
essence of the old order of things. As in politics, so in commercial 
matters, not without reason but stil] in fact, he revolutionizes under the 
guise of conservative readjustment. 

Though the Duke of Wellington argues strongly in favor of the 
course adopted by his brother as to the Private Trade (if he did not first 
suggest it); there is, it will be observed, a characteristic difference of 
detail between them. While the Governor-General, with an ‘eye to 
Indian commerce and finance, emphatically represents the duties on 
Indian sugars as much Too HIGH; the soldier-statesman, on imperial and 
professional grounds, takes the opposite view. As the West Indies are 
a better nursery for seamen than the East, he thinks that West Indian 
sugars ought to have the preference over those imported from India 
Proper. On the other hand, the Governor-General, in urging the necés- 
sity of licensing Indian shipping, insists, as usual, on the importance of 
defending the country, and obviating the political risks connected with 
foreign vessels. Such vessels are far less under the control of the 
Government than those of British Indian subjects; and dangerous 
persons are more likely to be imported in foreign bottoms. 

Want of space has compelled the omission of Mr. Dundas’s papers on 
the above subject, as well as of the Debate upon it at the India House, 
which was reported very copiously, and published, by Mr. Woodfall. 
This Debate is, in a historical point of view, not only a curious, but an 
interesting and instructive document. 


&. EDUCATION OF CIVIL SERVANTS. 


The ‘ Noles’ on the College of Fort William is certainly one of the most 
remarkable of Lord Wellesley’s compositions. The beauty of the style, 
unimpaired, in this case, by the amalgam of infusible Oricntalisms; the 
orderly development of the subject; the earnest and dignified pleading for 
high culture and diversified attainments as indispensable for the com- 
petent discharge of important political functions; the impressive picture 
presented to the imagination of so vast and varied an aggregate of 
‘ peoples, nations, and languages,’ so diverse in character and institutions, 
controlled and administered by a comparatively small number of strangers 
from the Isles of the West; the not Jess striking picture of the cducation 
of these men for their great task by the union of archaic Eastern lore, 


EDUCATION OF CIVIL SERVANTS xlv 
e 
fresh from its indigenous sources, and the advanced studies, and severer 
intellectual processes of Europe, with the novelty of the moral discipline 
of an Oxford College on the banks of the Hoogly; the pervading im- 
pression that one of Oxford’s greatest sons is here advocating what he 
feels and shews has gone far to make him what he would fain make 
others; the modern aspect of many questions raised in the course - of 
the discussion, which renders it no inappropriate or unprofitable study at 
the present juncture; the magnificent scale on which the whole plan is 
conceived, and the confidence with which it is announced and fashioned : 
—all these circumstances invest the Despatch with a peculiar interest, 
and may even arrest the attention of that far too numerous class of 
educated Englishmen, who are well content to remain studiously ignorant 
of most Indian topics. 

Turning to details, for reasons which are partly stated, partly assumed, 
the ‘writers’ are still to go out to India at an early age. On this point - 
the Governor-General and his employers were well agreed, though not 
altogether for the same reasons. While both parties were of opinion, 
that one who was to spend so much of his life in the East should lose no 
unnecessary time in entering on his career, and should not be hampered 
by ties and habits calculated to abate his zeal for a life of struggles, 
adventures, and even of hardship and peril, and to foster nostalgia; the 
Directors and their connexions were, no doubt, only too glad to be dis- 
charged, as quickly as possible, of the frequently perplexing burden of 
their young friends, and were ready enough, as Macaulay says, to ship 
them off—to make a fortune, or die of a fever. Wellesley, on the other 
hand, was anxious to secure fresh and malleable ‘ material,’ rather than 
overformed or misformed agents, whose confirmed faults it might be 
difficult to correct. ; 

But, it will also be observed, he is equally decided in fixing the 
general termination of the period of service earlier than might have been 
expected. If the civilian is to go out at sixteen or eighteen, and to be 
free after twenty-five years’ service, he will, as far as age goes, return 
home in the prime of life, and if his health stand, with the option of 
many years of good work before him. A certain proportion would, of 
course, remain in the higher branches of the service. Others would 
enter the Direction, or go into Parliament, or do both. 

But Wellesley may have contemplated the possibility of thus partly 
supplying a great want in England. He may have aimed at creating 
betimes the nucleus of a body of well-informed and authoritative public 
opinion at home on Eastern affairs, which might co-operate with his own 
influence, contribute to sustain his institutions, and counteract both the 
dead-weight of general ignorance and indifference, the fussy charlatanism 
and doctrinatre zeal of ambitious sciolists, and, worst of all, the Philistine 
party spirit which was too apt, then as now, to make an Indian Debate 


xlvi SURVEY OF LORD WELLESLEY’S ADMINISTRATION. 


a great field-day for the irrelevant, splenetic, and mischievous display of 
political rivalry. 

Again, both in arranging the retiring pension plan, and in precluding 
the use of the College staff for the purpose of educating English families 
in India, the Governor-General finds a new opportunity for discouraging 
European colonization. He makes, it will be seen, no allusion to the 
peculiar and rather hard case of those, who have been somewhat affectedly 
called ‘ Eurasians.’ 

And the same desire to make the patronage of the service dependent 
on local decision, which is defended at length in the Extract from his letter 
to Mr. Addington, leads him to suggest, that the Presidential designation 
of the young civilian should be left to the Governor-General, instead of 
being settled beforehand in England; and that, on emerging from the 
College, the fledgling should (as at Woolwich) take rank according to 
the impartial award of the educational authorities. 

It is clear that the old and early famous Etonian strongly prefers the 
preparation of a public school to the ordinary alternative of those days; 
and that, not only because the distinctive acquirements of the ‘commercial 
academy’ are out of date, and inappropriate to the case, but from the 
superior collateral advantages of the former institution. Learning apart, 
the celebrated and too often misapplied saying, attributed to his brother 
Arthur, about the playing fields of Eton, will here occur to many 
minds. 

What he would have thought of the present arrangements for the 
education of the Civil Servants, is an interesting speculation. Assuming 
the age at which the Candidates are now admitted, and that they are to 
remain two or three years at home afterwards, to pursue their studies and 
prepare for the active work of their profession, there can be little doubt 
that he would have advocated a University education, and that he would 
have hesitated to place their residence in London. As to the subject- 
matter of their studies, the entrance examination now disposes of much 
that would have been originally comprised in the courses and examinations 
at Fort William College. But thus much may be said as to the later 
and more distinctively Indian curriculum, In each of the great branches 
of Law and History, materials have vastly accumulated since his time; 
and criticism has done much to dispose and elucidate those materials. 

But, on the one hand, the study of pure law is undoubtedly distasteful, 
and apt to seem ‘dry,’ that is repulsive, to a large proportion of young 
minds. While the lapse of a very few ycars, and the exigencies of 
practical life, present it in a very different point of view, when its details 
can be mastered much more easily and profitably, because more willingly. 
On the other hand, historical studies, worthy of the name, I mean 
in extenso, and such as reveal, in due detail and with genuine local 
colour, the peculiar and influential physical features of the Italy of Asia, 


EDUCATION OF CIVIL SERVANTS. xlvii 


the memorable and stirring associations of particular localities, the life, 
character, and institutions of peoples, the critical phases and secret 
history of revolutions, the striking individuality, great conceptions, and, 
dramatic career of statesmen, the silent but unmistakeable and endlessly 
diversified action of the general causes that overrule personal aims, and 
amidst all its circumstantial varieties, give a real unity and continuity 
to the long story of humanity in the East:—such studies are not only 
more attractive to the young, but, properly directed, are peculiarly adapted 
to create and rapidly mature that breadth of view and depth of human 
sympathy, in short that development of the whole man, intellectual and 
moral, which it was Wellesley’s object to promote, and which is the best 
preparation for the work of a British administrator among an Indian 
population. Such studies are best calculated to dispel the strong pro- 
vincial prejudices, and to abate the dangerous caste pride of John Bull ; 
to awaken, from the first, a lively and intelligent interest in the places 
and the people among whom his lot is cast; to identify his aspirations 
with his local task, and counteract the increasing tendency to live, to 
a needless extent, as a stranger and a pilgrim in India. Thus they may 
greatly help to diminish the inevitable perils of foreign domination and 
arbitrary government; and to multiply and strengthen moral ties, which 
may, in some measure, supersede the crude terrors of the sword. 
Hence Lord Wellesley would, I believe, in the case of the Selected 
Candidates of our own day, have laid greater stress on the study of 
history, and less on that of pure’ Jaw, than is now done. 


' Pure Law I say advisedly, For he would certainly have hailed with peculiar satis- 
faction, in such works as those of Sir Henry Maine, a new and invaluable Organon. 
For nowhere else will the student see so powerfully revealed, and so felicitously 
employed, the discerning, catholic spirit, which it was his study to cultivate; and 
which has made the dry bones of ancient law and custom live again, for the common 
edification and mutual sympathy of races superficially so different, but here proved 
to have so many ancestral pretensions to fraternity, and such indefeasible charters of 


Association. 


SYNOPSIS 


: OF 


THE DESPATCHES, APPENDIX, 


AND PLANS. 


‘To the eventful and brilliant period of your Lordship’s Government, the 
Court look back with the feelings common to their countrymen; and anxious 
that the minds of their Servants should be enlarged by the instruction to be 
derived from the accumulated experience of eminent Statesmen, they felt it 
a duty to diffuse widely the means of consulting a work unfolding the prin- 
ciples upon which the supremacy of Britain in India was successfully maintained 
and enlarged under a combination of circumstances, in the highest degree critical 
and difficult.’—The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Honourable Court of 
Directors to the Marquess Wellesley, October 6th, 1836. 


‘That the authentic record of the principles on which I acted, during the 
most critical and difficult exigency of the affairs of the British Empire in India, 
should be deemed by the Court of Directors to contain an instructive and useful 
lesson for their Servants, is a testimony most glorious to the memory of my 
Services.'—The Marquess Wellesley to the Chairman of the Honourable Court of 
Directors. 


SYNOPSIS. 


No. 


ed 


1 


11. 


12. 


, Reference to 
Date. | original 
\ Edition. 


i] 


t 
1 


From and to Whom. 


\ t 
1806 {IV,1893.§, Sir Arthur Wellesley, K.B. (Introduction.) 


1798 I, 16.t 
June 18, 


July 6. | J, 21. 


Aug. r2. | I, 48. 


Nov. 8. I, 96. 
Dec. 18. | I, 114. 


1797 ~—«{V,* pages 


April 2. 2-6. 
1798 I, pages 

Jan. 30. viii-x. 
Sept. 20. | I, pages 
414-417. 


1799 I, 136. 
Feb. 13, 
[received.] 


Feb. ro. |V,* pages 
24-31, 


Feb. 22. | I, 139. 


Feb. 22, | I, 140. 


I. MYSORE. 


The Secret Committee of the Court of Direct- 
ors, to the Governor-General in Council of 
Bengal. [Received inSept.1798.] (Extract.) 

Mr. Josias Webbe, Secretary to the Govern- 
ment of Madras. For General Harris. 


Minute of the Governor-General in the Secret 
Department. 


The Earl of Mornington to Tippoo Sultaun. 


Tippoo Sultaun to the Earl of Mornington. 
[Received at Fort St. George, Dec. 25, 1798.] . 


Tippoo Sultaun the Victorious to the Repre- 
sentatives of the People, residing in the Isles 
of France and of La Reunion. 


Proclamation at the Isle of France. 


Letter from Sultaun Selim to the Indian 
Sovereign, Tippoo Sultaun; delivered to 
Mr. Spencer Smith, his Britannic Majesty’s 
Minister Plenipotentiary, &c. 


From Tippoo Sultaun to the Right Hon, the 
Governor-General. 


Translation of the Draft of a Letter from 
Tippoo Sultaun to the Grand Seignior. 


The Earl of Mornington to his Excellency 
Lieut.-General Harris. 


Declaration of the Right Hon. the Gov.-Gen. 
in Council, &c., on behalf of the Honourable 
the East India Company, his Highness the 
Nizam, and the Peishwa. 


§ The Wellington Supplementary Despatches, 

+ The Roman numerals in this column refer to volumes; the Arabic, when pages are 
not specified, to the number of the document in the original work, 

* Supplement, Mysore War. 


SYNOPSIS. 
Bee oe ee ee 


Subject. PAGE 


‘Memorandum on Marquess Wellesley’s Government of India’. . \xxiii 


I. MYSORE, ’ 


1. Instructions on occasion of Tippoo's reported alliance with the 
french against the Linglish in India . bee ee! dae AH 


- 


2. Danger ofa rupture with Tippoo . . . 2 1 ww ew 4 


3. Casus Belli agacnst Tippoo. Reasons for delay. Defensive 
alliance system explained and vindicated. Proposed conduct 


Of the Anglo-Indian Government towards the Sultan. iI 
4, Proposal to send an envoy to compose the quarrel . . . . 57 
5. Lvasive reply to the above. False account Z the Mission 
Yo the Maurthus . . . 59 
6. Proposals for an alliance ee he English i in India 62 
7 Announcement of taper s gas and of the conclusion ov the 
alliance. ar: . 67 
8. An exhortation to abstass ihe fasiabine the Pivach against the 
Lnglish in ae The French faithless, and enemies of the 
Faith . .. a ted en hg “SO AS’ Se gk ee wee, ee AO 
9. Formal acknowledgment y. the ae fs the above. Bias sas 
consent to treat . a og ey ot 
10. Private reply to Sultan Selim's letter. The znerh tn India 
SJatthless, and enemies of the Faith. . . re | 
ll, Lnstructions for the political conduct of the War with re sppoo . . 83 
88 


12, Declaration of the occasion of the War with Tippoo . 


lii 


SYNOPSIS, 


I. MYSORE. (Continued.) 


ee eee eee 


No. 


13. 


14, 


15. 
16. 
17. 


18. 


19. 


20.. 


21. 


22. 


23. 


24. 


25.° 


28. 


27. 


28. 


29, 


Date. 


1799 
Feb. 23. 


March 20. 


April 20. 
May 11. 
March 8, 


March 27. 


April 5. 
April 7. 
April ro. 
May 7. 
May 6. 
May 19. 
Aug. 3. 


July 13. 


1798 
Sept. 1. 


1800 
Oct. 12. 


1801 
July 27. 


Reference to 
origins 
Edition, 


poe . The Governor-General to General Harris. 
re ar- 


ris, pages 
251-256.] 


I, 161. | The Earl of Mornington to the Honourable 
the Court of Directors. 


J, 177. | The same to the same. 
I, 198. | The same to the same. 
I, 154. | Lieut.-General Stuart to the Earl of Morn- 


From and to Whom. 


ington. ra 
I, 163. | Lieut.-General Harris to the Earl of Morn- 
ington. 


a 
Rs 


168. | The same to the same. 
I, 170. | The same to the same. 
I, 174. | Major-General Floyd to the Earl of Morn- 
ington. 
1,194. | Lieut.-General Harris to the Earl of Morn- 
ington. 
I, pages | Major-General Baird to Lieut.-Gen. Iarris, 
697-699. Commander-in-Chief, &c. 
: I, 207. | The Earl of Mornington to the Secret Com- 
mittee of the Court of Directors. 
| II, 26. | The same to the IIonourable Court of Di- 
} rectors. 
II, pages | Subsidiary Treaty of Seringapatam, 
» 43-48, | 


II, THE NIZAM. 
I, pages | Treaty of Hyderabad. 
682-685, 
II, pages| Treaty of General Defensive Alliance. 
709-714. 


Ill. THE CARNATIC. 


II, pages| Declaration on the Annexation of the Car- 
553-561. natic. 


t 


SYNOPSIS. 


I, MYSORE. (Continued.) 


liii 


a Oc 


13. 


14, 


15. 
16, 
17. 


18, 


19. 
20. 
21. 


22. 
23. 
24. 
26. 


26, 


27. 


28, 


29. 


Subject. 
Advantageous circumstances under which the War was under- 
taken ‘ Go ok Dod. 18 


Vindication and plan of the Mysore War . 


Progress of the War . 
Conclusion of the War. 
Battle of Seedasere . 


Battle of Mailvelly 


Malvelly, and March to Seringapatam 
Colonel Wellesley’s Repulse 
Baitle of Malvelly, and Colonel Wels Route: 


Storming of Seringapatam . . 


The same. 


Documenfs, tllustrative of nes Lrench eter fet at 
Seringapatam . . . 

Partition and Setllement of Aieope Tree ae of the Sut h) 
family. Results of the War . 


Subsidiary Treaty of Seringapatam 


II. THE NIZAM. 
Treaty of Hyderabad . 


Treaty of General Defensive Alliance . 


IiI. THE CARNATIC. 


Declaration of the Right Honourable the Governor in Council 
of Fort St. George, byand with the authortty of His Excellency 
the Most Noble the Governor-General tn Council a all the 


British possessions in India 


PAGE 


132 
159 


178 


liv SYNOPSIS, 
Iv. OUDE. 
Referencé to 

No. Date. Bdiion. From and to Whom. 

30. 1799 Ii, 45. | The Earl of Mornington to the Secret 
Nov. 28. Committee of the Honourable Court of 

Directors. 

81. 1800 II, 64. | The Earl of Mornington to the Nabob of 
Feb. 9. Oude. 

33. 1801 II, 109. | The Marquess Wellesley to Lieut.-Colonel 
Jan. 22. William Scott, Resident at Lucknow. 

33. | Nov. 14. | II, 163. | The Marquess Wellesley to the Honourable 
the Secret Committee of the Honourable 
the Court of Directors. 

V. MAHRATTAS. 
84. 1802 III, 2. | The Marquess Wellesley to the Secret Com- 
Dec. 24. mittee of the Honourable Court of Direct- 
ors. 
35. 1803 III, 13. | The same to the same. 
Feb. ro. 
36. | April ro. | III, 20. | The same to the same. 
37. 1802 III, pages| Treaty of Bassein. 
Dec. 31, | 627-632. 
1803 
Dec. 16. 
38. } July 12. | HI, 46, | The lon. G. H. Barlow, Esq, to the Marquess _ 
and En- Wellesley. 1 
closure, 
39. 1804  |V,* pages} Lord Castlereagh, President of the Board of 
March 4. {302-318.} | Controul, to the Marquess Wellesley. 
40. | March 6. | IV, 49, | The Secret Committee of the Honourable 
. Enclo- Court of Directors of the East India Com- 
sure, pany to the most noble the Governor: 
General in Council, Bengal. 
41. | Nov.(?) |V,* pages| Major-General Wellesley’s Observations on 


318-337.| the policy of the Treaty. 


* Supplement, Mahratta War. 


SYNOPSIS, 


Iv. OUDE. 


30. 


81. 


82. 


33. 


34, 


35. 


36, 


37, 


38, 


39. 


Subject, 


Projected military re in Oude. 
of abdicating . 


WVecesstty of carrying out the military reforms. L'xposure of 
LVabob’s inconsistency in opposing them. Stern warning 

Proypect of partial—or total—cession v the Nabob Vizier’s terrt- 
Yories to the Company eS 


Advantages secured by the Treaty with the Nabob Vizier, aie: 
ment of the Hon. sonied ioc as empty | Commesstoner 
in Oude... ee os F 


c V. MAHRATTAS, 
l. ENGLISH INTERVENTION. 


The Crisis at Poonah, and the Governor-General’s views and 
action in consequence. 6 6 6 we we we : 


Lhe same. Conclusion of the Treaty of Bassin. 5. 0s 


The same. Restoration of the Pe'shwa to Poonah ide ee 
General Wellesley 
Treaty of Bassein . 6 . 6 6 6 


2. POLICY OF THE TREATY OF BASSEIN, 


Approval of the policy of theTrealy . . . 


Strictures on the Policy of the Treaty. . 5 1 6 6. 


The same. Propriety of relaxing some of the Articles . 


Reply to Lord Castlereagh's strictures and proposals 


Nabob’s alleged intention 


PAGE 


188 


19k 


201 


204 


223 
233 


273 


lvi 


V. MAHRATTAS. (Continued.) 


SYNOPSIS, 


. 


1803 
June 26. 


july 27. 
July 22. 


June 3. 


June 20. 
* 


Aug. 1. 


July 31, 
[received. } 


Aug. 6. 


Sept. 25. 


Oct. 31. 
Dec. 28. 
Sept. 11, 
7.30 P.M. 
Sept. 12. 
Sept. 13. 
Sept. 147. 


Sept. 24. 


Nov. 2. 


Nov. 30. 


Reference to 
original 
Edition. 


Ill, 34. 


III, 50, 
and 
2nd En- 
closure. 


IM, 31. 


II, 33. 


WI, 60. 


Ill, 57. 


3rd En- 
closure in 
III, 63. 


II, 100. 


II, 126. 
III, 158. 
Ill, 84. 


III, 86. 
Ill, 87. 
IU, 93. 
Il, 96. 
III, 130. 


III, 144. 


From and to Whom. 


The Marquess Wellesley to the Hon. Major- 
General Wellesley. 

The Marquess Wellesley to his Excellency 
General Lake, Commander-in-Chief, &c. 
N. B. Edmonstone, Esq., Secretary to Govern- 

ment, to Greme Mercer, Esq. 


N. B. Edmonstone, Esq., Secretary to Go- 
vernment, to Colonel Collins, Resident at the 
Court of Dowlut Rao Scindiah. (Extract.) 

The Marquess Wellesley to the Secret Com- 
mittee of the Court of Directors. 

The Governor-General in Council to the 
Honourable the Secret Committee of the 
Court of Directors. 

Dowlut Rao Scindiah to the Marquess Wel- 
lesley. : 

Translation of a letter from the Hon. Major- 
General Wellesley, to Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 


The Governor-General in Council to the 
Honourable the Secret Committee of the 
Honourable the Court of Directors. (Ex- 
tract.) 

The same to the same. 

The same to the same. 

Lieut.-General Lake to the Marquess. Wel- 
lesley. 

[Received at Fort William, Sept. 23, 1803. ] 

The same to the same. 

The same to the same. 

[Received at Fort William, Sept. 25, 1803.] 

The same to the same. 

The Hon. Major-General Wellesley to the 
Marquess Wellesley. 

[Received Oct. 30, 1803.] 

Lieut.-Gen. Lake to the Marquess Welles|cy. 

[Received Nov. 15, 1803.] 

The Hon. Major-General Wellesley to the 
Marquess Wellesley. 

[Received Dec. 25, 1803.] 


3. WAR WITH SCINDIAH AND THE RAJAN OF BERAR. 


42. 


43. 


44, 


45. 


46. 


47. 


48. 


49, 


50. 
61. 
52, 


53. 


54. 


55. 


56. 


57. 


58. 


SYNOPSIS. 


Subject. 


Delegation to General Wellesley of extraordinary seals or the 
conduct of the Mahratia War, $e. . + 

Necessity, Objects, and Plan of the War in Hindostan ; Gad 
Principles to be observed in negotiating with M. Perron and 
the native Chiefs . 


Instructions for negotiations i in Bundelcund, with Rojpoots, and 


Sumroo's Begum. ne 


Argument against the right of the Confederated Chieftains to 
object to the conclusion, or to obstruct the execution, of the 
Treaty of Bassein rv tens 


Progress of Mahratta affairs. In spite of rumours and appear- 
ances, the Governor-General thinks war wyll not ensue . 


Onsatisfaciory negotiations with Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar. 
War now appears pees for which the Governor-General ts 
well prepared ‘ ue aut 


Conditronal assent to the Treaty of Riviies 


Declaration of War 


Casus Belli against Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar, Vindi- 
cation of the Governor-General’s policy. Larlier operations 
of the War. Death vy Nizam Ak, sok accession Ae Secunder 


Jah. 
Progress of the War. i erst | allempls at vapodtisia 


Progress of the War, and of negotiation . 
Batlle of Delht. . . 


The same. Reasons for advance to Delhi . 
Statistics of the Batlle of Delhi. 1. . . . 
Military requirements in the conquered territory . 
Baitle of Assye . 

Balile of Lasswary . 


Battle of Argaum 6 6 6 6 


lvii 


PAGE 


298 


393 
316 


324° 
327 
332 
340 


340 


341 
373 
385 
394 


395 
398 
398 
401 
404 


408 


Wiii SYNOPSIS, 
V. MAHRATTAS. (Continued. 
Reference to 
No. Date. orginal From and to Whom. 
BQ. 1803 Ill, 149.| The Marquess Wellesley to the Hon. Major- 
Dec. 11. -| General Wellesley. (Extract.) 
eo. | Dec. x7. III, pages} Treaty of Deogaum. 
633-634. 
61. | Dec. 30. |III, pages} Treaty of Surje Anjengaum. 
"1634-636. 
62, 1804 IV, 30. | The Marquess Wellesley to the Honourable 
June 10. the Secret Committee of the Honourable 
the Court of Directors. 
63. | July 13. | IV, 33. | The Governor-General in Council to the 
Secret Committee of the Honourable the 
Court of Directors. (Extract.) 
64. Feb. III, pages| Governor-General’s reply to an address from 
ae 582-586.| the British inhabitants of Calcutta. 
es. | May 21. | IV, 49. | Lord Castlereagh to the Marquess Wellesley, . 
a [Received Oct. 14, 1804.] 
66, | June rg. | IV, 31. | The Governor-General in Council to the 
Honourable the Secret Committee of the 
Court of Directors. 
67, | July 28. | IV, 35. | Marquess Wellesley’s Notes on the War with 
Holkar. (Extract.) 
68 1805 IV, 90, | The Governor-General in Council to the Hon- 
March 24. |V,* pages}  ourable the Secret Committee of the Hon- 
135-155.) | ourable the Court of Directors. (Extract.) 
69. | May 31. | V,*3. | The same to the same. (Extract.) 
70, 1804 IV, 40, | Lieut.-General Lake to the Marquess Wel- 
Sept. 8. lesley. 
Sept. 2. |Enclosure} Hon. Colonel Monson to Lieut.-Gencral Lake. 
Aug. 31. Enclosure Captain Nicholl to the Hon. Brigadier-General 
I. Monson. 
71, 1805 =—‘|V,* pages} Lieut.-Gencral Lake to the Marquess Wel- 
July 1. |283-292. lesley. (Extract.) 
72, 1804 IV, 51. | Hon. Brigadier Monson to the Marquess 
Nov. 14. Wellesley. 
73. | Nov. 17, | IV, 52. } Lieut.-Gen. Lake to the Marquess Wellesley. 
74,1 1805 IV, 67. | The same to the same. 
Jan. ro. 


* Supplement, Mahratta War, 


SYNOPSIS. 


4. PACIFICATION AND RESULTS OF THE WAR. 


lix 


59. 
60. 
61, 


62. 


63. 


64. 


65. 


66. 


67., 


68. 


69. 


70. 


721, 
72. 


78. 
74, 


Subject. 


' 
Occasion and results of the war, and consequent character of the 


pacification 
Treaty of Deogaum . 


Treaty of Surje Anjengaum . 


Partition of Mahratta Conquests 


Advantages resulting from the War . 


Justification of the War, and of the Terms of Peace 
Doubiful policy of Annexations at the close of the War . 


5. WAR WITH HOLKAR. 
Origin of the War with Holkar. General narrative of tts earlier 
_ operations . i La De Seicaiteel @. See a Ee te 


Necessity of ees Lieut,-Colonel Monson with ee 


troops . 
Progress of the War. . Oniobions apse Burrs Critical 
aelations with Scindtah. . . . 


Terms Pe the Treaty with the Rajah of Bhuripore. The Defensive 


Alliance System tested favourably by the War with Holkar 
Monson's Retreat 6 6 6 we ee we we ee 
” ” 
” ” ' 
The same. 6 6 ee ee F , . 
Batlle of Deg . +. sa : 


Surprise and rout of Holkar and his cavalry, « . 
First unsuccessful assault on Bhurtpore . .- + 


PAGE 
4rl 
407 
419 


423 


436 


441 


445 


449 


469 
470 
52r 
524 
625 
529 
531 
843 


546 
546 


79. 


80. 


81. 


82. 


83. 


84. 


85. 


86. 


87. 


88. 


SYNOPSIS. 


V MABRATTAS. (Continued.) 


Reference to 


Date. engin! From and to Whom. 


1805 | IV, 68. | Lieut.-General Lake to the Marquess Wel- 
Jan. 21. | lesley. 

Feb. 21. IV, 76. | The same to the same. 

Feb. 22. ' IV, 81. ' The same to the same. 


March 9. | IV, 81. | The Marquess Wellesley to Lieut.-General 


Lord Lake. 
VI. DEFENCE OF THE INDIAN EMPIRE. 


1800 II, 88. | The Marquess Wellesley to the Right Hon. 


July 13. Henry Dundas. 
Dec. 30. | V, Supt. | The Right Hon. Henry Dundas to the Mar- 
Miscel- quess Wellesley. 
laneous 1. 


Jan. V, Supt. | Copy of a private Paper written by General 
Miscel- Stuart prior to his leaving India in January 
laneous 2. 1800, and submitted to the Right Hon. 
Henry Dundas, on his arrival in England, 
in July in that year. 
1804 III, pages} Enclosure in a Letter from the Acting Resi- 
Feb. 20. |663, 664. dent at Poona. 
Received March x1, 1804. 
1803 III, page| The Marquess Wellesley to Lord Hobart. 
June 20. | 656. (Extract.) 
March 16. | III, 43. | The Right Hon. Lord Castlereagh to the 
Marquess Wellesley. 
[Received July 6, 1803.] : 
July 25. | III, 58. | Marquess Wellesley to Right Hon. Lord 
Viscount Castlereagh. 


1798 I, 64. | The Earl of Mornington to Major-General 
Sept: 16, Sir James Henry Craig, K.B. 


Oct. 6. I, 75. | Major-General Sir James Henry Craig to the 
Earl of Mornington, 


Oct. 13. I, 79. | The same to the same. 


SYNOPSIS. 


* 5. WAR WITH HOLKAR. (Continued.) 


|xi 


seed = So, Fo a a CE ee 


75. 


76. 
77. 
78. 


79. 


80. 


81. 


82. 


83. 


84, 


85. 


86. 
87. 


88, 


Subject. 


Second unsuccessful assault on Bhurtpore . 


Third unsuccessful assault on Bhurtpore . 
fourth unsuccessful assault on Bhurtpore . 
Onsuccessful assaults on Bhurtpore . 


VI. DEFENCE OF THE INDIAN EMPIRE. 
1. EUROPEAN ARMY. 


Reform and increase of the Luropean army 


' The same. Financial and other ore to the Se scheme. 


Counter proposals . . 


55% 


552 


556 


GENERAL POLICY, ESPECIALLY AGAINST THE FRENCH. 


Danger of foreign invasion, by land and sea, ee of 


. securing the whole sea-board. Commercial policy 


Lrench incendiary proclamation to the Chiefs of Hindostan 


Precautions against the revival o Lrench ied and influence in 
India . ; ; ane 
Impending renewal of war “with ree eine ny ii k snlbied 
with military efficiency in India , de nae | Chg rites? Bina 


Difficulties of such a combination. Reduction of jase the 
Cape, §c., destrable, and how to be effected . 


8, NORTH-WESTERN FRONTIER. 


Linguiry as to military precautions to be taken aes Zemaun 
Shah's threatened tnvaston . 

Reply to the enquiry. Importance of a Mebraila diane mult 
tary imbectlily of Oude, and probable weakness of the Sikhs. 

The same. English army deficient in training and ammunition. 
Danger of underrating the enemy . Bag ea. Var fa 


567 


578 


579 


581 


583 


592 


595 


602 


Ixti SYNOPSIS, 


VI. DEFENCE OF THE INDIAN EMPIRE. (Cohtinued.) 


Reference to 


No. Date. le ey : From and to Whom. 


89. 1801 11, 151.| The Marquess Wellesley to the Honourable 
Sept. 28. [ the Secret Committee of the Honourable 
the Court of Directors. 


90.| May 10. | Il, 130. | The Marquess Wellesley to the Right Hon. 


Henry Dundas. 
91. 1803 IIJ,145.| The Marquess Wellesley to Lord Hobart. 
Nov. 30. (Extract.) 


92.| 1801 II, pages | The Marquess Wellesley to the Shereef of 
March 1g. |471-473. Mecca, the Imaum of Senna, and the Sul- 
taun of Aden. 


93. 1804 IV, 33. | The Governor-General in Council to the Secret 
July 13. Committee of the Honourable the Court of 
: Directors. (Extract.) 


94.| 1805 |IV,115.} The same to the same. (Extract.) 
June 2. 


VII. MISCELLANEOUS DESPATCHES. 


95. 1799 I, 217. } The Right Hon. H. Dundas to the Earl of 
March 18. Mornington. 
[Received Aug. 5, 1799.] 
96.| March 21x. | II, 28. | The same to the same. 
(Received at Fort William, Aug. 5, 1799-] 


97.| 1800 II, 69. | The Earl of Mornington to the Right Hon. 
March 5. Henry Dundas. 


98. 1803 III, 153.; The Marquess Wellesley to Lord Castlereagh. 
Dec. 15. 


VIII. SUPREME AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS. 


99.| 1800 II, 85. | The Governor-General in Council to the 
July 9. Honourable Court of Directors. 


100.| 1798 I, pages| The Earl of Mornington to Lord Clive. 
July 29. |280-232. (Extract.) 


Ixiii 


SFNOPSIS, 
4, PERSIA. 

Subject. ° PAGE 

89. Persian embassy and Treaty, and advantages thus secured. hes 
an Eyropean ambassador, tn state, was required . : 607 

5. CEYLON. 
80. Jmportance of placing Ceylon under the Indian Government 613 
®1. The same . 617 
6. RED SEA EXPEDITION, 
92. Summons to join us in expelling the French from Leypl . 626 
7, THE EMPEROR. 

93. Danger of the French availing themselves of the Imperial pre- 

fenstons. Importance of. Bare Shah Allum and his Cae y 
under British protection . 629 
94. Lstablishment of Shah Allum as fitular King of Delhi ve + 633 

VII. MISCELLANEOUS DESPATCHES. 

95. Foreign Politics. Relations of the Anglo-Indian Government to 
the Nizam, Zemaun Shah, the Mahrattas, and Tippoo. . 636 

96. ‘Lnterior administration of our different settlements,’ Bengal, Oude, 

the Carnatic, Tanjore, the Northern Circars, Lhe Malabar 
Coast, Indian Taxation . 641 

97. Chiefly in answer lo the two last. Farsi aud rsa politics, 

Crotl Service reform. Sudder Courts. cada Court, Also 
on Finances, and Commerce 645 

98. General vindication of territorial austin during Let Wel- 
‘ 2... 664 


lesley’s administration 
ViiI. SUPREME AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, 
99. Constitution, Functions, and Reform of the Supreme Government. 645 


100. Relations of the Supreme to the Subordinate Governments . 688 


xiv SYNOPSIS, 


VIII. SUPREME AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS. (Continued.) 


; | Reference to i: 
No. a vie From and to Whom, 
101.; 1802  |III, pages} The Marquess Wellesley to the Right Hon. 
Jan. 10. | xiv—xvii. Henry Addington. (Extract.) 
102. 1800 | II, 74. | The Earl of Mornington to the Hon. Jonathan 
April 16. Duncan. (Extract.) 


Ix. FINANCE AND TRADE. 


103.) 1799 Il, 27. | The Right Hon. Henry Dundas to the Earl of 
March 18. Mornington. 


[Received at Fort William, Aug. 5, 1799-] 


104.; 1800 II, 94. | The Marquess Wellesley to the Honourable 
Sept. 30. | the Court of Directors. 


X. EDUCATION OF CIVIL SERVANTS. 


105.; 1800 Ii, 86. | The Governor-General’s Notes with respect 
July ro. to the foundation of a College at Fort 
William. 


106.|} July ro. | II, 87. | Regulation for the College at Fort William. 


107.| 1798 (II, pages) Extract from a public Letter from the Court 
May 25. |738-740. of Directors of the East India Company to 
Bengal. 


XT. THE FLEET. 


II, pages| The Marqucss Wellesley to his Excellency 
Feb. 5. |755-758.| Vice-Admiral Rainier, &c., &c., &c. (Ex- 


108. | 1801 
| tract.) 


SYNOPSIS, 


~ Ixv 


VIII, SUPREME AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS. (Continued, 


aE ee ra ee re ne ee he a rr 


log, 


103. 


104, 


105. 


106. 


107. 


108. 


Subject. 


Serious dangers involved in the direct assumption of Indian 
patronage by the Directors, or the Board of Control . 

Working of the Local Government tn the absence of the Governor, 
wethin the limits of the Presidency by Bo stnceh 8 


IX. FINANCE AND TRADE. 


Necessity and means of ‘heeping up a large investment from India, 
Lucouragement of India-built shipping for Private Trade . 


Propriety of lucensing Indta-built hips Ter Private Trade between 
India and England | au 48 


X. EDUCATION OF CIVIL SERVANTS. 


Necessity of a special collegiate training of Croil Servants, Plan 
of the proposed mstitulion, and tts anticipated benefils . 30° 


‘Passed by the Governor-General in Counctl, on the roth July, 
1800 ; corresponding with the 28th Assar, 1207, Bengal era ; 
the 4th Sazvun, 1404, Lussily; the 28th Assar, 1207, Wil- 
laity, the 4th Sawun, 1857, Sumbut; and the 17th Suffer, 
1215, LHigeree ;—But by his Lor dship s special order, bearing 
dale on the 44h May, 1800, being the first anniversary of the 
glorious and decisive victory oblained by the British. arms at 
Ser ingapalam, the capital of the Kingdom of Mysore’ : 

An objurgation on the character and conduct of the servants of the 


Company . 


XI. THE FLEET. 


Propriety of the Fleet in the Indian Seas co-operating, without 
special orders from England, in expeditions projected by the 
Governor-General, and nol deemed tmprudent by the Admiral . 


696 - 


7Or 


718 


746 


752 


APPENDIX. 


-_ ees 


N : Reference to 
o Date. original 
Edition. From and to Whom. 


1, 1801 Wellesley | Lord Wellesley’s Oude Treaty. (Extract.) 
Nov. 10, |Despatches. 
| II, pages 
600-602, 


THE WELLINGTON SUPPLEMENTARY DESPATCHES. 


2. 1798 I, 46. | ‘Reflections upon the plan for having the army 
Oct. 26, in the Carnatic at all times in a state of pre- 
paration.’ 
3. 1799 I, 112. | ‘Draft of the Description of our march to 
March. Major-General St. Leger,’ 


4} Aprils. | 1,114. | To the Earl of Mornington. (Extract.) 
5. | April 18, | 1,115. | Tothe same. (Extract.) 
8. | May 8. I, 119. | To the same. (Extract.) 

. 7.1 Undated. | IJ, 983. | ‘ Memorandum on Oude.’ 


8. |17970re8s| I, 10. ‘Memorandum on Bengal.’ 


9. 1803 |IV,1681., To Lieut.-Colonel Munro. (Extract.) 


Nov. 1. 
10. [1804 1805; (©) ate Extracts from General Wellesley’s Corre- 
4 ages 465, enc 
Sept. Jan. oe he 480. spondence. 
1805 (B) IV, 


July 3. | page 511, 


SIR THOMAS MUNRO’S CORRESPONDENCE 
in his Life by Rev. G. R. Gleig. 
ll. | 1808 III, pages’ To General Wellesley. 
, Nov, 28. | 182-184. 
12.: 1804 (III, pages To Colonel Read. 
March 6. | 192-193. 


i 
13, | Undated. ‘Ill, pages’ To his Father. 
' 201, 202., 


APPENDIX, 


1, 


Subject. 


Terms of the arrangement for the military defence wy Oude, Nabodb 
Vizter's promise of better civil government : 


PAGE 


461 


THE WELLINGTON SUPPLEMENTARY DESPATCHES. 


2. 


11, 


12, 


13. 


Mobilization and reinforcement of the Madras army against Tippoo. 


March of the army to Seringapalam. . . . . 


Battle of Mallavelly. . 6 1. . 
Colonel Wellesley’s Repulse . 


Plunder of Seringapatam . 

The Company necessarily Se ais for the d hints “ad sndvnal 
administration of Oude . . wo Sef ar we 

Influence of the Company's rule eee the resources and sresperi 
of Bengal. Private Trade. Tribute 


Answer to Munro's first criticism on the Battle of ive ; 


(a) ALonson's Retreat, (8) Assaults on Bhuripore . 


SIR THOMAS MUNRO’S CORRESPONDENCE 
in his Life by Rev. G. R. Gleig. 


Criticism on the Batlle of Assye . 


Rationale of Mahratla Defeats 


The same. 


763 


767 
769 
770 
771 
771 


773 
785 


488 


789 
79t 


792 


Lxvili APPENDIX, 


SIR THOMAS MUNRO’S CORRESPONDENCE. (Continued.) 


| Reference to , 


No. Date. ' original, From and to Whom. 
Edition. 
14,\ 1818 III, pagesi To the Honourable M. Elphinstone. 
April 23. | 247, 248. 
15. 1817 | I, pages , To his Excellency the Governor-General. 
Aug. 12. | 461-467, 
MISCELLANEOUS EXTRACTS. 
No. | Date. Reference. | Authority. 
16.| 1806 {Pages 55, Anonymous. A Vindication of the justice, 
&c. &c., of the late Wars, &c. 
17./ 1841 V, pages} Barchou de Penhoén. Histoire de I’Empiré 


134-136. Anglais, &c. 
18. 1805 | III, page| Marquis Cornwallis to the Right Hon, Lord 


Aug. 30. | 544. Lake. Cornwallis Correspondence. 
19./ 1806 | Pages | Mr.T.C. (later Lord) Metcalfe. Kaye's Met 
ee est calfe Papers. 
20. 1814 Pages | The same Writer, and Work. 


December. | 145, 146. 


al, 1868 1st Edi- | Colonel George Chesney. Indian Polity. 
tion, pages 
32, 33. | 


MAP AND PLANS. 


1. 1858 1, Wellington Supplementary Despatches. 

2. |" 1840 |Page 522.) Lushington’s Life of Lord Harris. 

3. 1800 = |Page 169.| Beatson’s War with Tippoo Sultaun. 

4. 1804 | Page 94.} Wellesley’s Notes on Transaction in the 
Mahratta Empire. . 

5. Page 105.) The same Work. 

6. Page 67.| The same Work. 

7. 1830 I, page | Welsh’s Military Reminiscences. 


188. 
8. 1818 Page 408. Thorn’s Memoir of the War in India. 
9. iPage 415.} The same Work. 


APPENDIX. 


lxix 


SIR THOMAS MUNRO’S CORRESPONDENCE. (Continued. 


14. 


15, 


16. 
17. 
18, 
19. 


20 


21. 


poe 


Siege of Bhurtpoor , 


Subject. PAGE 

Lixpedtency of the Company's assuming the office of Peishwa 793 
Ultimate tendency of the subsidiary alliance system "794 

MISCELLANEOUS EXTRACTS. 
Lord Wellesley’s Policy . 498 
Retirement of Lord Wellesley . 802 
The political situation and the Governor-General’s intended policy . “803 
The Policy of Sir George Barlow 804 
Extension of Territory and tis Results . 8x1 
Result of Lord Wellesley’'s admintstration . 812 
MAP AND PLANS. 

Map of India . . In cover. 
Battle of Mallavelly . 117 
Plan of Seringapatam ad fin. 
Battle of Dethi 395 
Battle of Lasswary . ad fin. 
Batlle of Assye 4or 
Batlle of Argaum . 409 
Battle of Deeg 544 
547 


EXPLANATION OF THE PLANS. 


Mallavelly (page :17).—The following is given in Lord Harris’s Life, to 
explain the Plan reproduced from that work in this volume :— 

‘References. Red, denotes the rst position of the English army. Blue, the 
end ditto. Purple, the 3rd ditto. Yellow, Tippoo’s, the rst ditto. Green, the 
2nd ditto. Orange, shows the encampment of the army after the action. 

A. A large body of the eneiny’s horse kept in check by the 25th regiment 
- of light dragoons. B. A party of the horse and rocket boys driven off by the 
picquet. C. A small party of the enemy’s horse charging the 1st, or European 
brigade, and repulsed. D. The 2nd regiment of cavalry advancing to charge, 
but halted on the European brigade beginning to fire. E. A large body of the 
enemy which retreated on the party C being repulsed. F. A party of the 
enemy’s infantry engaged with the left of the European brigade, and obliged 
to retreat. G. Another party that attacked the 33rd regiment, the head of | 
Colonel Wellesley’s division. H. Retreat of the party G charged by the 33rd 
regiment. I. Charge of three regiments of cavalry, under General Floyd, on 
the fugitives H. K. Two brass 18-pounders on a high spot, cannonading the 
enemy while the line formed. L. Ditto advanced to some commanding rocks, 
from which they opened on the enemy as the line advanced.’ 

Seringapatam (ad jinem).—This plan is taken from Licut.-Colonel Beatson's 
War with Tippoo Sultaun; and that of the Battle of Argaum (page 409) from 
Colonel Welsh’s Military Reminiscences. Both will, it is hoped, sufficiently 
explain themselves, and the events to which they relate. 


The Governor-General’s Notes Relative to Transactions in the Mabratta 
Empire has supplied the Plans of the Battles of Delhi (page 395), Lasswary 
(ad finem), and Assye (page 401). The following details on the first and third 
result from a comparison of that work with Major Thorn's Memoir of the War 
in India. 

Battle of Delhi—aA. First position of the English army. P. Grand guard 
and advanced picquets. B. Cavalry reconnaissance, under Lake in person. 
C. English infantry, and D. do. cavalry, advancing to the attack, N, English 
cavalry detached against Seik do. H, First battn., and N. Infantry, and K. 
four guns, appuyed on O., the village. IE. Enemy’s infantry in array. G.G. 
English infantry attacking, and S.S., do. pursuing the enemy. Q, The Mah- 
rattas in flight. M. English cavalry dislodging a body of the enemy from 
a village. 

Battle of Lasswary.—The explanatory matter in the margin of the plan is 
not, as it there stands, very explicit. But the following, which is given at 


EXPLANATION OF THE PLANS. Ixxi 


the end of the volume, supplies this deficiency, and corresponds, sentence 
by sentence, to the letters, which are here accordingly repeated :— 


AAA, 


BBBB, . .. . . two white lines 


D E F 


HLM. 27 DY. H.M. 8 Du. HLM. 29 Dn. 


rN. Cavs, at N. Cavy. 
6N. Cavy, 3° N. Cavs. 4th N. Cavy. 


C.C.C.C, 


HUHLHLH. oe ea 


GGG ve ceceeee 


RRRR, 


‘REFERENCES. 


First position of the enemy, when attacked 
by the British cavalry on the morning of the 
ist November. The right upon the village of 
Lasswary, their left extending to the fortified 
village of Mohaulpoor, with 72 pieces of cannon, 
arranged in divisions in front of the centre 
and flanks. 

Second position of the enemy at noon drawn 
up in two lines, with their guns in front. The 
enemy took up this position on the arrival of 
the British infantry. 

Disposition of the British cavalry (with two 
batteries of their galloper guns advanced, and 
covered each by a squadron, K. 1. & K. 2.) in 
order to divide the enemy’s attention in front, 
and to attack them as soon as the column of 
British infantry should turn their flank. 

Third position of the enemy, in discovering 
the movement of the columns of British in- 
fantry to turn their flank. 

Route of the columns of infantry led by 
Ii. M.’s 76th regiment; to turn the enemy’s 
right flank, but not being able to turn it, ad- 
vanced upon their lines C CC, which they 
broke and routed, taking their guns, &c. &c. 


. The British infantry then drove the enemy 


off, towards a small mosque. ......%. in 
the rear of the village, about which the enemy 
were met and charged by the British cavalry 
in various directions 1], m. n. 0... . red lines, 

H. M.’s 2oth light dragoons who advanced 
and charged the enemy’s cavalry at S on the 
left flank of the column of British infantry. 

A column of the enemy’s baggage, infantry, 
&c, &c. going off, but turned by the charge 
of the British cavalry, I. m,n. 0. 

Shows the enemy completely broken and 
routed in various directions. Two thousand 
of the enemy finding it impossible tq succeed 
in their attempt to escape, threw down their 
arms and surrendered themselves prisoners, 
with baggage and every thing belonging to the 
enemy’s camp. 


Ixxii EXPLANATION OF THE PLANS. 


A Flag. (See Map.) Encampment of the British army after the 
action. Left of the line of infantry at Lass- 
wary; right at Impury, or Sengrah, with the 
cavalry thrown back on the right towards the 
Nullah, and facing the hills. A battalion of 
infantry left in charge of the prisoners of war, 
who were all collected at the village of Saje- 
poorah.’ 

Battle of Assye.—A. English army advancing to the ford. 1, 2, 3, Nizam’s 
and Peishwa’s cavalry. X. The left of the enemy’s infantry line, in its original 
position, which it was proposed to attack. B., B., Second position of the 
enemy’s infantry (first line), and of the English army confronting it. D. 
Enemy’s second line of infantry, after its re-formation. C. English army pur- 
suing the enemy’s routed first line. E. Mahratta cavalry charging the 74th 
regiment, F. Countercharge of the English cavalry. G. General Wellesley’s 
charge with the 78th regiment and 7th regiment N.C. H. Position of the 
General and these troops, after the charge. 

The Plans of the Battle and Siege of Deeg (p. 544), and of the Siege of 
Bhurtpore (p. 547), are given from Major Thorn’s Memoir. 

Battle of Deeg.—A. Goverdown, whence the English reconnoitred and ap- 
proached. B. A village round which they marched. K. Position of the enemy, 
when first seen. D. English army advancing to the attack. C. Native cavalry, 
keeping F., the enemy’s cavalry in check. E. E. E. Progress of the English 
army. I. Enemy’s infantry and guns, G.H. English detachment hemming 
in a body of the enemy. L. A part of that body driven into the marsh. M. 
Position of the English camp after the battle. O. A cavalry picquet, on a 
height, to watch the enemy’s motions after the battle. The small letters 
refer to the details of the siege, which is related at large in the Memoir. 

Siege of Bhurtpoor.—The Plan will, it is hoped, elucidate, sufficiently for 
the present purpose, the scene and the operations. The letters relate mostly 
to the successive batteries, breaches, and defences, and are explained in the 
Major’s narrative, tq which it may be cnough to refer those who wish to 
study professionally the #inutie of the affair. 


LOOK ON THIS PICTURE, AND ON THAT. Ixxiii 


INTRODUCTION. 


MEMORANDUM ON MARQUESS WELLESLEY’S 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. 


By The Duke of Wellington.’ 


IN order to understand the merits or demerits of Marquess 
Wellesley’s government in India, it is necessary to review the 
state of that country when his Lordship assumed its government 
in May, 1798, and that in which it was left in April, 1806, which 
was the close of the official year in which Marquess Wellesley 
resigned the government. This subject is large, and will require 
a minute detail of many measures, of the causes which led to 
them, and of their consequences. But this paper shall be made 
as short as possible ; and nothing shall be inserted in it which is 
not neccssary for the elucidation of the subjects on which it is 
“written. . 

The first intelligence which reached Marqucss Wellesley, 
upon his arrival in India, was that the ancicnt Native enemy of 
the Company had formed an alliance with the French at Mau- 
ritius, for the purpose of attacking the British nation in India ; 
and that, in conscquence of this alliance, a body of Frenchmen 
had already been landed at the port of Mangalore on the coast 
of Malabar, and had marched to Scringapatam, Shortly after 
the receipt of this intelligence, it was known in India that Buona- 
parte, with a large French army, had landed and taken posses- 
sion of Egypt, and that the avowed object of this expedition was 
to invade India by that route. 

The state of warfare which was to be expected in consequence 
of the intelligence of these mcasures and movements of the ene- 
mics of the British government, rendered necessary a review of 
its situation in all its branches ; and what follows is the result of 
that review, and of the measures which were adopted to apply 
a remedy to the inconvenicnces and evils which were found to 
exist. 


? Then (1806) Major-General, Sir A. Wellesley, K.B. 


Ixxiv FINANCIAL DISTRESS, AND MILITARY INEFFICIENCY. 


The Company were found to have a revenue of 8,059,880/., 
a sum less than that which they had been found to have in 
1793, at the renewal of their charter, by 165,7482° The debt 
amounted to 10,866,588/7, having increased since 1793; and 
the interest was annually 746,933/, having increased since 1793. 
The total amount of the charges of the government in India, 
including the interest of the debt, was 8,178,626/,; and the 
deficiency of the revenues, in comparison with the charges, at 
a time of profound peace in India, was 322,530/, At the same 
time the Company’s credit was at the lowest ebb. Money 
could not be borrowed in Bengal at 12 fer cent. interest ; the 
Company’s bonds and securities at that rate were circulated at 
such a discount, as well at that Presidency as at Madras and 
Bombay, as to amount nearly to a stagnation; and with this 
great war in -expectation, the Company’s financial servants in 
India were entircly at a loss to find the means for supporting and 
carrying on the ordinary opcrations of the government in time of 
peace. The Company’s armies, although in a high state of dis- 
cipline, and maintained, that of Fort William at the expense of 
* 1,996,4872, that of Fort St. George at the expense of 1,868,498/,, 
and that of Bombay at the expense of 641,469/., were not in a 
state of preparation and efficiency to perform the opcrations 
which the crisis of the Company’s affairs was likely to require 
from them. The Commander-in-Chicf and Adjutant-Gencral of 
Fort St. George reported that six months would be required to 
prepare for service the army serving under that Presidency, upon 
which the brunt of the contest was likely to fall; and the govern- 
ment of that Presidency were apprehensive of the consequences 
of drawing the attention of the encmy by making the smallest 
preparation for defence against the attack which they well knew 
he had meditated. The army of Bombay, on which naturally 
the task would have fallen of co-operating in the contest with that 
of Fort St. George, was necessarily scattered in the disaffected 
provinces under the government of Bombay; and the army of 
Bengal was stationed principally in the Vizier’s territories, with 
a view to keep them in tranquillity, and to defend them from the 
expected invasion of th@King of Caubul. 

Those powers on whom experience of former wars with Tip- 
poo had shown that the Company ought to rely for assistance 
were the Nizam, the Peshwah, the Nabob of the Carnatic, and 
the petty rajahs and zemindars on the coast of Malabar. Since 
the peace of 1792 with Tippoo, which had attained the object of 


o 


OUR ALLIES UNABLE OR UNWILLING TO HELP US. \xxv 


the alliance between the first two and the Company, the situation 
of these powers had been considerably changed. The Nizam, by 
the result of an unfortunate state of hostility with the Mahrattas, 
which ended in battle, and a peace, or rather capitulation, con- 
cluded at Kurdlah in the year 1795, had fallen from the state of 
a great and Icading power in Hindustan to that of a tributary 
to the Mahrattas. His ministers were appointed by the Mah- 
rattas ; his army was disbanded ; and the only support of his 
authority was a corps consisting of about 14,000 men, trained, 
disciplined, and commanded by French officers. These officers 
had possession of a considerable portion of the Nizam’s territories, 
from the revenues of which they were to pay their troops ; and 
by the power which they acquired by this possession, and by the 
state of confusion of the government of the Mahrattas at Poonah, 
the weakness of that of the Nizam, and the supine indifference 
of that of the Company, they were becoming a French state in 
the peninsula of India. By their power and violence they over- 
awed the Nizam’s councils, and precluded all hope of his co- 
operation in the war which was expected with Tippoo and his 
French allics ‘in the year 1798. 

The Mahratta government of Poonah, which had afforded such 
matcrial assistance to the British government in the war which 
had cnded in 1792 by the treaty of Scringapatam, was become 
equally incapable with the Nizam of affording any aid in that 
which was expected in 1798, After the peace of Kurdlah in 
1795, the Peshwah, Mahdoo Rao Narain, threw himself from a 

. window in his palace at Poonah, and dicd upon the spot. A con- 
test,then ensued for the possession of the power of that govern- 
ment, in which all the principal Mahratta chicfs were engaged, 
and which, having lasted with various success during the ycars 
1796 and 1797, had ended by placing all the power at Poonah 
in the hands of Dowlut Rao Scindiah. This chief already pos- 
sessed the Mahratta territorics upon the Jumna and Ganges 
bordering upon those of the English and the Nabob of Oude, and 
the actual sovercignty of all those situated to the northward 
of the rivers Nerbudda and Taptce. By the gain of the influence 
ever the government ‘of the young Peshwah, Bajee Rao, he 
extended his power to the northern fronticr of Tippoo’s domi- 
nions in Mysore; thus holding in his own hands all the different 
Mahratta states. 

In 1798 this extended power was but fecbly established, and 
would have been uncqual to the exertion to be made in the 


Ixxvi SCINDIAH UNFRIENDLY, AND UNDER FRENCH INFLUENCE, 


expected contest with Tippoo, even if it could be supposed that 
Scindiah’s policy would have led him to enter into it. But when 
that chief became the sole head of the Mahrattas, his policy 
would have led him to support Tippoo rather than the English 
in the impending contest, supposing his power to have been in 
that state to enable him to enter into it. He must have been 
aware that, with respect to him, the English were the most for- 
midable of the two powers ; and that his objects would have becn 
forwarded by their defeat. Besides this, Scindiah’s principal 
force consisted in a body of infantry, raised, disciplined, and 
commanded by French officers; and although the influence of 
these officers over the government of Scindiah was by no mcans 
of the description of that exercised by those in the service of the 
Nizam over the government of that prince, it was still sufficiently 
strong to prevent Scindiah from adopting a measure which was 
contrary to his obvious policy, as the sole possessor of all the 
Mahratta power from the Ganges to the Toombuddra. 

Thus, then, nothing was to be expected from the two powers 
which had been the principal allics of the Company in the 
former war with Tippoo ; and as the French weie likely to be 
actively and personally engaged in this expected war, it was to 
be apprehended that they would derive assistance from the force 
commanded by Frenchmen in the service of those powers who 
had formerly been considered as the firm allics of the British 
government. 

Since the peace of 1792 the Nabob Mahomed Ali of the Car- 
natic had died, and had been succceded by his son, Omdal ool 
Omrah, This prince, who was very unpopular in his territorics, 
showed every disposition to impede rather than to forward the 
operations of the British army. He gave them no assistance ; 
and it was afterwards found at Scringapatam that he was in 
correspondence with the Company’s enemy. 

As for the rajahs of Malabar, they (with the exception of the 
Rajah of Koorg) had been in a state of hostility with the Com- 
pany from the conclusion of the peace of 1792 till the year 1798, 
and had kept a considerable proportion of the Bombay army in 
constant hostile operations against them. No assistance was to 
be expected from them; but, on the contrary, every thing which 
was in their power to annoy and harass the army and to aid the 
enemy. 

Add to this representation of the state of our affairs in India 
at this period, that a revolution had just been effected in Oude 


BAD STATE OF OUDE ARMY, AND OF DEPENDENT STATES. xxvii 


by Lord Teignmouth; that the government of the reigning 
Prince Saadut Ali was most unpopular, and by no means firmly 
established throughout the country; that his army was mutinous 
and disaffected ; that an invasion of his country was expected 
from Zemaun Shah, the King of Caubul, against which it was 
necessary to provide by the assembly of a large force in Oude 
under the command of Sir J. Craig; and that, in this emergency 
of affairs in Oude, such was the state of mutiny and disaffection 
of the Nabob’s troops, that His Highness could not trust to them 
the guard of his person, but was obliged to call for British troops 
to preserve him from the effects of their treachery; and Sir J. 
Craig, to whom was intrusted the defence of Oude, considered 
these troops in the light of an enemy’s fortress in his rear. | 

Another circumstance which embarrassed government in India 
at all times, and was a considerable -source, of embarrassment at 
the period under consideration, was the nature and state of the 
alliances between the British government and its dependent and 
tributary states. 

Fhese alliances had always been formed in a moment of ex- 
treme weakness, and gencrally after the Native and dependent 
state had been conquered. The principal stipulation was uni- 
formly protection by the British government, in consideration of 
subsidy to be paid by the Native state, and in other respects the 
Native state was declared or was considered to be independent 
in the management of all its internal concerns. 

The Native states having in every instance contracted these 
alliances in a moment of weakness, in which, of course, all the 
powers of their governments were paralysed, they have invariably 
been under the necessity of calling for the assistance of the British 
protecting government for the support of their authority in the 
management of their internal concerns. 

The system of government in India, the foundations of autho- 
rity, and the modes of supporting it and of carrying on the opera~ 
tions of the government, are entircly different from the systems 
and modes adopted in Europe for the same purposes. 

The foundation and the instrument of all power there is the 
sword ; and when these alliances have been formed, the sword, 
or, in other words, the army of the East India Company, became 
the only support and the only efficient instrument of authority of 
the protected Native states. 

This position of affairs, which was the result of the principle of 
government long established in the East, and of the weakness of 


Ixxviill ARMY OF FORT ST. GEORGE REHABILITATED. 


the Native state, was attended by a stipulation in some cascs, or 
an understanding in others, that the Native state should be znde- 
pendent in all the operations of its internal government ; and at 
the very moment in which this stipulation was made, the inter- 
ference of the British government was required, and all the internal 
concerns of the Native state submitted to its judgment, in order 
that its agents might see whether the cases in which its interference 
was called for were of a nature to justify it. 

Here, then, the door was necessarily opened to the interference 
of the British government in every concern; and the result was 
increased weakness in the Native state, jealousy of this inter- 
ference, and disunion bordering upon treachery. « 

These evils had long appeared to require a remedy; and they 
must have been felt particularly at the moment in which the 
British government was likely to be involved in a most extensive 
warfare with the most formidable of the Native powers, assisted 
by the French. 

This having been the state of India at the time Marquess 
Wellesley assumed the government in the year 1798, the measures 
adopted to apply a remedy to the evils which existed will form 
an epitome of the history of his Lordship’s administration, I shall 
detail them in that order which is most likely to make them clear 
to the understandings of those who will rcad this paper. 

The objects which pressed most upon his Lordship’s attention 
in May and June, 1798, were to place the army of Fort St. 
George in a situation to resist the expected hostility of the 
enemy, to relieve the finances from the difficultics under which 
they laboured, and to bring back the allics of the Company to the 
state in which they had been left by the peace at Scringapatam 
in 1792, so that the allics might be able to render the assistance 
in the war which they were capable of affording. 

The measures of finance which were at that time successfully 
adopted laid the foundation of the system which was subsequently 
acted upon, and which will be fully considered in another part of 
this paper. | 

Effectual measures were immediately adopted to put in a situ- 

\ ation to enable them to defend themselves the whole disposable 
force of Fort St. George, and eventually to perform the service 
which might be, and was afterwards, required from them. 

The army of Fort St. George was reinforced by European 
troops from Bengal, and preparatory mcasurcs were adopted to 

enable government to reinforce it still further with Native troops, 


FRENCH REPLACED BF ENGLISH TROOPS AT HYDERABAD, 1xxix 


when the most favourable season for transporting them by sca 
should come round. 

But the principal measure of those days, that which gave a 
turn to the state of the Company’s affairs in India, and to the 
general sentiment of the people of that country respecting the 
British government, was the negotiation at Hyderabad, which 
ended by the substitution of a British for a French force at the 
capital of the Nizam. 

The Nizam had long been connected with the British govern- 
ment, and by the treaty of 1789 it had been stipulated that he 
should have the assistance of two British battalions when he 
should call for them. This article of the treaty had not been per- 
formed till the war broke out with Tippoo, which ended by the 
peace of 1792, when Lord Cornwallis made a new treaty [1790] 
with the Nizam, and attached to his army two British battalions, 
which acted with them during that war. At the same time two’ 
British battalions were attached to the Mahratta army under 
Pursheram Bhow. 

The services of these battalions stationed with the Nizam, as 
will be observed by the treaty, were to be confined to operations 
against foreign cnemies and domestic rebels; but not to be 
directed against the Mabrattas, and in particular not against 
certain tributaries of the Nizam stationed upon the Mahratta 
fronticr, who were likewise tributarics of the Peshwah. 

After the defeat and capitulation of the Nizam at Kurdlah in 
1795, which has been above referred to, the Mahrattas had 
obliged His Ilighness to send these battalions back into the 
Company’s territories; but during the disputes at Poonah for the 
succession to Madhoo Rao, His Highness had taken advantage of 
the momentary weakness of the Mahratta government, and had 
recalled these battalions to his capital. 

The object of the negotiation which Marquess Wellesley com- 
menced with the Nizam was to prevail upon His Highness to 
perform the defensive treaty of Ilyderabad, 1st Sept. 1798; and 
as it appeared that His Highness was unable to perform it on 
account of the powcr which the French officers and their faction 
had over his councils, it was proposed to His Highness that he 
should dismiss them and their troops from his service for ever; 
and an offer was made to supply British troops to enable His 
Highness to accomplish this object, and to remain thereafter at 
Hydcrabad as substitutes for the troops under the command of 
the French officers. | 


Ixxx NEW TREATY WITH NIZAM, NEGOTIATION WITH TIPPOO. 


A treaty was concluded on this basis with the utmost secrecy 
and despatch, which contained all the restraining articles for the 
service of the troops which had been in the treaty of 7th May, 
1798; and a body of British troops entered the Nizam’s terri- 
tories, and had made some marches towards Hyderabad before 
the French officers were aware of their fate. This body of troops, 
having joined those already at Hyderabad, performed the service 
on which they were sent without bloodshed ; and the Nizam was 
thus restored to the power of performing his defensive engage- 
ments with the Company, and one of the great and fruitful sources 
of the evils impending overeus in 1798, which has been already 
described, was removed by a timely, well-contrived, and able 
exercise of the power of the British government. 

This negotiation at Hyderabad was accompanied by another 
at Poonah, with a view to the same objects. But this failed, for 
reasons which will be reviewed hereafter. In the course of this 
negotiation all the circumstances attending that carrying on at 
Hyderabad were described to the Peshwah, with a vicw to prevent 
the jealousy which might otherwise have been expected upon the 
renewal of the ancient alliance between the Company and the 
Nizam. 

After one of the principal allies of the British government had 
thus been placed in a situation to be enabled to perform his 
treaty of alliance, a negotiation was opened with Tippoo Sultaun, 
the object of which was to bring that Prince to an carly decision, 
whether he should be at peace or at war with the Company. It 
was obvious that the assistance which he had hitherto received 
from his allies, the French, was small in comparison with that 
which he might expect from them; and that it was not of an 
extent and description to be very formidable to the British 
government, particularly as its alliance with the Nizam had 
been renewed, and the source of danger in that quarter had 
been removed. All that was required from Tippoo, therefore, 
was a renunciation of this offensive alliance, and such an un- 
equivocal proof of it as should be satisfactory to the whole 
world ; and the adoption of arrangements which should facilitate 
the usual friendly communications between states not in hostility 
with each other, 

These negotiations were attended by military preparations 
which were calculated to secure carly success and a speedy 
termination to the war, which it was determined should be the 
‘consequence of Tippoo’s refusal to give the allies the rcasonable 


CONQUEST, PARTITION, AND SETTLEMENT OF MYSORE. 1xxxi 


satisfaction which they had required. The wisdom of these early 
preparations was soon proved ; for on the very day that Tippoo, 
after a delay of some weeks beyond the period fixed for his 
answer to the remonstrance of the British government, despatched 
his answer, and desired that a British officer might be sent to 
negotiate with him, he commenced his march to attack the 
Bombay army, which was assembled in the territories of the 
Rajah of Koorg. 

In this review of the measures of Marquess Wellesley’s 
government, it is not intended to detail the movements or the 
actions of the different armics. The result of the well-prepared 
and well-combined operations of the war against Tippoo was the 
capture of his capital, with all his arscnals, treasure, &c.; his 
own dcath, on the 4th May, 1799; and the subsequent reduction 
and submission of all his territorics to the allied governments. 

The army of the Nizam, with the subsidiary force as formed 
by the late Treaty of 1798, co-operated in this war with the 
British army; and His Highness’s government shared equally 
with the British government in the advantages arising from its 
successful termination, The territorics of the Company were in- 
creased by the addition of those belonging to Tippoo, situated 
upon the sea coast of Malabar, and those which gave possession 
of important military positions. The Nizam reccived an equiva- 
lent, contiguous to his frontier; and a portion was reserved for 
the Peshwah, to be given on the condition that His Highness 
should become a party to the alliance between the other govern- 
ments, and should acccde to certain stipulations which were 
proposed to him, and which will be discussed in a subsequent 
part of this paper. Jlis Ilighness having refused to accept these 
conditions, this portion was divided between the Company and 
the Nizam. 

The principal and all the centre part of the territories of 
Tippoo were given to a descendant of the ancient Rajahs of 
Mysore, in whose person a state was formed under the immediate 
influence and protection of the British government. This state 
was connccted by a treaty of alliance with the Company, which 
was bound to defend it on condition of the payment of a stipu- 
lated tribute. As alliances of this description, by conferring a 
nominal independence on the Princes connected by them with 
the Company, had been found in other instances to be attended 
with many inconveniences, to render necessary a constant inter- 
ference by the protecting government in the internal affairs of the 

f 


Ixxxil SUMMARY OF RESULTS OF FIRST YEAR’S ADMINISTRATION. 


Native subordinate statc, and to occasion internal weakness, 
jealousy of the protecting power, and a waste and cmbarrassment 
of the resources of the government, it was thought best, in the 
treaty of alliance with the government of Mysore, to provide for 
the interference of the British government in all its concerns 
when such interference might be necessary; and the state in 
which this government is found to be at this moment, the cordial 
and intimate union which exists between the government of 
Mysore and the British authorities, and the important strength 
and real assistance which it has afforded to the British govern- 
ment in all its recent difficultics, afford the strongest proofs of 
the wisdom of this stipulation of the treaty. 

Thus, then, in less than one year from the period at which the 
perils which I have above described threatened the existence of 
the British government in India, our principal ally, the Nizam, 
was restored to us, the French state growing in the peninsula of 
India was destroyed, our formidable Native enemy, Tippoo, the 
certain ally of the French in India, was subducd, and in his place 
was established in Mysore a government calculated to afford, and 
which has afforded, the most substantial assistance to Great 
Britain in all her difficulties. 

The Governor-General having now rclieved the peninsula of 
India from the danger by which it was threatened, and affairs in 
that quarter having been placed on foundations of strength cal- 
culated to afford lasting peace and sccurity, turned his attention 
to the great and increasing cause of the weakness of the north- 
west frontier of the Bengal provinces. These provinces were 
covered in that quarter by the territorics of the Nabob Vizier of 
Oude, who was connected with the Company by a treaty of alli- 
ance, by which, in considcration of a subsidy amounting to a sum 
not exceeding 50 lacs sicca rupees per annum, the Company 
were bound to defend him; and with this view to maintain ‘at 
all times at least 10,000 men in his territories; and in case 
this number should for any cause be increased beyond 13,000 
men, the Nabob was to pay the actual expense incurred by the 
Company, This treaty was attended by the usual stipulation of 
the independence of the Nabob in his internal concerns ; which 
stipulation had been uniformly frustrated by the necessary and 
uniform interference of the Company in all those concerns for 
the support of the Nabob’s authority, for the preservation of 
tranquillity in the country, and for the security of the funds 
from which the Company derived so important a portion of the 


STATE OF OUDE, AND NECESSITY OF REFORM THERE. Ixxxiii 


resources applicable to the payment of their military establish- 
ments, 

For some ycars previous to 1798 apprehensions had been en- 
tertained that Zemaun Shah, the King of Caubul, would carry 
into execution an old and favourite planof the Affghan government 
to invade Hindustan; and thcse apprchensions had appeared 
so well founded in 1798 that the Governor-General, Marquess 
Wellesley, had found it necessary to assemble a large British 
army in Oude, under the command of Sir J. Craig, for the pro- 
tection of the Nabob’s territorics against this expected invasion, 
notwithstanding the difficulties under which the government 
laboured at the same period in the peninsula of India. 

At the close of the year 1797 the Nabob, Azof ool Dowlah, 
diced, and was succeeded in his government by his supposed son, 
Vizier Ali. This usurper had been formally deposed by the 
authority of the British government under Lord Teignmouth, 
after a full examination of the justice of his claim; and Saadut 
Ali had been placed in the government of Oude. 

This prince was very unpopular with the army, and was not 
tenerally agrecable to his subjects. His disposition was parsi- 
monious, and his habits were not of a nature to conciliate the 
affections of his turbulent subjccts. 

When the preparations were making to resist the expected 
invasion of Zemaun Shah, the Nabob, Saadut Ali, although fully 
convinced of the necessity of collecting the largest force upon the 
fronticr, called for a detachment of the British troops to attend 
and guard his person against his own turbulent and disaffected 
troops. Ic declared repeatedly that these troops were not to 
be trusted in the day of battle, or on any service; and after view- 
ing their state of discipline and cquipment, and obtaining a 
knowledge of their principles and attachment to the cause of the 
allicd governments, Sir J. Craig considered these troops as worse 
than uscless, as dangerous, and of the nature of an enemy’s 
fortress in his rear; and he actually left a detachment of British 
troops to watch them, and the turbulent inhabitants of Rohilcund, 
the frontier province of Oude to the north-west. : 

The Governor-Gencral, by his negotiations at the court of 
Persia, had drawn the attention of the King of Caubul to the 
defence of his own western fronticr; and availed himself of the 
certain tranquillity which he had obtained on the frontiers of 
Oude to arrange the affairs of that country on a basis better 
calculated to give it permanent sccurity and tranquillity, and to 

f 2 


Ixxxiv NEW ARRANGEMENT, AND GAIN TO THE COMPANY. 


increase the strength of the British government on its north-west 
frontier, which was onc of its weakest points. 

Towards the close of the year 1799 the Governor-Gencral 
called upon the Nabob of Oude to dismiss his expensive, useless, 
‘and dangerous troops, and to fill their places by increased num- 
bers of the Company’s troops. The Nabob had desired the 
assistance of the Governor-General in the reform of the different 
establishments of his government; but the British government 
had a right, under the article of the treaty of 17y8, to require 
that this reform should be made. After some difficulties, arising 
principally from the defective principle on which the military 
establishments were formed, paid, and commanded, this great 
object was effected ; and arrangements were made for introduc- 
ing into the Vizier’s territorics 3000 additional British troops, at 
the expense to the Nabob Vizier of 76 lacs of Oude sicca rupees 
per annum. 

In order to improve the security of Oude still further, a reform 
of the civil administration of the government was necessary; and 
this reform was pressed upon the attention of the Nabob. But 
while the negotiations for this purpose, and for the final arrange- 
ment of the military establishments, were going on, the Nabob 
plainly declared that he was not able to pay the expense of the 
troops which had been stationed in his country for its defency at 
the time of the expected invasion of Zemaun Shah, or the expense 
of the additional troops which had been necessarily stationed in 
his country upon the occasion of the reform of his military estab- 
lishments, although he was bound by treaty to defray the whole 
of these charges. 

A demand was then made upon him to give territorial security, 
according to the 11th article of the treaty of 1798; and, after a 
long negotiation, a treaty was concluded on the roth Nov. 1801, 
by which, in commutation for subsidy, and for the perpetual de- 
fence of his country, the Nabob ceded to the Company the terri- 
tory of Rohilcund, the Dooab, and Gorruckpoor; the two former 
being his fronticr provinces towards the Mahrattas, the Sciks, 
and Affghans, and the latter bordering upon the Company; and 
he engaged, further, to introduce a better system of managzement 
into the territories which remained in his hands. 

By the whole of this arrangement the Company gained, 

ist. The advantage of getting rid of a useless and dangerous 
body of troops stationed on the very point of their defence, and 
ready at all times to join an invading enemy : 


THE VIZIER A GAINER BY THE TRANSACTION. Ixxxv 


andly. The advantage of acquiring the means of placing upon 
this weak point additional numbers of the British troops, and 
thereby increasing its strength, and the general security of the 
provinces in their rear: 

grdly. Ample territorial security for the regular and perpetual 
payment of these funds for the support of their military estab- 
lishments in Bengal: 

4thly. By the introduction of their own system of government 
and management into the countries ceded to them, and the 
employment of thcir own scrvants in the administration, they 
secured the tranquillity of those hitherto disturbed countrics, the 
loyalty and happiness of their hitherto disaffected and turbulent 
inhabitants ; and, above all, they acquired the resources of those 
rich but hitherto neglected provinces for their armies, in case of 
the recurrence of the necessity for military operations upon that 
fronticr. 

These advantages, the full bencfit of which, as will be scen 
hercaftcr, was felt in a very few ycars, were gained without 
incurring any disadvantage whatever ; in particular, that was not 
incurred which appears most likely to weaken a great continental 
power, such as the Company is in India, viz. the frontier was 
not increased. The Company were cqually bound to defend, 
and had actually defended, this same fronticr in 1798 and 1799, 
when the country was governed by the Nabob; so that all was 
gain and strength, without the smallest degree of disadvantage 
or weakness, 

But the advantages in this arrangement were not gained by 
the Company only; those of the Nabob were at Icast equal to 
those of the Company, Whatever increased the security of the 
Company manifestly increased his security likewise; and here 
he acquired a great advantage. But this was not all. It is 
known that the Nabob of Oude had never collected from the 
countries ceded, and realised in his treasury, even the sum of 76 
lacs of Oude sicca rupees, being the old subsidy paid under the 
treaty of 1798; much less had he realised the increased sum 
which he was obliged to pay in consequence of the increase of 
the number of troops stationed in his country. His pecuniary 
gain was the difference between the annual sum he realised and 
that which he was bound to pay. Under the new treaty of Nov. 
1801, the Company were bound to defend the territories of the 
Nabob under all circumstances; and no new demand could be 
made upon him on any account, whatever might be the extent 


Ixxxvi THE PLAN GOOD, DESPITE‘ DIFFICULTIES IN SETTLING it; 
> 


of the service, or of the expense incurred in their defence. The 
Nabob has already felt the full advantage of this stipulation. 

Besides these advantages of a pecuniary nature, the Nabob 
derived others from the arrangement. The cession of the 
provinces had been preceded by the discharge of a large pro- 
portion of his troops; and those which remained in his service 
scattered over the whole surface of his enlarged territorics, were 
unequal to the performance of the duties required from them. 
These duties could not, with convenience, be performed by the 
Company’s Native troops, commandcd as they are by European 
officers, as the civil government remained in the hands of the 
Nabob’s Native servants. Both the Company’s government and 
the Nabob suffered inconvenience; the former from the frequent 
calls of the Nabob for the service of their troops in the detail 
of the collections of the revenuc; and the latter from the want 
of habit of these troops in duties of this description, and the 
difficulties of performing them through the agency of European 
officers directed by Native servants. When the provinces were 
ceded to the Company, the Nabob had the means and advan- 
tage of employing in a reduced territory the troops which had 
been found insufficient for the conduct of the administration of 
one of greater extent; and thesc troops, being more immediately 
under his inspection, and within the reach of his authority, were 
kept in better order. 

Thus then, upon the whole, this arrangement has been advan- 
tageous, and has proved satisfactory, to both the partics to it, 
whatever may have been the difficultics in settling it; and 
Marquess Wellesley removed by it all the inconveniences and 
weakness felt upon the north-west frontier of Bengal, and added 
considerably to the resources of the British government. 

The evil to which Marquess Wellesley next directed his 
efforts was the nature of the British alliances with its tributary 
states in gencral, and particularly with the Nabob of Arcot. 
The alliance between the Company and the family of this prince 
had commenced in the infancy of the British power in the 
peninsula of India, and the terms of it had been altered at 
different periods. The gencral purport of them, however, at all 
times, had been protection of the Carnatic by the Company, on 
the condition of the regular monthly payment of a stipulated 
subsidy by the Nabob; that the Nabob should have no political 
communication with any foreign power, excepting through the 
intervention or with the consent of the Company; that the 


EVILS OF DOUBLE GOVERNMENT OF CARNATIC. 1xxxvii 


Company should not interfere in the internal concerns of the 
Nabob’s government; and the last treaty of 1792 provided par- 
ticularly that, in case of failure in the payment of the stipulated 
subsidy, certain countries should be ceded to the Company. 

‘One of the great evils in this alliance, as in all those of this 
description which had been formed in India, was that it provided 
that the Company should not interfere in the internal concerns 
of the Nabob’s government, at the same time that the inter- 
ference of the Company in every possible case was absolutcly 
and essentially neccssary for the support of the Native govern- 
ment, and was practised on every occasion. 

Another evil which affected this, as well as every alliance of 
the same description, was that the amount of the subsidy to be 
paid to the Company was to be realised from the country by 
the Nabob; and that this subsidy necessarily bore so large a 
proportion to the revenues which the country could afford, that 
it was scarcely possible to realise it so as to make the regular 
monthly payments required by the nature of the Company’s 
service and stipulated in the treaty. The consequence was that 
the Nabob was obliged to borrow money, at large interest, to 
make his payments at the stipulated periods; and as the 
Natives were unable or unwilling to come forward to lend their 
moncy upon these occasions, the loans were made from the 
Company’s civil and military servants, and the European 
inhabitants of Fort St. George and its dependencies, 

The interest upon these loans was usually 3 per cent, per 
mensem ; and the sccurity for the payment of the interest, as 
well as the principal, was gencrally a tuncaw, or order, or assign- 
ment, from the Nabob, upon the revenucs of certain portions 
of his territories. It is obvious that the tuncawdar, or holder of 
these orders, could have no interest in the prosperity of the 
country of which he was thus appointed by the Nabob the 
temporary collector, excepting to recover from it as he could, 
and at the earliest possible period, the sums supposed to be due. 
Ifere, then, was established a system which tended not only to 
the oppression of the inhabitants of the country, to the impover- 
ishment of the Nabob, and to the destruction of the revenues of 
the Carnatic, but it was carried into exccution by the Company’s 
civil and military servants, and by British subjects, 

In this view of the evil it was of cnormous magnitude. The 
practice of lending moncy to the Native powers by British sub- 
jects had been repeatedly forbidden by the Company, and the 


Ixxxviii ‘THE NABOB OF ARCOT’S DEBTS.’ 


continuance of it, therefore, was a breach of their most positive 
orders; but it was so general, and the profits so large, that no 
government had been found sufficiently strong entircly to pre- 
vent it. But the evil did not consist only in the ruin of the 
Nabob and his country, and in this breach of order and disci- 
pline, but it established at Madras, and in the subordinate terri- 
tories, a body of men in the service of the Company, or living 
under its protection, whose intercsts and objects, as rclative to 
the Nabob of the Carnatic, were different from those of the 
Company. On all occasions, whether trifling or important, of 
difference between the Company and the Nabob, the latter was 
certain of the advice, assistance, and active exertions of this 
description of men; and he never failed to succeed in his 
objects. It is not astonishing, therefore, that a Prince whose 
views were directed to an increase of his political power, and 
whose vanity was flattered by the services performed and court 
paid to him by so many Europeans of the first rank and con- 
sequence in that country, should have promoted every object 
which could have a tendency to continuc this system, and 
should have sct his face against every measure calculated to 
restrain it, although it was evidently ruinous to his finances, 
to the revenucs of his country, and to his real interests and 
independence. 

The countrics which by the treaty of 17y2 had been assigned 
as security to be assumed by the Company, in case of the failure 
in the regular payment of the subsidy, were among the richest 
of all those under the government of the Nabob; and it had 
been particularly provided by the*treaty that tuncaws should not 
be granted upon these districts. Those who lent Tis Highness 
their moncy, however, had no objection to take these countrics 
as their security; and it was natural that the Nabob should 
feel a slighter degree of interest in the permanent prosperity of 
those countries than in that of the other provinces subject to 
his authority. Accordingly, tuncaws were generally granted, 
contrary to treaty, upon these provinces assigned by treaty for 
the Company’s security; and in aggravation of the accumulated 
evils of this system, the Company’s governments abroad had 
the mortification to observe the daily and increasing ruin of 
the resources of Fort St. George, and the deterioration of the 
prosperity of the provinces allottcd as their security by the 
means of thcir own servants and those living under their pro- 
tection, Not a month clapsed. that did not afford matter of 


TIPPOO’S FALL BRINGS CARNATIC MATTERS TO A CRISIS. |xxxix 


speculation whether the Nabob could continue to pay his 
stipulated subsidy; and not one in which he did not procure 
the money by loan at a large interest, by means which tended 
to the destruction of the country. 

From the time the operation of the treaty of 1792 was 
observed, every Governor had endcavoured to prevail upon the 
Nabob to consent to an alteration of it, by which the Company’s 
resources should be secured, and the evils above described 
should be prevented. The endeavours, however, of Lord Buck- 
inghamshire, Marquess Wellesley, and Lord Powis, equally 
failed in prevailing upon the Nabob to consent to a modification 
of the treaty; and when the war broke out with Tippoo, the 
country was labouring under all the accumulated disadvantages 
of the system, its resources were ruined, and its inhabitants, 
from long oppression, disaffected. 

Besides these evils, there was a manifest indifference, or 
rather disaffection, in the Nabob, Omdal ool Omrah, himself, to 
the cause of the British government and its allies, the meaning 
of which was not discovered till Scringapatam was taken, and 
the papers of Tippoo had fallen into the hands of the British 
government. Among them were found all the written com- 
munications and correspondence which had been carried on 
between the Nabob Mahomed Ali and the Nabob Omdal ool 
Omrah, his son, and Hyder Ali and Tippoo Sultaun, without 
the knowledge of the Company’s government. 

The fact of the existence of the correspondence alone was a 
breach of the treaties by which the Nabobs of the Carnatic had 
been allicd to the British government ; but in addition to this 
fact it was found that the correspondence referred to objects 
under discussion by the different partics to it, and cntircly 
inconsistent with the principle of the connexion bctween the 
British government and the Nabobs of the Carnatic, with the 
terms of the treatics by which that connexion had been formed, 
or the existence of friendly intercourse between any states in 
any part of the world. 

As soon as Marquess Wellesley had ascertained all the cir- 
cumstances attending these communications, by an examination 
of the persons who had been instrumental in carrying them on, 
he referred the whole subject to the authoritics in England, and 
stated in detail his sentiments on the conduct of the Nabob, and 
on the measures which it would be advisable to adopt. These 
sentiments having been approved, his Lordship procecded to 


XC CARNATIC ANNEXATION PREVIOUSLY APPROVED AT HOME, 


carry into exccution the measures which he had proposed to 
adopt. 

His Lordship’s principles on this question were, generally, 
that the Nabobs, by their communications with Ilyder Ali and 
Tippoo Sultaun, had broken their treaties of alliance with the 
Company; and that in consequence of this breach of treaty the 
Company had a right to act in the manner that best suited their 
own interest. That which best suited their own interest was, 
to take into their own hands the entire management of the civil 
and military government of the Carnatic; giving to the Nabob, 
for the support of himsclf and his family, such a proportion of 
the revenues as should be sufficient for those objects, provided 
His Highness would acquiesce in the arrangements which should 
be carried into execution. These principles were considered to 
apply equally to the son, or supposed son, of the Nabob Omdal 
ool Omrah, as it was obvious that he could claim to inherit the 
authority of his father in the Carnatic, and the advantages 
derived from the connexion with the Company, only under the 
treaties between the Company and his family, all of which had 
been broken by the correspondence carried on with Hyder Ali 
and Tippoo Sultaun, by Mahomed Ali and Omdal ool Omrah. 

When the orders from Marquess Wellesley upon this subject 
reached Madras, the Nabob Omdal ool Omrah was in such a 
state of health as to be incapable of attcnding to business; and 
soon afterwards he dicd. The supposed son was then apprised 
of the discoverics which had been made at Seringapatam, of the 
sentiments of the British government in consequence of these 
discoveries, and of the measures which they proposed to adopt 
in the Carnatic. But he refused to accept the situation held out 
to him under the new arrangement. As the claim of this Prince 
to succeed to his father, supposing that circumstances had 
allowed of the succession, was by no means clear, and as it was 
desirable for the peace of the Carnatic that the Nabob’s family 
should adopt the arrangement, Lord Clive (now Earl of Powis) 
determined to set aside Ali Husscin entircly, and to propose it 
to Azeem ool Dowlah, the eldest legitimate son of Amecr ool 
Omrah, who was the second son of the Nabob Mahomed Ali, 
and brother of the late Nabob Omdal ool Omrah. This Prince 
having agreed to the arrangement, a treaty was concluded by 
which the whole of the civil and military government of the 
Carnatic was transferred for ever to the Company; and the 
Nabob Azcem ool Dowlah, and his heirs, were to preserve their 


ITS BENEFITS. NIZAM STILL PRESSED BY MAHRATTAS, xci 


title and dignity, and to receive one fifth part of the net 
revenues of the country.} 

Thus was this important arrangement concluded in a peace- 
able manner, by which a remedy was provided for all the evils 
which had attended the former connexion between the Company 
and the Nabobs of the Carnatic; additional security was given 
to the British government, and an addition of 800,000/. per 
annum, value of 20 lacs of star pagodas, was made to their 
pecuniary resources. This improvement in their situation was 
not attended by any extension of their fronticr (for the Com- 
pany was bound before, both by treaty and positive interest, to 
defend the same line of country), or any circumstance which 
tended to weaken the British government in the Carnatic. 

The arrangement, the nature of which I shall next discuss, is 
the treaty of 1800, with the Nizam. It will be recollected that 
the treaty of 1798, which had been a remedy for some of the 
inconveniences existing at that time in the connexion between 
the Company and the Nizam, had been directed principally to 
the object of enabling His Highness to perform his part of the 
triple alliance of 1790, formed against the powcr of Tippoo 
Sultaun, in which object it had completely succeeded. But in 
reference to the Nizam, there were objects in contemplation also 
at that moment, which could not be carried into execution; and 
some inconveniences had grown out of the treaty of 1798 for 
which it was necessary to provide an carly remedy. Between 
the ycars 1792 and 1798 the power of the government of the 
Nizam had fallen under the influence of the Mahrattas. This ° 
power had large claims upon His Highness; some founded upon 
the treaty or capitulation of Kurdlah, which claims had been 
afterwards modificd and given up by other treaties; and others 
founded upon the general principle of overbearing extortion of 
the Mahratta government. 

As will appcar in a subsequent part of this paper, the 
Governor-General had endcavoured, in 1798, to prevail upon the 
Peshwah to become a party to the treaty made that year with 
the Nizam, and to allow the British government to arbitrate 
in the Mahratta claims on the Nizam’s government, but without 
success; and the Mahrattas continucd to bring forward these 
vexatious and groundless claims, and at different periods, as well 
lee a pret 

1 Unless the revenue exceeded the sum of 25 lacs of star pagodas, in 
which case the 5th part of the excess was to be applied to purposes of 
military defence. 


xcii NIZAM UNABLE TO KEEP ORDER IN HIS TERRITORIES 


during the war against Tippoo as subsequently, Scindiah, who at 
that time possessed the power at Poonah, had collected armics 
upon the Nizam’s frontier for the purpose of enforcing them. 

Another evil which had existed in 1798 affecting the Nizam’s 
government, and for which the treaty of 1st Sept., 1798, had 
been no remedy, was the state of the Nizam’s government in 
relation to its tributarics, who were likewise tributaries to the 
Mahrattas. A considerable proportion of the pecuniary re- 
sources of the Nizam was derived from this source; but the 
Nizam was unable to enforce payment of his just demands, 
which the tributaries were encouraged by the Mahrattas to 
withhold from His Highness. 

Under the treaty of ist Sept. 1798, the Nizam was not 
entitled to the assistance of the British troops stationed in his 
country, either to defend him against the Mahrattas, or to assist 
him in overawing those of his tributaries who were likewise 
tributaries to the Mahrattas; and after the conquest of Mysore 
the British government, which by that event had become 
paramount in India, was obliged to determine the precise nature 
of the relation in which it would stand, as well to the Nizam’s 
as to the Mahratta government, and that in which those powers 
should stand to cach other. 

It was obvious that the Mahrattas would continue to make, 
and would at length enforce, their unjust demands upon the 
Nizam’s government to the length of replacing affairs at Ilyder- 
abad in the situation in which they had been Icft by the treaty 
‘ of Kurdlah in 1795, when a Mahratta minister had governed 
the Nizam’s territories. But this was not the only danger. The 
Nizam’s government could not procced unless its tributarics 
were brought under subjection. This measure was necessary as 
well on account of the pecuniary relief which it would afford to 
the Nizam, as because the rebellion of these tributarics was a 
dangerous example of insubordination to the governors and col- 
lectors of the revenue of the distant provinces of the Nizam’s 
territories. The existence of rebellion and insubordination in 
any country must always be formidable’ to its ncighbours; but 
it is particularly so in India: and in the ycars 1799 and 1800 
the existence of these evils was peculiarly inconvenient to the 
British government, and impeded the scttlement of the new 
government of Mysore and the conquered provinces. 

After the peace of Scringapatam, therefore, the British govern- 
ment were compelled to advert to the means of strengthening 


‘ ALTERNATIVES FOR STRENGTHENING THE NIZAM. xCiili 


the government of the Nizam. Those which occurred were 
first to encourage and aid the Nizam in raising an army, to be 
disciplined and commanded by European officers. It would 
have been impossible to provide the number of English officers 
which His Highness’s service would have required, even if all 
the persons of this description who might have been prevailed 
upon to go to India could have been depended upon, and if the 
national policy in respect to India had allowed of the emigration 
to that country of such a large body of persons. These European 
officers must therefore have been foreigners, all of whom have 
been invariably found to’be inimical to the British interests, and 
principally Frenchmen. Here, then, the evil would have been 
revived, of which the inconvenience and danger had bcen felt 
previous to 1798, and for which the treaty of 1798 had been a 
remedy. 

The second mode which occurred was to encourage the Nizam 
to raise a Native army. From the treachery of the Native 
chiefs, from their habits of correspondence and communication 
with the Mahrattas, and the superiority which this nation had 
acquired over them in a long serics of contests, nothing effectual 
was to be expected from this measure, and it would have Iced 
directly to place the Nizam in a state of subjection to the 
government of Poonah, The Mahrattas would thus have been 
brought to the Company’s frontier in the Northern Circars, the 
Carnatic, and to the boundarics of the new government of 
Mysore. The power of the Poonah state was at that time 
exercised by Scindiah, who was in his own right in possession 
of all the Mahratta powcr in Hindustan. Thus one Mahratta 
would have had in his hands all the power from the Ganges 
and Indus to the frontiers of the Carnatic and Mysore ; touching 
the Company’s fronticr on the whole linc, and possessing the 
means of attacking it where he should think proper. Such a power 
has never appeared in India, and it is to be hoped never will! 

The third mode was to extend the basis of the treaty of rst 
Sept. 1798; to make it generally defensive against all powers ; 
and, in fact, to take the Nizam under the protection of the British 
government. 

Adverting to the state of the government of the Nizam, to the 
fact that it was incapable from weakness of carrying on its 
ordinary operations over the countrics and people submitted to 
Ilis Ilighness’s authority, excepting by the assistance of a 
Gallo-Indian army, by means which would have subjected His 


Xciv NECESSITY OF CONCLUDING TREATY OF 1800 WITH NIZAM. 


Highness to the Mahrattas, or by the assistance of the British 
government; and that in either of the former cases it would 
have fallen into the hands of our rivals or enemies, and would 
have been exercised to our disadvantage, there is no man who | 
will doubt of the propriety of the arrangement made by the 
treaty of 1800. 

But this treaty was preceded and attended by other circum- 
stances, which, as a political measure, rendered it more necessary. 
It has already been stated that, since the peace of Kurdlah in 
1795, the Mahrattas had never ceased to make vexatious demands 
upon the Nizam, supported gencrally by the assembling of armies 
upon his frontier. The remonstrances and ncgotiations of the 
British government had preventcd the invasion of His Highness’s 
territorics, with a view to enforce the payment of these demands; 
and there is no doubt that any symptom of an intention to with- 
draw from his support would have been followed by their imme- 
diate conquest, in the same manner as the omission of the British 
government to interfere between the two powers in 1795 had 
been the occasion of the war, and the disasters which were 
followed by the capitulation of Kurdlah. 

Here, then, is a new view of the case—a Mahratta conqucst 
made of the Nizam’s territories, in consequence of our moderation 
at least ; and the conqucror placed upon our fronticr. 

If there had been no treaty with the Nizam, if the British had 
no interest in his preservation excepting what related to them- 
selves, they would have been bound to interfere to prevent this evil. 

But besides the great views of policy which rendered the 
alteration of the treaty of 1798 desirable, as far as related to 
the employment of the forces, there were other circumstances, 
of inferior importance certainly, which rendered expedient the 
other alterations made by the treaty of 1800. 

Under the treaty of 1798 the British government had been 
bound to furnish the Nizam with a certain force, for the payment 
of a stipulated sum of money monthly. As was usual in all these 
cases, this subsidy fell in arrcar; and the records of the Presi- 
dency are filled with accounts of the complaints made of the 
existence of these arrears, and of the measurcs adopted to secure 
their liquidation. These arrears gave rise to complaints and 
remonstrances from the British government, which of course 
must have tended to weaken the good understanding which 
ought to have existed between the Nizam and them; and they 
were equally prejudicial to the interests of both powers. The 


x 


TREATY WELCOME & BENEFICIAL TO BOTH GOVERNMENTS, xcv 


grant of territorial security for the payment of the subsidy re- 
moved all these causes of misunderstanding. 

The territory which was granted to the Company was that 
which had been under the government of Tippoo Sultaun, and 


"had been ceded to the Nizam by the treaties of Seringapatam of 


1792 and 1799. The authority of the Nizam had never been 
firmly established in those countries; and the state of confusion 
in which they were in 1799-1800 was highly prejudicial to the 
British interests in Mysore, and in the Company’s recently ac- 
quired countries. The Nizam’s treasury had never received 
any thing from those countries ; and His Highness had supported 
the Company’s subsidiary troops by funds acquired from other 
parts of his territories. It was hoped that the introduction of a 
better system of government would have produced ordcr and re- 
gularity among this hitherto turbulent people, a hope which has 
been completely fulfilled ; and this territory now yields a revenue 
of ,a sum fully equal to pay the expenses of 
the subsidiary force stationcd with the Nizam, and of the ad- 
ministration of government in the provinces which His Highness 
ceded, 

Under this arrangement the Company’s frontier is defined by 
the course of the Toombuddra to its junction with the Kistna ; 
and then by the course of the Kistna to its entry into the pro- 
vince of . The provinces acquired under this 
treaty cover the Mysore country to the northward ; and have 
removed the source of danger to be apprchendcd to that newly 
established government, from the neighbourhood and cxample 
of a turbulent and disaffected people, paying no revenue or 
obedience to the government under which it is placed. 

From the general view which has been given of this arrange- 
ment, it will readily be believed that the Nizam wished to 
accomplish it much more cagerly than the British government 
did. In fact, Ilis Highness felt that before this arrangement was 
made his government was not in a state of sccurity; and it will 
be observed that the security of His Iighncss’s government was 
the principal object and motive of this treaty. Other objects 
were connected with this principal motive, equally interesting 
and advantageous to both the partics to the treaty; and upon 
the whole it may be said that it does not contain an article or an 
arrangement in which both partics were not equally interested, 

The next subject to which I shall advert is the arrangement 
made with the Peshwah by the treaty of Basscin. It will be 


ve? 


XCVi MAHRATTA POLITICS ON WELLESLEY’S ACCESSION. 


recollected that the Mahratta government of Poonah had been 
connected with the British Government by a treaty made by 
Lord Cornwallis on 1st Sept. 1748, commonly called the Treaty 
of Triple Alliance, against Tippoo Sultaun. Under this treaty 
His Highness was bound to assist the British government and the 
Nizam, in case either of these powers was attacked by Tippoo. 

After the peace of Seringapatam, in 1792, the Mahrattas at- 
tacked the Nizam, and the war ended by a peace or capitulation 
concluded at Kurdlah, by which the Nizam ceded half his terri- 
tories, placed the remainder under the influence of the Mahrattas, 
paid a large sum of money, gave up his minister as a prisoner, 
and appointed other ministers nominated: by the Mahrattas. 
Shortly after this peace the Peshwah, Mahdoo Rao Narain, dicd. 
A contest ensued among the different Mahratta chiefs for the 
succession to the office of Peshwah, and the possession of the 
influence and power of the government, which, aftcr various 
success, ended in the establishment of the present Pcshwah, 
Bajee Rao, and the possession of all the power and influence of 
the government by Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 

This chief already had, by right of succession to his relative 
Mahdajee Scindiah, all the Mahratta territorics in Hindustan, 
situated between the rivers Nerbudda and Taptce, and the 
Ganges and Indus. The principal support and instrument of 
his government was an army disciplined and commanded by 
French officers, with a formidable train of artillery; and, by his 
influence at Poonah, he had now acquired that part of the power 
of the Mahratta government which was not already in his hands. 

This was the general state of Mahratta affairs in the ycar 
1798, when Marquess Wellesley assumed the government. But 
this power of Scindiah’s was by no means consolidated. A 
formidable rebellion prevailed in his territorics north of the 
Nerbudda, which was directed and encouraged by the female 


_ relations of his predecessor: and the confusion in the southern 


parts of the empire which had attended the progress of the con- 
test for the possession of the power at Poonah, had not subsided 
upon its establishment in the hands of Scindiah. 

Besides these causes of disquictude, Scindiah was not unin- 
terested in the invasion of India by Zemaun Shah, at that time 
expected. The first effects of that invasion would have been felt 
by Scindiah; and his only hope of safety was in the assistance 
which he might derive from the British government. 

It appears that, from this state of affairs, the Governor- 


NEGOTIATION WITH PESHWAH THWARTED BY SCINDIAH, Xxcvii- 


Gencral, Marquess Wellesley, endeavoured to derive additional 
strength and sccurity to every part of the British empire in 
India. His first object was to procure the assistance of the 
Peshwah in the war against Tippoo Sultaun, which was impend- 
ing, according to the stipulations of the Treaty of Triple Alli- 
ance ; and with this view he endeavoured first to prevail upon 
Scindiah to return to Hindustan for the protection of his northern 
frontier against Zemaun Shah ; and secondly, he acquainted the 
Peshwah with the course of measures he was pursuing for the 
restoration of the power and activity of the other party to the 
alliance, the Nizam; and offered to adopt similar measures for 
the establishment and support of the power of the Peshwah. 

With the object of obtaining the assistance of the Mahrattas 
in the war against Tippoo, was connected another equally 
important to the permanent interests of Great Britain in India. 
J have already related the effect which the existence of the 
Mahratta claims upon the Nizam, and the mode in which they 
had been enforced, had produced upon the strength of His High- 
ncss’s government, and upon the gencral strength and efficiency 
of the Triple Alliance formed against Tippoo Sultaun, in 1798. 

In the view which the British government must have taken of 
the probable issue of their discussions with Tippoo in 1798, ‘they 
naturally considered the continuance of that alliance and the 
strength of all the parties to it as essential to the preservation of 
the peace of India; and in any event, even if they could have 
anticipated that which occurred in May, 1799, they must have 
considered the security of the Nizam’s government to be essential 
to the peace and security of the British territorics in the peninsula 
of India. 

The propositions made to the Peshwah, with a view to obtain 
his assistance in the war, were accompanied by offers to arbitrate , 
in the Mahratta claims on the Nizam, and were attended by a 
negotiation with Scindiah, to induce him to return to his terri- 
torics in Tlindustan, for their defence against the invasion of , 
Zemaun Shah. 

The influence of Scindiah, however, occasioned the failure of 
this negotiation, and the war against Tippoo was carried on and 
concluded without the assistance of the Peshwah. 

After this event, which ended in the death of Tippoo, the 
destruction of his power, and the transfer of it to the British 
government and the allics, the principal object of the Triple 
Alliance of course existed no longer. The other objects of the 


g 


XCVIll MAHRATTA EVENTS PRECEDING TREATY OF BASSEIN. 


alliance with the Peshwah, viz., the independence of his power 
in relation to Scindiah, and the arbitration and scttlement of 
the Mahratta claims in his name on the government of the 
Nizam, still existed. The British government thercfore repeated 
the offers which’it had made to the Peshwah, accompanied by 
others, to allow His Highness to participate in the advantages 
resulting from theewar, which were likewise rejected by the 
influence of Scindiah. 

The negotiation was renewed by the Peshwah at different 
periods, particularly in the year 1800, when his power and the 
safety of his person were threatened by Scindiah ; but their object 
was always defeated by the influence and violence of that chief, 
and by the apprehension of the Peshwah of their effects in 
the period which must elapse between the moment in which 
Scindiah might become acquainted with the negotiation and 
that at which the British troops would be in a position to 
protect the Peshwah. 

At length the confusion which had existed in the northern 
parts of Scindiah’s territories from the period of the death of 
Mahdajee Scindiah came to a crisis towards the close of the 
year 1800, which drew Scindiah’s attention, and required his 
presence in that quarter ; and here commenced a new scenc in 
Mahratta affairs, which led immediately to the treaty of Basscin, 
and the subsequent transactions in which the British government 
have been engaged. 

It has already been noticed that the female relations of the 
predecessor of Dowlut Rao Scindiah were at the head of a party 
in Hindustan, who were in rebellion against the authority of 
Scindiah’s government. When the contest had lasted for some 
time, the Mahratta chief, Tuckajec Holkar, who had been next 
in rank and power to Scindiah, dicd in the year 1797; and the 
sons of that chief came to Poonah to arrange with the Peshwah 
the succession of one of them to the territories of their father. 
Scindiah’s objects in this arrangement were to procure the suc- 
cession for Cashee Rao Holkar, the legitimate son most likely to 
favour the pretensions and objects of Scindiah in the Mahratta 
empire. The wishes of the family were for Mulhar Rao Holkar, 
with whom were connectcd his illegitimate brothers, Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar and Vittojee Rao Holkar. 

While the negotiations were going on at Poonah bctween 
these different branches of the Holkar family and the Peshwah, 
Scindiah, on the night of the Sept. 1797, attacked the camp 


CONTEST BETWEEN SCINDIAH & HOLKAR IN HINDUSTAN. XCix 


of Mulhar Rao Holkar, put him to death, seized his widow, and 
dispersed all his adherents, including his illegitimate brother. 
Vittojee Rao-Holkar was soon afterwards taken in rebellion 
against the Peshwah, and was put to death at Poonah. Jeswunt 
Rao Holkar fled first.to Hyderabad, and then to Nagpoor, the 
capital of the Rajah of Berar, where, by the influence of Scindiah, 
he was put in confinement ; and, after a short time, having made 
his escape from Nagpoor, he fled into Hindustan, where he 
joined the army of the rebels against the authority of Scindiah’s 
government, assembled under the influence of the female rela- 
tions of: his predecessor. In a short time Holkar acquired 
considerable influence in the councils and the army of these 
females, which he soon turned to his own advantage ; and he 
,suddenly attacked and plundered them, and placed himself at 
the head of their troops. He then increased his forces to the 
utmost extent that was practicable, and on the 17th and 18th 
July, 1801, made an attack upon a large detachment of Scindiah’s 
regular infantry stationed at Ougein, the capital of Scindiah’s 
government, which detachment he defeated with great slaughter, 
particularly of their European officers; and he plundered the city 
of Ougein. This event drew Scindiah’s serious attention to the situ- 
ation of affairs in Hindustan; and he removed from Poonah with 
his army in the month of Dec. 1800, [1801. Ed.] His agents, 
however, still conducted the operations of the Peshwah’s govern- 
ment. His-Highness’s prime minister had been appointed by 
Scindiah ; and, although His Highness’s person and his councils 
were in some degree relicved from the previous constraint under 
which they had laboured for some years, no act of the govern- 
ment could be carried into execution without the consent of 
Scindiah’s servants. 

When Scindiah arrived in Hindustan with his army the con- 
test between him and Holkar continued with increased violence ; 
and at length Holkar was defeated in a great battle, which was 
fought at Indore, the capital of the possessions of the Holkar 
family, on the [14th October, 1801]. After this battle, Holkar 
was obliged to withdraw from Hindustan into the hilly countrics 
between the Nerbudda and the Taptec, into which Scindiah was 
unable to carry the war, as his attention was still taken up by 
the scttlement of his government in the north of Hindustan, 
and his armies were not re-united sufficiently from the loss 
sustained in the different battles which had been fought. Holkar 
took advantage of this respite to carry the war across the Taptee 


g2 


c BATTLE OF POONAH,. PESHWAH FLIES TO BASSEIN, 


into the Peshwah’s country. In the course of the ycar 1802 he 
had several engagements with the Peshwah’s troops in Candcish 
and on the Godavery,.in which he was uniformly successful, 
and at length, in the month of October, 1802, he approached 
Poonah. Scindiah had sent a small detachment of his regular 
infantry and a body of cavalry to join the remnant of the 
Peshwah’s army; and on the 25th October, 1802, a great battle 
was fought between these armies, almost within sight of the 
icity of Poonah, which ended in the complcte defeat of the troops 
lof the Peshwah and Scindiah. After this battle the Peshwah fled 
lfrom Poonah into the Konkan, or low country on the sca-coast 
between Bombay and Goa. Having been pursued by Holkar’s 
troops, he embarked at Severndroog, on board a ship which was 
sent from Bombay for his accommodation, and he arrived at. 
Basscin, opposite to the Island of Salscttc, on the 16th Decem- 
ber; and Holkar remained in possession of the authority of the 
government of Poonah. 

During the progress of Holkar in his invasion of the Peshwah’s 
territories, His Highness the Peshwah renewed the negotiations, 
which had been so frequently broken off, for the assistance of the 
British government. These negotiations, however, were not 
brought to a close on the day of the battle ncar Poonah ; and 
after the result of that day was known, and immediately pre- 
vious to his flight, His Highness signed a paper, by which he 
engaged to perform all the material stipulations required by the 
British government as the conditions on which they would con- 
sent to give him the assistance for which he asked. These were, 
principally, that His Highness would allot a territorial security 
for the payment of the troops which the Company would detach 
into his country; that those troops should occupy a position 
within his territories ; that the Company should arbitrate on the 
differences between him and the Nizam; and that the Pcshwah 
should not enter into any treaty or correspondence with any 
foreign power excepting with the knowledge and consent of the 
Company. 

When the Governor-General reccived this paper from Poonah, 
it was necessary that he should revise all the proceedings in the 
negotiations at Poonah, and all the reasonings which had led to 
and operated upon them; and that he should decide according 
to the new appearance which affairs had taken in the Mahratta 
empire since the late revolution. 

The principle on which the negotiations at Poonah had turned 


NECESSITY OF CHIEF ARTICLES OF TREATY OF BASSEIN, ci 


since the death of Tippoo Sultaun, on the 4th May, 1799, had 
been, the necessity of introducing the arbitration of the British 
government in the disputes and claims which existed between 
the Peshwah and the Nizam. It was obvious that unless the 
British government should interfere, the Nizam must fall under 
the power of the Mahrattas; and for this reason the treaty of 
1798 with the Nizam had been made generally defensive against 
all powers whatever by the treaty of October, 1800. When this 
treaty was concluded there existed a necessity for continuing to 
urge the Peshwah to admit of the arbitration of the British 
government in the Mahratta claims; or the British government 
must have been prepared for, and must have expected, war with 
the Mahratta nation, whenever these claims should be made, and 
the Mahrattas should find themselves in a condition to enforce 
them. The attainment of this political object, therefore, was the 
only one likely to ensure the peace of the peninsula of India. 

The introduction of the British troops into the Peshwah’s 
territories was a mere military question, and turned exactly 
upon the chance of being able to support the Peshwah’s power, 
-and of giving him sufficient authority in his own government 
to cnable him to perform his treaty with the Company in favour 
of the Nizam. 

The cession of territory for subsidy was the best mode of 
avoiding the disputcs and inconvenience which had invariably 
attended these subsidiary alliances in other instances ; and the 
article respecting the intercourse of the Peshwah with foreign 
states was rendered necessary by the nature of the constitution 
of the two governments, the alliances by which each was bound, 
and the laws which regulated their intercourse with foreign 
states. The necessity for this connexion with the head of the 
Mahratta Empire was rather increased by the successful invasion 
of the Peshwah’s territorics, and by the usurpation of His High- 
ness’s authority by Jeswunt Rao Holkar; and the circumstances 
which existed at the close of the ycar 1802, and in the com- 
mencement of 1803, afforded the fairest prospect of effecting this 
great object without hostilitics. 

Immediately after’the flight of the Peshwah from Poonah, 
Holkar took upon himself the government of the Peshwah’s 
territorics ; but finding that this arrangement was not popular, 
and gave offence to the chicfs in the southern parts of the empire, 
he appointed the son of Amrut Rao, who was the adopted son 
of the father of the Peshwah, Bajee Rao, to be the new Peshwah ; 


Cii TREATY CONCLUDED, WITH PRIVITY OF SCINDIAH’S MINISTER. 


and Amrut Rao to be his minister, and himself to be the head 
of his armies. He endeavoured to obtain the consent and ac- 
knowledgment of the Nizam and of the British government to 
this arrangement; and while the negotiations were going on 
upon this subject, it is well known that he was collecting about 
his person all the pretenders to authority, and the disaffected 
subjects of the Company and their allies, that could be found; 
and he was preparing the documents on which he intended to 
found the vexatious claims of the Mahratta government on the 
Nizam, the territories of Mysore and Arcot. He was at the 
same time urging the British government to acknowledge his 
new dynasty at Poonah, and to interfere in the scttlement of the 
Mahratta affairs. Scindiah, who had been informed by the 
Governor-General of the progress of the Peshwah’s negotiations 
with the British government in the year 1802, and who must have 
been aware of the engagement which the Peshwah had signed 
upon his departure from Poonah, earnestly urged the British 
government to interfere in the Mahratta affairs, as the only 
mode of settling their actual confusion. 

The animosity between Scindiah and Holkar still existed with 
the greatest violence; and in the operations which must be 
carried on to relieve the Peshwah and to restore his authority, 
there was every rcason to expect that Holkar would find himself 
exposed singly to the hostility of all the grcat powers in India, 
and that he would withdraw from the Peshwah’s territories, 

Orders were therefore issued for the conclusion of a treaty 
with the Peshwah, upon the basis of the paper which had been 
delivered by His Highness to the Resident at Poonah on the day 
preceding his flight; and the treaty was concluded accordingly 
on the 31st Dec. 1802. Scindiah’s minister, who, as was before 
related, was the Peshwah’s dewan, was privy to the whole trans- 
action ; and he on the part of Scindiah, and on the 
part of Cashee Rao Holkar, engaged to make good to the Pesh- 
wah a part of the expense which he should incur in procuring 
the interference and assistance of the British government. 

The treaty having been concluded on the 31st Dec, 1802, 
and all the preparatory arrangements made, the British troops 
marched from the frontiers of Mysore on the 12th March. They 
were joined on their march by the principal of the Mahratta 
chiefs and of the Peshwah’s officers in the southern parts of the 
Mahratta empire. The detachments of Holkar’s army, which 
had becn upon the Kistna and Godavery, successively fell back ; 


PESHWAH RESTORED TO POONAH. BENEFITS OF TREATY. Ciii 


and the British troops formed a junction with the Nizam’s army 
and the subsidiary British troops in His Highness’s service on the 
15th April, within 100 miles of Poonah. Nearly about the same 
time Holkar withdrew from Poonah to the northward, and left 
that city to be occupied by the British army. A communication 
was immediately opened with the Peshwah, who was at Rassein, 
under the protection of a detachment of the army of Bombay, 
and His Highness entered Poonah and took upon himself the 
government of his country on the 13th May. 

In this manner this great arrangement was effected without the 
loss of aman. By a skilful and ready application of the forces 
and resources of the government, and by taking advantage of 
opportunities, the ally of the Company was restored to his 
dignity and to the exercise of his authority; the usurpation of 
a most rapacious freebooter was destroyed ; and this dangerous 
neighbour was removed from the frontier of the Company’s 
allies. At the same time an arrangement was made which was 
calculated to preserve peace between the Company’s allies, and 
secure the weak government against the unjust claims of the 
strong; and, by preserving all in the relative situation in 
which they were at the moment the arrangement was made, to 
strengthen all the powers of India against the attacks of a 
forcign invader, and to sccure its internal tranquillity. 

From the knowledge which the British government possessed 
that Scindiah was aware of all the circumstances of the negotia- 
tions which the Peshwah was carrying on, that he had earnestly 
desired their interference in the Mahratta affairs, and, above all, 
because he must have known that they had acquired a most 
formidable position for their armies in the peninsula, of which 
nothing could deprive them excepting great military success, it 
- was confidently expected that this arrangement would not have 
occasioned any subsequent hostilities. 

But these were not the only grounds on which this expec- 
tation of the continuance of peace was founded. Scindiah had, 
in point of fact, no right to interfere in an arrangement between 
the Company and the Peshwah, particularly in one concluded 
under all the circumstances which had attended the treaty of 
Basscin. : 

The Mahratta empire has at times been considered as an 
institution, in some degree, of the same description with the Em- 
pire of Germany; at others it has been considered as the union 
of a number of chiefs possessing territory and power, acknow- 


civ SCINDIAH 'S CONSENT TO TREATY NOT NECESSARY. 


ledging the Peshwah as their nominal head ; and at others, the 
Peshwah has been considered as the real head of a government 
of which Scindiah and others were only the powerful officers. 
Arguments have been drawn from the supposed existence of all 
these imaginary forms of government to prove that the Peshwah 
had no right to enter into the treaty of Bassein without the 
consent of Scindiah and other chiefs of the Mahratta empire. 

Admitting the existence of all, or any, of these forms of govern- 
ment (and excepting the similarity to the Empire of Germany, 
all have in reality existed at different periods of the Mahratta 
history), the fact is, and cannot be denied, that the Peshwah has 
frequently made treaties, not only to which none of the Mahratta 
chiefs consented, but to which some of them objected. For in- 
stance, the Treaty of Triple Alliance, in 1748, was objected to 
by Mahdajee Scindiah and Tuckajee Holkar. The treaty of 
peace in 1792, at Seringapatam, and of partition, was not con- 
sented to by any of the Mahratta chiefs. But if it be true that 
the Peshwah, who is acknowledged by those who reason upon all 
these different forms of government to be either the rcal or the 
nominal head of what is commonly called the Empire, cannot 
make a treaty without the consént of Scindiah and the other 
chiefs, it may be presumed that Scindiah and the other chicfs, 
who are supposed to be of the second rank, cannot make a treaty 
without the consent of the Peshwah. How is this fact? They 
make war and peace in their own names against whom they 
please, when they please, and as they please ; and never use the 
Peshwah’s name, or refer to its authority, excepting as a last 
subterfuge in the discussions which may attend thcir negotia- 
tions. In point of fact, Scindiah, instead of being a powerful 
subject, and in that light a party to be consulted in an agrec- 
ment to be entered into by the Peshwah with the British govern- 
ment, was himself the guarantee of the treaty of Salbye between 
the same parties. 

In this very capacity of guarantce of a treaty he must have 
beén considered, and must have been in fact, independent of the 
two powers contracting it. Before he became a guarantee, the 
history of those times shows that he was independent of the 
Peshwah. But this very act of guarantec has always been con- 
sidered important in India, particularly by the Native poli- 
ticians, as it afforded complete evidence of the division of the 
Mahratta power. 

The hopes of the continuance of peace, then, were founded as 


MOTIVES OF THE BONSLAY’S ANTI-ENGLISH LEAGUE, cv 


well upon the right of the Peshwah to conclude the treaty of 
Bassein, as upon the circumstances which attended its negotia- 
tion and its execution. 

A new party, however, came forward upon this occasion, 
through whose means and by whose exertions a peace was 
patched up between Scindiah and Holkar, on which was founded 
a confederacy against the British government. 

The Rajah of Berar had not been engaged in hostilities since 
the year 1780, when he had marched to the British frontier of 
Bengal, and had received a sum of money to desist from his 
hostilities, excepting during the short campaign of 1795, in 
which he had co-operated with the other Mahrattas against the 
Nizam. He was the oldest of the chiefs of the present day, 
and was renowned among them for his wisdom and _ political 
knowledge and skill, He had claims upon the power of the 
state of Poonah, from his relationship to the Rajahs of Sattarah ; 
and he was known to have entertained serious designs of form- 
ing an union of all the Mahratta powers against the British 
government. 

When he perceived the advantage which the British govern- 
ment had taken of the existence of the disputes among the 
Mahratta chicfs, he saw that he must become the victim of the 
arrangement. Holkar had been obliged to retire to the north- 
ward in front of the British troops; but he could not venture to 
cross the Taptee, as he would then have been exposed to Scin- 
diah’s hostility. Holkar would have been unwilling to discharge 
his army; he could not remain in the Peshwah’s territories, or 
invade those of the Nizam; and his only resource to provide for 
their subsistence would have been to enter Berar. 

The Rajah, who clearly perceived this consequence (and who 
has since acknowledged this motive for his conduct), determined 
to endcavour to organise a confederacy of the Mahrattas against 
the British government. 

Whatever might have been the claim of Scindiah to the pos- 
session of the power of the Peshwah’s government, and the de- 
gree of encouragement he gave to the conclusion of the treaty 
of Basscin, there is no doubt that he lost solid power by the 
arrangement, which he could not hope to recover. He had 
nothing to gain by the continuance of hostilities against Holkar ; 
and the sacrifices which he made, and which he intended should 
be only nominal, were more than compensated by the advantages 
which he hoped to acquire from the confederacy, in which, from 


CVi WAS GOVERNMENT TO BLAME FOR NOT FORESEEING THIS? 


the efficiency and the general state of his power, he must act the 
principal part. Holkar could hope nothing from the continuance 
of his hostilities with Scindiah. The latter had driven him from 
Hindustan ; and in the course of the years 1801, 1802, in which 
he had settled his government in the northern parts of India, he 
had acquired additional strength which he could apply in his 
contest with Holkar, if it should continue. 

A combination of all the Mahratta chiefs, with thcir forces, 
had long been an object with the Mahratta politicians; and the 
plan flattercd the national vanity, although it was impracticable, 
unless attended by great and important military successes at its 
outset. The Rajah of Berar, therefore, succecded. in patching 
up a peace between Scindiah and Holkar, none of the important 
articles of which were performed by cither party. 

Before I proceed to the relation of the events which followed 
the treaty of Bassein, it will be proper to discuss the justice and 
policy of the British government in entering into the treaty of 
Bassein, on the ground that they must have expected the event 
which followed it. 

I have already pointed out the objects of the treaty, the 
favourable circumstances under which it was negotiated, and the 
probability which existed that its arrangements would be carried 
into exccution without a war, and that it would sccure the per- 
manent peace of India. But the faithless nature of the Mah- 
ratta character, and the habits of the councils of all the chiefs, arc 
so well known, that it may be admitted that the British govern- 
ment ought to have contemplated the chance of a confederacy of 
the Mahratta chiefs to oppose the arrangement. 

Considering the nature of the materials of which that con- 
federacy was to be formed ; that the two most powerful of the 
chicfs entertained the most rooted and inveterate animosity 
against cach other; that after they had signed their treaty of 
peace their hostilities continued, and they could not trust cach 
other so far as to place their armics within rcach of attack ; that 
none of the chiefs trusted the other; and that the pride of all 
prevented them from placing the management of the affairs and 
the command of the armies of the confederacy in the hands of 
one; the British government had but little to apprehend from 
this confederacy, provided vigorous measures were adopted at 
an early period of time to oppose it effectually, and to prevent it 
from acquiring strength and consistency by success. 

The arrangements which had been made by Lord Wellesley, 


N 


LEAGUE NOT FORMIDABLE, IF PROPERLY OPPOSED.  cvii 


viz. the treaty with the Nabob of Oude, the treaty with the 
Guickowar, the arrangement at Surat, the arrangements in 
Mysore, the treaty with the Nizam, of October, 1800, and above 
all, the treaty of Bassein, afforded the most efficient means of 
opposing the confederacy with success. If the troops did their 
duty with their usual bravery, its early dissolution became 
certain; and by the advanced position in which the treaties of 
Hydcrabad and Bassein placed the British troops, the evils of the 
war would be removed to a distance from the British territories, 
the scat of the resources of the government. 

But it is not clear that the omission to conclude the treaty of 
Basscin would not have led equally to a war with all the powers 
of the confederated Mahratta states, under circumstances of in- 
creased disadvantage. The removal of Holkar from Poonah 
was absolutely necessary on every ground of justice, policy, and 
good faith; and if the treaty of Bassein had not been made, 
the British government must have aided Scindiah in effecting 
that object. Holkar’s armics would have been defeated, and 
_the power of his rival, Scindiah, would have been established in 
full vigour at Poonah. We would thus again have been in pos- 
session of all the Mahratta power from the Ganges and the Indus 
to the Toombuddra ; and his situation would have been .so far 
more advantageous, as in the course of the years 1801 and 1802 
he had overcome the rebellion which had till then prevailed in 
his northern dominions, and had completcly established the 
authority of his own government in those rich countrics. His 
first demand would have been upon the Nizam; and here at 
once the Company would have come in contact with a Mahratta 
confederacy, but under very different circumstances of strength 
from that with which they were engaged in 1803. In this contest 
Scindiah would have. been really, as well as nominally, at the 
head of the confederacy; he would have had no rival, or rather 
actual enemy, in Jeswunt Rao Holkar, and would have been able 
to direct all his forces against the British government. He 
would have had on his side, instead of against him, all the 
strength of the Peshwah, including, what is of no small import- 
ance, all the strength of the southern chiefs situated on the 
fronticr of Mysore. The Company, on the other hand, would 
have been obliged to engage with this more formidable con- 
federacy with diminished mcans and resources, as they would 
not have had the Peshwah and the southern chiefs on thcir side. 
But their principal loss woyld have been the position for their 


cviii TREATY JUST & POLITIC; & AVERTED WORSE STRIFE. 


armies which the treaty of Basscin gave them] By adopting 
this position in the Deccan in 1803, the armics were enabled 
immediately to render offensive the operations of a war which 
had been undertaken solely for defence. In the war which must 
have been expected if the treaty of Bassein had not been con- 
cluded, the operations must have been defensive upon a fronticr 
extending above a thousand miles, assailable in all its parts ; 
and the seat of the war would have been either the heart of the 
territorics of the Nizam, or those of the Rajah of Mysore. 

Upon the whole, then, I conclude that the treaty of Basscin 
was a wise, just, and politic measure; that none of the chiefs 
had any right to interfere in it or question its stipulations ; and 
that it was concluded under circumstances and at a time which 
promised that it would be followed by lasting tranquillity. If it 
should be contended that the British government ought to have 
expected, as a consequence of the treaty, the confederacy and 
war which happened in 1803, I answer that, with the military 
and political advantages they acquired by the trcaty,of Basscin, 
they had nothing to fear from that confederacy; and that if they 
had not concluded the treaty of Basscin they would in a few 
months afterwards have been involved in a war with the same 
power, much increased in strength and resources, and possessing 
superior advantages, while those of the Company, in every point 
of view, would have been diminished. 

As soon as the British government was made acquainted with 
the measures which had been adopted by the Rajah of Berar to 
arrange a confederacy of the Mahratta chicfs against the Company, 
the Governor-Gencral directed that measures should be taken to 
make the Rajah of Berar and Holkar acquainted with the stipu- 
lations of the treaty of Basscin, and to point out to all the chiefs 
the innocent and defensive nature of the treaty, and the arrange- 
ment contained in the article which provided for the security of 
all their rights. They were at the same time called upon to 
declare the nature and object of their negotiations, and their 
views in marching to join cach other in a station at so great a 
distance from the Nizam’s frontier. In answer to these repre- 
sentations, Scindiah declared that he could not say whether 
there would be peace or war till he should mect the Rajah of 
Berar. After Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar had joined their 
troops in a position which enabled them in one march to enter 
the Nizam’s territorics, letters were presented to them from the 
Governor-General, in which the nature and objects of the treaty 


THE CRISIS ENDED IN SUCCESSFUL WAR. cix 


of Basscin were fully discussed and explained. Scindiah and 
the Rajah of Berar wrote the following answers to these letters. 
In the mean time the peace between Scindiah and Holkar had 
been signed, although but one article of it had been carried into 
execution, viz. that which stipulated that Hindoo Rao Holkar, 
the infant and posthumous son of Mulhar Rao Holkar, should 
be delivered over by Scindiah to Jeswunt Rao Holkar. The 
object of Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar in writing these 
answers to the Governor-General’s letter was to gain time, to 
allow the scason of the rains to pass over, to conciliate the con- 
fidence and reccive the co-operation of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, 
and to complete their preparations for attack on all parts of the 
fronticr of the Company and the allies. Early measures, how- 
ever, had been adopted by the British government to resist their 
hostilities, and their armies were completely prepared in the 
middle of July, 1803. It was an object of importance to bring 
the confederates to a decision whether there should be peace or 
war before the scason of the rains should pass over, before they 
should have time to complete their preparations, and to con- 
ciliate the confidence of Holkar. Accordingly the following 
letter was written to them by the commanding officer in the 
Deccan, in answer to their letters to the Governor-General, 
They refused to comply with the reasonable demand contained 
in this Ictter, and the British Resident quitted the camp of 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah on the 3rd Aug. and hostilities immedi- 
ately commenced. 

It is uscless to follow the operations of the British armies. It 
is sufficient to state, that owing to the preparations which were 
made, the positions which they had taken, and the favourable 
season in which the military operations were commenced, they 
were uniformly successful; the result was, the carly dissolution 
of the confederacy, in which Holkar never joined, and that in 
Iess than two months the confederates sued for peace. 

Treatics were concluded with Scindiah and the Rajah of 
Berar in the end of December, 1803, by which the allies gained 
an acknowledgment of the treaty of Basscin. The Company 
acquired from the Rajah of Berar the district of Cuttack, &c., 
by which they insured the defence of a weak part of the fronticr 
of Bengal, and the continuity of their possessions, and the cer- 
tainty of a communication at all times between the Presidency 
of Fort William and Fort St. George. On the north-west fron- 
ticr they acquired from Scindiah all his possessions on both banks 


[ep ,¢ GAINS TO COMPANY & ITS ALLIES, FROM THE WAR. 


of the Jumna; by which they got that river for a frontier, and 
secured its navigation, an object of infinite importance to the 
commerce of that part of the country. They also acquired from 
Scindiah the town, port, and territory of Baroach, in Guzerat, 
by which they secured the government of the Guickowar and all 
the Company’s interests in that quarter. Scindiah was also 
obliged to relinquish the influence which he had exercised over 
the person and power of the Mogul; and to admit the inde- 
pendence of all the petty states in the north of India, who, 
during the war, had connected themselves by treaty with the 
Company. By this arrangement, which affected the Rajpoot 
state of Jeypoor, and all the petty Rajahs to the northward of 
that state, the Mahrattas were removed to a distance from the 
Company’s frontier, which was surrounded and guarded by these 
petty states. 

The Nizam acquired by these treatics an exemption from all 
demands of all descriptions on his terriforics by the confedcrates. 
He also acquircd on the side of Scindiah a defined boundary, 
and all the territories belonging to Scindiah which were within 
that boundary. 

From the Rajah of Berar, the Nizam acquired the province of 
Berar, with the river Wurda and the hills to the northward as a 
frontier; by which cession he gained an addition of revenuc 
amounting to 800,000/, annually. 

The Peshwah acquired from Scindiah the fort and territory of 
Ahmednuggur, and, by an arrangement made with Amrut Rao 
at the commencement of the war, he had acquired the jaghire 
of this chief upon the Godavery. By these arrangements his 
territories became compact; the city of Poonah was rendered 
more sccure, and the pretext of posting troops in the ncighbour- 
hood for the purpose of collecting the revenues of territorics in 
that quarter was annihilated. 

Besides these advantages acquired by cach of the allics by 
this war, the British government destroycd entircly the corps in 
the service of the enemy, which was commanded and officered 
by Frenchmen, and took from them not Icss than 823 pieces of 
ordnance. The advantages resulting from these military suc- 
cesses will be best understood by reflecting on the difficulties 
and losses sustained in gaining them, and on the reputation 
for bravery and other military qualities acquired by our officers 
and troops. 

During this war with the confederacy the conduct of Holkar 


HOLKAR’S CONDUCT, MEANTIME, FAVOURABLE TO US, , cxi 


had been rather favourable than otherwise to the British govern- 
ment. This chief had employed his army in levying contribu- 
tions in the countries under the government of Scindiah situated 
north of the Nerbudda, and in endeavours to establish the 
authority of his infant nephew in the jaghire of the Holkar 
family. When Scindiah was obliged to collect a body of troops 
at Ougein, in consequence of the progress made by the army in 
Guzerat towards that capital, Holkar proceeded to the northward, 
and began to plunder the Rajpoot states. Shortly afterwards, 
peace was concluded between the British government and the 
other members of the confederacy. 


SELECTIONS 


FROM THE 


WELLESLEY DESPATCHES. 


I. MYSORE. 


1. Extract of Letter from the Secret Committee of the Court 
of Directors, to the Governor-General in Council of 
Bengal, dated 18th June, 1798. 


Instructions on occasion of Tippoo’s reported alliance with the 
French against the English in India. 


‘WE take the carlicst opportunity of acquainting you that we 
have reccived information from His Majesty’s ministers that a 
very large armament of ships, troops, military stores, &c. has 
been lately fitted out at Toulon, and that it sailed from thence 
on the 19th ult. Although the ultimate object of this arma- 
ment has not been ascertained, it is not improbable, from many 
circumstances that have transpired, and from the spirit of daring 
adventure by which the French have been actuated during the 
present war, that its destination may be for India, either (having 
first taken possession of Egypt) by way of the Red Sea, or by, 
Bussora. Elis Majesty’s ministers have therefore informed us,| 
that immediate mcasurcs will be taken for a considerable aug- 
mentation of the European force in the East Indies; you may \ 
thercfore expect that not Icss than 4,000 seasoned and disci- 
plined troops, and perhaps a larger number, may be sent to the 
Company’s scttlements with all possible expedition, part of » 
which will, we trust, reach India not many months after the 

B 


2 IF TIPPOO'S FRENCH ALLIANCE IS CERTAIN. 


reccipt of this despatch. Should the expedition, notwithstand- 
ing the measures taken by His Majesty’s Government to inter- 
cept and defeat it in the Mediterranean, reach Egypt, and be 
destined for India by either of the routes we have mentioned, 
a part of His Majesty’s ficet, consisting of two men of war and 
probably a sloop, now under dispatch for India, will be ordered 
to be stationed in the Straits of Babelmandel, and in the Gulph 
of Persia, for the purpose of intercepting any force that may be 
proceeding to India that way. i 

‘A copy of a Proclamation, issued at the Mauritius in the 
‘month of March last, has been transmitted to our several pre- 
sidencies by Mr. Pringle, the Company’s agent at the Cape 
of Good Hope. We are unable to judge whether this Pro- 
clamation be in reality what its import declares it to be, and 
Tippoo has really conceived any hostile designs against the 
British empire in India, or intended mercly as a fcint, with 
a view to embroil us with that prince. Our respective Govern- 
ments will, of course, have taken such precautionary measures 
in consequence as appeared to them necessary and applicable 
to existing circumstanccs, 

‘Our empire in the East has ever been an object of jcalousy to 
the French, and we know that their former Government enter- 
tained sanguine hopes of being able to reach India by a shorter 
passage than round the Cape of Good Hope, and we have no 
doubt that the present Government would risk a great deal, 
and even adopt measures of a most enterprising and uncommon 
nature, for the chance of reducing, if not annihilating, the British 
power and’ consequence in that quarter of the world. To cffect 
this, without the aid and previous concert of one of the Indian 
Powers, scems almost impossible, and would scarcely be at- 
tempted. In the present situation of India, Tippoo appears to 
be the fittest instrument to be employed in the furtherance of 
such ambitious projects. 

‘It is highly improbable that Tippoo should have entered into 
any league with the French without some apparent preparation 
on his part of an hostile nature in furtherance of their designs. 
Tf such, therefore, shall have been the case, it would be neither 
prudent nor politic to wait for actual hostilities on his part. 
We therefore recommend, that if you shall not have adopted 
the necessary measures for bringing Tippoo to a satisfactory 
explanation before the receipt of this despatch, that you should 
immediately take the proper steps for so doing, accompanying 


ACT PROMPTLY, BUT CAUTIOUSLY. 3 


this inquiry with such a disposition of your force as may give 
effect to it; and should you judge, either from his answers, or 
from the steps he is taking, that his designs are such as the 
French Proclamation represents, and that he is making pre- 
parations to act hostilely against us, we think it will be more 
advisable not to wait for such an attack, but to take the most 
immediate and most decisive measures to carry our arms into 
our enemy’s country, not failing at the same time to make 
known to the Powers in alliance with us the necessity of such 
measure, and that we have not in view a wanton attack upon 
our inveterate enemy with a design to augment our own power, 
but a necessary and justifiable defence of our own possessions, 
and calling upon them for the assistance they are under engage- 
ments to furnish us. 

‘But although we have thus recommended energy, firmness, 
and decision in your conduct towards Tippoo, we rely upon 
your using the latitude allowed you in the preceding paragraph 
with the utmost discrction, that we may not be involved in a 
war in India without the most inevitable necessity, of which 
necessity we leave you to be the sole judges. And as it is 
impossible for us to conjecture, should either the Proclamation 
circulated at the Mauritius be founded, or the force now in the 
Mediterrancan be really destined for India, what measures the 
implacable revenge and rash enterprise of the French may 
induce them to undertake against the British power in India; 
we can only exhort our scveral Governments to be constantly 
upon their guard, and watchful against surprise, by not only 
keeping the troops in perfect order for action, and our forts 
and garrisons in constant preparations of defence, but if it shall 
appear necessary, by encouraging military associations amongst 
our civil servants and others, as in this country, which may be 
prepared to act on any emergency; and in carefully keeping in 
view every channel through which it may be possible for France 
to get an European force out to India, and taking precautionary 
mcasures to prevent it. 

‘We have transmitted copics of this despatch to our Govern- 
ments of Madras and Bombay,’ 


4 TIPPOO’S RELATIVE STRENGTH AUGMENTED OF LATE. 


2. From Mr. Josias Webbe, Secretary to the Government of 
Madras. 


Danger of a rupture with Tippoo. 
6th July, 1798. 
Memorandum for General Harris, in consequence of his late 


conversation upon the possibility of an early rupture with 
Tippoo Sultaun. 


That M. Malartic’s Proclamation is genuine I have no doubt, 
because it is a termination perfectly consistent with an intrigue 
which, from respectable intelligence at the time, there was 
reason to believe on foot previous to the departure of his am- 
bassadors for the Mauritius; but whether we should take 
measures at this period for punishing or preventing the effect 
of this negotiation, is the most momentous question which can 
be proposed in this place. Upon this question it is certainly 
my duty to state my idcas ; but the shortness of time docs not 
admit of any arrangement. 

As all questions of national war should, I suppose, be deter- 
mined by the national interest, it is natural to advert to the state 
in which India was placed by the Treaty of Scringapatam, be- 
cause that state was considercd at the time we had the mcans of 
changing it, as most advantageous to the British interests. The 
principle of our policy then was, the preservation of Tippoo as a 

- Power of India, and the balance between him, the Mahrattas, 
and the Nizam by our superior influence and force. Whether 
this principle has been superseded by other notions in Europe I 
know not; but whether any attempt can now be madc to intro- 
duce a new order of things without a greater danger of evil than 
a chance of good, I doubt. 

Tippoo, if he has not advanced in actual strength, has certainly 
the vantage ground: the three other Powers have certainly re- 
ceded from the condition they were in at the Treaty of Scring- 
apatam. The shock which the balance between the Nizam and 
the Mahrattas sustained from the warfare that was allowed to 
terminate in the Treaty of Kurdlah has driven him from his 
position, and the distractions which have since prevailed at 
Poonah incapacitate them from holding their ordinary sphere, 
while the force of the English is checked and retarded by the 
) pressure of the French war. 


OUR ATTACK ON HIM NOW WILL PROBABLY FAIL, 5 


In the discussions which took place upon the political state of 
India, when the expedition against Manilla was under contem- 
plation, it was, I believe, acknowledged that the confusion at 
that time in the Mahratta empire was such as to render any 
exertion of their strength improbable, or at least not formidable. 
The subsequent confinement of Nana Furnavees, the eccentric 
irregularity of young Scindia, and the want of power in the 
Peishwa, certainly corroborated that notion, which, if it then left 
us little to apprehend from their enmity, can now give us little 
to expect from their friendship. The only respectable part of 
the Nizam’s force is under the uncontrolled command of the 
French party: that influence has increased, and whether out 
inertion during the contest between his Highness and the Mah 
rattas may have alienated the disposition which his ministers! . 
once manifested towards ours, whether it is the natural con-! 
sequence of a prevailing interest inimical to us, we have much 
reason, from Captain Kirkpatrick’s late correspondence, to 
apprehend that our weight at Hyderabad is not great. The 
Nizam’s irregular troops proved, during the last war, one of our 
serious impediments: his efficient force could hardly be em- 
ployed, certainly not trusted, under the command of Perron. In 
respect to ourselves, a very large proportion of the coast army is 
detached, our means of resource curtailed by the war in Europe, 
and our credit in this country, at least upon this coast, bankrupt. 
If, therefore, with all the advantages we possessed in the year 
1790, with the hearty and effectual co-operation of the Mah- 
rattas, and with the friendship of the Nizam, our operations 
against Tippoo were not made successful without the greatest 
difficulty, I am fearful that, under the general change of circum- 
stances which I have mentioned, and which I believe to be 
correct, an attack upon him now is morc likely to end in dis- 
comfiture than victory. 

But Ict us descend to more particular considerations, Although 
we have every reason to be satisfied that Tippoo’s army has 
been kept in a state efficient and prepared to mect the events, 
which there might be reason to expect from the general appear- 
ance of convulsion throughout India, yct in the same discussions 
on the subject of the Manilla expedition, both Sir J. Shore and 
Lord Hobart were of opinion that he was not likely to hazard a 
rupture without a very large rcinforcement from the French. 
Whatever may be the object of Tippoo’s embassy to the Mau- 
ritius, or whatever may be the event of it in Europe, the late 


6 CORNWALLIS BARELY SUCCEEDED AGAINST HIM. 


intelligence from the islands, which leaves us no room to doubt 
that the military have been sent to France, and the French marine 
dispersed, satisfies me that no immediate co-operation can take 
place; and consequently, that no rupture is to be apprehended 
but by our own provocation. : 

This argument I urge in the perfect conviction that during this 
unprecedented contest in Europe, peace in India is indispensably 
necessary, and that it ought not to be risked without the pros- 
pect of positive advantage. If, however, it should be argued, 
that this very conjunction of circumstances which I have men- 
tioned, should impel us to make an immediate effort against 
Tippoo, I answer that all our former united and unexampled 
exertions were made against Tippoo single, and unsupported by 
the French ; but, single and unsupported as he was, except by the 
natural obstacles which oppose our progress, the exertions of the 
allies were only successful. For this I refer to the chance by 
which Bangalore fell, to the condition of Lord Cornwallis’s army 
before the junction of the Mahrattas, in May 1791, to the diffi- 
culty with which the battering train was advanced to Scringapa- 
tam in the second campaign, to the condition of the Bombay 
army, and to the state in which our own army returned after the 
conclusion of peace. With the war well advanced, with our 
preparations and arrangements on foot for twelve months before, 
and with such a combined alliance as may be now despaired of, 
it still cost Lord Cornwallis two campaigns before he could 
besiege Seringapatam. 

From the intrigues at Seringapatam, and the consequent em- 
bassy to the Isle of France, I have no doubt that the French 
emissaries were employed in persuading Tippoo to hostilities 
with us, under promises of immediate assistance. This the Sultan 
appears to have considered insufficient ground to provoke a war ; 
but if he should be provoked to war by us, I conccive there 
would be a material difference of circumstances ; for though the 
French might. find great difficulty in persuading him to war, 
from the great difficulty of furnishing the force he requires, yct 
if he should be absolutely plunged into a war, they would find it 
easily practicable to foment and keep it alive. ITostility with 
Tippoo, if it should be known before the conclusion of peace, 
would inevitably tend to protract the war in -urope, or even to 
revive it if peace should have been made. The French, despair- 
ing perhaps of any successful attempt upon England itself, would 
leave nothing unattempted to subvert, or at |cast curtail, our 


THE NIZAM AND MAHRATTAS NOT TRUSTWORTHY, 7 


Indian empire. This argument is of the more force, because a 
very small increase of French soldiers is a very material addition 
to Tippoo’s strength. 

In the event of hostility, I take it for granted the object will 
be to make it a war of alliance against Tippoo. I doubt that it 
is practicable to obtain the assistance of the Mahrattas: the pre- 
sent disunion of the chiefs renders a hearty co-operation impos- 
sible, The assistance of any party, if even it could be persuaded 
to risk the danger of absence from its own territories, might have 
the natural effect of throwing its adversaries into the opposite 
scale. If such an event should take place, the Mahrattas would 
remain, as they now are, balanced against each other, while 
Tippoo, freed from the apprehension of their united force, would 
be at liberty to employ his whole cavalry against us. It is 
known to every officer in the field, that during the last war the 
Nizam’s cavalry were a heavy incumbrance to us; and if, not- 
withstanding the apparent change in Azim ul Omrah’s disposi- 
tions towards us, we should be disposed to rely on the fidelity of 
his Royal Highness’s infantry under the command of M. Perron, 
it is not extravagant to anticipate an cvent which has already 
happened, that marching into the Mysore country with his High- 
ness in alliance, we were compelled to march back again with his 
Highness in alliance against us. In respect both to the Mah- 
rattas and the Nizam, I think there is no reasonable ground to 
expect cffectual.assistance from cither until we should strike 
some signal blow. Neithcr of them were hearty in the cause 
during the last war before the fall of Bangalore. 

Not to dwell upon the possible predicament in which we 
should be placed by a refusal of the allics to execute their en- 
gagements, let us look to our own means of equipping a force 
sufficient to support a remonstrance to Tippoo upon his embassy 
to M. Malartic. It must never be forgotten that the army under 
General Medows in the month of November, 1790, consisted of 
about 5,500 European and 18,400 native seasoned men, and that 
even this army was augmented by troops from Bengal before it 
marched against Bangalore. By the returns you have now re- 
ceived, a body of about 14,000 men can be drawn together, in- 
cluding Lascars and pioncers ; a force so inadequate to an offen- 
sive war, that you could not venture to quit the Carnatic. From 
Ceylon you could draw no reinforcements ; but, on the contrary, 
might be called upon to increase the force on that island in the 
event of our army invading the Mysore country: The whole 


8 WE CLEARLY CANNOT ATTACK HIM AT ONCE, 


reinforcement must be sent from Bengal; of what extent it 
could be we have no means of judging, but it is obvious that it 
must be so large as to place its arrival here at a very remote 
distance. The superiority of Tippoo in cavalry, and the greater 
rapidity with which he moves, would render it impracticable to 
proceed to the attack of Scringapatam without cstablishing a 
systematic chain of posts for depdts of stores and provisions. | 
That he has endeavoured to frustrate this is evident from his 
policy in the destruction of Ossoor and Bangalore, and in making 
Seringapatam his only or principal fortification. By the former 
it is his intention to increase the difficulty of our approach by 
lengthening the line of our operation, and by the latter to oppose 
such impediments as to make the capture of Seringapatam im- 
practicable in the course of one campaign. The Cauveryporam 
pass is yet unexplored; but I understand that the route from 
thence to Seringapatam lies through a barren country, so much 
interspersed with jungle as to be extremely adverse to the march 
of anarmy. The Gugulhelts pass is no longer thought of. As 
nothing therefore short of the capture of Scringapatam can justly 
be considered as striking an cffectual blow against Tippoo, the 
achievement of any immediate success appears to me to be utterly 
impracticable. 

This idea, then, of striking an immediate blow being aban- 
doned, Ict us look to the slow and regular equipment of an army 
for the invasion of Mysore. The different corps could, I believe, 
be assembled at Walajahbad in about two months from the time 
of their being ordered to march. The equipment of bullocks 
for the army, with its train of ficld artillery, could not, accord- 
ing to my cstimation, be accomplished before the month of 
January; but in respect to a train of battering guns, sufficient 
for the siege of Scringapatam, I can form no notion; nor do I 
belicve Mr. Cockburn can, of the time when it could be furnished 
with cattle. This period of the scason (January) is, by the expe- 
rience of Lord Cornwallis’s campaign, too late for the establish- 
ment of a depdt at Bangalore and the siege of Scringapatam in 
the same season; for though we should be able to put Bangalore 
in a state to admit of its becoming a depdt, we could not avoid 
being overtaken at Scringapatam by the monsoon, which sete in 
in May. Hence the necessity of a second scason, and probably 
of a second equipment of bullocks, before an efficient army could 
invest Seringapatam. Supposing it however there, and joined 
by the Bombay army (the difficulty of which it is here unneces- 


eiND, WHILE WE PREPARED, HE WOULD ATTACK US. 9 


sary to consider), I doubt whether there are any well-grounded 
expectations that they could feed themselves. The experience of 
Lord Cornwallis’s army proves that we were unable to supply 
ourselves, or to open our rear for the admission of Brinjaries until 
we had becn joined by the Manrite army, and the whole 
country embraced. 

At present there is no grain at Arnce or Vellor, and I believe 
no considerable quantity could be stored im the forts of the 
Bara-Mahal before the harvests of November. The vessels 
which bring grain from the northern ports and from Bengal do 
not arrive here before the months of September and October. 

Upon the whole there are sufficient grounds for concluding 
that the whole of the coast army which could be assembled 
would be incapable of offensive operations, and that they could 
not be put in motion before the month of January. How far, 
and at what period, they may be in a condition to make a 
serious attack upon Tippoo must depend upon the extent and 
time of reinforcements from Bengal; and as nothing of con- 
sequence could be undertaken without them, the time of our 
making any scrious impression must be proportionably delayed, 

Meanwhile the movement of our troops and military pre- 
parations could not escape the vigilance of Tippoo: his 
resources are always more prompt than our own; and, as great 
part of his army is said to be in a state of field equipment, our 
attempt to strike a blow at him is likely to produce an invasion 

of the Carnatic before we are in a situation to resist him; for, 
as Tippoo can, in my opinion, have nothing to apprehend from 
the Mahrattas, his whole attention will be directed to us. A 
comparison betwecn his own and his father’s wars, with the late 
expcricnce of his own misfortunes, has taught him that our 
strength depends upon our supplics. The crops of the Bara- 
Mahal! would be his first object ; and the consequences of such a 
policy, which he has manifested by the demolition of Bangalore 

_ and Ossoor, might fix the war in the Carnatic, until by the con- 
sumption of our supplics, and the failure of our resources, we 
should be compelled to accept his terms of peace. 

When the war of 1790 begun, the funded debt of this Pre- 
sidency was_17 lacks of pagodas, the Company's credit high, 
and the rate of interest low. Very large subscriptions were 
in consequence made within the course of a few days to a 
,12 per cent. loan; Jarge supplics of dollars brought hither in 
“the Canton ships, and intended for the China investment, were 


fe) WE ARE TOO POOR TO PREPARE PROPERLY. 


converted to the purposes of the war, and immense remittances 
were made from Bengal, as well in specie as by bills. At pre- 
.sent the funded debt of this Presidency is 51 lacks of pagodas ; 
the Company’s credit so low, that their eight per cent. paper 
bears a discount of 18 and 20 per cent.; and the scarcity of 
money so great, that their 12 per cent. bonds do not pass but 
at a discount of 4 per cent. Every mode has been tried without 
effect to raise money at this Presidency: our only mcans of 
supply is from Bengal. The bills which we have in consequence 
been long compelled to substitute for ready money payments have 
overstocked the market, and consequently pass at a discount. 
After repeated and urgent applications for money, we have been 
disappointed for want of funds in Bengal; and at this very mo- 
ment, when the expenses, of the military establishment for the 
ensuing months cannot be provided for without specie from 
thence, the only sum which we can confidently expect is, as I 
understand, immaterial in comparison with our wants. 

The deficit in the present resources of this government is at 
least 18 lacks of pagodas ; the expense of an army of 14,000 men 
in the field is, pag* , and the expense of providing carriage 
for them, pag* 34,700 per month. 

Nothing can be more urgent than our representations to 
Bengal upon the state of our finances, except the necessities 
which produced them. It is a fact, that without assistance in 
money from thence, our military expenses, upon the peace 
establishment, cannot be provided for beyond the month of 
September. I am afraid, therefore, that far from being in a state 
to equip an army for the field, we shall scarcely have the means 
of marching the different corps to Walajahbad, while the state 
of the treasury renders it utterly impracticable to make any 
suitable advance for draft and carriage cattle. 

_ Thave not studied to exaggerate any part of this memorandum; 
but seeing that our resources have, by the mere opcration of the 
war in Europe, becn reduced to a state of the greatest embarrass- 
ment, and having no hope of effectual relief but in peace, I can 
anticipate none but the most bancful consequences from a war 
with Tippoo. If this war is to be a vindication of our national 
rights, it is clear that we cannot undertake it in less than six 
months; and this delay, with a reference to our national in- 
tercsts, may probably admit of its being postponed till we attain 
sufficient strength to prosecute it with vigour. But if war is 
inevitable, and the present are judged the most advantageous 


OUR ONLY HOPE IS, TO POSTPONE THE CRISIS. li 


circumstances under which it can commence, I fear that our 
situation is bad beyond the hope of remedy. 

This memorandum only reaches to that period at which your 
military inquirics commence, they will require no Icss serious 
reflection, and must occupy the thoughts of those who are to 
direct as well as of those who are to execute the operations of 
the war. For myself, I ought to apologize for the freedom of 
these opinions, but the desultory manner in which they are 
stated, will acquit me of all premeditated intention to give 
offence, and time does not-admit of any amendment. 

J. WEBBE. 


8. Minute of the Governor-General in the Secret Department. 


‘Casus Belli’? against Tippoo. Reasons for delay. Defensive 
alliance system explained and vindicated. Proposed con- 
duct of the Anglo-Indian Government towards the Sultan. 


The Governor-General. Fort William, August 12, 1798. 
In communicating to the Board an authentic copy of the pro- 
clamation issued by the Governor-General of the Isle of France, 
during the residence of the Ambassadors of Tippoo Sultaun in 
that island, I informed the Board that I would prepare the detail 
of such mcasures, as appeared to me most advisable, for the pur- 
pose of frustrating the united efforts of Tippoo Sultaun and of 
France. Accordingly I have laid before the Board, for that 
necessary purpose, a number of propositions, connected in their 
principle as well as in thcir object, and I have cndcavoured to 
carry the proposed system of measures into exccution with every 
practicable degrce of diligence and despatch. When it is re- 
membcred that I did not take charge of this Government until 
the 18th of May, that the proclamation did not make its first 
appearance at this Presidency until the 8th of June, and was not 
authenticated here until the 18th of June, I trust it will appear 
that I have proceeded with as much expedition as was com- 
patible with the due considcration of the various and important 
questions which demanded my decision. Although the leading 
objects of the several propositions which have becn adopted by 
this Government may be collected from my late correspondence 
with the Governments of Fort St. George and Bombay, and with 
the Residents at Poonah and Hydcrabad, it may be useful to 
revicw, with more particularity, the circumstances which have 


12 DIVISION OF TIE SUBJECT. 


suggested this system of measures to my judgment. My present 
intention, therefore, is to explain and illustrate the principles 
upon which that system is founded, the means by which I hope 
to carry it into effect, and the ends which I expect to accomplish 
by its ultimate success and permanent establishment. In this 
retrospect of my conduct, I shall disclose, without hesitation or 
rescrve, the whole train of reflections which has passed in my 
mind during the agitation of this intricate and extensive subject; 
and J shall avow, without disguise, every successive variation of 
my opinion, and every instance in which I have reluctantly sub- 
mitted my unaltered judgment to the pressure of practical diffi- 
culties; nor shall I deny that I have ultimately pursued a course, 
far within the limits of that, to which the sense of my own duty 
and character, the clearest principles of justice and of policy, the 
unquestionable rights and interests of the Company, and the 
honour of the British name in India, would have directed me, 
if the obstacles to my progress had not appeared absolutely 
insurmountable. 

The various considerations which have successively engaged 
my attention may be stated in the following order :— 

First,—The nature and character of the recent proceedings of 
Tippoo Sultaun. 

Secondly,—The rights and interests of the Company, and the 
principles of my duty arising out of those proccedings. : 

Thirdly—The circumstances which might suspend or limit 
the actual exercise of those rights, the immediate and complcte 
establishment of those interests, and the satisfactory discharge 
of that duty. 

Fourthly,—The intermediate precautions which might be 
adopted during the suspension of more effectual measures, and 
the securitics which might now be provided against the rcturn 
of our actual danger. 

The first consideration required an attentive examination of 
the proclamation issucd at the Isle of France, together with all 
the collateral circumstances accompanying that extraordinary 

| publication. The proclamation made its first appearance at 
Calcutta in a newspaper of the 8th of June. 

Upon the first view of the subject, I was much inclined to 
doubt the authenticity of the proclamation. It scemed in- 
credible that, if the French really entertained a design of fur- 
nishing aid to Tippoo, they would publicly declare that design, 
when no other apparent end could be answered by such a de- 


THE PROCLAMATION AUTHENTIC. 13 


claration, excepting that of exposing the project in its infancy to 
the observation of our Governments, both at home and in India, 
and of preparing both for a timely and effectual resistance. It 
did not appear more probable that Tippoo (whatever might be 
his secret design) would have risked so public and unguarded 
an avowal of his hostility; however, even under these circum- 
stances, I thought it advisable to transmit a copy of the pro- 
clamation to the Governor of Fort St. George, in a private letter 
of the 9th of June, apprising him that, if the proclamation should 
prove authentic, it must lead to a serious remonstrance from this 
Government to Tippoo, the result of which remonstrance must 
be uncertain ; my Ictter, thercfore, directed him to turn his at- 
tention to the means of collecting a force upon the coast, if 
necessity should unfortunately require such a measure. 

The first regular authentication of the proclamation which 
I received was contained in the letter from Lord Macartney, of 
28th of March, and in that from Sir Hugh Christian of the same 
date, received on the 18th of June. It could now no longer be 
doubted that the proclamation actually had been issued by the 
Governor-General of the Isle of France. Still, however, it might 
have remained a question whether this step might not have been 
taken without the concurrence of Tippoo Sultaun, and for the 
promotion of some scparate object of the French Government, 
unconnccted with his interests and unauthorized by his consent. 
From the accounts which I had received of the state of the Isle 
of France, I was Iced to believe that the object of Mr. Malartic 
might have been to clear the Island of the adherents to the cause 
of the present Government of France, rather than to afford any 
effectual assistance to Tippoo. It appears, however, from a more 
accurate investigation of evidence, that the ship (which first 
conveycd to the Isle of France those accounts of the last re- 
volution in France, and of the violent measures projected against 
the Isles of France and Bourbon, which occasioned the late dis- 
turbances at Port Nord Ouest, and the expulsion of the French 
national troops from thence) did not reach the Isle of France 
until Tippoo’s Ambassadors had departed from thence on their 
return to Mangalore. The assistance afforded to Tippoo cannot 
therefore have been connected with the recent commotions in 
the Isle of France. However, I do not apprehend, unless some 
new revolution shall happen in the Isle of France, that Tippoo 
Sultaun will be able to derive any considcrable aid from that 
quarter. But whatever may have been the motives of Monsicur 


14 TIPPOO’S HOSTILE DESIGNS CERTAIN, 


Malartic in this transaction, the object of Tippoo Sultaun was 
always plain and clear, although, fortunately for our interests, 
his success has not yet been answerable to the extent of his 
design. Of the object of that design, I soon possessed ample 
proof, arising from the best evidence which the nature of the case 
could admit. In the first place it appeared, by the gencral tenor 
of the letters from the Cape, as wcll as by every public account 
which had been given of the transaction, to be an undisputed 
fact, {that Tippoo despatched two Ambassadors to the Isle of 
France, and that the proclamation in question was published sub- 
sequently to their arrival and during their residence in that island. 
These facts would perhaps have been sufficient, without further 
inquiry, to warrant a strong presumption that this proclamation, 
purporting to declare the object of the embassy, must have been 
framed with the consent and knowledge of the Ambassadors of 
Tippoo, then on the spot, and must have corresponded with their 
instructions from their sovercign, whose orders they would 
scarcely have ventured to excecd in a matter of such scrious 
consequence as the conclusion of an alliance, offensive and de- 
fensive, with the French. In order, however, to obtain the most 
accurate information with respect to the circumstances attending 
the reception of the embassy, the publication of the proclamation, 
and the conduct of the Ambassadors, I examined, upon oath, 
some respectable persons who were present in the Isle of France 
during the residence of the Ambassadors-at Port Nord Ouest. 
From the concurrent testimony of these persons, since corro- 
borated by intelligence from various quarters, I obtained a con- 
nected account of the whole transaction. 

Tippoo despatched two Ambassadors, who embarked at Man- 
galore for the Isle of France, and arrived there at the close of 
the month of January 1798. They hoisted Tippoo’s colours 
upon entering the harbour of Port Nord Ouest, were reccived 
publicly and formally by the French Government with every 
circumstance of distinction and respect, and were entertained 
during their continuance on the Island at the public expense. 
Previously to their arrival, no idca or rumour existed in the 
Island of any aid to be furnished to Tippoo by the French, or of 
any prospect of a war between him and the Company. The 
second day after the arrival of the Ambassadors, an advertisement 
was published of the same purport as the proclamation, and im- 
mediately afterwards the proclamation was fixed up in the 
most public places, and circulated through the town. One of the 


HIS AMBASSADORS COMMITTED HIM. 15 


Ambassadors was perfectly conversant with the French language. 
A person accompanied the embassy from Mangalore, who was 
habited in the Turkish dress, who spoke French and English 
with uncommon correctness and fluency, and who appeared to 
possess considcrable knowledge and talents, and to be well ac- 
quainted with most of the country languages of India. This 
person had been known at Bussorah by the name of Abdoolah, 
at Surat by that of Derwish, and in the Isle of France passed 
under that of Talamas, under which last name he had also passed 
in Bengal, where he resided for some years. The Ambassadors 
(far from protesting against the matter or style of the procla- 
mation) held, without reserve, in the most public manner, the 
same language which it contains with respect to the offensive 
war to be commenced against the British possessions in India; 
“they even suffered the proclamation to be publicly distributed 
at their owa house. ~ Talamas’s conversation, though with more- 
caution and mystery, corresponded in substance with theirs. In 
consequence of these circumstances, an universal belief prevailed 
in the Island, that Tippoo would make an immediate attack 
upon the British possessions in India, which opinion had gained 
so much force, that the persons who gave this evidence, and all 
those who arrived at that period in India from the Isle of France, 
expected to find us at war with Tippoo, but they all concurred 
in declaring, that the temerity of Tippoo’s design had excited 
general ridicule in that Island. The Ambassadors were present 
in the Island when the French Government procecded to act 
under the proclamation in question, and they aided and assisted 
the execution of it, by making promiscs in the name of Tippoo 
for the purpose of inducing recruits to enlist; they proposed to 
levy men to any practicable extent, stating their powers to be 
unlimited with respect to the numbers of the force to be raised. 
The Ambassadors aided and assisted in the Ievy of 150 officers 
and privates for the service of Tippoo, under the terms and for 
ithe purposes of the proclamation. Few of the officers are of any 
expcricnce or skill, and the privates are the refuse of the lowest 
class of the democratic rabble of the Island. Some of them are 
voluntecrs, others were taken from the prisons and compelled to 
embark, several of them are Caffres and people of half-cast. 
With such of these troops as were voluntcers, the Ambassadors 
entered into several stipulations and engagements in the name 
of Tippoo. . 
On the 7th of March, 1798, the Ambassadors embarked on 


16 INTERNAL EVIDENCE OF THE PROCLAMATIuUnN. 


board the French frigate La Prencuse, together with the foie 
thus raised, and they publicly declared an intention of proceeding 
to the Isle of Bourbon, with the hope of obtaining more recruits 
for the same service. 

The proclamation, therefore, originated in the arrival of the 
Ambassadors at the Isle of France, was distributed by their 
agents, was avowed in every part by their own public declara- 
tion, and finally was executed according to its tenor by their 
personal assistance and co-operation. 

The proclamation itself furnished the most powerful internal 
evidence of the concurrence of the Ambassadors in all its essen- 
tial parts, the principal facts stated thercin are— 

‘That Tippoo Sultaun, through two Ambassadors despatched 
for the purpose to the Isle of France, had addressed Ictters to 
the colonial assembly of the Isle of France, to all the Generals 
employed there, and to the Executive Directory of France, and 
had made the following propositions :— 

“rst. That he desired to form an alliance, offensive and dc- 
fensive, with the French, and offered to maintain at his cx- 
pense, during the continuance of the war in India, whatever 
troops should be furnished by the French, and to supply (with 
the exception of certain stores) every necessary for carrying 
on the war. 

‘2d. That he had given assurances that all his preparations 
were already completed, and that the generals and officers would 
find everything necessary for carrying on a species of war, to 
which Europeans have not been accustomed in their contests 
with the Native Powers in India. 

‘3d. That he only waited for the succour of France to declare 
war against the English, and that it was his ardent desire to 
expel the English from India.’ 

Upon the ground of these facts, the proclamation recommends 
a general levy of men for the service of Tippoo; and it con- 
cludes by assuring ‘all the citizens who shall enlist, that Tippoo 
will give them an advantageous rate of pay and allowances, 
which will be fixed by his Ambassadors, who will also engage, in 
the name of their sovereign, that the Frenchmen who shall have 
enlisted in his army, shall never be detained there after they 
shall have expressed a desire of returning to their native 
country.’ 

The avowed purport of this proclamation is to acquaint the 
inhabitants of the Island with the propositions made by Tippoo 


THE AMBASSADORS ACTED UP TO IT, 17 


Sultaun, through his Ambassadors then on the spot. It enu- 
merates those propositions with a particularity of detail which 
could never have been hazarded in the presence of the Ambas- 
sadors if the facts stated had not been correctly true, or if the 
propositions enumerated had varied in substance from those 
communicated by the Ambassadors under the orders of their 
sovereign. But the last paragraph of the proclamation con 
nected with the conduct of the Ambassadors as already described, 
establishes in the clearest manner their participation in the whole 
transaction. That paragraph contains a direct reference to the 
powers of the Ambassadors, and engages on their behalf that 
they shall enter into certain stipulations in the name of their 
sovereign with respect to the pay and final discharge of such 
French subjects as shall enlist in his army under the conditions 
of the proclamation. The accounts which I have received from 
the Isle of France concur in stating, that the Ambassadors 
openly acted under this part of the proclamation, and in the 
name of Tippoo entered into engagements and stipulations with 
the recruits according to the assurances specified in the procla- 
mation. Monsieur De Bue, now master attendant at Mangalore, 
stated to one of the witnesses whom I examined, the whole sub- 
stance of the engagements which had passed personally between 
him and the Ambassadors, all of which engagements referred 
immediately to Tippoo’s intention of commencing war upon the 
Company, with the aid of the French force then about to be 
levied; and it is certain that without some such engagement | 
not a man would have been raised in the Isle of France for the 
service of Tippoo. It appears from the evidence which I have 
collected, that the Ambassadors had not brought to the Isle of 
France a supply of treasure sufficient for advancing bounty 
money to the recruits, It was stated that an apprehension of 
the English cruizers had prevented the embarkation of treasure 
for this purposc, and no doubt was entertained that if the Am- 
bassadors had been better provided with moncy, they might 
have raised a much greatcr number of men, who refused to 
engage on the mere security of promiscs in the name of Tippoo. 
The Ambassadors, together with the force thus collected 
during the time of their mission in the Isle of France, landed 
from the frigate, La Preneuse, at Mangalore, on the 26th of 
April, 1798. Accounts vary with respect to the exact number 
of the force landed ; the most probable are that it did not ex- 
ceed 200 persons. Tippoo (far from manifesting the least 
c 


18 AS DID TIPPOO, ON THEIR RETURN. 


symptom of disapprobation, of the conduct of his Ambassadors 
in any part of the transaction) formally received them, and the 
officers and leading persons so landed with public marks of 
honour and distinction. One of his Ambassadors resided for 
some time with the French recruits in a fortress near Mangalore, 
and the Sultaun has admitted the whole levy of officers and men 
into his service. Referring, therefore, to the conduct of the 
Ambassadors in the Isle of France to their arrival at Mangalore * 
with the force levied in consequence of thcir mission, and finally 
to the reception of the Ambassadors and of the French recruits 
by Tippoo Sultaun, the following conclusions appeared to me 
to be incontrovertibly established :— 

First,—That the Ambassadors despatched by Tippoo Sultaun 
to the Government of the Isle of France proposed to that 
Government an alliance, offensive and defensive, against the 
British possessions in India, which alliance was accepted by 
that Government, and its acceptance formally notified by a 
public proclamation, 

Secondly,—That the Ambassadors were charged with letters 
from Tippoo Sultaun to the Executive Directory of France, 
which letters were stated to contain the same proposition, and 
that the Ambassadors dclivered these Ictters to the Governor- 
General of the Isle of France for the purpose of transmission to 
France. 

Thirdly,—That the Ambassadors, in the name of Tippoo 
Sultaun, gave public assurances that he had actually completed 
the necessary preparations for commencing immediate hostilitics, 
and that he only waited the arrival of succours from the French 
to declare war against the Company, for the express purpose 
of expelling the British nation from India. 

Fourthly,—That the Ambassadors demanded unlimited mili- 
tary succour from the French, and levied a military force in the 
Isle of France with the declared object of commencing imme- 
diate war against the British nation in India. 

Fifthly,—That this force has been actually landed in Tippoo’s 
country, and publicly admitted into his service with signal 
marks of approbation; and that the Ambassadors have been 
received with similar distinction. 

Sixthly,—That Tippoo Sultaun (by receiving with public 
marks of approbation his Ambassadors, who had concluded in 
his name an offensive and defensive alliance with the French; 
and by admitting into his service the military force raised for 


SUMMARY OF THE CASUS BELLI. 19 


effecting the objects of that alliance) has personally ratified the 
engagements contained in the proclamation of the Governor- 
General of the Isle of France, and has proceeded to act 
under those engagements conformably to the tenor of that 
proclamation. 

Seventhly,—That although the succour actually received by 
Tippoo Sultaun under his offensive alliance with the French 
is inconsiderable, yet the tenor of the proclamation, the pro- 
position made to the French Government for unlimited military 
aid, &c. &c., and the declarations of the Ambassadors prove, 
that it was the intention of Tippoo Sultaun, to receive into his 
service the largest force which he could obtain, for the purpose 
of commencing a war of aggression against the Company in 
India. 

Having thus entered into offensive and defensive engagements 
with the enemy, having proceeded to collect in conjunction with 
the enemy, a force openly destined to act against the posses- 
sions of the Company, having avowed through his public 
Ambassadors, that he has compleated his preparations of war 
for the express purpose of attempting the entire subversion of 
the British Empire in India, and having declared that he only 
waits the effectual succour of the French to prosecute offensive 
operations; Tippoo Sultaun has violated the treaties of peace 
and friendship subsisting between him and the Company, snl 
has committed an act of direct hostility against the British 
Government in India, 

Before I proceeded to apply the principles of the law of 
nations to the conduct of Tippoo Sultaun, it appeared proper 
to enquire what had been the conduct of the Company towards 
him for some years past, and whether he had received any 
provocation to justify or to palliate his late proceedings. 

Since the conclusion of the Treaty of Seringapatam, the 
British Governments in India have uniformly conducted them- 
selves towards Tippoo Sultaun, not only with the most exact 
attention to the principles of modcration, justice, and good 
faith; but have endeavoured by every practicable means to 
conciliate his confidence, and to mitigate his vindictive spirit. 
Some differencés have occasionally arisen with respect to the 
boundarics of his territory bordering upon the confines of our 
possessions on the coast of Malabar; but(the records of all the 
British Governments in India will shew, that they always mani- 
fested the utmost anxicty to promote the amicable adjustment 

C2 


20 THIS CONDUCT WAS UNPROVOKED. 


of every doubtful or disputed point; and that Tippoo Sultaun 
has received the most unequivocal proofs of the constant, dis- 
position of the Company to acknowledge and confirm all his 
just rights, and to remove every cause of jealousy, which might 
tend to interrupt the continuance of peace. 

The servants of the Company in India have not however 
been ignorant of the implacable sentiments of revenge, which | 
he has preserved without abatement since the hour of his last 
defeat. It has always been well understood, that Tippoo Sul- 
taun’s resentment was not to be appeased by any conciliatory 
advances on our part, nor by any other means than the recovery 
of his lost power, the disgrace of the British arms, and the 
ruin of the British interests in India. With such views it was 
expected that he would eagerly embrace the first favorable 
occasion of striking a blow against our possessions; and his 
intrigues at the Courts of Hyderabad and Poonah, together 
with his Embassy to Zemaun Shah, (although managed with 
such a degree of caution as to avoid the appearance of direct 
acts of aggression,) were sufficient indications of an hostile mind. 
But none of these circumstances have in any degree affected the 
conduct of the Company’s servants towards him, and the corre- 
spondence between him and the late Governor-General, and the 
letters from Bombay on the subject of the district of Wynaad, 
furnish ample proofs of a sincere desire to bring that question 
to a fair issue, ‘co%th the consent and knowledge of both parties; 
according to the tenor of the 7th article of the treaty of Scring- 
apatam; I appeal to the Ictter which I despatched to him soon 
after my arrival in Bengal, proposing an amicable adjustment 
of the same question, as well as of his recent claims upon 
certain parts of the district of Coorga, for a testimony of the 
pacific spirit which has marked my first communication with 
him; although, perhaps, a less mild representation might have 
been justificd, by his unwarrantable precipitation in stationing 
a military force on the frontier of Coorga, before he had made 
any trial of the prescribed and regular channels of negociation. 
Tippoo Sultaun cannot therefore alledge even the pretext of a 
grievance to palliate the charactcr of his recent acts; he has 
indeed allcdgcd none, but has constantly professed the most 
sincere desire to maintain the relations of amity and peace with 
the Company. In his letters to Sir John Shore (written a short 
time before the return of the Mysorean Ambassadors from the 
Isle of France, and received at Fort William on the 26th April, 


TIPPOO DID NOT PROFESS TO HAVE A GRIEVANCE. ar 


1798, the day on which the French force landed at Mangalore) 

Tippoo declares, ‘that his friendly heart is disposed to pay 

every regard to truth and justice, and to strengthen the founda- 

tions of harmony and concord established between the two 

states. And he signifies his desire that ‘ Sir John Shore would 

impress Lord Mornington, with a sense of the friendship and 
_ unanimity so firmly subsisting between the two states,’ 

This is not the language of hostility, nor even of discontent. 
From what disposition in the friendly heart of Tippoo these 
amicable professions have proceeded, how they are connected 
with a regard to truth and justice, or calculated to strengthen 
the foundations of harmony and concord, and to impress me 
with a sense of the Sultaun’s friendship, can now admit of no 
question, since it is now proved, that these letters were written 
at the very moment, when Tippoo was in anxious expectation 
of the hourly arrival of that military succour, which he had 
solicited from the enemy for the express purpose of com- 
mencing a war of aggression against the Company’s possessions. 

The motive therefore of Tippoo Sultaun, was no other than 
that avowed in his correspondence with the enemy, and pub- 
lished under the eyes of his own Ambassadors, ‘an ardent desire 
to expel the British nation from India. 

It appears highly probable, that he was instigated by the 
promises and exhortations of the Government of France, (whose 
emissaries have reached his councils) to hasten the execution 
of a project, in which every consideration of interest, and every 
sentiment of passion would induce the French to embark with 
a degree of zeal, ardour, and rancour not inferior to his own. 

The importance of these possessions to all the most valuable 
interests of Great Britain, has pointed the particular attention 
of the Government of France to the destruction of our empire 
in India. The prosperity of our settlements in India, has long 
been the primary and undisguiscd object of the jealousy of 
France, avowed by all her ministers in every negociation, and 
by all her rulers in every stage of her innumerable revolutions ; 
Tippoo therefore might reasonably hope, that if the cessation of 

hostilities on the continent of Europe, should at any time enable 

the French Directory to turn their views to the disturbance of 
the peace of India, such an adventure would be among the 
carlicst of their operations. 

The conclusion of a peace upon the continent of Europe, 
the weak state of the internal Governments ef Poonah and 


22 WE MUST OBVIATE THE EFFECTS OF HIS ENMITY. 


Hyderabad, the existing dissentions, apparently precluding all 
co-operation and concert between those two powers, added to the 
growing strength of a French faction in every part of India, may 
have appeared both to Tippoo and to the French to offer a 
favorable opportunity for the prosecution of their joint design. 
The premature disclosure of this design may perhaps be im- 
puted rather to the policy of M. Malartic, than to the im- 
prudence of Tippoo; whether the scope of that policy was to 
involve us in a war ‘with Tippoo, or to expose his treachery to 
our view, is yet a matter of doubt; but whatever circumstances 
occasioned the premature disclosure of the design, whether the 
design was wisely or rashly conceived ; whether it has partially 
succeeded, or entirely failed, are questions, the solution of which 
in no degree affects the offensive nature of an aggression so 
unprovoked, and of a violation of faith so flagrant and un- 
qualified. The history of the world scarcely furnishes an in- 
stance, in which any two powers have united in confederacy or 
alliance precisely with the same motives. The party proposing 
an offensive alliance against the Company, cannot be absolved 
from the consequences of such an act, by any apparent or real 
indifference in the party accepting such a proposal. The con- 
duct of Tippoo Sultaun, therefore, cannot be correctly estimated 
by reference to the supposcd motives of Monsicur Malartic. 
From the application of the acknowledged principles of the law 
of nations to the facts of this case, I formed my judgment of the 
rights of the Company, and of my own duties with reference to 
the aggression of Tippoo. The course of reasoning which I 
pursued may be stated in the following manner. 

The rights of states applicable to every case of contest with 
foreign powers, are created and limited by the necessity of pre- 
serving the public safety; this necessity is fhe foundation of the 
reciprocal claim of all nations to explanation of suspicious or 
ambiguous conduct, to reparation for injurics done, and to 
security against injuries intended. 

In any of these cases, when just satisfaction has been denied, 
or from the evident nature of circumstances cannot otherwise 
be obtained, it is the undoubted right of the injured party to 
resort to arms for the vindication of the public safety; and in 
such a conjuncture, the right of the state becomes the duty of the 
Government, unless some material consideration of the public 
interest should forbid the attempt. 

If the condugé of Tippoo Sultaun had becn of a nature which 


IT’ IS NOT A CASE FOR EXPLANATION. 23 


could be termed ambiguous or suspicious; if he had merely 
increased his force beyond his ordinary establishment, or had 
stationed it in some position on our confines or on those of our 
allies, which might justify jealousy or alarm; if he had renewed 
his secret intrigues at the Courts of Hyderabad, Poonah and 
Cabul, or even if he had entered into any negociation with 
France, of which the object was at all obscure; it might be our 
duty to resort in the first instance to his construction of pro- 
ceedings, which being of a doubtful character, might admit of 
a satisfactory explanation. But where there is no doubt, there 
can be no matter for explanation, | The act of Tippoo’s ambas- 
sadors, ratified by himself, and accompanied by the landing of 
a French force in his country, is a public, unqualified and un- 
ambiguous declaration or act of war, aggravated by an avowal, 
that the object of the war is neither explanation, reparation, nor 
security, but the total destruction of the British Government in 
India. | To affect to misunderstand an insult and injury of such 
a complexion would argue a consciousness either of weakness 
or of fear; no state in India can misconstrue the conduct of 
Tippoo ; the correspondence of our Residents at Hyderabad and 
Poonah sufficiently manifests the construction which it bears at 
both those Courts; and in so clear and plain a case, our demand 
of explanation would be justly attributed either to a defect of 
spirit or of power, the result of such a demand would therefore 
be, the disgrace of our character, and the diminution of our 
influence and consideration in the eyes of our allies, and of every 
power in India. If the moment should appear favourable to the 
exccution of Tippoo’s declared design, he would answer such 
a demand by an immediate attack; if, on the other hand, his 
preparations should not be sufficiently advanced, he would deny 
the existence of his engagements with France, would persist in 
the denial until he had reaped the full benefit of them; and 
finally, after having completed the improvement of his own 
army, and received the accession of an additional French force, 
he would turn the combined strength of both against our pos- 
sessions, with an alacrity and confidence inspired by our inaction, 
and with advantages redoubled by our delay. In the present 
casc the idea therefore of demanding explanation must be re- 
jected, as being disgraceful in its principle, and frivolous in its 
object. The demand of reparation, in the strict sense of the 
term, cannot properly be applicd to cascs of intended injury, 
excepting in those instances, where the nature of the reparation 


24 NOR FOR REPAIRING A PARTICULAR WRONG. 


demanded may be essentially connected with security against 
the injurious intention. 

Whcere a State has unjustly seized the property, or invaded 
the territory, or violated the rights of another, reparation may 
be made by restoring what has been unjustly taken, or by a 
subsequent acknowledgment of the right which has been in- 
fringed ; but the cause of our complaint against Tippoo Sultaun, 
is not that he has seized a portion of our property which he 
might restore, or invaded a part of our territory which he might 
again cede, or violated a right which he might hereafter acknow- 
ledge; we complain, that, professing the most amicable dis- 
position, bound by subsisting treaties of peace and friendship, 
and unprovoked by any offence on our part, he has manifested 
a design to effect our total destruction; he has prepared the 
means and instruments of a war of extermination against us; he 
has solicited and received the aid of our inveterate enemy for 
the declared purpose of annihilating our Empire; and he only 
waits the arrival of a more effectual succour to strike a blow 
against our existence. 

That he has not yet received the effectual succour which he 
| has solicited, may be ascribed either to the weakness of the 
‘Government of Mauritius, or to their want of zeal in his cause, 
or to the rashness and imbecility of his own Councils; but 
jncither the measure of his hostility, nor of our right to restrain 
it, nor of our danger from it, are to be estimated by the amount 
of the force which he has actually obtained ; for we know that 
his demands of military assistance were unlimited; we know 
that they were addressed not merely to the Government of 
Mauritius, but to that of France, and we cannot ascertain how 
soon they may be satisfied to the full extent of his acknow- 
Iedged expectations. This, therefore, is not merely the case of 
an injury to be repaired, but of the public safety to be secured 
against the present and future designs of an irreconcileable, 
desperate and treacherous enemy: against an cnemy of this 
description, no effectual security can be obtained otherwise than 
by such a reduction of his power, as shall not only defeat his 
actual preparations, but cstablish a permanent restraint upon his 
future means of offence. 

To this species of sccurity our right is unquestionable, upon 
the grounds already stated. But it cannot be supposed that 
Tippoo Sultaun will voluntarily concede to us a security of this 
nature against the effects of his own resentment, treachery and 


WE MUST EXACT PRECAUTIONS FOR OUR FUTURE SAFETY. 25 


ambition, and against the success of the most favorite projects 
of his mind. 

Since, therefore, the principles of justice and of the law of 
nations entitle us to such a security, and since we cannot pos- 
sibly obtain it by the voluntary concession of Tippoo Sultaun, 
it is the right of the Company to compel him to yield it; and 
it is equally my duty to use that compulsion without delay, 
provided the interests of the Company committed to my charge 
be not more endangered by the attempt, than by the unre- 
strained progress of his preparations for war. 

In proportion to the continual progress of Tippoo’s prepara- 
tions, he will acquire more decisively the advantage of holding 
in his hands the issues of peace and war, together with the 
power of selecting the time and mode of his long meditated 
attack upon our possessions. He has not yet obtained any 
formidable accession of strength from his alliance with France, 
nor is it probable that any such accession will reach his country 
within a short period, certainly not before the close of the 
monsoon on the coast of Malabar; while he shall retain the 
ready means of intercourse by sea with the French Government, 
it cannot be doubted that they will use every endeavour to assist 
him with military aid, and to instigate him to war. The arrival 
of one or two French regiments would probably induce Tippoo 
to commence offensive operations, and the assistance even of 
so small a body of Frenchmen might become alarming in the 
actual state of the native armies of India. The systematic 
introduction of French officers into the service of all the native 
powers, is described by Mr. Wickham as the fixed policy of j 
France, adopted with a view of establishing the most certain’ 
means of subverting the foundation of our power. This system 
has becn pursucd in the armics of the Nizam, of Scindiah, and 
of many other inferior powers with unremitting assiduity, and 
extensive success. If Tippoo should be allowed to derive from 
France such succour as would induce him to act offensively 
against us, his earlicst movements would probably be seconded 
by the gencral insurrection of the various bodies of French ad- 
venturers, who are incorporated in the service of the several 
» native powers, and who maintain a concert and correspondence 
in every quarter of India. Under such circumstances, it would 
be prudent to take advantage of the actual crisis, in which the 
hostile design of Tippoo has been clearly manifested, but the 
means of accomplishing it have happily disappointed the ardor 


26 TO ATTACK HIM AT ONCE WOULD BEST EFFECT THIS, 


of his hopes. _In this moment of his comparative weakness, of 
iis disappointment, and of his probable dejection, no policy 
could be more wise than to strike such an instantaneous blow 
against his possessions, as should effectually frustrate his pre- 
parations for war, and should render him unable to avai! himself 
of the aid of France whenever it may arrive. | 

The inconsiderable amount of the force which he has already 
received from France, while it cannot limit our just right to 
reduce his power, affords a strong argument of policy in favour 
of an immediate attack. 

It is therefore evident that the rights and interests of the 
Company concur to demand from this Government every prac- 
ticable effort to anticipate the execution of his projects of ven- 
geance by attacking him on all sides without delay. In this 
train of reasoning I was confirmed by adverting to the general 
tenor of the orders of the Court of Directors, and of the procecd- 
ings of this Government with reference to the contingency of a 
French force landing at any time in the territories of Tippoo 
Sultaun. 

The orders of the Court of Directors uniformly enjoin that the 
landing of a French force in Tippoo’s country should be ‘the 
signal for our attack upon him.” The construction of those 
orders by the late Governor-General in his instructions to the 
President in Council of Fort St. George of 12th September, 
1796, appears to have been, that the number of the French force 
should be considerable in order to justify our attack. But I am 
persuaded that the real intention of the late Governor-General 
in those instructions, could not have been to dcclare, that the 
justice or policy of attacking Tippoo was hereafter to be mea- 
sured solely by the magnitude of any French force landed in his 
country. 

It is certainly true that, on the one hand, the landing of a 
considerable French force in Tippoo’s country would be an 
unquestionable indication of his hostile intentions against the 
British power, while on the other hand the landing of a few 
French officers and privates, and even thcir admission into the 
service of Tippoo, might, under certain circumstances, be sup- 
posed to manifest nothing more than a disposition to improve 
the gencral discipline of his armics, without implying any formed 
design of war against the Company or their Allies. This, Iam 
persuaded, is the only view in which the late Governor-General 
in Council could consider the magnitude of the French force 


BY IMPOSING IMPORTANT CHECKS ON HIM. 27 


landed in Tippoo’s country as the foundation of a rule for limit- 
ing the discretion of the Company’s governments in such a con- 
tingency. On the present occasion, the hostile intentions of the - 
Sultaun are unequivocally manifested by the proclamation, by 
the declarations and conduct of his Ambassadors, and by their 
demand of French troops to an unlimited extent. Connected 
with these circumstances, the landing and admission into the 
Sultaun’s armies, even of a less considerable force than that 
which he has reccived, would be deemed, under the just con- 
struction of the opinions both of the Court of Directors and of 
this Government, ‘a signal for our attack upon him.’ t 

My determination, therefore, was fixed to attack Tippoo with 
every degree of practical despatch. 

The objects which appeared to me the most desirable, as well 
as the most easily’ attainable, were,—First, To seize the whole 
maritime territory remaining in his possession below the Ghauts 
on the coast of Malabar, in order to preclude him from all future 
communications by sea with his French allies. 

Secondly, By marching the army from the coast of Coro- 
mandel directly upon his capital, to compel him to purchase 
peace by a formal cession of the territory seized on the coast of 
Malabar, 

Thirdly, To compel him to defray our whole expense in the 
war, and thus to secure the double advantage of indemnifying us 
for the expense occasioned by his aggression, and of reducing’ 
his resources with a view to our future security. 

Fourthly, To compel him to admit permanent Residents at 
his Court from us and from our Allies, a measure which would 
enable us at all times to check his operations, and to counteract 
the intricacies of his treachery. 

Fifthty, That the expulsion of all the natives of France now in 
his service, and the perpetual exclusion of all Frenchmen, both 
from his army and dominions, should be made conditions of any 
treaty of peace with him. 

With this plan in view, I directed that the army upon the 
coasts of Coromandcl and Malabar, and at Bombay, should be 
immediately assembled; and I entertained a very sanguine hope 
that active operations might have been commenced so carly as, 
with the co-operation of his Majesty’s squadron on the coast of 
Malabar (which Rear-Admiral Rainier had promised), might have 
secured the effectual reduction of Tippoo's power before any 
assistance could have reached him from France. But I never 


28 IT WAS NECESSARY TO PREPARE FOR WAR, 


proposed to undertake any attack upon him, of which the success 
could be doubtful in the judgment of those whose opinions must 
always govern my discretion in every question of military detail. 

The avowed designs of Tippoo, the state of his preparations 
for war (which, notwithstanding his late disappointment, was 
certainly forward as far as regarded his own troops), the un- 
certainty of the motives which might impel the violence of his 
temper to action, and my knowledge of the indiscreet zeal with 
which he has frequently pursued his favourite object of revenge 
against the British power, all concurred to urge the necessity of 
placing ourselves in a state of preparation for war at least equal 
to that of his army. These measures appeared to me not mat- 
ters of choice, but of indispensable duty. I could not suffer the 
' security of the Carnatic to rest on so precarious a foundation as 
the forbearance of Tippoo Sultaun and of his French allies. To 
resume the power of meeting him in the field, and to replace in 
our hands the option which he then possessed, of accommodating 
the time of attack to circumstances and events, appeared to me 
to be the most prudent step which could be immediately adopted, 
whatever might hereafter be the service to which our force might 
be applied. The orders, therefore, which I gave for assembling 
the army (although pointed more particularly at the execution 
of the plan of operations, which I have just now detailed) were 
founded upon principles independent of the practicability of that 
‘plan, and were connected not only with the immediate defence 
of the Carnatic, but with other comprehensive measures of per- 
manent precaution and security, to which my views have been 
extended at every period of this crisis. 

When I submitted my ideas of the time and objects of the 
proposed attack upon Tippoo to those military authoritics, which 
I shall always consider with respect, it seemed to be their 
opinion, that the state of our army admitted no doubt of the 
ultimate success of the plan which I had proposed. If its specdy 
accomplishment had appeared to them as certain as its ultimate 
success, I should nat have hesitated a moment in directing the 
commencement of offensive operations; but I found that, instead 
of deriving to the interests of the Company the inestimable ad- 
vantages of a sudden and rapid reduction of Tippoo’s means of 
offence, the result of such an attempt was likely to lead to a 
tedious, protracted, and expensive, although ultimately succcss- 
ful, war. The obstacles which arose were of a nature not to be 
surmounted by any degree of present activity or resolution, 


BUT SERIOUS OBSTACLES INVOLVED DELAY. 29 


although they originated in causes which I trust may be re- 
moved by future diligence and perseverance. 

The result of my earliest enquiries convinced me that radical 
defects existed in the military establishments on the coast of 
Coromandel, which would render it impossible to put our army 
in that quarter in motion soon enough to effect the object which 
I proposed. The opinions which I received from military autho- 
rities here, with respect to the impossibility of making any 
sudden or speedy military movement on the coast of Coro- 
mandel, were afterwards confirmed by the concurrent testimony 
of the Governor of Fort St. George, and of the Adjutant-General 
of that establishment. I have entered into a particular considera- 
tion of this testimony in a Minute recorded in the Secret De- 
partment of the 20th July, to which I desire to refer on this part 
of the subject. The letter of the Government of Fort St. George 
of the 10th of July proceeds far beyond the limits of any opinion 
which I had ever formed or heard with respect to the difficulty 
of restraining the hostility of Tippoo; in that letter the Presi- 
dent in Council even deprecates the ordinary precautions of 
defence, Iest they should draw down the resentment of the 
Sultaun upon our unprotected possessions, 

The expense of a protracted war, and the evil effects which 
such a calamity must produce on the trade of the Company, 
upon their pecuniary affairs at home, upon the welfare of their 
subjects in India, and upon the general state of the public 
revenue and credit of Great Britain, now pressed with great 
weight upon my mind, and the embarrassment of our finances 
aggravated all the difficulties of my situation. The question 
was now entirely changed ; the plan which I had originally had 
in contemplation was nothing more than a military expedition 
of short duration, of no hcavy expense, and of certain success, 
with the additional advantage that success would certainly ex- 
oncrate our finances, and throw the whole expense of the under- 
taking upon the enemy, who had provoked it. But it now 
appeared that I could not hope to effect any of my proposed 
objects without encountering the expense and inconvenience of 
a long war. 

In this state of the question, the condition of our Allies oc- 
curred as an insuperable obstacle to our progress, Although 
the assistance of the Pcishwa and of the Nizam might not have 
been deemed indispensable in an expedition of the nature which 
IT have described ; I have always been apprized that an offensive 


30 OUR POSITION MIGHT BE IMPROVED IN THE INTERVAL. 


war of any long duration in Mysore would be difficult, if not im- 
practicable, without the effectual aid of the Peishwa and of the 
Nizam, in facilitating the supplies of provision to our army in 
the field. 

The state of the Courts of Hyderabad and of Poonah afforded 
no hope of their early co-operation with us; and although I had 
determined to take the most expeditious measures for restoring 
both our Allies to the power of fulfilling their defensive engage- 
ments with us, I could not expect to derive any bencfit from 
those measures for a considerable period of time; and it would 
have been imprudent to have undertaken offensive opcrations, 
with-the prospect of a continued war, until the efficiency of our 
alliances had been previously secured. Under the accumulated 
pressure of all these difficulties, I felt, with the utmost degree of 
disappointment and regret, that the moment was unfavourable 
to the adoption of the only measure which appeared to me suff- 
cient to satisfy the rights and interests of the Company and the 
exigencies of my own duty; I was therefore compelled to re- 
linquish the idea of striking an immediate blow against the pos- 
sessions of Tippoo Sultaun. But the circumstances which thus 
suspended the actual exercise of the rights and the immediate 
establishment of the interests of the Company, could not absolve 
me from the duty of providing, without delay, every degree of 
intermediate sccurity which might now bc attainable, by adopt- 
ing such a system of preparation and defence as might enable us 
to repel any attack which Tippoo might make upon us, or to 
support any demand of satisfaction, which we may cventually 
deem it advisable, in concert with our Allics, to make to him. 

The sense of this duty induced mc to proposc to the Board 
the several orders and instructions which have been forwarded 
to the Governments of Fort St. George and Bombay, and to the 
Residents at Poonah and Hyderabad, from the 8th of July to 
the present time. 

The principles upon which these instructions and orders are 
founded will be best illustrated by referring to the nature of our 
actual danger, as well as to the causes which have contributed 
to produce it. 

No comprehensive or satisfactory view can be taken of this 
subject without adverting to the whole system of our defensive 
alliances with the Native States, and to the various circum- 
stances which have effected or which now influence the general 
balance of power in India. 


THE NIZAM HAS LOST THE POWER TO HELP US, gL 


The primary objects of the Treaties of Poonah and Paungul, 
combined with the Treaty of Seringapatam, were to diminish 
Tippoo Sultaun’s means of future aggression, by reducing his 
resources and territory, and to provide an efficient defence 
against him by strengthening the Peishwa and the Nizam, 
by uniting their interests with ours, and by securing their 
co-operation in any future war with Mysore. On the other 
hand, a part of the policy of the Treaty of Seringapatam 
seems to have been to preserve to Tippoo Sultaun that degree 
of power which might enable him to maintain a balance with 
the Mahrattas and the Nizam in such a manner that the inter- 
position of our force might always turn the scale. 

It is evident-that the policy of this system has been entirely 
frustrated by the course of recent events, and that neither the 
Peishwa, the Nizam, nor Tippoo Sultaun now retain the same 
relative position which they held at the conclusion of the Treaty 
of Seringapatam, either with respect to one another or to our 
interests. 

Since the conclusion of the peace of Seringapatam, the power ' 
and resources of the Court of Hyderabad have been constantly 
declining. The disgrace which fell upon the Nizam’s arms in 
the unfortunate contest with the Mahrattas at Kurdlah reduced 
the military character of the Court of Hyderabad to the lowest 
point of degradation. The treaty in which that defeat termi- 
nated completed the humiliation of the Nizam; he was com- 
pelled to sacrifice a large portion of territory, to engage to pay a 
fine of three crores of rupees, and to submit to the captivity of 
his minister, Azim ul Omra, who was carricd a prisoner to 
Poonah. Azim ul Omra resided at Poonah during the late con- 
vulsions in the Mahratta Government ; and, although a prisoner, 
bore a very distinguished part in supporting Nana through the 
various revolutions which followed the sudden death of the 
Peishwa, Mahda Row. For these services Nana agreed to relin- 
quish all the bencfits acquired by the Pcishwa against the Nizam, 
under the Treaty of Kurdlah. 

But the Peishwa, Bajee-row, having called in the assistance of 
Scindiah to check the overgrown powcr of Nana, Scindiah per- 
suaded the Pcishwa to violate the engagements concluded with 
Azim ul Omra; and the event has been, that the Pcishwa has 
insisted upon and obtained from the Nizam a cession of one- 
fourth part of the territory, and the payment of one-fourth part 
of the fine stipulated by the Treaty of Kurdlah, 


32 AND IS IN THE HANDS OF OUR FRENCH FOES; 


In addition to so heavy a loss, both of power and honour, the 
internal resources of the Nizam's Government have not yet re- 
covered the derangement occasioned by the rebellions of Ali 
Jah, and the son of Darah Jah; by the unfortunate contest 
with the Mahrattas; and by the detention of Azim ul Omra at 
. Poonah. 

The effect of these causes has necessarily been to reduce the 
consideration of the Nizam in the scale of the neighbouring 
states; and in this weak and degraded condition he has been for 
some time past menaced by the army of Scindiah, stationed in’ 
the neighbourhood of Poonah. But the most striking feature of 
change in the state of the Nizam’s affairs since 1793, is the altéra- 
tion which has taken place in his military establishment. The 
Nizam, since the peace of Seringapatam, has greatly reduced his 
cavalry and other troops, and considerably augmented the body 
of infantry commanded by French officers, and known by the 
name of Raymond’s corps. 

The corps of Raymond had becn in the service of the Nizam 
before the last war with Tippoo Sultaun, and in 1792, when it 
served with Lord Cornwallis’s army, its strength was not greater 
than 1,500 men at the highest estimation, and its discipline very 
defective. At the battle of Kurdlah, in 1795, its strength 
amounted to about 11,000 men. During the rebellion of Ali 
Jah, and in a variety of scrvice in which the corps has since been 
employed, it has acquired experience and skill, and it is now 
composed of thirteen regiments of two battalions cach, amount- 
ing in the whole to upwards of 14,000 men. Its discipline, ac- 
cording to every recent account, is very considcrably improved, 
insomuch that, although inferior to our native force, it is said to 
be superior, in nearly an equal proportion, to the ordinary scale 
of the infantry in the service of any of the Native Powers. Be- 
sides field pieces to each regiment, a park of 40 picces of 
ordnance, chiefly brass, from 12 to 36 pounders, with a well- 
trained body of artillery men (including a number of Europeans) 
is attached to the corps. A foundation has also been laid for 
raising a body of cavalry to act with the corps of infantry. The 
chief officers of this corps are all Frenchmen of the most virulent 
principles of jacobinism; many of the privates served originally 
with the French native force at Pondicherry, and the whole corps 
constitutes an armed French party of great power, zcal, and 
activity. The efforts of this party are continually cmploycd 
to magnify the power, resources and success of France, and to 


WHO TAMPER WITH OUR SEPOFS, 33 


depreciate the character, force, and credit of Great Britain in the 
eyes of the Court at Hyderabad; and it appears by authentic 
intelligence, that wherever any detachment of this corps has 
been’ stationed for any considerable time, a most unfavourable 
impression has been produced against the character of the 
British nation. 

Thé death of Monsieur Raymond, which happened a few 
months past, appeared likely to impair the influence of this corps 
at the Court of Hyderabad; and accordingly Azim ul Omra 
took that opportunity to resume the large Jaghire which had 
been allotted for the pay and maintenance of the corps, but an- 
other Frenchman of the name of Peron has succeeded to the 
command: his disposition is described to be violent and brutal ; 
and his principles do not appear to differ essentially from those 
of Raymond. The corps, as now constituted, forms the most 
considerable and only efficient part of the Nizam’s military 
establishment, and retains such a degree of ascendancy over the 
councils of the Nizam, as to be an object of serious alarm to 
Azim ul Omra.! This corps has been recruited, in the propor- 
tion of one-third of its total numbers from our territories, and 
from those of the Nabob of Arcot, and partly from deserters 
abandoning our service. 

Distinct proof has been given of the assiduity and success of 
the emissarics employed by Monsieur Baptiste (the second in 
command to Monsicur Peron, and stated to be of a very design- 
ing and artful character) for the purpose of exciting mutiny and 
sedition, and of inviting desertion amongst our sepoys stationed 
on the fronticr of the Nizam’s dominions. A considerable 
desertion of our troops took place in that quarter some time 
ago, and nearly 500 men, with several native officers, who 
deserted on that occasion, are now serving in Monsieur Peron’s 
corps. The repeated applications of our Resident for the 
surrender of these deserters have hitherto been frustrated by the 
prevailing influence of Monsicur Peron and of his army, and by 
the weakness of the Nizam’s Government, which Azim ul Omra 
has declared to be unable to control the overbearing spirit and 


* In addition to the command of this corps, M. Raymond had the 
entire conduct of the Nizam’s Ordnance, with an allowance of 50,000 
rupecs monthly ; the Ordnance has since been placed under the com- 
mand of M. Peron, and he derives great influence from so important 
& charge. 

D 


34 ARE A NUCLEUS OF SPREADING DANGER, 


formidable power of the French faction. After a protracted 
negociation, Azim ul Omra has at length, with much difficulty, 
and by an extraordinary effort, obtained the surrender of two 
Subadars, who were the principal contrivers of the desertion. 

Monsieur Peron and his officers maintain a correspondence 
with a faction at the Nizam’s Court denominated the Paugah 
party, being composed principally of the officers of his High- 
ness’s body guard of cavalry. ° 

The Paugah party has long been connected with Tippoo 
Sultaun, and is entirely adverse to Azim ul Omra, dnd to all 
the friends of the British interests at the Court of Hyderabad. 

It must not be forgotten, that in the year 1796, during the 
detention of Azim ul Omra at Poonah, the French faction, with 
the assistance of the Paugah party, prevailed upon the Nizam 
to dismiss the British detachment, and took such measures in 
concert with Tippoo (a large body of whose army marched in 
this crisis to the frontier of the Nizam’s dominions) as would 
have enabled them to dispose of the succession to the Musnud 
according to their pleasure, if the Nizam’s dcath had happencd 
in that critical conjuncture. At this period of time, the French 
contrived to obtain the grant of the large Jaghire, since resumed; 
this grant (which comprized the district of Maiduck, containing! 
2,142 square British miles, situated to the northward of Hyder- 
abad, and producing an annual revenue of cighteen lacs of 
rupees) may be considered as the first step towards the csta- 
blishment of a territorial revenue; and there can be no doubt 
that it would have led to that necessary foundation of European 
power in India, if the death of Monsicur Raymond had not 
enabled Azim ul Omra to frustrate the project. The French 
officers at Hyderabad maintain a direct correspondence with 
their countrymen in the service of Tippoo Sultaun, and of Scin- 
diah. The latest accounts from the Resident at Hyderabad 
state, that French officers and adventurers arrive continually at 
Hyderabad to reinforce Monsicur Peron’s corps, although the 
routes by which they gain access to the Deccan are as yet 
unknown, 

This French party, connected as it is with the prevailing 
factions in the Court of the Nizam, corresponding with Tippoo 
Sultaun, zealous in the cause of France, and actuated by a spirit 


1 The Company's Jaghire in the Carnatic contains 2,436 square 
British miles. 


AND THE BASE OF A FRENCH FACTION IN INDIA. 35 


of intrigue, which would lead it to mix in every distraction of 
the State, if not to originate internal confusion, must be con- 
sidered as a circumstance of positive weakness in the frame of 
the Government of Hyderabad. Azim ul Omra is fully aware 
of the magnitude of this evil, and dreads the growth of a party 
which he can no longer restrain within any bounds of modera- 
tion, and which already threatens to subvert his power, and to 
disturb the regular order of succession, if not to destroy the 
throne itself. With respect to our interests, and to the value of 
our defensive alliance under the treaty of Pangul, the change in 
the Nizam’s military establishments places him in a condition 
worse than that of absolute inefficiency, and renders the Court 
of Hyderabad a source of additional strength to our enemies, 
rather than of useful assistance to any branch of the Triple 
Alliance. The dangers to be apprehended from the existence 
of Peron’s corps are not to be estimated merely by the actual 
state of its discipline, of its numbers, or of its influence over 
the councils of the Nizam: our views of this danger must be 
extended beyond the present moment. The French army at 
Hyderabad must be considered not only as a powerful aid to 
the cause of France in the present crisis, but as the basis of a 
permanent French factian in India; on which, according to the 
opportunitics of fortune, and the variation of circumstances and 
of events, the activity of the enemy may establish a strength of 
the most formidable kind, either in peace or war. 

It requircs no labour of argument to prove the benefits which 
must be derived to the cause of France, even in time of peace, 
from the establishment of an army of 14,000 men, commanded 
by natives of France, in the heart of the dominions of one of our ° 
principal allics, in the vicinity of our most active enemy among 
the native powers, and on the borders of a vulnerable part of our 
own dominions. In the event of peace, no more convenicnt 
channel could be provided for the intrigues of France, no more 
uscful point of union for the numcrous adherents to her prin- 
ciples, and emissarics of her designs, And it cannot be doubted, 
that the natural effect of the unchecked and rapid growth of 
such an army at the Court of the Nizam must be, to detach that 
Court from our interests, and to fix it absolutely in those of our 
enemy. 

But in the event of a war with Tippoo Sultaun, or in the still 
More aggravated case of a war with him, aided by a French 

' force, what assistance can we expect from the Nizam, the main 
D2 


36 THE NIZAM’S COURT A DANGER, NOT A HELP, TO US. 


body of whose army is commanded by the correspondents of 
Tippoo, natives of France, distinguished by their zeal in the 
cause of that country, and united with the whole body of French 
adventurers now established in India? = 

Under such circumstances, the force of the Nizam would be- 
come useless and even dangerous to us, precisely in proportion to 
the exigency of the case, in which we should require its services. 

If the French troops of the Nizam did not afford Tippoo open 
assistance, at least they could not be brought into the ficld 
against him without the utmost danger to our cause; nor could 
they be suffered to remain in the Deccan during the continuance 
of the contest, unless checked by the presence of an equally 
powerful force, which must, in that case, be diverted from the 
objects of the war, and must operate as a positive diminution of 
our effective strength in the field. It appears however nearly 
certain, that in the present weak state of the Nizam’s Govern- 
ment, the French corps in his service would openly join Tippoo 
Sultaun, and by a sudden blow, endeavour to seize the Nizam’s 
\territories, and to sccure them to the dominion of France, under 
an alliance offensive and defensive with Tippoo Sultaun} This 
danger is aggravated by the present position of Scindiah’s army, 
and by the disposition and present views of that Chicf; he now 

ntertains a large body of infantry in his service under the com- 
aah of a French officer; and it might be expected that he 
would readily engage with Tippoo Sultaun (with whom he is 
supposed to have lately opened a negociation) and with the 
French, upon the conditions of a partition of the territories and 
authority of the Peishwa and of the Nizam. The junction which 
might thus be effected by the French officers in the several 
armies of the Nizam, of Scindiah, and of Tippoo, might establish 
the power of France in India upon the ruins of the States of 
Poonah and of the Deccan. Under all these circumstances 
therefore it is evident, that the Court of Hyderabad in its present 
condition (whatever may be its disposition to use every effort 
for our assistance) is not only disqualified from co-operating with 
us as an ally against Tippoo, but furnishcs him with powerful 
means of prosecuting his designs against us, and offers every 
temptation to the ambition of France. 

Such being the condition of the Nizam, it will be found that 
the Peishwa, who forms another branch of the triple alliance 
against Tippoo Sultaun, is not more able to fulfil his defensive 
engagements with us. 


THE PEISHWA, TOO, HAS LOST ALL POWER. 37 


The precise situation in which the Mahratta Empire stood 
after the peace of Seringapatam, was the most favourable to 
our interests: the séveral co-estates were then so equally 
balanced as to prevent any danger of that degree of union which 
might concenter the formidable force of the whole in one con- 
solidated mass, either against the British possessions, or against 
any other established power in India; nor had any one member 
of the Empire attained such a degree of strength as to be able 
singly to encounter our force. On the other hand, the Peishwa, 
the acknowledged and constitutional head of this extensive 
confederation, aided by the abilities of his Minister Nana Fur- 
Navese, possessed a sufficient influence over several of the 
leading Chiefs to render him a respectable ally, and to furnish 
him with the means of bringing a considerable force into the 
field. 

From the period of the peace of Seringapatam to that of the 
death of Mahda Row, the danger appears to have been, that the 
address of Nana might have drawn too great a weight into the 
scale of the Peishwa’s power, and have enabled the Government 
of Poonah to wield the united force of the whole Mahratta 
Empire. At the battle of Kurdlah the Peishwa was assisted 
against the Nizam by the contingents of most of the confederate 
chieftains of the Mahratta Empire; and the power of the Nizam 
was greatly endangered in that state of the Peishwa’s authority 
and force. But Nana’s ambition or jealousy having induced 
him, upon the sudden death of Mahda Row, to attempt the 
disturbance of the regular order of succession by intruding an 
adopted child upon the throne, opened the way to those suc- 
cessive intrigues and revolutions which for some time past have 
distracted the Mahratta Empire. Without pursuing the various 
changes and convulsions of the Government of Poonah during 
the period described, it is sufficient to observe, that their pro- 
gress naturally tended to weaken the Sovereign power, and has 
terminated in the imprisonment of Nana, in the ruin of his 
influence, and in the suspension of the power and authority of 
the reigning Pcishwa, under circumstances which menace the 
abolition of his office. 

Scindiah, who in this changeable scene has altcrnately taken 
part with the present Pcishwa and with Nana, has at length 
Overpowercd both, and has been for some time past so far 
master of the Government of Poonah, that the Pcishwa could 
not, in his present condition, command the co-operation of any 


38 TIPPOO HAS BEEN NURSING HIS STRENGTH, 


considerable body of the Mahratta chieftains, nor afford us any 
assistance against Tippoo Sultaun. 

During the course of the events which have contributed to 
veaken and degrade the Governments of Poonah and Hyder- 
bad, their mutual animosities and opposition of interests have 
isen to such a height as to render all co-operation between them 
itterly impracticable. The cfficiency of our system of defensive 
lliance against Tippoo Sultaun has thercfore been impaired, 
iot only by the respective weakness of each of our allics, but 
»y the difficulty of uniting them in any common view or joint 
»peration, 

In the meanwhile Tippoo Sultaun has enjoyed a state of 
nternal tranquillity nearly uninterrupted. While our allies 
nave been distracted and exhausted by faction, rebcllion, revo- 
lution and war, he has been employed in improving the dis- 
cipline of his armics, and in repairing the vigour of his re- 
sources; he has .alternately endeavoured, but without success, to 
gain the Peishwa and the Nizam to his cause; he however pos- 
sesses a considerable influence at the Court of Hyderabad, in 
consequence of his connections with the corps of Raymond, and 
with other factions adverse to the British interests at that 
Court. It is also known, that he despatched an embassy to 
Zemaun Shah, whose design of invading Hindostan has becn 
recently announced in a formal manner to this Government, 
and to the Nabob Vizier. 

That Zemaun Shah really entertains the romantic project 
of invading Hindostan cannot admit of a doubt; this was the 
opinion of the late Governor General, in which I entirely 
concur. 

It has been supposed that Zemaun Shah, in his late march 
towards Hindostan, was recalled from Lahore into his own 
dominions, either by some domestic dissention, or by the appre- 
hension of an attack from some of the States in the ncighbour- 
hood of his Kingdom. And it was hoped that the same causes 
might for some time obstruct the execution of his declared pro- 
ject, but the last despatches from the Acting Resident at the 
Court of Scindiah state a report, that Zemaun Shah is now 
relieved from all apprchensions, either of internal rebellion or of 
foreign invasion; and his inclination as well as his ability, to 
move his army towards the fronticr of Hindostan, at the close 
of the rainy season, are now universally credited. It must be 
recollected, that upon a recent occasion, Zemaun Shah advanced 


FAVOURED BY ZEMAUN SHAH AND SCINDIAH. 39 


to Lahore without meeting any formidable opposition from the 
Seiks; although it had formerly been asserted, that the country 
of the Seiks would always prove an insuperable obstacle to his 
progress. Between the country of the Seiks and the frontier 
of Oude no barrier exists to check the motions of the Shah, 
excepting the power of Scindiah. The dominions of Scindiah 
at present are so weakened by internal dissentions as to be in 
a state nearly defenceless, while Scindiah continues at Poonah 
with the main body of his army, and while his tributary Chiefs, 
remaining in Hindostan, are notoriously disaffected to his cause, 
and are prepared to seize any favourable opportunity of anni- 
hilating his power. 

Zemaun Shah cannot be ignorant of these advantages, and: if 
'they should tempt him to invade Hindostan, the diversion of 
our force which would be occasioned by such an event, would 
offer the most favourable opportunity to an attack from Tippoo 
upon the Carnatic. It is not improbable that the object of the 
intercourse between Tippoo and Zemaun Shah was, (on the part 
of the former at least) some such plan of joint operation. 

The present position of Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s army, operates 
as a double advantage to the cause of Tippoo. The absence of 
Scindiah from his dominions in Hindostan, invites the invasion 
of Zemaun Shah and favours its success; while the presence of 
Scindiah’s army at Poonah holds both our allics in check. The 
weight of Tippoo’s power in the general balance, must therefore 
be considered to have received an augmentation, not only by 
the declared projects of Zemaun Shah, and by the possibility of 
their (at least limited) success, but by the operations of Scindiah 
in addition to all the other events which have concurred to 
impair the efficiency of our defensive alliance. 

In the mean while, the Government of Fort St. George, whose 
peculiar duty it is to watch the operations of Tippoo Sultaun, 
and to communicate to me every circumstance relating to the 
growth of his powcr, have distinctly stated in their Ictter of the 
roth of July, that ‘his resources are more prompt than our 
own, and that a great part of his army is supposed to have long 
becn in a state of ficld equipment.’ So sensible indeed is the 
Government of Fort St. George to the terror of Tippoo Sultaun’s 
arms, as to be apprehensive of making any effort for resisting 
their progress, lest Tippoo should anticipate the tardiness of our 
preparations by the rapidity of his own, and should overrun the 
Carnatic, before our army could even move for its defence. 


40 REDUCTIO AD ABSURDUM OF MADRAS VIEW. 


It is difficult to describe the pain and regret, which that letter 
from the Government of Fort St. George occasioned in my mind; 
nor can I conceive that it is calculated to raise any other emo- 
tions in the mind of any friend to the prosperity of the British 
interests, or to the honour of the British name in India. If the 
facts and arguments stated in that letter be correct, it must now 
be admitted, that the glorious successes of the last war in 
Mysore, the wisdom which balanced the relative interests and 
forces of the belligerent powers at the conclusion of Peace, and 
finally the great expense incurred by the Company in the pro- 
gressive increase of their military establishments on the coast, 
have terminated in no better result, than to render Tippoo’s 
power absolutely invincible, and to place the disposal of our fate 
in his hands. For if the sentiments of the Government of Fort 
St. George, be founded upon a just estimate of the relative con- 
ditions of Tippoo Sultaun and of the Company in India, he 
possesses the ready means of attack, while we cannot venture 
to resort even to those of defence; but, with a full knowledge 
of his hostility, of his offensive alliance publicly concluded with 
the enemy, and of his continual and advanced preparations for 
war; we must submit to remain unarmed, because any attempt 
to counteract his design might possibly accelerate its exccution. 
This argument against the prudence of preparing for our defence 
would become stronger every day in proportion to the progress 
of Tippoo’s hostile preparations ; until at length, we should be 
reduced to the alternative either of implicit submission, or of 
incurring a much greater risk than any, which can now be appre- 
hended from assembling our defensive force. Although I am 
not disposed to adopt the sentiments of the Government of Fort 
St. George on this subject, I acknowledge with great concern 
those defects in the military establishments on the coast, which 
will not admit any large proportion of that army to move for 
several months; those defects certainly constitute so many 
additional advantages in the scale of Tippoo’s power; and in 
this view, they become objects of the most scrious consideration, 
and form a principal feature of the danger which it is the duty 
of this Government to avert, by counsels of another spirit, than 
that of despondency, and by measures of another character, than 
that of inaction, or of implicit submission to the will of the 
enemy. 

I have now examined the principal causes of that danger, as 
they are to be traced in the variable course of events since the 


SUMMARY OF OUR CRITICAL, NOT ALARMING, STATE, 41 


peace of Seringapatam; the nature of our actual situation, 
arising from the combined effects of these causes, will best 
appear, by a summary review of the facts which I have already 
enumerated in detail. 

Tippoo Sultaun having manifested the most hostile intentions 
towards us, possesses an army of which a considerable portion 
_ is now in readiness to take ‘the field for purposes of offence; he 
has increased the number of his French officers, and has solicited, 
and may possibly receive further assistance from the French ; 
he may also receive assistance from the several corps com- 
manded by French officers in the service of the Nizam, of 
Scindiah, and of many other native powers. He may be assisted 
by the invasion of Zemaun Shah, and by the-direct co-operation 
of Scindiah. On the other hand, our protecting force upon the 
coast of Coromandel cannot be put in motion within a shorter 
period than three, (or according to the Adjutant General 
Lieutenant Colonel Close, than six) months, even for the purpose 
of defending the Carnatic; our allies in the’ mean while, are 
utterly unable to fulfil their defensive engagements with us; 
the Peishwa being depressed and kept in check by the intrusion 
of Scindiah, and the Nizam by the vicinity of that chieftain’s 
army, and by the overbearing influence of an army commanded 
by French officers, and established in the centre of the Deccan. 
_ While we remain in this situation, without a soldicr prepared 
to take the field in the Carnatic, and without an ally to assist 
our operations in the event of an attack from Tippoo, we leave 
the fate of the Carnatic to the discretion of Tippoo; we suffer 
the cause of France to acquire hourly accessions of strength in 
every quarter of India; we abandon our allies the Nizam and 
the Pcishwa to the mercy of Tippoo and of Scindiah in con- 
junction with the French; and we leave to France the .ready 
means of obtaining a large territorial revenue, and a permanent 
establishment in the Deccan, founded upon the destruction of 
our alliances. 

Under all these circumstances the situation of the British 
empire in India is, without doubt, extremely critical, but in my 
opinion, by no means alarming. For in the very difficulties of 
our actual situation are to be found the means, not only of 
averting the danger of the present moment, but of providing 
permanent security against the future return of a similar crisis. 
A common apprchension of the designs of Scindiah has for- 
tunately produced an union of interests between the Govern. 


42 WE MUST REVIVIFY THE TRIPLE ALLIANCE, 


ments of Poonah and Hyderabad; and notwithstanding some 
occasional symptoms of that spirit of duplicity and intrigue 
which marks the character of every Asiatic Court, Azim ul 
Omra and the ministers of the Peishwa scem to be sincerely 
convinced, that a renewal of amicable engagements between the 
Peishwa and the Nizam is equally necessary to the safety of 
both. On the one hand it appears, that the Peishwa cannot 
expect to be speedily emancipated, or effectually defended from 
the undue influence of Scindiah, without the assistance of the 
Nizam; and on the other hand, it is evident, that the restoration 
of the just power and authority of the Pcishwa would operate 
as a constant restraint on the designs of Scindiah, of Tippoo, 
and of the French against the independence of the Court of 
Hyderabad. Under these circumstances it appeared to me that 
neither the Peishwa nor the Nizam would be likely to view with 
jealousy any assistance which we might think it advisable to 
afford to either, for the purpose of reviving the triple alliance 
against Tippoo on its original basis, and of cnabling the con- 
tracting partics to fulfil their respective engagements. This 
expectation constituted a fundamental principle of my instruc- 
tions to the Residents at Poonah and Hyderabad, of the 8th of 
July. Their subsequent correspondence has furnished abundant 
proof, that my view of the disposition of the two courts was not 
erroneous ; since it appears, that while I was occupied in framing 
a system of measures for uniting the Nizam and the Pcishwa 
upon the firm ground of their reciprocal interests, a treaty was 
actually concluded between those two powers at Poonah, with 
a view to the same object; the ratification of this treaty on the 
part of the Nizam, has been delayed by Azim ul Omra; but 
there appears every reason to hope, that the interposition of our 
arbitration will accommodate every point of difference. Our 
arbitration has already been earnestly solicited by both parties, 
and I am persuaded that it will be both acceptable and 
efficacious whenever it shall be interposed. 

The increasing alarm excited at the Court of Ilyderabad, by 
the intemperate conduct of M. Piron and of the French army, 
would dispose Azim ul Omra to receive with gratitude any offer 
of assistance towards the destruction of so powerful and dan- 
gcerous a faction; and the existing jcalousics between the French 
officers, would facilitate the dismission of the corps. Azim ul 
Omra has recently expressed in the strongest terms his wish of 
being enabled, by our assistance, to accomplish this most de- 


WE MAY HOPE TO MANAGE SCINDIAH. 43 


sirable measure. The only obstacles which appear likely to 
occur to a general accommodation, are the impetuosity and 
violence of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, whose continuance in his 
present position would operate as an effectual assistance to Tip- 
poo, and would preclude the possibility of restoring either the 
Peishwa or the Nizam to any degree of efficiency or considera- 
tion. But the absence of Scindiah from his own dominions, and 
the ungovernable excesses of his temper, (however to be lamented 
as having contributed to those events which have impaired the 
power of our allies,) have at the same time weakened the sources 
of his own power, have occasioned a spirit of faction and revolt 
in his own dominions, and have disgusted all the ancient friends 
and connections of his family, together with every respectable 
adherent to his cause. His violence towards the female relations 
of his family has raised a considerable party against him 
amongst his own followers; and his signal treachery in the im- 
prisonment of Nana, from which he hoped to derive the free use 
of Nana’s treasure, has terminated in rendering that resource in- 
accessible to him, at the very moment when it is most indis- 
pensable to his necessities. He is therefore now surrounded byan 
army clamorous for pay, is destitute of pecuniary resource, and is 
unsupported by any one respectable friend. His principal minister, 
a person of considerable experience, and bearing the highest 
character of any of his followers, has expressed to the Resident 
| at Poonah in the most distinct terms an entire disapprobation of 
Scindiah’s late conduct, and an earnest wish for an accommoda- 
tion between Scindiah and the Pcishwa through our mediation, 
and for the peaceable return of Scindiah to his dominions in Hin- 
dostan; Scindiah himself has manifested no disinclination to re- 
ceive the advice of the Resident at Poonah ; whose discretion has 
hitherto limited the extent of his interference; but from what has 
already passcd, it is reasonable to hope, that Scindiah, in the pre- 
sent distressed state of his affairs, will give a favorable attention 
to any just and moderate proposition, urged with the full autho- 
rity of his Government. In the mean while, the threatened in- 
vasion of Zemaun Shah offers a new motive to recal Scindiah 
to the protection of his own dominions, and he must be sensible 
not only that his sccurity, in the event of such an invasion, must 
depend in a great measure on the co-operation of the British 
troops, but that in the present disturbed condition of his posses- 
sions and of his army, we hold his fate in our hands. 
In this posture of affairs, any opposition to our interference 


44 AN ENGLISH CORPS TO REPLACE THE FRENCH, 


for the re-establishment of our alliances, would be cqually 
ineffectual and unjustifiable on the part of Scindiah ; and 
various considerations of policy and interest will concur to render 
him cautious of taking any step, which might afford us just 
cause of offence. The last despatches from Poonah afford a 
hope that Nana Furnaveese and the Pcishwa may find it their 
interest to forget their mutual animosity; any accommodation 
between them would lead greatly to facilitate an arrangement, 
embracing the respective interests of the Peishwa, of Scindiah, 
and of the Nizam| 

Such are the circumstances of the present moment, which 
appear to me to favor the exccution of that comprehensive 
system of precaution and defence demanded by the exigency of 
our actual situation. The mode in which I have endeavoured to 
carry this system into effect has been suggested by the following 
considerations. The Court of Hyderabad has repeatedly and 
carnestly solicited an increase of the British detachment in the 
service of the Nizam, under an assurance that the French corps 
of Piron would be dismissed from his Highness’s service imme- 
diately upon the arrival of the additional British force. This 
proposition has hitherto been embarrassed by conditions of a 
nature incompatible with our engagements at Poonah, and the late 
dissentions between the Nizam and the Pcishwa have precluded 
all hope of any amicable adjustment of this difficulty. It was 
therefore thought advisable by the late Governor-General in 
Council to resort to the expedient of encouraging the introduction 
of British adventurers into the service of the Nizam, for the pur- 
pose of counterbalancing in some measure the influence of the 
French army at Hyderabad. With this view, the corps com- 
manded by Mr. Finglass has received the protection and en- 
couragement of the Acting Resident, and has been augmented to 
the number of 8,000 men. 

The policy of this expedicnt always appcared to me very 
doubtful, and I have entertained serious apprehensions that the 
measure might ultimately furnish additional recruits to the cause 
of France, instead of counteracting her influence. In the most 
favorable view, however, this expedient could only be considered 
as a palliative of the evil: it could not be expected that such 
a force as that of Mr. Finglass would enable the Nizam to dis- 
band the corps of Piron; it must therefore have been evident at 
all times, that nothing Iess than a considerable and permanent 
increase of our regular subsidiary force at Hyderabad could em- 


<{ND SECURE SECUNDER JAH’S SUCCESSION, 45 


power the Nizam to extricate himself from the hands of the 
French faction, so solidly established in his dominions. 

I have already stated my reasons for thinking that the increase 
of the British detachment at Hyderabad would no longer afford 
any cause of jealousy to the Peishwa; and under all these cir- 
cumstances, I have availed myself of the late conduct of Tippoo 
and of Scindiah, to propose that measure, subject in the first 
instance to the previous consent of the Court of Poonah: I have 
accompanied this proposition with a condition, that the arbi- 
tration of this Government shall be accepted for the final adjust- 
ment of the points of difference still remaining between the two 
Courts. These points are now so few, and the requisitions of 
the Court of Hyderabad of a nature so just and moderate, that 
T entertain a confident expectation of effecting an accommodation 
upon principles equally advantageous to both partics. 

I have already observed that one of the most dangerous cir- 
cumstances attending the establishment of the French party at 
Hyderabad, is the influence which they are likely to possess in 
directing the succession to the throne, whenever it shall become 
vacant by the death of the Nizam. 

Secunder Jah, the eldest son of the Nizam, would be the 
natural successor, unless the regular order of succession should 
be disturbed by domestic faction, foreign intrigue, or force ; for, 
although priority of birth may not be considered to give the 
same absolute and exclusive right to succession in India as it 
does in Europe, it is invariably deemcd the strongest title, 
and is rarely superseded cxcepting in case of disaffection, or of 
positive disqualification. So far from these or any other ob- 
jections being applicable to the title of Secunder Jah, it is well 
known that the Nizam has given the strongest indications of his 
favorable intentions towards Secunder Jah, by entrusting that 
Prince with the custody of his Seal, and by empowering him to 
perform certain acts which are reserved exclusively for the 

Sovereign. This admission to the personal exercise of a portion 
of the sovereign authority during the life of the Nizam is deemed 

‘ equivalent to a virtual nomination to the thronc; and there is 
No reason to suppose that the Nizam will nominate any of his 
younger sons to the exclusion of the heir apparent, unless his 
Highness should be prevailed upon in the weakness of his last 
Moments to commit an act of such flagrant impolicy and in- 
justice. 

Secunder Jah is connected by marriage with the family of 


46 WITHOUT AWAITING THE PEISHWA’S ASSENT, 
@ 


Azim ul Omra, and his establishment upon the throne would 
give great additional security to the British interests at the 
Court of Hyderabad: on the other hand, none of the younger 
sons can hope to reach the throne by any other assistance than 
that of the French party, and of Tippoo Sultaun. Sufficient 
proof has been stated of the interest which Tippoo and the 
French take in the exclusion of Secunder Jah, and of the 
attempts which they have already made to interfere in governing 
the succession. These attempts may be renewed, and their 
success would necessarily involve the destruction of Azim ul 
Omra and of Secunder Jah, together with the consequent anni- 
hilation of the British influence at Hyderabad; all hope of 
re-establishing the balance of power in India as it existed at the 
peace of Seringapatam, would then be precluded ; the countries of 
the Nizam would in such an event become in effect a dependency 
of France, and the partizans of that nation, in conjunction with 
Tippoo, and with the body of their countrymen lately received 
into his pay, would have the means of endangering the British 
power in India. 

Under all these circumstances, the same principles which 
suggested the necessity of increasing the British detachment 
at Hyderabad, demanded that it should be employed to support 
the succession of Sccunder Jah, as being essentially connected 
with the permanency of our influence at Hyderabad, and with 
the effectual exclusion of the interference of Tippoo and of 
France. 

I have therefore authorised the Resident at Ilyderabad to 
employ the British troops in this service, if thcir assistance 
should hereafter become necessary; but I am persuaded that 
the mere presence of our force, accompanied by the knowledge 
of my firm determination to support the regular order of suc- 
cession, will preclude every movement either of forcign or do- 
mestic opposition. 

The arrangements proposed for the service of the Nizam 
will be very incomplete, unless connected with the restoration 
of the Peishwa to a due degree of authority and power, and 
preceded by the cordial approbation of the Court of Poonah. 
But the great danger to be averted is the growth of the influence 
of Tippoo and of France in India. It is therefore evident, that 
the failure of the proposed plan at Poonah would increase the 
necessity of providing for the safety of the Nizam, and of de- 
stroying the French party at his Court. If, therefore, the 


THE NIZAM TO EXCLUDE TUE FRENCH, FOR EVER. 47 


Peishwa should either refuse his assent to the propositions to 
be made to him, or if from the success of Scindiah’s operations, 
or from any other cause, those measures which relate to the 
Court of Poonah should be frustrated, I have still deemed it 
advisable to direct the Acting Resident at Hyderabad to carry 
into effect the increase of the British detachment, and such 
other parts of my instructions as may appear practicable, re- 
serving always to the Pcishwa the power of acceding hereafter 
to any treaty which we may conclude with the Nizam, and 
continuing with that view the restrictive terms of our present 
subsidiary engagements with the latter, as far as they relate to 
the interests of the Peishwa. The dismission of the French 
corps at Hyderabad would not fully answer the views with 
which I have proposed that measure, if the officers or European 
privates were permitted to enter into the service of any other 
native power, although I should think them less dangerous in 
any service than in that of the Nizam. I have endeavoured not 
only to secure the expulsion of the French from Hyderabad, 
but also their immediate return to their native country. I have 
therefore required that the French officers and privates should | 
be delivered up to the Government of Fort St. George, in order 
that they may be immediately conveyed to Europe; the Nizam 
is under no engagements either with the Government of France 
or with the French officers to continue them in his service, and 
he possesses the full right to dismiss them whenever he shall 
think fit. The exorbitant power which M. Piron and his army 
have acquired at Hydcrabad, as well as their immodcrate abuse 
of it, will justify the Nizam in taking whatever measures may 
appear most effectual for the purpose of securing himself against 
a faction so formidable not only to the independence of his 
Government, but to the safety of his own person, and to the 
existence of his throne. With the same view, I have made it 
a preliminary condition of the whole plan, that the Nizam, his 
heirs and successors shall for ever exclude the French from their 
armies and dominions. 

The corps of Mr, Finglass, after the establishment of a con- 
siderable British force at Hyderabad, will no longer be liable 
to the full force of the objections which I have stated against 
the policy of encouraging such a body of adventurers in the 
service of the Nizam; this question, however, does not require 
an immediate decision ; we shall possess ample means of deciding 
it according to our discretion, if our propositions to the Court of 


48 PROPOSALS OFFERED TO THE PEISHWA, 


Hyderabad should be attended with success. The consent of 
the Nizam to such parts of the proposed arrangements as relate 
to the re-establishment of the Government of Poonah is required 
as a necessary preliminary to the increase of the British detach- 
ment at Hyderabad ; my intentions being to také no step in the 
first instance at cither Court without the full knowledge and 
concurrence of the other; a principle, the strict observance of 
which to every degree of practicable extent, appears to ime to be 
the only effectual mode of removing all causes of jealousy, of 
uniting the confidence of both parties, and of bringing them to 
a dispassionate consideration of their mutual intcrests. 

The parts of the proposed arrangement which relate to the 
re-establishment of the Government of Poonah were suggested 
by COlonel Palmer’s letter of 1st of June, in which he states 
‘that the authority of the Peishwa would be restored by the 
appearance of a strong British force at Poonah, and that Scindiah, 
_ under the circumstances of Tippoo’s recent aggression, could on 
| no just pretence object to such a movement of our troops, nor 
in his present condition be able to oppose it.’ 

The whole tenor of the subsequent advices from Poonah tended 
to confirm this opinion: for while it appeared evidently im- 
possible that the authority of the Peishwa could be restored other- _ 
wise than by foreign assistance, there seemed to be every rational 
ground of expectation, that the mcre appearance of our troops 
would induce all the leading Chieftains of the Mahratta empire 
to unite in support of the Peishwa, and that such an event would 
not be unacceptable even to the followers of Scindiah. The 
Peishwa himself has earnestly solicited the aid of a body of our 
troops, and has expressed the fullest sense of the necessity, as 
well as reliance on the efficacy of such a measure for the restora- 
tion of his authority and for the protection of his person. 

On the other hand, the danger of the Peishwa increased from 
day to day; the assistance which he had solicited from the Nizam 
was not likcly to reach him before his fate had been decided ; 
and the expectation even of any assistance from the Court of 
Hyderabad, notwithstanding the conclusion of the late treaty, 
appeared to rest on a very precarious foundation. In this 
situation, the direct interposition of this Government by moving 
a detachment of troops to Poonah was the only measure on 
which we could rely with any degree of certainty for averting the 
immediate destruction of our interests at that Court. 

The Resident at Poonah was therefore authorized to require 


COURSE TO BE TAKEN WITH SCINDIAH. 49 


-a detachment of troops from Bombay, but previously to so 
decided a step, it was deemed proper that. the Resident should 
require of the Peishwa his consent to the increase of the British 
detachment at Hyderabad, his acceptance of our arbitration 
between the Courts of Poonah and Hyderabad, and his exclusion 
of the French from his armies and dominions. 

With a view of securing the lasting benefit of this arrangement 
at the Court of Poonah, it is intended that a proposal shall be 
made to the Peishwa to enter into permanent subsidiary engage- 
ments with us of a similar nature and extent with those which 
shall be concluded at the Court of Hyderabad. . 

With the same view, the Resident at Poonah has been directed 
to take such measures as may appear to him most likely to 
interest Nana Furnaveese in the success of this general arsange- 
ment of the affairs of the two Courts. 

The last despatches from Poonah afford every reason to hope, 
that the abilities and experience of Nana may be successfully 
employed by Colonel Palmer in effecting the return of Scindiah 
to his own gominions, and the consequent restoration of the 
Peishwa. 

The impediments which Scindiah opposes to the success of 
this arrangement will probably disappear whenever the union of 
the two Courts, cemented by our interposition, shall become 
a matter of public notoricty. 

The treasure of Nana is the only resource in which Scindiah 
can find the means of appeasing the clamours of his discontented 
army; and Colonel Palmer will avail himself of any favourable 
opportunity of connecting the interests of Nana with those of 
Scindiah and of the Pcishwa, in such a manner as shall enable 
Scindiah to retire with safety into his own dominions, without af- 
fording him the power of effecting any other military movement. 

Being desirous of conciliating the real interests of all partics, 
I have instructed Coloncl Palmer to make the most amicable 

propositions to Scindiah, and to urge the policy of his return to 

‘his own dominions by pointing out their actual danger during 
his absence, by offering our co-operation against the menaced 
invasion of Zemaun Shah, and our mediation with the Courts of 
Poonah and Hyderabad ; and I have made the consent of those 
Courts to our mediation of their respective differences with 
Scindiah an indispensable preliminary of the arrangements 
which regard the restoration of their own independence. Scin- 
diah cannot reject our propositions on any ground which would 

E 


59 NECESSITY OF ASSEMBLING THE COAST ARMY. 


not immediately place him in the rank of a declared enemy to 
us, and of an avowed auxiliary to Tippoo Sultaun. 

In this case, therefore, we must have recourse to compulsion ; 
and I have authorized the Resident at Poonah to use it in the 
last and, I trust improbable, extremity. 

Such are the measures which I have proposed, with a view to 
restore the efficiency of our alliances, and to check the growth 
of the French party in the Deccan. 

I have already stated the reasons which convinced me (against 
the opinion of the Government of Fort St. George) that the 
assembling the army on the coasts of Coromandel and Malabar, 
and at Bombay, was absolutely indispensable to the defence of 
the Carnatic, under the circumstance of Tippoo’s declared 
designs and acknowledged preparations for war. 

The fatal policy of neglecting to kecp pace with the forward- 
ness of the enemy’s equipments has been felt more than once on 
the coast of Coromandcl, and, I repeat it, I cannot, consistently 
with any sentiment of duty, consent to rest the sccurity of the 
Carnatic, in the present crisis, on any other foyndation than 
a state of active and early preparation for war. But if I had 
looked only to the success of those measures which are now 
depending at the Courts of Poonah and Iyderabad (measures 
essentially involving our present and future means of checking 
the implacable enmity of Tippoo), I should on that ground 
alone have proposed to assemble the army upon the coast of 
Coromandel, at Bombay, and upon the coast of Malabar. 

It is impossible to suppose that Tippoo would not employ 
every effort to prevent the revival of our defensive alliances ; and 
it would, therefore, be nearly certain that his advanced state of 
preparation for war, and his renewed conncction with the French, 
would tempt him to interfere in the affairs of the Nizam and of 
the Peishwa, and to assist the views of Scindiah at Poonah, and 
of M. Piron’s army at Hyderabad. It therefore became neces- 
sary to check the motions of Tippoo Sultaun, by assembling 
an army upon his frontier during the continuance of our ne- 
gociations with our allics. 

I have advertced, in the course of this Minute, to those defects 
in the constitution of the army upon the coast which have 
impeded its carly movement in the present critical conjuncture. 
The measures which I have proposed for the correction of those 
defects are absolutely necessary, in my judgment, to our future 
security in the Carnatic. The detail of those measures will 


HOW VIGOUR AND ECONOMY MAY BE COMBINED, 5L 


appear in my Minute in the Secret Department of the 2oth 
July, and in the letter to the Government of Fort St. George 
of the same date. 

I am fully aware of the expense to be incurred in establishing 
any improved system, which shall enable the army on the coast 
to keep pace with the promptitude of Tippoo’s resources, and 

1 to move with’an alacrity and expedition equal to his. « 

If, however, the proposed increase of our subsidiary engage- 
ments at Hyderabad should take place, it is my intention that 
the whole detachment, consisting of three regiments, should be 
furnished from the establishment of Fort St. George. The force 
thus stationed at Hyderabad will afford an effectual security to 
the northern Circars against Tippoo Sultaun, or against any 
other foreign enemy. The duty of the Circars will then require 
no larger a proportion of troops than may be sufficient to main- . 
tain the internal police and good order of the country. It will 
not therefore be requisite, in the event of peace, to raise more 
than one regiment at Fort St. George, to replace those serving 
with the Nizam, This arrangement will operate as a saving of 
the expense of two regiments upon the establishment at Fort 
St. George, and will furnish a fund at least adequate to the per- 
manent charges of the ntw establishments of artillery, draft 
cattle and grain, which our recent experience has proved to be 
indispensable for the purpose of enabling the army on the coast 
to take the ficld expeditiously, on any sudden emergency. 

In this view, the restoration of our defensive alliances against 
Tippoo is essentially connected with the improvement of our 
system of defence in the Carnatic; and the assistance afforded to 
the Nizam will become (without any increase of expensc) the source 
of additional vigour and activity to our army upon the coast. 

Deeply as I lament the obstacles which have prevented us 
from striking an instantancous blow against the possessions of 
Tippoo, I expect to derive considerable advantage from the 
success of that system of precaution and defence which I have 
been compelled to substitute in place of an immicdiate war. 

The cnlargement of our subsidiary engagements at the Court 
of Hyderabad, combined with the establishment of similar en- 
gagements at the Court of Poonah, will become a great aug- 
mentation of our strength, attended by no increase of charge, 
and possibly by a diminution of our military expenses.’ 

The two detachments will form a considerable army, stationed 
on the most vulnerable part of Tippoo Sultaun’s fronticr, in 

E 2 


52 ADVANTAGES OF THE SUBSIDIARY PLAN. 


a position which will at all times facilitate our approach to his 
capital, by securing the protection of our convoys of provisions. 
A force so stationed will operate as a perpetual restraint upon 
any movements which Tippoo might be disposed to make towards 
the frontier, either of the Carnatic, of the Northern Circars, or of 
Malabar. It will also impede any co-operation between the 
armies of Scindiah and of Tippoo; and will induce the former 
to remain within his own dominions, where his motions will 
again be checked by the vicinity of our army on the frontier 
of Oude. 

In such circumstances, it must always be the interest of 
Scindiah to cultivate our friendship in preference to that of the 
French, or of any native power. Thus he may become an useful 
ally to us in the event of Zemaun Shah’s approach to the frontier 
of Hindostan; and the prospect of that event must render him 
anxious to secure our protection. On the other hand, the success 
of his present ambitious and unjustifiable views against the 
Pcishwa would fix him in the interests of Tippoo Sultaun and 
of France, with the accession of whatever strength he might be 
able to collect from the remnants of the empire which he would 
have , overthrown. 

The influence which we shall naturally derive, both at Ilyder- 
abad and Poonah, from the presence of so large a body of our 
troops, will enable us to prevent any aggression on cither side, 
by the constant interposition of our good offices with both 
partics, to restrain every symptom of a revival of their former 
spirit of jealousy and contention. © 

Our endeavours may then be successfully directed to the 
desirable object of preserving unimpaired the strength and 
resources of the two powers, on whose co-operation we must rely 
for assistance in the event of any war with the state of Mysore; 
and while we prevent our allics from weakening, themselves by 
repcated contests, we may expect that such an interference in 
the disputes of the native powers, so far from tending to 
foment divisions, and to occasion war, will prove the best security 
for the general tranquillity of India, as well as the most solid 
pledge of our disposition to preserve that blessing from inter- 
ruption. 

However comprehensive and intricate the proposed system 
may appear at the first view, it will soon be evident to all the 
powers of India, that the fundamental principle of our policy is 
invariably repugnant to every scheme of conquest, extension of 


OUR AIMS PURELY DEFENSIVE, AND PACIFIC, 53 


dominion, aggrandiscment, or ambition, either for ourselves or 
for our allics./ Consistently with this principle, it is our right 
and duty to restore the vigour and efficiency of our defensive 
alliances; but beyond the limits of this principle, we entertain 
no project of altering the condition, of reducing or of raising the 
power of any established state in Indiaf On the other hand, the 
same principle justifies and demands’ our firm resistance to the 
intrusion of any foreign power which shall attempt to acquire 
a preponderant influence in the scale of Indian politics, to the 
prejudice of our defensive alliances, and of our just interests, 
The establishment of our subsidized force at Poonah and Hy- 
derabad will afford éffectual means of guarding, not only against 
any such intrusion, but against the undue growth of any native 
power. While we possess so formidable a force in the centre 
of India, no such event can happen without our knowledge and 
consent. 

The last question which remains for consideration is, what 
shall be the nature and extent of that demand of satisfaction 
which we shall make from Tippoo Sultaun, whenever we shall 
have completed the system now depending at the Courts of our 
Allies, and shall have brought our army in the Carnatic to a 
state of preparation for the ficld? 

It is evident from the facts which have come under my obser- 
vation in the course of this discussion, that our safety requires 
a further reduction of the relative power of Tippoo Sultaun, 

The policy of the Treaty of Scringapatam certainly was not to 
maintain Tippoo’s power upon such a scale as should leave him 
a constant object of alarm and apprchension to the Company. 
That he has been so for some years past cannot be denied by 
any person acquainted with the records either of this Govern- 
ment or of that of Fort St. George. The present is the second 
crisis within the last two years, in which this Government has 
thought it necessary to assemble the army on the coast, for the 
sole purpose of checking his motions. 

The vague and inaccurate nature of our intclligence with 
respect to the extent of his force and to the state of his pre- 
parations, added to the facility which he possesses of receiving 
emissaries and succours from France by sca, have contributed 
to increase the anxicty of the Company’s Governments; and 
our intcrcourse with him has becn of an unscttled and ill defined 
character, destitute of the advantages cither of peace or of war. 
Under such circumstances, the continuance of Tippoo’s power in 


54 NATURE AND SCOPE OF DEMANDS ON TIPPOO. 


its actual state, must prove to the Company a perpetual source 
of alarm, vexation and expense. 

The reduction of his means of offence might be effected, either 
by a positive diminution of his territory and resources, or by 
a proportionate increase of power and efficiency on our side of 
the balance, accompanied by such additional securities as might 
enable us to ascertain at all times the nature of his intentions, as 
well as his power of carrying them into effect, and to restrain, if 
not wholly to preclude, his intercourse with France. 

The diminution of his territory on the coast of Malabar, would 
certainly be the most effectual mode of precluding his intercourse 
with France, as well as of preventing his movements towards the 
Carnatic. But it does not appear probable that this most 
desirable security can ever be obtained by the mere terror of our 
arms. It must be purchased at the expense and hazard of war. 
Any considerable reduction of his resources must probably be 
purchased at the same price. 

I have already stated the nature and tendency of those steps 
which have been taken, for confining the power of Tippoo within 
narrower limits by the operation of the proposed system of 
alliance, of subsidiary engagements, and of improvement of our 
defences in the Carnatic. 

The success of this system will unquestionably operate as 
an effectual restraint upon the power of Tippoo, and will so 
strengthen our barricrs against him as to afford a rational ex- 
pectation, that we may be enabled to obtain from him without 
incurring the hazard of war, a very considerable augmentation of 
security with respect to all those points, which now form the 
most alarming features of his power. 

I have already stated those points to be, the secrecy of his 
operations ; his continual intercourse with the French, and con- 
stant state of equipment for war. 

Our demand of satisfaction for his late infraction of treaty, 
should be so framed as to apply correctives to cach of these 
evils; and such a demand might be founded on principles of 
modcration and justice so clear and indisputable, as would place 
the refusal of Tippoo in the most odious light, and in that event 
prove to all India the necessity of our resorting to arms. 

We might distinctly state to Tippoo, that we entertain no view 
of encroaching upon his territory or of diminishing his resources ; 
and we might appeal to the late restoration of the district of 
Wynaad, for an unequivocal proof of this disposition, 


WHAT THE SPECIFIC DEMANDS SHOULD BE. 55 


We might declare, that after a most unprovoked violation of 
treaty on his part, we do not intend to demand any cession of 
dominion or payment of money; but will content ourselves with 
obtaining those ordinary pledges of an intention to abstain from 
hostilities, which all civilized nations in a state of peace, are in 
the established habit of requiring reciprocally from one another; 
we might insist on an unequivocal and final explanation of the 
real nature of our rclation with him; declaring, that we will no 
longer submit to that ambiguous and anxious state, in which the 
allies have becn placed by his conduct for some years past; we 
might signify our determined resolution, either to establish with 
him a real and effectual peace, accompanied by the customary 
intercourse, by the mutual exchange of good offices, and by all 
other securities which maintain the continuance of that blessing, 
or to wage war upon him, until we have’removed the causes of our 
apprehension and danger by the entire destruction of his power. 

This declaration might be made jointly by all the allies, and it 
might be followed by requiring Tippoo to receive at his Court 
an established Ambassador from each of the allies, according to 
the practice of all civilized nations in a state of peace, offering at 
the same time to admit Ambassadors from him on equal terms. 

The force levied by him under his offensive alliance with 
France, having been raised for the express purpose of aggression 
upon the Company, can be considered in no other light than 
that of a signal of hostility, while it shall remain in his service. 
He must therefore be required to disband it without delay, and 
to remove it from his dominions. 

The anxious desire of the French to destroy the British power 
in India, the nature of Tippoo’s acknowledged connection with 
them, and the intercst which they must always feel in instigating 
him to war, demand the further requisition, that he should enter 
into an engagement for himself, his heirs and successors, to 
exclude the French from his armies and dominions for ever. 

The advantages resulting from these concessions on the part 
of Tippoo, would be very considerable. 

The residence of an Ambassador at his Court would not only 
restrain the execution of any hostile designs which he might 
hereafter form, but would provide an authentic source of intel. 
ligence, from which we might always derive timely information 
of his motions. This measure might also ultimatcly lead to 
the establishment of an amicable intercourse with Mysore; for 
Tippoo may perhaps at length be convinced, that his wisest 


‘ 


56 HOW WE SHOULD GAIN BY THEIR CONCESSION. 


policy would be to rest satisfied with the undisturbed possession 
of his present dominions, rather than to risk the loss of what he 
still retains, by attempting to regain what he has lost. 

The dismission of the French corps raised at Mauritius would 
discourage other adventurers of that nation from attempting to 
engage in the service of the Sultaun; and with a British Am- 
bassador on the spot, it would be difficult for him to evade the 
engagements by which he would have bound himself to exclude 
the French from his armies and dominions. 

The combined effect of these two mcasurcs would thercfore be, 
if not wholly to preclude, at least to embarrass to a very great 
degree his intercourse with our encmy. He may also at length 
perceive that he never can hope to make any lasting inipression 
upon the British power, without the aid of a large French force ; 
and that he never can admit such a force into his dominions, 
without the utmost danger to his own independence. 

The revival of our alliances, the appearance of our armics in 
the field, and the presence of a part of the British squadron on 
the coast of Malabar, will probably incline Tippoo to listen to 
requisitions of this nature. He will soon perccive that we possess 
ample means of annihilating his military force, and I trust he 
will also be convinced, that we have no object in view beyond 
our own security, and that we are really desirous of maintaining 
the relations of amity and peace with him, as long as he shall 
rest contented with his present dominions, and shall relinquish 
his vindictive projects against ours. 

If Tippoo should accede to the substance of the requisitions 
which I have suggested, I entertain a sanguine hope, that with 
the efficiency of the triple alliance not only restored but con- 
siderably strengthened, with a large army at Hyderabad, and 
another at Poonah, with a Resident established at Scringapatam, 
and with the exclusion of the French from the dominions of 
Tippoo Sultaun, of the Nizam, and of the Pcishwa, we may be 
enabled to look confidently to a long continuance of tranquillity 
in India. The growth of the French power in India, would no 
longer be a matter of apprehension, Scindiah (or whoever shall 
succeed to his dominions in Hindostan) would become an useful 
auxiliary against the threatened irruption of Zemaun Shah; the 
military charges on the coast of Coromandel, might then safely 
admit of reduction; this Government would not then be per- 
petually alarmed with rumours of Tippoo’s equipments, and of 
impending invasions of the Carnatic, We should no longer 


HONESTY THE STATESMAN'S BEST POLICY, 57 


suffer in time of peace all the solicitude, and hazard, and much 
of the expense of war; and the continuance of tranquillity would 
be ensured not more by the predominance of our power, than by 
the modcration manifested in using it for the sole purpose of 
obtaining permanent security, and genuine peace. 


Iam, &c., MORNINGTON. 


4. The Earl of Mornington to Tippoo Sultaun. 
Proposal to send an envoy to compose the quarrel. 


Fort William, 8th November, 1798. 


It affords me sincere satisfaction to learn that you have 
nominated two persons of integrity and honour to meet and 
confer with the Deputies appointed, under my orders, by Mr. 
Duncan (the Governor of Bombay), for the purposes of inves- 
tigating the question regarding the Talooks of Ameera and 
Soulea. It is only by means of regular enquiry, and amicable 
discussion, that such questions can be adjusted among inde- 
pendent powers. My determination, in the case of Wynaad, 
was dictated by those principles of justice and moderation, 
Which always direct the Company’s Government, nor shall my 
scrupulous adherence to the same principles be less manifest in 
my decision on your claim to the districts at present in question, 
the possession of which shall not be withholden from you for an 
instant if, aftcr full investigation, I shall be satisficd of the justice 
of your title to them. 

It is a well known truth, that they are always the most ready 
to respect the just rights of others who are the most vigilant and 
resolute to maintain their own. 

I have understood your sentiments concerning the ‘turbulent 
disposition of interested men, who, by nature, are ever sccking 
opportunitics of sowing the sccds of dissension.’ For the hap- 
piness of mankind it is to be lamentcd that these authors of 
confusion are too numerous, assiduous and successful, in all 
parts of the world. In no age or country were the bancful and 
insidious arts of intrigue cultivated with such success as they are 
at present by the French nation, I sincerely wish that no im- 
pression had been produced on your discerning mind by that 
dangerous people; but my situation cnables me to know that 
they have reached your presence, and have endeavoured to 


58 HAVE FOU BEEN HUNEST WITH US? 


pervert the wisdom of your councils, and to instigate you to war 
against those who have given you no provocation. 

It is impossible that you should suppose me to be ignorant 
of the intercourse which subsists between you and the French, 
whom you know to be the inveterate enemies of the Company, 
and to be now engaged in an unjust war with the British nation. 
You cannot imagine me to be indifferent to the transactions 
which have passed between you and the enemies of my country; 
nor does it appear necessary or proper that I should any longer 
conceal from you the surprise and concern with which I per- 
ceived you disposed to involve yourself in all the ruinous con- 
sequences of a connection, which threatens not only to subvert 
the foundations of friendship between you and the Company, 
but to introduce into the heart of your kingdom the principles 
of anarchy and confusion, to shake your own authority, to 
weaken the obedience of your subjects, and to destroy the 
religion which you revere. 

Immediately after my arrival at Bengal, I read your corre- 
spondence with the late Governor-General, Sir John Shore, and 
with the Acting Governor-General Sir Alured Clarke; and I 
perceived with great satisfaction, that in all your letters you 
constantly professed a disposition to strengthen the bonds of 
sincere attachment, and the foundations of harmony and con- 
cord established between you and the Honourable Company. 
I received particular pleasure from reading your last Ictter to 
Sir John Shore, in which you significd your amicable desire 
that he should impress me with a sense of the friendship and 
unanimity so long subsisting between the two States. Your 
subsequent Ictters to me have abounded with professions of the 
same friendly nature. 

Combining these professions of amity on your part with the 
proofs which the Company’s Government have constantly given 
of their sincere disposition to maintain the relations of friendship 
and peace with you; and adverting, at the same time, to your 
reputation for wisdom and discernment, it was natural for me to 
be extremely slow to believe the various accounts transmitted 
to me of your negociations with the French, and of your military 
preparations ; but whatever my reluctance to credit such reports 
might be, prudence required both of me and of the Company’s 
allics, that we should adopt certain measures of precaution and 
self-defence, and these have accordingly been taken, as you will 
no doubt have observed. The British Government and the 


YOU WILL DO WELL TO SET YOURSELF RIGHT. 59 


allics, wishing nevertheless to live in peace and friendship with 
all their ncighbours, entertaining no projects of ambition, nor 
any views in the least incompatible with their respective engage- 
ments, and looking to no other objects than the permanent 
security and tranquillity of their own dominions and subjects, 
will always be ready, as they now are, to afford you every 
demonstration of their pacific disposition. 

The Peishwa, and his Highness the Nizam, concur with me 
in the observations which I have offered to you in this letter; 
and which, in the name of the Company, and of the Allics, 
I recommend to your most earnest consideration; but as Tam 
also desirous of communicating to you, on the behalf of the 
Company, and their allies, a plan calculated to promote the 
mutual security and welfare of all parties; I propese to depute 
to you, for this purpose, Major Doveton, who is well known to 
you, and who will explain to you more fully and particularly 
the sole means which appear to myself, and to the allies of the 
‘Company, to be effectual for the salutary purpose of removing 
all existing distrust and suspicion, and of establishing peace 
and good understanding on the most durable foundations. 

You will, I doubt not, Ict me know at what time and place 
it will be convenient to you to receive Major Doveton; and 
as soon as your friendly lctter shall reach me, I will direct him 
to proceed to your presence. 

I shall expect your answer to this Ictter, with an earnest hope 
that it may correspond with the pacific views and wishes of the 
allics; and that you may be convinced that you cannot in any 
manner better consult your true interests than by. mecting, with 
cordiality, the present friendly and modcrate advance to a 
satisfactory and amicable scttlement of all points on which any 
doubt or anxicty may have arisen in the minds cither of your- 
self or of the allics. 

A true Copy, N. B. Epmonstonr, 

Persian Translator to Govt. 


5. Tippoo Sultaun to the Earl of Mornington. 
Levasive reply to the abowe. False account of the mission 
to the Mauritius, 


18th Dec. 1798, 
(Received at Fort St. George, 2gth Dec. 1798. 


[ have been made happy by the receipt of your Lordship’s 
two friendly Ictters, the contents of which I clearly comprchend, 


60 I HAVE NOT PLAYED YOU FALSE. 


(vide those written 4th and 8th November). The particulars 
which your Lordship has communicated to me, relative to the 
victory obtained by the English flect over that of the French 
near the shores of Egypt, nine of their ships having been cap- 
tured and two burnt, on one of which of the latter was their 
Admiral, have given me more pleasure than can possibly be 
conveyed by writing. Indeed I possess the firmest hope that 
the leaders of the English and the Company Bahauder, who ever 
adhere to the paths of sincerity, friendship, and good faith, and 
are the well wishers of mankind, will at all times be successful 
and victorious; and that the French, who are of a crooked 
disposition, faithless, and the encmics of mankind, may be ever 
depressed and ruined. Your Lordship has written to me with 
the pen of friendship, ‘that in no age or country were the bane- 
ful and insidious arts of intrigue ever cultivated with such suc- 
cess as they are at present by the French nation. Would to 
God that no impression had been produced on my mind by that 
dangerous people; but that your Lordship’s situation enables’ 
you to know that they have reached my presence, and have 
endeavoured to pervert the wisdom of my councils, and to 
instigate me to war against those who have given me no pro- 
vocation. That it is impossible that I should suppose your 
Lordship ignorant of the intercourse which subsists between me 
and the French, who I know to be the invetcrate enemics of the 
Company, and to be now engaged in an unjust war with the 
British, and that I cannot imagine your Lordship indifferent to 
the transactions which have passed between me and the enemics 
of the English.’ 

In this Sircar (the gift of God) there is a mercantile tribe, 
who employ themselves in trading by sca and land. Their 
agents purchased a two-masted vessel, and having loaded her 
with rice, departed with a view to traffic. It happened that she 
went to the Mauritius, from whence forty persons, French, and of 
a dark colour, of whom ten or twelve were artificers, and the 
rest servants, paying the hire of the ship, came here in scarch of 
employment. Such as chose to take service were entertained, 
and the remainder departed beyond the confines of this Sircar 
(the gift of God); and the French, who are full of vice and 
deccit, have perhaps taken advantage of the departure of the 
ship to put about reports with the view to ruffle the minds of 
both Sircars. 

It is the wish of my heart, and my constant endeavour, to 


LET US BE FRIENDS—AS PER TREATY! 61 


observe and maintain the articles of the agreement of peace, and 
to perpetuate and strengthen the basis of friendship and union 
with the Sircar of the Company Bahauder, and with the Sircars 
of the Maha Rajah Saheb, Sree Munt Peishwa Bahauder, and 
his Highness the Nabob Asuph Jah Bahauder. And I am 
resident at home, at times taking the air, and at others amusing 
myself with hunting at a spot which is used as a pleasure ground. 
In this case, the allusion to war in your friendly Icttcr, and the 
following passage, namely ‘that prudence required that both the 
Company and their allics should adopt certain measures of pre- 
caution and sclf-defence,’ have given me the greatest surprize. 

It was further written by your friendly pen, that as your 
Lordship is desirous of communicating to me, on the behalf of 
the Company and their allics, a plan calculated to promote the 
mutual security and welfare of all parties; your Lordship pro- 
poses to depute to me for this purpose Major Doveton, who 
formerly waited upon me, and who will explain to me more 
fully and particularly the sole means which appear to your 
Lordship and the allics to be effectual for the salutary purpose 
of removing all existing distrust and suspicion, and of estab- 
lishing peace and good understanding on the most durable 
foundations; and that therefore your Lordship trusts I will let 
you know at what time and place it will be convenient to me to 
reccive Major Dovcton. It has becn understood, by the blessing 
of the Almighty, at the conclusion of the peace, the treatics and 
engagements entered into among the four Sircars were so firmly 
established and confirmed as ever to remain fixed and durable; 
and be an example to the rulers of the age; nor are they nor 
will they ever be liable to interruption. I cannot imagine that\ 
means more effectual than these can be adopted, for giving 
stability to the foundations of friendship and harmony, pro- 
moting the security of states, or the welfare and advantage of \ 
all parties. 

In the view of those who inspect narrowly into the nature of 
friendship, peace and amity are the first of all objects, as indecd 
your Lordship has yourself written to me that the allied Sircars 
look to no other object than the security and tranquillity of their 
own dominions, and the case and comfort of their subjects. 
Praise be to God, that the sum of my views and the wish of my 
heart are limited to these same points. On such grounds then 
a just and permanent observance of existing treaties is neces- 
sary; and these, under the favours of God, daily acquire new 


62 THE TIGER COURTS THE TIGER-MONKEY ,; 


strength and improvement by means of amicable correspondence. 
Your Lordship is a great Sirdar, a firm friend, and the rectifier 
of all things, and you possess an enlightened judgement. I have 
the strongest hope that the minds of the wise and intelligent, 
but particularly of the four states, will not be sullied by doubts 
and jealousies, but will consider me from my heart desirous of 
harmony and friendship. 

Continue to allow me the pleasure of your correspondence, 
making me happy by accounts of your health. What more shall 
be written. 

Dated the 9th of Rujub, 1213, of the Hegirah, (answering to 
the 18th December.) 

A true Translation, N. B. Epwoystoxe, 

Persian Translator to Govt, 


6. Tippoo Sultaun the Victorious to the Representatives of 
the People residing in the Isles of France and of La 
Reunion. 


Proposals for an alliance against the F:nglish in India. 


Seringapatam, 2nd of April, 1797. 
Citizens Representatives, 

You cannot be ignorant of the friendship which my father and 
mysclf have ever entertained for the French. I sought every 
opportunity of proving it during your former government, and 
T have done all in my power since the commencement of your re- 
volution to make known to you the sentiments of my heart. From 
want of opportunity and of intercourse with persons acquainted 
with your customs and manners, I have not been able before this 
time to inform you of my intentions. A fortunate chance has 
sent me Citizen Ripaud (one of your officers) who at my request 
has answered all the questions which I put to him. I consider 
him to be worthy of my confidence, and from what he has told 
me, I perceive zt ts now the moment for me to revive the friend- 
ship which I have always entertained for your nation; Tacknow- 
ledge the sublimity of your constitution, and as a proof of my 
sincerity J propose to your nation and to you a treaty of alliance 
and fraternity, which shall be for ever indissoluble, and shall be 
Sounded on republican principles, of sincerity and good faith; to 
the end that you and your nation with myself and my people may 
become one Family, that the same oath may bind us for life or for 


WITH A GROWL, AT PREVIOUS DESERTION. 63 


acath ; that your enemies may be mine and those of my people ; 
and that my enemies may be considered as yours. Thus do I wish 
henceforth to treat with my allies. You now see my disposition 
towards your country; when I shall receive a proof of yours, 
I will fulfil my promises; but, Citizens Representatives I will 
not fulfil these engagements with you until I sce your forces as 
well naval as military actually arrive in India. During the last 
war (it is with regret that I am obliged to recall to your memory 
the disasters which my friendship for the French nation. has 
brought upon me) I maintained with zeal and courage, all the 
pretensions of the French. The English, the ambitious English, 
not having sufficient confidence in their own strength and courage 
to attack me singly, formed an alliance with the Mahrattas and 
the Nizam, and attacked me in every quarter. At the very 
moment when I was on the point of conquering them, the French 
army under the command of M. de Cossigny, received an order 
from M. de Bussi to abandon me, though I had paid them well, 
and they were in want of nothing; but what filled me with 
indignation was, that those orders extended to M. de Lally, who 
commanded a body of French in my pay, to withdraw himself 
with his party; this I opposed, and on just grounds. From that 
moment, my army became disgusted. Reduced singly to my 
own resources, and abandoned by my allics, I was compelled to 
make peace, with the loss of half of my dominions, and three Crores 
and thirty thousand rupees in specie. Behold what have been 
my losses, Representatives! What is past is past. I have cited 
these truths in order to apprtize you, that if I should declare war 
against your encmics, I will not be deserted, nor shall you have 
the powcr of making peace without my previous consent, nor 
without including myself and my people in the treaty. For the 
security of our reciprocal friendship and good faith it is necessary 
to stipulate one preliminary condition. It is this, that as my 
people are ignorant of the customs of the French republicans, 
and as the republicans are equally unacquainted with the customs 
of my country, if one of the citizens of either party should violate 
the customs of the other, he shall be reprimanded immediately 
by his own superior, without any interruption of the good under- 
standing and harmony, which ought to subsist between good 
allics, I insert this clause, although Citizen Ripaud has assured 
me, that the observance of the most severe discipline and of 
respect for the laws exists in the republican army: mine shall 
always be conducted in the same manner., I require also that 


64 THE HUNTING OF THE BRITISH LION. 


the commanding officer shall always consult me on every mea- 
sure which he may undertake for the destruction of our common 
enemy, because I am acquainted with the country, its customs 
and manners. This is a reservation that he cannot consider as 
offensive. Happy moment! the time ts come when I can deposit 
in the bosom of my friends the hatred which I bear against these 
oppressors of the human race. If you will assist me, in a short 
tame not an Englishman shall remain in India; you have the 
power and the means of effecting it by your free negroes; with 
these new citizens (much dreaded by the English) joined to your 
troops of the line, we will purge India of these villains. The 
springs which I have touched have put all India in motion, my 
Friends are ready to fall upon the English ; for everything here 
rely on my discretion. Your cnemies, as I have apprised you, shall 
be mine. Now you are apprized of my designs, dclay not to 
inform me of yours, but make no promises which you cannot 
perform. I have retained Citizen Ripaud to answer your letters, 
and I will give him a salary worthy of the situation which he 
holds near my person. I entreat you not to be offended with 
him, but on the contrary to approve of what he has done, and 
to quict his apprehensions of being considered as a deserter of 
his country and of his colours, (a laudable motive which interests 
me for his welfarc). I request you to authorize him to remain in 
his present station with me for the service of his country, of your 
colonics, and of mysclf. J detained him, nor did he consent to 
remain till after much solicitation, being extremely attached to 
the Island of Bourbon, to which he belongs. In case you should 
consent to my propositions, it is necessary that you should know 
the extent of my power to assist the French Republic and its 
army. 

Article 1. I engage, immediately on the arrival of the French 
troops on the coast, to victual both the land and sca forces, 
(European liquors excepted) and I will furnish all necessaries, 
such as flour, rice, meat, wood, &c. 

Article 2. I engage also to make advances of moncy for all 
the wants of the land and sca equipments. 

Article 3. I engage to provide all the bullocks necessary for 
the artillery of the republican troops, as well as the bullocks, 
camels, and Lascars, for carrying the baggage of the officers and 
soldiers. 

Article 4. I engage to provide palanquins for the Generals, 
and horses for the officers, of the troops of the Republic. 


THE TIGER’S SHARE OF THE HUNT, AND THE PREY. 65 


Article 5. In case the French army should happen to be in 
want of gunpowder, or other ammunition, I engage to supply it. 

Article 6. As soon as the French army shall have dis- 
embarked, I engage to march with my troops; which shall in 
the first instance consist of 30,000 cavalry, and 30,000 infantry 
and artillery, well disciplined, with arms, ammunition, and every- 
thing necessary for the success of our enterprize. 

What I require on the part of France is as follows: 

Article 1. That the French Republic shall not, under any 
pretence whatever, conclude peace, but with the consent of me 
and my people, nor without including us in such treaty. 

Article 2, That as the troops of the Republic will derive such 
advantages from me, the Generals in command shall undertake 
nothing without first consulting me, to ensure the success of the 
common cause, and of our respective armies. 

Article 3. Should the French General or Republican troops 
detect traitors in my country, or should I or my troops come to 
the knowledge of any such in the French army, the chief of the 
party wherein the traitor may be found, shall cause him to be 
seized and exccuted, upon authentic proofs of his guilt, without 
prejudice to our mutual friendship; since engaged in the same 
cause, our intcrests are the same. 

Article 4. As I propose to make the advances, and furnish 
the necessary supplics of moncy to the French Republic, both 
for the land and the sca forces, it is just that I should be re- 
imbursed at the end of the war, from the sums of money which 
may be taken from our common enemy. 

Article 5. Every capture made from our common enemy, as 
towns, forts, territory, money, merchandize, ships, ammunition, 
&c. shall be equally divided at a fair valuation, fraternally 
between the troops of the Republic, me, and my people. 

Article 6, As I have suffered greatly in supporting the cause 
of the French in the last war, when I lost the best part of my 
country, I require that all the towns, forts, territorics, or contri- 
butions, which I may be able to seize within my former boundaries, 
be excmpted from the 4th Article, that they shall become mine 
hy right, and that the republican troops shall have no pretensions 
or claims thercto. I claim this act of justice from my brethren. 

Article 7. If the fortune of war shall put us in possession of 
Goa and Bombay, the port of Bombay and the territories de- 
pendent on it, belonging to the English, shall belong of right to 
the French ; but Goa and its dependencies shall be mine. 

F 


66 HOW THE HUNT IS TO BEGIN. 


Article 8. I demand that all male and female prisoners, as 
well English as Portuguese, which shall be taken by the repub- 
lican troops or by mine, shall be treated with humanity, and with 
regard to their persons, that they shall (their property becoming 
the right of the allies) be transported at our joint expence, out of 
India, to some place far distant from the territories of the allies, 

Article 9. As the towns, ports, forts, and territorics stipulated 
in the 6th article, are to be divided between the allies, they shall 
be garrisoned as they may fall into our hands, and the stipu- 
lations of that article, shall be afterwards arranged by the French 
general and myself, with a discretion, if circumstances require it, 
to blow up any fort which may be deemed useless. 

Article 10. In order to achieve the conquest of the English 
and Portuguese possessions, and those of thcir allies, it is neces- 
sary that I should be assisted with from five to ten thousand 
regular troops or national guards, and from twenty-five to thirty 
thousand of your xew citisens, (if you have put the decree into 
execution ;) selecting the most subtle and best instructed of them ; 
those, in short, who are likely to disturb the peace in your own 
colonies ; I will answer for our quick and casy success. 

Article 11. To facilitate the attack and capture of Goa, a port 
essential for your squadron and your transports, it will be ne- 
cessary to disembark at my port of Onore, situated in latitude 
14.35 N. and 70 longitude. 

Article 12, That I may be apprized whether you accept or 
reject my propositions, I request, that after having fully con- 
sidered them, you'will despatch a packet-boat to Mangalore, to 
inform me of your decision as expeditiously as possible. That 
nothing may be wanting on the arrival of your squadron, a 
French officer will be stationcd at Mangalore, to afford the 
necessary assistance, and to advise me of your intentions, To 
avoid any surprize or doubt, the ship, during the time she may 
remain at anchor in the roads, shall hoist American colours, with 
the national flag at the main-top-mast head, over that of the 
Sultaun, which my envoys carry for that purpose. I am desirous, 
and therefore particularly request that Citizen Aubaigne may be 
appointed to command this packet boat, as he knows my 
harbours, and is acquainted with the customs of my country. 

ticle 13. I depute four of my chiefs who have proved 
themselves worthy of my confidence, to treat in my name on the 
articles which I transmit to you; but should you neither have 
the power of accepting them altogether, nor of carrying them 


THE TIGER-MONKEY NOT TO PLAY TRICKS. 67 


into effect without an order from the executive government of 
your mother country, I request you to despatch three of my 
chiefs in one of your best vessels for France, and to join with 
them some citizen whom your wisdom may select, to guide and 
to advise them in France. I despatch these chiefs for this 
express purpose: they are charged with a packet, and with 
orders to explain my intentions to the executive power; I cannot 
send my ship thither without giving the English reason to 
suspect some hostile designs on my part; if you send a squadron, 
send with it the remaining one of the four chiefs and also my 
ship, which I request may be coppered, and we will arrange 
matters accordingly. If, however, you think that the ship cannot 
be coppered without delaying the voyage of the convoy, you will 
send the ship back at the proper season, with a captain and two 
officers, whom I will pay. 

Article 14. We will commence hostilities against the English 
and Portuguese; when, in case the Nizam and the Mahrattas 
should join them, we will make war against them also, for it will 
then be necessary to subjugate them also, and to render them 
tributarics to us. 

These, Representatives, are my intentions; do not let my 
attachment to your nation expose me to the same calamity 
which I formerly suffered; I entreat you to reflect well before 
you return an answer, or you may expose me to great anguish of 
heart, since I shall act according to the tenor of your answer. 
I offer up my vows for the success of our enterprize, for the 
continuation of prosperity to the arms of the French Republic, 
one and indivisible, and for a speedy answer. I swear an in- 


violable friendship for your nation. 
TIPpPpoO SULTAUN. 
(A true Copy.) C. Macautay, Secretary. 
(A true Translation.) G, G. Kzsrz, French Translator. 


7. Proclamation at the Isle of France. 


Liberté. Egalité. Liberty. Equality. 
REPUBLIQUE FRANCAISE, THE FRENCH REPUBLIC, 
Une & indivisible. One and indivisible. 

PROCLAMATION. PROCLAMATION. ~* 
Anne Joseph Hyppolite Malartic, Gee Anne Joseph Hyppoltte Malartic,. 
neral en Chef, Governeur-general Commander in Chief and Gover- 


des Isles de France & de la Re- nor-General of the Isles of France 
F 2 


68 MALARTIC’S PROCLAMATION. 


union, § Commandant-general des 
Ltablissements Frangais, a [Est 
du Cap de Bonne Esperance. 


CITOYENS, 


Connaissant depuis plusieurs 
années votre zéle & votre at- 
tachment pour les interéts & 
Ia gloire de notre République, 
nous sommes tres empressé¢s 
& nous nous faisons un devoir 
de vous donner connaissance 
de toutes les propositions que 
nous fait Tippoo Sultaun, par 
deux ambassadeurs qu'il nous 
a dépéchés. 

Ce prince a écrit des lettres 
particulitres 4 l’Assemblée Co- 
loniale 4 tous les Généraux qui 
sont employés dans ce gou- 
vernement, & nous a addressé 
un paquet pour le Directoire 
Executif. 

1°, Il demande a faire une 
alliance offensive et défensive 
avec les Francais, en proposant 
d’entretenir a ses frais, tant que 
la guerre durera dans I’'Inde, 
les troupes qu’on pourra lui 
envoyer. 

2°. Il promet de fournir 
toutes les choses nécessaires 
pour faire cette guerre, ex- 
cepté le Vin & TEau de Vie, 
dont il se trouve absolument 
dénué. 

3°. Il assure que tous lcs 
préparatifs sont faits pour re- 
gevoir les secours qu’on lui 
donnera, & qu’a larrivéc des 
troupes, les Chefs & Officicrs 
frouveront toutes Ics choses 


and Reunion, and of all the French 
establishments to the eastward of 


the Cape of Good Hope. 


CITIZENS, 


Having for several years 
known your zeal and your at- 
tachment to the interests, and 
to the glory of our Republic, 
we are very anxious, and we 
feel it a duty to make you 
acquainted with all the pro- 
positions which have been 
made to us by Tippoo Sul- 
taun, through two ambassadors 
whom he has despatched to us. 

This prince has written par- 
ticular letters to the Colonial 
Assembly; to all the generals 
employed under this govern- 
ment; and has addressed to 
us a packet for the Executive 
Directory. 

1. He desires to form an of- 
fensive and defensive alliance 
with the French, and proposes 
to maintain at his charge, as 
long as the war shall last in 
India, the troops which may 
be sent to him. 

2. He promises to furnish 
every necessary for carrying 
on the war, wine and brandy 
excepted, with which he is 
wholly unprovided., 


3. He declares that he has 
made every preparation to re- 
ccive the succours which may 
be sent to him, and that on 
the arrival of the troops, the 
commanders and officers will 


THE WAR TO BE A OUTRANCE. 69 


nécessaires pour faire une 
guerre a laquelle les Euro- 
péens sont peu accoutumés. 


4°. Enfin il n’attend plus que 
le moment ou les Frangais vien- 
dront a son secours, pour dé- 
clarer la guerre aux Anglais, 
désivant avec ardeur pouvoir 
les chasser de CInde. 

Comme il nous est impos- 
sible de diminucr le nombre 
des soldats des ro7e. & 108e. 
regimens, & de la garde soldée 
du Port de la Fraternité, a 
cause des secours que nous 
avons envoyés a nos alliés les 
Hollandais ; nous invitons tous 
les citoyens de bonne volonté, 
a se faire inscrire dans leurs 
municipalités respectives, pour 
aller servir sous les drapeaux 
de Tippoo. 

Ce prince désire aussi avoir 
des citoyens de couleur, libres, 
& nous invitons tous ceux qui 
voudront aller servir sous ses 
drapeaux, 4 se faire aussi in- 
scrire. 

Nous pouvons assurer tous 
Ies citoyens qui se feront in- 
Scrire, que Tippoo lcur fera des 
traitements avantageux qui 
seront fixés avec scs ambassa- 
deurs qui s’cngageront en outre, 
au nom de leur souverain, a ce 
que les Frangais qui auront 
pris parti dans ses armécs, ne 
puissent jamais y tre retenus 
quand ils voudront rentrer 
dans Icur patrie. 


find every thing necessary for 
making a war, to which Euro- 
peans are but little accus- 
tomed. 

4. In a word he only waits 
the moment when the French 
shall come to his assistance, ¢o 
declare war against the English, 
whom he ardently desires to 
expel from India. 

As it is impossible for us to 
reduce the number of soldiers 
of the 107th and 108th regi- 
ments, and of the regular guard 
of Port Fraternité, on account 
of the succours which we have 
furnished to our allies the 
Dutch ; we invite the citizens, 
who may be disposed to enter 
as volunteers, to enrol them- 
selves in their respective muni- 
cipalities, and to serve under 
the banners of Tippoo. 

This prince desires also to 
be assisted by the free citizens 
of colour, we therefore invite 
all such who are willing to 
serve under his flag, to enrol 
themselves, 

We can assure all the citizens 
who shall enrol themselves, that 
Tippoo will allow them an ad- 
vantageous rate of pay, the 
terms of which will be fixed 
with his ambassadors, who will 
further engage in the name of 
their sovercign, that all French- 
men who shall entcr into his 
armics, shall never be detained 
after they shall have expressed 
a wish to rcturn to their own 
country, 


vie) THE PORTE NEUTRAL IN EUROPE, 


Fait au Port Nord-Ouest, le Done at Port North West, 
10 Pluviose, ’an six de la the 30th January, 1798. 
République Frangaise, une & (Signed) MALARTIC. 
indivisible. 

(Signé) MALARTIC. 


8. Letter from Sultaun Selim to the Indian Sovereign, Tippoo 
Sultaun, dated Constantinople, 20th September, 1798; de- 
livered to Mr. Spencer Smith, his Britannic Majesty’s 
Minister Plenipotentiary, &c. 


An exhortation to abstain from assisting the French against the 
English in India. The French faithless, and enemies of the 
Fatth. 


We take this opportunity to acquaint your Majesty, when the 
French Republic was engaged in a war with most of the powers 
of Europe within this latter period, our Sublime Porte not only 
took no part against them, but regardful of the ancient amity 
existing with that nation, adopted a system of the strictest 
neutrality, and shewed them even such acts of countenance as 
have given rise to complaints on the part of other Courts. 

Thus friendly disposed towards them, and reposing a con- 
fidence in those sentiments of friendship which they appcared to 
profess for us, we gave no car to many propositions and advan- 
tageous offers which had been made to us to side with the 
belligerent powers, but pursuant to our maxims of moderation 
and justice, we abstained from breaking with them without direct 
motive, and firmly observed the line of neutrality; all which is 
notosious to the world. 

In this posture of things, when, the French having witnessed 
the greatest marks of attention from our Sublime Porte, a per- 
fect reciprocity was naturally expected on their side, when no 
cause existed to intcrrupt the continuance of the peace betwixt 
the two nations, they all of a sudden have exhibited the un- 
provoked and treacherous procecdings, of which the following 
is a sketch. 

They began to prepare a flect in one of thcir harbours, called 
Toulon, with most extraordinary mystery, and when completely 
fitted out and ready for sca, embarked a large body of troops, 
and they put also on board several pcople versed in the Arabic 
language, and who had been in Egypt before; they gave the 
command of that armament to onc of their gencrals, named 


TILL THE FRENCH INVADED EGYPT, 71 


Buonaparte, who first went to the Island of Malta, of which he 
took possession, and thence proceeded direct for Alexandria, 
where being arrived the 17th Muharem, all of a sudden landed 
his troops, and entered the town by open force, publishing soon 
after manifestocs in Arabic among the different tribes, stating, 
in substance, that the object of their enterprize was not to 
declare war against the Ottoman Porte, but to attack the Beys 
of Egypt, for insults and injurics they had committed against 
the French merchants in time past; that peace with the Ottoman 
empire was permanent, that those of the Arabs who should join, 
would meet with the best treatment; but such as shewed oppo- 
sition, would suffer death: with this further insinuation, made in 
different quarters, but more particularly to certain Courts at 
amity with us, that the expedition against the Beys was with 
the privity and consent of our Sublime Porte; which is a hor- 
rible falsity. After this they also took possession of Rosetta, 
not hesitating to engage in a pitched battle with the Ottoman 
troops, who had been detached from Cairo to assist the invaded. 

It is a standing law amongst all nations, not to encroach upon 
each other’s territories, whilst they are supposed to be at peace. 
When any such events take place as lead to a rupture, the 
motives, so tending, are previously made known between the 
partics ; nor are any open aggressions attempted against their re- 
spective dominions until a formal declaration of war takes place. 

Whilst, therefore, no interruption of the peace, nor the smallest 
symptom of misunderstanding appeared between our Sublime 
Porte and the French Republic, a conduct so audacious, so 
unprovoked, and so deccitfully sudden on their part, is an 
undeniable trait of the most extreme insult and treachery. ¢ 

The province of Egypt is considered as a region of general 
vencration, from the immediate proximity of the noble city of 
Mecca, the Keblch of the Mussulmen, (the point of the compass 
to which all Turks turn their face in performing their prayers) 
and the sacred town of Mcdina, where the tomb of our blessed 
prophet is fixed; the inhabitants of both these sacred cities 
deriving from thence their subsistence, 

Independent of this, it has been actually discovered from 
several letters which have been intercepted, that the further 
project of the French is to divide Arabia into various republics ; 
to attack the whole Mahommedan sect, in its religion and 
country; and by a gradual progression, to extirpate all Mussul- 


men from the face of the earth. , 


72 AND MADE US }OIN THE ENGLISH. 


It is for these cogent motives and considerations, that we have 
determined to repel this enemy, and to adopt every vigorous 
measure against these persecutors of the faith; we placing all 
confidence in the Omnipotent God, the source of all succour, and 
in the intercession of him who is the glory of prophets. 

Now it being certain that, in addition to the general ties of 
religion, the bonds of amity and good understanding have ever 
been firm and permanent with your Majesty, so justly famed 
for your zeal and attachment to our faith; and that more than 
once such public acts of friendly attention have been practised 
between us, as to have cemented the connection subsisting 
between the two countries, we therefore sincerely hope, from 
your Majesty’s dignified disposition, that you will not refuse en- 
tering into concert with us, and giving our Sublime Porte every 
possible assistance, by such an exertion of zeal, as your firmness 
and natural attachment to such a cause cannot fail to excite. 

We understand that, in consequence of certain secret intrigues 
carried on by the French in India, (after their accustomed 
system) in order to destroy the settlements, and to sow dissen- 
sions in the provinces of the English there, a strict connection 
is expected to take effect between them and your Majesty, for 
whose service they arc to send over a corps of troops by the 
way of Egypt. 

We are persuaded, that the tendency of the French plans 
cannot, in the present days, escape your Majesty's penctration 
and notice, and that no manner of regard will be given to their 
deceitful insinuations on your side: and whereas the Court of 
Great Britain is actually at war with them, and our Sublime 
Porte engaged on the other hand in repelling their aggressions, 
consequently the French are cnemics to both; and such a 
reciprocity of interests must exist between those Courts, as 
ought to make both parties cager to afford every mutual succour 
which a common cause requires. 

It is notorious, that the French, bent upon the overthrow of 
all sects and religions, have invented a new doctrine, under the 
name of Liberty; they themselves professing no other belief but 
that of Debrees ; (Epicureans, or Pythagorcans) that they have 
not even spared the territories of the Pope of Rome, a country, 
since time immemorial, held in great reverence by all the 
European nations; that they have wrested and shared, With 
others, the whole Venctian State, notwithstanding that fellow 
republic had not only abstained from taking part against them, 


DO LIKEWISE—FOR THE FAITH! 73 


but had rendered them service during the course of the war, 
thus effacing the name of the republic of Venice’ from the annals 
of history. 


There is no doubt that their present attempt against the - 


Ottomans, as well as their ulterior designs (dictated by their 
avaricious view towards oriental riches) tend to make a general 
conquest of that country, (which may God never suffer to take 
effect!) and to expel every Mussulman from it, under pretence 
of annoying the English. Their end is to be once admitted in 
India, and then to devclope what really lies in their hearts, just 
as they have done in every place where they have been able to 
acquire a footing. 

In a word, they are a nation whose deceitful intrigues and 
perfidious pursuits know no bounds. They are intent on nothing, 
but on depriving people of their lives and properties, and on 
persecuting religion, wherever their arms can reach. 

Upon all this, therefore, coming to your Majesty’s knowledge, 
it is sincerely hoped, that you will not refuse every needful 
exertion towards assisting your brethren Mussulmen, according 
to the obligations of religion, and towards defending Hindostan 
itsclf, against the effect of French machinations. Should it be 
truc, as we hear, that’ an intimate connection has taken place 
between your Court and that nation, we hope that, by weighing 
present circumstances, as well as every future inconvenience, 
which would result from such a measure, your Majesty will 
beware against it, and in the event of your having harboured any 
idca of joining with them, or of moving against Great Britain, 
you will lay such resolution aside. We make it our especial 
request, that your Majesty will please to refrain from entering 
into any measures against the English, or lending any compliant 
ear to the French. Should there exist any subject of complaint 
with the former, please to communicate it, certain as you may 
be of the employment of every good office on our side, to com- 
promise the same; we wish to sce the conncction above alluded 
to, exchanged in favour of Great Britain. 

We confidently expect that, upon considcration of all that is 
Stated in this communication, and of the necessity of assisting 
your brethren Mussulmen in this gencral cause of religion, as 
well as of co-operating towards the above precious province 
beint delivered from the hands of the encmy, your Majesty will 
employ every means, which your natural zcal will point out, to 
assist the common cause, and to corroborate, by that means, the 


74 I HEAR THE SULTAUN! SEND DOVETON. 


ancient good understanding so happily existing between our 
empires. 
A true Copy, N. B. Epstonstong, 
Persian Translator to Govt. 


9. From Tippoo Sultaun to the Right Hon. the Governor 
General. 


Formal acknowledgment of the receipt of the above. Ambiguous 
consent to treat. 


Received 13th February, 1799- 

I have been much gratified by the agreeable reccipt of your 
Lordship’s two friendly letters, the first brought by a camelman, 
the last by hircurrahs, and understood their contents. The letter 
of the Prince, in station like Jumshcid ; with angels as his guards ; 
with troops numerous as the stars; the sun illumining the world 
of the heaven of empire and dominion; the luminary giving 
splendour to the universe of the firmament of glory and power; 
the Sultaun of the sea and the land; the King of Rome (i.c. the 
Grand Signior); be his empire and his power perpetual! ad- 
dressed to me, which reached you through the British Envoy, 
and which you transmitted, has arrived. Being frequently dis- 
posed to make excursions and hunt, I am accordingly proceeding 
upon a hunting excursion. You will be pleased to despatch 
Major Doveton (about whose coming your friendly pen has 
repeatedly written) slightly attended (or unattended). 

Always continue to gratify me by friendly letters, notifying 
your welfare. 

A true Translation, N. B. Epmonstonr, 

Persian Translator to Govt. 


10. Translation of the Draft of a Letter from Tippoo Sultaun 
to the Grand Seignior. 

Private reply to Sultan Selim’s letter. The English in India 

Jaithless, and enemivs of the Faith, 
In the Name of the Most Merciful God ! 

[After the customary invocation to the Deity and the Prophet, 
and a scrics of pompous titles, addressed to the Grand 
Seignior, the letter proceeds as follows :] 

Your Highness’s august Ictter, written on the rrth of Rubbce 

Cossaunec 1213 of the Hedjree (anseering to the 23a September, 


I AM THE CHAMPION OF ISLAM IN INDIA, 75 


1798) which was conveyed through the English’, honoured me by 
its gracious arrival, was the means of glory and distinction, and the 
productive source of boundless favour. Its contents added strength 
and firmness to the foundations of union and attachment ; and its 
gracious expressions gave stability to the fabric of friendship. 

With respect to what your Highness wrote, of the invasion of 
the venerated Iand of Egypt by the devoted French, by treachery 
and deceit, notwithstanding the observance of long subsisting 
friendship on the part of your Highness. The objects of that 
irreligious, turbulent people; the determination of the Ottoman 
Porte to employ the most vigorous mcasures to repel that re- 
bellious race; of my assisting and joining my brethren Mussel- 
mans in the general cause of religion, and defending the regions 
of Hindostan from the machinations of this enemy; that I would 
communicate to your Highness whatever subject of complaint 
I might have against the English, when, by the aid of God and 
your Highness’s good offices, those complaints should be removed 
to my satisfaction, and the grounds of opposition and estrange- 
ment be exchanged for the desirable objects of harmony and 
union. This, which your Highness did me the honour to write, 
has been understood. 

By the favour of God, and the benevolence of the prophet, all 
the followers of the faith hold fraternity in religion: particularly 
the exalted Ottoman State and the Khoodadaud Sirkar (between 
which, regard and attachment are established firmly as columns, 
and of which friendship and union, repeated tokens have been in- 
terchanged) are aiding and assisting each other. As this labourer 
in the way of the Lord, is a brother in the faith, is obedient to 
your Highness’s all powerful will, and docs not conceive any 
difference to exist between us; I beg you will communicate to 
me what your Highness’s exalted mind conceives will be con- 
ducive to the welfare and interests of the followers of the faith. 
As the French have made themsclves your Highness’s enemies, 
they have made themsclvcs so to all the followers of the Faith— 
God is the protector and defender of the land of Hindostan; 
next to him, this suppliant at the Almighty Throne, does not 
and will not neglect the defence and service of the people. I am 
fully confident that your Highness will be disposed to afford 
your assistance and support, in all mattcrs, to us Labourers. All 
Hindostan is over-run with infidels and polythcists, excepting 
the dominions of the Koodadaud Sirkar, which like the Ark of 


1 Over this word is written, ‘ Zhe Governor of Madras,’ 


56 HOW THE INFIDELS CAME HERE, 


Noah are safe under the protection and bounteous aid of God. 
It is my hope, from the supreme king of kings, that as at 
the appearance of a second Adam, the religion of Islaum will 
obtain exclusive prevalence over the whole country of Hindostan, 
and that all the sinful heretics will with the utmost ease become 
the prey of the swords of the combatants in the cause of reli- 
gion. Be it known to those who stand at the foot of the imperial 
throne, that the treachery, deceit, and supremacy of the christians 
in the regions of Hindostan, are beyond the power of expression. 
A summary elucidation of this, will be found as follows: 

A person, by name Da-ood Khaun, an Afghaun, was appointed 
to the Soobadarry of Arcot, on the part of the Emperor of Delhi. 
About that time, the French and English, each with one of their 
detested ships, and a few Kaufers (/nfidels) on board, came to 
the coast, expressly for the purpose of trade; bringing with them 
some of the products of their country, such as knives, scissors, 
needles, china and glass-ware, for sale. After prescnting several 
articles to the deluded Soobadar, as a Nuzzer (or offering, ex- 
pressive of submission) they requested the grant of a spot of 
ground, sufficient for a single house, for their residence, in order 
that they might import the products of Europe, paying the 
proper duties, and there remain with a dozen of their people. 
The Soobadar complied with their request ; and there the English 
resided for some time. 

It happencd, that the exalted Firmaun of Behaudur Shah, Son 
of Aulumgeer, Emperor of Shahjchaun-abaud (Delhi) addressed 
to Da-ood Khaun, arrived, directing him to leave a trusty Dewan 
(Manager) in Arcot, and repair himself to the presence. In con- 
formity to the Emperor’s summons, Da-ood Khaun repaired to 
Delhi, leaving Saadut-oolla Khaun as his deputy. Owing to the 
negligence and folly of the ministers at Delhi, Saadut-oolla 
Khaun became a traitor, and usurped the dominion of the 
‘country. About that period, the English and the French applied 
to the Soobadar for the grant of a little ground round about their 
houses; to which the Soobadar, from his want of foresight, and 
from his innate folly, consented ; and accordingly granted them 
the ground which they asked. After this, both these nations 
erected small forts, and stationed about a hundred men to gar- 
rison them, (verses) ‘Where a country is abandoned by its prince, 
every village becomes a principality. The relations and fol- 
‘lowers of Saadut-oolla Khaun, each took possession of Taalooks 
(districts) and erecting fortresses, established their abode. At 


DIVIDE, ET IMPERA/ FRENCH RISE. "7 


the same time, the French and English, taking with them some 
of the products of Europe, repaired to the districts of the rela- 
tions and followers of Saadut-oolla Khaun, and contracted friend- 
ship with them; and under this cover, obtaining a complete 
insight into their characters, their mode of living, the structure 
of their forts, the administration of their territories, and the con- 
dition of their forces, they entertained from four to five hundred 
men of that country and waited their opportunity. In the mean 
time Saadut-oolla Khaun died. After his death his relations 
and adherents, who were very numerous, quarrelled among them- 
Selves, and one of them, by the name of Sufder Alli Khaun, 
entered into an intrigue with the infidels of Poonah, and so- 
licited military succours. Agreeably to his request, an army of 
the Poonah infidels, consisting of 50,000 horse, under the com- 
mand of Rugghoo Futteh Sing, invaded the province of Arcot; 
where Sufder Alli Khaun suffered his father Alli Doast Khaun 
to be slain in battle by the infidels of Poonah. After this, these 
infidels seeing the dissensions which prevailed amongst the 
adherents and relations of Sufder Alli Khaun, plundered all the 
inhabitants of that country, without discrimination of friend or 
foe; carricd off a hundred thousand men and women prisoners 
to their own country, and sold them to slavery: they also took 
prisoner Hoossain Doast Khaun, known by the name of Chunda 
Khaun, who was the husband of Sufder Alli Khaun’s sister, and 
carricd him to Poonah. In the meantime, Mortiza Khaun, the 
governor of Vellore, and husband of another sister of Sufder Alli 
Khaun, enticed the latter to his house, and put him to death. 
After this event, Nizam-ool Moolk the Vizier of Delhi, who had 
made himself master of the Deccan, arrived in the province of 
Arcot, and appointing Anwar-oo-decn Khaun, Soobadaur of that 
province, on his own part gave in charge to him the two infant 
sons of the late Sufder Alli Khaun, with injunctions to protect 
and cducate them, and then returned to the Deccan. After this, 
Anwar-oo-deen Khaun incited the Afghauns to murder one of 
the children. A short time after, Chunda Khaun, who was in 
confinement at Poonah, bribing the infidels with a sum of 
money, obtaincd his release, and arrived in the province of 
Arcot, whence he proceeded to Pondicherry, a factory belong- 
ing to the French, where he took refuge: he there procured 
a body of French troops, with which he marched against 
Anwar-oo-decen Khaun, with a view to reduce the province of 
Arcot. In the mean time, Anwar-oo-decn Khaun sought the 


78 THE FRENCH STILL PROSPER. 


assistance of the English, who then held a factory at Cheena- 
puttun (Afadras.) Accordingly the English joined him with 
a body of troops. In proof of the words ‘He who afforded 
assistance to the oppressor, shall fall under subjection to the 
very man he assisted,—both these persons becoming the objects 
of the divine anger, sought assistance from. these two infidel 
tribes, and proceeded to hostilities. It was so decreed, however, 
that Anwar-oo-deen Khaun fell by the hand of Hoossain Doast 
Khaun. After this, Mohummud Alli Khaun, son of Anwar- 
oo-deen Khaun, giving up both his worldly and spiritual concerns, 
to the direction of the English, and making them his protectors, 
prepared for hostilities against Chunda Khaun. In the mean 
time, Nizam-ool-Moolk died, and was succeeded by his son 
Naussir Jung; whom Mohummud Alli Khaun invited to join 
him: but before his arrival, Naussir Jung’s nephew, Hidauyet 
Mohee-oo-deen Khaun, fled with a small body of troops to 
‘Pondicherry; and the French collecting a force which consisted 
of about a thousand men of their own nation, and about four 
thousand sepoys, proceeded with the troops of Hidauyet Mohce- 
oo-deen Khaun, against Naussir Jung; who joined with Mo- 
hummud Alli Khaun, after sustaining repeated engagements 
with the French, laid sicge to the fortress of Gingee, which is 
situated on a hill, and was then in the possession of the French. 
The latter entering into a collusion with the Sirdars of Naussir 
Jung’s army, attacked it in the night. After the alarm was 
given, Naussir Jung mounted his elephant ; when a man, named 
Behauder Khaun, an Afghaun in his service, had the bascness to 
kill him by a musket shot, and causing his elephant to be driven 
close to that of Naussir Jung, cut off his head and stuck it on the 
point of a spear. Upon this event, the French sct up Hidauyet 
Mohee-oo-deen Khaun as his successor, and, accompanicd by 
a body of their own troops under the command of an officer 
named Bussy, directed his march towards Hydcrabad. In the 
course of their march, they halted at the fort of Raychota, where 
the traitor Bchauder Khaun, and the French troops commanded 
by Bussy, quarrelled about the division of the plundered treasure 
and jewels, and an engagement took place, in which Behauder 
Khaun, and the other cursed Afghaun chicf, were slain, and 
precipitated to hell. Ylidauyet Mohce-oo-deen Khaun, also fell 
in this engagement by a musket shot. The French then con- 
ferred the succession on the worthless Salibut Jung, second son 
of Nizam-ool-Moolk, and proceeded with him to Hyderabad ; 


ENGLISH TRIUMPH IN CARNATIC AND BENGAL. 79 


whereby the whole of the Deccan may be said to have come 
under the authority of the French at Hyderabad. The French 
christians (who amounted to near 1,200 men) in a state of in- 
toxication, in open day, ‘entered the houses of the votaries of 
Islaum, and violated numbers of their women. Many of the 
females of the nobles ripped up their own bellies, and threw 
themselves into wells, Hence all the inhabitants of Hyderabad 
conceived enmity against the French. 

In the mean time Nizam Alli Khaun, son of Nizam-ool-Moolk, 
imprisoned his elder brother Salibut Jung, and established him- 
self in his room. A short time afterwards, when the utmost 
disagreement had taken place between the people of Hyderabad 
and the French, the worthless Bussy marched from that city with 
his troops and returned to Pondicherry. During™ thege trans- 
actions Mohummud Alli Khaun, in conjunction with thé English, 
carried on the war against Chunda Khaun, who was cordially the 
friend of the French. The armies of both the infidel nations 
contended for the province of Arcot, and after many battles and 
much bloodshed, the English and Mohummud Alli Khaun, 
having pledged their faith to him, and under that sanction made 
him their prisoner, put him to death, and obtained possession 
of the whole of the Arcot province, yielding a yearly revenue of 
near four crores of rupees, 

When the English had thus established themselves in Arcot, 
they turned their views to the conquest of Bengal. To this end, 
with the same treachery and deceit which has been above de- 
scribed, they applied to the viceroy of Bengal also for a spot 
of ground; and having obtained possession of sufficient for a 
single house, they there stationed their people as for the pur- 
poses of trade, and waited their opportunity. About this time 
the viccroy of Bengal died, and contentions arose among his 
children and rclations. The English taking part with the one, 
they subducd the other; and rendcring that other entircly 
dependent upon them, obtained possession of the whole do- 
minion of Bengal, a territory consisting of four Soobahs, and 
yielding an annual revenue of twenty crores of rupees. Not far 
from thence is a place called Lucknow, the ruler of which was 
Mirza Amauni (Assof-00-Dowlah) son of Shujah-oo-Dowlah. 
By intrigue and chicane with him, they (the English) intruded 
themsclves into that country also. What is more extraordinary 
is this: lately Mirza Amauni sent an ambassador to Zemaun 
Shah, the king of Caubul. This circumstance coming to the 


So THE LION PAINTED BY THE TIGER, 


knowledge of the English (Governor) General! who resides at 
Calcutta, he proceeded thence on a visit to Mirza Amauni, and 
having leagued with the ministers of that country, caused Mirza 
Amauni to be poisoned, violated the chastity of his widow, and 
plundered his house of money and jewels, to the amount of 
twenty crores of Rupees. Throughout the territory of Bengal, 
wherever there were men of learning, science, and rank, the 
English have forcibly taken prisoners wives and daughters, 
violated their chastity, and carried them off to their own islands 
and country; seizing the youths of the class of Syuds, devotees, 
and learned men, and obliging them to eat the flesh of swine, 
proclaimed it by beat of tomtom. In the country of Bengal, 
and in all other places where their authority prevails, they set up 
swine butchers, and cause them to sell the flesh of hogs publicly 
in the streets and markets. 

All this power and authority have the English acquired in the 
space of forty years. 

About twenty years ago, during the life-time of my late re- 
vered father Hyder Alli Khaun, disputes occurring among the 
worthless Sirdars of the Poonah infidels, Roggoo-naut Rao, the 
uncle of Narrain Rao, the head of the Poonah state, treachcrously 
murdered his nephew: the turbulent spirit of the chiefs, how- 
ever, obliged him to seck refuge at Bombay, a place in the 
possession of the English. 

The English, obtaining from him money and jewels to a large 
amount, detached an army with Roggoo-naut Rao for the re- 
duction of Poonah. The Poonah ministers, deccitfully sclected 
a child of two or three days old from their own class, proclaimed 
him as the genuine offspring of the murdered Narrain Rao, and 
as the successor to the Musnud (¢hrone) and assembling an army, 
marched to oppose the English and Roggoo-naut Rao. Finding 
themselves unable to cope with the English, they repeatedly 
sent letters by ambassadors of rank to the presence of his late 
Highness (Hyder Ali) soliciting his assistance. His Highness 
prudently considering, that although it is declared ‘ Herctics are 
impure, yet that it was more advisable to afford than refuse his 
assistance to the infidels belonging to the country (because the 
supremacy of the English was the source of evil to all God’s 
creatures)—with a view to the aid of Poonah, marched to 
Madras with a vast army. Many engagements ensucd, and 
many places fell, and Madras itself was near being taken; when 


; Sir John Shore, 


ee 


A NEW VIEW OF THE LAST PEACE. 81 


it pleased God that his Highness should end his days in that 
expedition, and he died in the vicinity of Arcot. After this 
event, I continued the war; and after many victories, and the 
capture of numberless prisoners, the English sent their am- 
bassadors, humbly, and by engagement and oath, to sue for 
peace. Although I was not myself disposed to grant them 
peace, yet by the earnest advice of the nobles of the Khoodadaud 
Sirkar, I consented. Four or five years after, when ambassadors 
from the Khoodadaud Sirkar, arrived at the Sublime Porte; and 
after representing the sentiments of fricndship, returned to the 
presence. The English, receiving information of this circum- 
stance, with hearts inflamed, immediately conceived that all the 
tribe of Islaum were about to league together for their destruc- 
tion. They knew too, that they had given your Highness proofs 
of their evil disposition, and thercfore, uniting to themselves 
Nizam Alli Khaun, and the infidels of Poonah, they waged war 
against the Khoodadaud Sirkar for four years. At length, near 
a hundred thousand of the followers of the faith, had determined 
to slay their wives and familics with their own hands, and rushing 
upon the infidels, drink the cup of martyrdom, and plunge the 
infidels into hell. The counsellors, the Lords, and the respected 
sages of Islaum, all agreed that this attack upon the dominions 
of the Khoodadaud Sirkar was in consequence of the deputation 
of ambassadors with Ictters to the Sublime Porte, and therefore 
that it was advisable by any means to accommodate matters 
for the present; to communicate to your Ilighness all that 
occurred, and joined with your Highness's aid, proceed to exter- 
minate the infidels. I approved the representation of my faith- 
ful servants, and surrendering thrce crores and thirty lacs of 
rupecs in treasure, and half my country (which was all a dead 
loss to mc) put an end to the contest. 

The English having adopted a determined resolution to subdue 
the whole of Hindostan, and to subvert the Mussulman religion, 
and having united to themselves Nizam Alli Khaun, and the in- 
fidels of Poonah, have for five ycars past been devising the means ; 
accordingly they have latcly written in plain and undisguisced 
terms, that it is their intention to destroy the religion of Islaum— 
‘evil designs return upon the heads of the inventors” The 
infidels of Poonah, in consequence of the disagreements pre- 
vailing among the ministers at Delhi, have subverted that 
country, and having destroyed its houscs, have erected their own 
temples on their ruins—thcy have possessed themselves entirely 

G 


82 MY AMBASSADORS WILL TELL MORE. 


of that kingdom, whilst a poor sightless individual of the royal 
family of Delhi, whose servants put out his eyes, is scated in his 
house in a state the most abject. The resources of his main- 
tenance are fixed from the sale of the fruits of his gardens; and 
he is obliged to pay the price (of that maintenance) by paying adula- 
tion to those treacherous infidels. Near five hundred thousand of 
the infidels of the district of Calicut, Nuzzurabaud, Zuffcrabaud, 
and Ashrufabaud, who were wavering on the precincts of obe- 
dience, have been converted at different times, Praise be to God, 
that the whole energy of the well-directed mind of this labourer 
in the way of the Lord, on whose forchead is engraved the motto 
‘They dread not the terrific day of judgment, is continually 
exerted to support the Religion of Mohummud. Accordingly, 
having lately been informed of the excessive commotions excited 
by the son of Abdool Wahaub in the neighbourhood of Mecca 
the holy, immediately addressed Ictters to the supreme minister 
Yoosuf Vizier, to the Shereef of Mecca, and the servants of the 
holy receptacle (meaning the place at Medina where Mohummud ts 
buried) purporting, that it was my intention to send a consider- 
able force under the command of one of my approved sons, and 
desiring them to write to me a particular account of the situation 
of affairs in that quarter. For the illustrious Kaaba is the object 
of veneration to the followers of truth, and the object of the 
regard of the All Powerful; and to do services thercunto is pro- 
ductive of blessings, both in this world and the world to come. 
The respected and accomplished Syuds, Syud Alli Mohum- 
mud and Syud Modaur-oo-decn, are now nominated and deputed 
with this friendly letter to represent various points of great im- 


. portance, and to communicate the sentiments of my mind, and 
. with instructions to remain in attendance on your Majesty during 


three years. I trust that-they will be honoured by admission to 
your Highness’s presence, and have an opportunity of a personal 
conference, and of stating to you my sentiments, and that their 
representations will obtain full credit with your Highness. May 
the victorious banners of Islaum be ever prevalent, and every 
trace of heresy and infidels be wiped away! 

[A letter to the same effect as the foregoing, was also written 
to Zemaun Shah; several alterations, however, which were ne- 
cessary to adapt the letter to the situation of Zemaun Shah, are 
inserted in the margin of the draft.] 

(A true translation.) 
N. B. Epsonsrone, P. T. to the Government. 


POLITICAL COMMISSION FOR THE WAR, 83 


ll, The Earl of Mornington to his Excellency Lieutenant- 
General Harris. 


Lustructions for the political conduct of the War with Tippoo. 


Fort St. George, Feb. 22nd, 1799. 
Sir, 

I have reason to believe that many of the tributaries, principal 
officers, and other subjects of Tippoo Sultaun, are inclined to 
throw off the authority of that Prince, and to place themselves 
under the protection of the Company and of our allics, The 
war in which we are again involved, by the treachery and 
violence of the Sultaun, renders it both just and expedient that 
we should avail ourselves, as much as possible, of the discon- 
tents and disaffection of his people. It is, therefore, advisable, 
to arrange a plan for the regular conduct of all negotiations con- 
nected with this object. 

Being apprehensive that your more important avocations will 
not admit of your taking any part in the details of this business, 
T hereby direct you to constitute a commission for this purpose, 
to consist of the Honourable Coloncl Wellesley, Licutenant- 
Colonel Close, Licutenant-Colonel Agnew, and Captain Mal- 
colm, assistant to the Resident at Hyderabad; with Captain 
Macaulay, to act as secretary to the commission. 

The commissioners are to act constantly in communication 
with you, and to obey whatever dircctions you shall think 
proper to signify to them. 

Thcy are to report their procecdings tg me as frequently and 
as regularly as circumstances shall permit. 

They will correspond with the commissioners in Malabar on 
such points as shall be connected in any respect with the objects 
of this commission: and for this purpose you will be pleased to 
furnish them with a copy of the Company’s cypher, No, 11. 

Their duty is to consist, generally, in receiving and considering 
all such overtures from the subjects of Tippoo Sultaun (of what- 
ever class), as may either be referred by you to the commis- 
sioncrs, or may be addressed to them through other channels, 

In cases which may not admit of reference to me, they will 
decide, under your authority, on the degree and nature of the 
encouragement proper to be given to such persons as may pro- 
pose to place themsclvcs under the protection of the Company. 
The following extracts from my instructions to the commis- 
sioners in Malabar (which you will be pleased to communicate 

G 2 


84 HOW TO MEET THE DISAFFECTED, 


to the officers named in the present commission), will explain 
the general principles by which their conduct is to be regulated. 

‘I now authorize you to avail yourselves, without reserve, 
of the overtures made some time since to Mr. Uthoff and to 
Captain Mahony, by Shehab-ud-Dein Khan, to whatever extent 
you may judge practicable and uscful. You will also receive 
and encourage from any other of the chiefs, or public officers of 
Tippoo Sultaun, on the coast of Malabar, any advances which 
shall appear to you to promise assistance to the Company, in” 
the prosecution of the war against that Prince. 

‘I am not at present in possession of any information which 
enables me to judge with sufficient certainty of the gencral dis- 
position and temper of the inhabitants of Tippoo’s remaining 
dominions on the coast of Malabar. If, however, they should 
manifest an inclination to revolt against his authority, and you 
should think it expedient to encourage them, I leave it to your 

| discretion to offer them such support and protection as the state 

‘of the British force on your coast may enable you to afford. I 
also authorize you to give to all tributarics, or others, renouncing 
their allegiance to Tippoo, and acting heartily in our favour, the 
most positive assurances, in the name of the Company, that I 
will use my utmost efforts to compel that Prince to relinquish 
all claims upon their allegiance, and to agree to their becoming 
the dependents and subjects of the Honourable Company, on 
such terms as shall hereafter be arranged under my orders.’ 

The enclosure No. 1 contains an account of the overtures from 
Shehab-ud-Dein Khan, referred to in the foregoing extract. 

It will be obvious, however, that the instructions apply more 
particularly to tributaries, or zemindars, possessing or claiming 
,such districts 67 the borders of the Company’s territory as may 
be annexed to it, in the favourable event of a further reduction 

f the Sultaun’s power, and of a partition of his present domi- 
nions. 

The commission will communicate with Mecr Allum, with 
respect to all such proposals as may appear likely to concern 
the interests of the Nizam. Any overtures which may be made 
by tributaries, or other subjects of the Sultaun, adjacent to the 
present frontier of his Highness, will be considered with Mcer 

_Allum’s assistance ; the necessary cncouragement and assurances 
to such persons being, more properly, to be adjusted by the 
powers to whom their allegiance may eventually be transferred. 

The same principle must be applied to any offers which may 


ON THE FRONTIER, OR IN THE INTERIOR. 85 


proceed from districts bordering on the present Mahratta domi- 
nions. Should a Mahratta force hereafter join your army, the 
commissioners will (in the cases to which I now refer), consult 
with the commander of that force, as well as with the command- 
ing officer of any British detachment from Bombay which may 
be acting with the Mahrattas. 

But, although in the two last cases, authoritative assurances 
and encouragement would most properly proceed from our allies 
respectively, it is not improbable that, on some occasions, the 
guarantce of the Company may be required to such engage- 
ments, and even be made an indispensable preliminary condition 
by the parties proposing to abandon the cause of Tippoo. 

It is desirable to avoid all such engagements of the nature 
of a guarantce, the commissioners, therefore, will be careful not 
to guarantee any engagements which the allies may be inclined 
to form with persons renouncing their allegiance to Tippoo 
Sultaun, excepting in cases where the proposed advantage shall 
, be important to the common cause, and evidently unattainable 
without a formal guarantce.| In general, therefore, such con- 
tracts must be avoided; but if a case of peculiar exigency 
should arise, without a possibility of a previous reference to me, 
the commissioners will regulate their conduct as nearly as pos- 
sible on the principles which I have already established, for 
cascs more immediately affecting the particular interests of the 
Company. 

The firm foundation on which our connexion with the Court 
of Hydcrabad is now happily placed, disposcs me to guarantee, 
with less hesitation, any engagements which the Nizam, or Meer 
Allum, on his Highness’s behalf, might be willing to form with 
the tributarics of the enemy on the side of his Highness’s 
frontier than prudence would require in any similar transaction 
under the Mahratta power. 

With respect to overtures proceeding from the more central 
parts of the enemy’s country, and, therefore, from persons whose 
possessions are not likely, in any event, to be transferred to any 
of the allics, it is evident that such overtures cannot be received 
or encouraged in the same manner as those which have bcen 
already considered. To offers of this description, the commis- 
sion must return mercly such assurances of aid and support 
(whether military or pecuniary), as it may be immediately 
practicable to afford; avoiding, carcfully, any engagements 
which might ultimately embarrass a negotiation for peace. With 


86 APPEAL TO THE MYSORE PURLIC. 


regard to pecuniary aids, I authorize you to give your sanction 
to such advances of money as the commissioners may dcem 
essentially necessary to promote the objects of these instruc- 
tions; apprizing you, however, that these advances of money 
must be confined within the limits of moderation, and with due 
attention to economy. 

With these instructions you will receive copies, in Persian and 
English, of a declaration which J propose to publish for the 
purpose of justifying to the powers of Hindostan the measures 
which .the conduct of Tippoo Sultaun has compelled the Com- 
pany and their allies to adopt. You will communicate this 
document to the commissioners, who are to prepare and publish, 
in your name, such proclamations as shall appear to them to be 
best adapted to the state of the different parts of the enemy's 
country through which you may pass, or with which you may 
open any intercourse, conforming the gencral tenor of all such 
proclamations to the principles and spirit of the declaration. 

You have already been furnished with copics in Persian and 
English, of my correspondence with Tippoo Sultaun, as well as 
with translations in Persian, of the Grand Signior’s manifesto, 
and of his Highness’s letter to the Sultan; you will communicate 
these papers to the commissioners. Those passages of the 
correspondence, and of the documents received from Constanti- 
snople, which expose the character of the French republic, and 
the outrages committed by the French against the acknow- 
ledged head of the Mahommedan church, may, in particular, be 
employed* to produce an useful impression on all the Mussul- 
man inhabitants of Mysore. The commissioners will make any 
further use of these documents which may appcar advisable, 

T also enclose (No. 2) copies, in Persian and Inglish, of an 
agreement which has been lately concluded, under my direction, 
with certain chicfs of the Ghyre Mchdy sect of Mussulmans. 
For an account of the banishment of these scctaries from the 
dominions of Tippoo Sultaun, I refer you to the accompanying 
extract of a Ictter from the Resident at Hyderabad, under date 
the 4th of January last, making the inclosure No. 3. Among 
these exiles are many persons who formerly held situations of 
great trust under the government of the late Hyder Ali Khan, 
as well as under that of Tippoo Sultaun; and it is obvious that 
all these persons must be intimately acquainted with the country 
of the enemy. It will be the business of the commissioners, 
under your orders, to consider how the knowledge and probable 


INTRIGUES WITH THE RANEF, ETC. 87 


connexions of these people, may be best applied to the pro- 
motion of the objects of their commission. It appears that the 
Sirdars, whom, together with 400 Sillahdar horse, I have agreed 
to entertain for the present (principally with a view to the 
advantages which may be derived from their local knowledge 
and connexions) posscss the means, as well as the inclination, of 
levying for our service a considerable body of cavalry, consisting 
of their exiled associates, now dispersed throughout the domi- 
nions of the Pcishwa and of the Nizam, !To employ their whole 
force in the ficld would be extremely burthensome, and I trust 
we shall never be under the necessity of resorting to such 
assistance beyond the extent of the arrangement already con- 
cluded with Jafficr Khan and Syed Yacoob.., 

The commission will be confidentially informed by Captain 
Malcolm of the progress which may have been made in a certain 
secret negotiation which has been opened by Mcer Allum, in 
communication with Captain Malcolm since the conduct of 
Tippoo Sultaun compelled me to adopt the resolution of attack- 
ing his territorics. It is impossible for me, in the present stage 
of this negotiation, to give the commission any precise instruc- 
tions for the regulation of their proceedings with relation to this 
very peculiar and important case, and, therefore, I must leave 
the management of it to their discretion, aided by that of Meer 
Allum, If, however, they should be able to transmit to me any 
report on this delicate point before the communication between 
the army and this Presidency shall become precarious or dif- 
ficult, it is my desire that they should write to me in cypher, a 
caution which they must always observe in their correspondence 
with me, from any position which may render their despatches 
liable to be intercepted. 

The enclosure No. 4, consists of a memorandum of a most 
secret and delicate nature, relating to the family which governed 
Mysore previously to the usurpation of Ifyder Ali Khan. 

It is obvious that no advantageous negotiation can be opened 
with any of the surviving branches of this family under any 
other circumstances than a determination, accompanied by 
undoubted power, to effect the total removal of the ruling 
dynasty. Such a determination in the present stage of our 
contest with Tippoo Sultaun would be premature, and incom- 
patible with the principles on which my instructions to you of 
the 3rd instant were founded. My orders for the march of the 
army being grounded on the necessity of providing for our own 


88 EXTREME PRECAUTION ENJOINED, 


indispensable security and reasonable indemnity, and being 
strictly limited to those justifiable objects. There is, besides, 
no reason to suppose that any of the persons mentioned in the 
accompanying memoir could be rendcred useful (in any matcrial 
degree) in the prosecution of the war. 

The commissioners must, therefore, confine their proceedings 
on this subject to enquirics into the state of partics in Mysore, 
with a view to the practicability of restoring that family with or 
without the consent of the principal Mussulman chicfs at present 
in authority in the country. The commission will readily per- 
ceive that these enquiries must be conducted with the utmost 
caution and prudence; for if their object were to transpire, the 
discovery might check, if not prevent, many advances which 
‘would otherwise be made from persons attached to the Mussul- 
man Government. 

The personal safety of the surviving adherents of the ancient 
family of the Rajahs of Mysore, and even of the Rance herself, 
also requires peculiar discretion and secrecy in the conduct of 
this part of the business of the commission. The most dreadful 
scene of vengeance and slaughter would be the probable con- 
sequence of Tippoo’s recciving the slightest intimation of the 
contents of the accompanying memoir, which, therefore, after 
being attentively perused by the commissioners, must be de- 
stroyed. 

You will direct Captain Macleod, of the intelligence depart- 
ment, to communicate, from time to time, to the commission 
whatever intelligence he may reccive of a nature connected with 
the objects of the commission, with which I authorize you to 
make him fully acquainted. - 

Tam, &c, 
MORNINGTON. 


12. Declaration of the Right Honourable the Govornor Gone- 
ral in Council, for all the forces and affairs of the British 
nation in the ‘East Indies, on behalf of the Honourable 
the East India Company and the allies of the said Com- 
pany there, his Highness the Nizam and the Poishwa. 


Declaration of the occasion of the War with Tippoo. 
Fort St. George, 22d Feb., 1799. 


A solemn treaty of peace and fricndship was concluded at 
Seringapatam, between the Honourable Company and the, 


TIPPOO CANNOT BLAME OUR CONDUCT. 8y 


Nabob Asoph Jah and the Pcishwa on the one part, and the 
Nabob Tippoo Sultaun on the other part; and from that day 
all commotion and hostility ceased. Since that day, the three 
allicd states have invariably manifested a sacred regard for the 
obligations contracted under that treaty with the Nabob Tippoo 
Sultaun. Of this uniform disposition, abundant proofs have 
been afforded by each of the allics. Whatever differences have 
arisen with regard to the limits of the territory of Mysore, have 
becn amicably adjusted without difficulty, and with the most 
exact attention to the principles of equity, and to the stipula- 
tions of treaty. Such has been the solicitude of the allics for 
the preservation of tranquillity, that they have viewed with 
forbearance, for some ycars past, various embassies and military 
preparations on the part of Tippoo Sultaun, of a tendency so 
evidently hostile to the interests of the allies, as would have 
justified them, not only in the most serious remonstrances, but 
even in an appeal to arms, On the part of the British Govern- 
ment every endeavour has been employed to conciliate the con- 
fidence of the Sultaun, and to mitigate his vindictive spirit, by 
the most unequivocal acknowledgment and confirmation of his 
just rights, and by the removal of every cause of jealousy which 
might tend to interrupt the continuance of peace. These pacific 
sentiments have been most particularly manifested in the 
Governor Gencral’s recent decision on Tippoo Sultaun’s claim 
to the district of Wynaad, and in the negotiation opened by his 
Lordship with regard to the districts of Amcrah and Soulcah. 
In every instance the conduct of the British Government in 
India towards Tippoo Sultaun, has been the natural result of 
those principles of modcration, justice, and good faith, which the 
legislature of Great Britain and the Honourable the East India 
Company have firmly established as the unaltcrable rule of their 
intercourse with the native princes and states of India. 

The exemplary good faith and the pacific disposition of the 
allics, since the conclusion of the treaty of Seringapatam, has 
never been disputed even by Tippoo Sultaun, Far from having 
attempted to alledge even the pretext of a complaint against 
their conduct, he has constantly acknowledged their justice, 
sincerity, and good faith; and has professed, in the most cordial 
terms, his desire to maintain and strengthen the foundations of 
harmony and concord with them. 

In the midst of these amicable professions on the part of 
Tippoo Sultaun, and at the moment when the British Govern- 


go YET HE HAS JOINED THE FRENCH AGAINST US, 


ment had issued orders for the confirmation of his claim to 
Wynaad, it was with astonishment and indignation that the 
allies discovered the engagements which he had contracted 
with the French nation, in direct violation of the treaty of 
Seringapatam, as well as of his own most solemn and recent 
protestations of friendship towards the allics. 

Under the mask of these specious professions, and of a pre- 
tended veneration for the obligations of treaty, Tippoo Sultaun 
despatched ambassadors to the Isle of France, who, in a period 
of profound peace in India, proposed and concluded, in his 
name, an offensive alliance with the French, for the avowed 
purpose of commencing a war of aggression against the Com- 
pany, and consequently against the Peishwa and the Nizam, the 
allies of the Company. 

The ambassadors, in the name of Tippoo Sultaun, demanded 
military succours from the French, and actually levied a military 
force in the Isle of France, with the declared view of prosecuting 
the intended war. 

When the ambassadors returned, in a French ship of war, 
from the Isle of France, Tippoo Sultaun suffered the military 
force, which they had levied for the avowed purpose of making 
war upon the allics, to land in his country; and finally, he 
admitted it into his army: by these personal acts ratifying and 
confirming the proceedings of his ambassadors. 

This military force, however, was not sufficiently powerful to 
enable him immediatcly to attempt his declared purpose of 
attacking the Company’s possessions, but in the meanwhile 
he advanced his hostile preparations conformably to his engage- 
ments with the French’; and he was ready to move his army 
into the Company’s territories whenever he might obtain from 
France the effectual succours which he had assiduously solicited 
from that nation. 

But the providence of God, and the victorious arms of the 
British nation, frustrated his vain hopes, and checked the pre- 
sumptuous career of the French in Egypt at the moment when 
he anxiously expected their arrival on the coast of Malabar. 

The British Government, the Nizam, and the Peishwa, had 
not omitted the neccssary precaution of assembling their forces 
for the joint protection of their respective dominions, The 
strict principles of self-defence would have justified the allies at 
that period of time in making an immediate attack upon the 
territories of Tippoo Sultaun; but even the happy intelligence 


AND EVADED FRIENDLY CONFERENCE, gt 


of the glorious success of the British flect at the mouth of the 
Nile did not abate the anxious desire of the allics to maintain 
the relations of amity and peace with Tippoo Sultaun. They 
attempted, by a modcrate representation, to recall him to a 
sense of his obligations, and of the genuine principles of 
prudence and policy; and they employed every effort to open 
the channels of negotiation, and to facilitate the means of 
amicable accommodation. With these salutary views, the Go- 
vernor General, on the 8th Novembcr, 1798, in the name of the 
allies, proposed to despatch an ambassador to Tippoo Sultaun, 
for the purpose of renewing the bonds of friendship, and of con- 
cluding such an arrangement as might afford effectual security 
against any future interruption of the public tranquillity; and 
his Lordship repeated the same proposal on the 1oth December, 
1798. Tippoo Sultaun declined, by various evasions and subter- 
Tages, this friendly and moderate advance on the part of the 
allies, and he manifested an evident disposition to reject the 
means of pacific accommodation, by suddenly breaking up, in 
the month of December, the conferences which had commenced 
with respect to the districts of Amcrah and Soulcah, and by 
interrupting the intercourse between his subjects and those of 
the Company on their respective fronticrs, On the 9th January, 
1799, the Governor Gencral being arrived at Fort St. George 
(notwithstanding these discouraging circumstances in the con- 
duct of Tippoo Sultaun) renewed with increased carnestness, 
the expression of his Lordship’s anxious desire to despatch an 
ambassador to the Sultaun. 

The Governor General expressly solicited the Sultaun to 
return an answer within one day to this Ictter; and as it in- 
volved no proposition cither injurious to the rights, dignity, or 
honour of the Sultaun, or in any degree novel or complicated 
either in form or substance, it could not require a longer con- 
sideration. The Governor Gencral waited with the utmost 
Solicitude for an answer to the reasonable and distinct pro- 
position contained in his Jctter of the 9th January, 1799. Tippoo 
Sultaun, however, who must have reccived this Ictter before the 
‘isth of January, remained silent, although the Governor Gencral 
(had plainly apprized that prince, that dangcrous consequences 
would result from delay. In the meanwhile the season for 
military operations had already advanced to so late a period, as 
\to render a speedy decision indispensable to the security of the 
allies, Under these circumstances, on the 3rd of February 


| @ hunting excursion ; 


92 HOPING TO DISARM US, BY DELAY. 


(eight days having elapsed from the period when an answer 
might have been received from Seringapatam to the Governor 
General’s letter of the 9th January) his Lordship declared to the 
allies, that the necessary measures must now be adopted, without 
delay, for securing such advantages as should place the common 
safety of the allies beyond the reach of the insincerity of Tippoo 


. Sultaun, and of the violence of the French. With this view, the 


Governor General, on the 3rd of February, issued orders to the 
British armies to march, and signified to the commander of his 
Majesty’s squadron, that the obstinate silence of the Sultaun 
must be considered as a rejection of the proposed amicable 
negotiation. 

At length, on the 13th of February, a letter from Tippoo 
Sultaun reached the Governor General, in which the Sultaun 
signifies to his Lordship, ‘that being frequently disposed to 
make excursions and hunt, he was accordingly proceeding upon 
’ adding, ‘that the Governor Gencral would 
be pleased to despatch Major Doveton to him, unattended or 
slightly attended.’ : 

The allies will not dwell on the peculiar phrases of this letter ; 
but it must be evident to all the states of India, that the answer 
of the Sultaun has, becn deferred to this late period of the 
season, with no other view than to preclude the allies, by 
insidious delays, from the benefit of those advantages which 
their combined military operations would enable them to secure. 
On those advantages alone (under the recent expericnce of 
Tippoo Sultaun’s violation of the treaty of Seringapatam, and 
under the peculiar circumstances of that prince’s offensive 
alliance with the French) can the allies now venture to rcly for 
the faithful execution of any treaty of peace concluded with 
Tippoo Sultaun. 

The allies cannot suffer Tippoo Sultaun to profit by his own 
studied and systematic delay, nor to impede such a disposition 
of their military and naval force, as shall appear best calculated 
to give effect to their just views. 

Bound by the sacred obligations of public faith, professing the 
most amicable disposition, and undisturbed in the posscssion of 
those dominions secured to him by treaty, Tippoo Sultaun 
wantonly violated the relations of amity and pcace, and com- 
pelled the allies to arm in defence of their rights, their -hap- 
piness, and their honour. 

For a period of three months, he obstinately rejected every. 


IN VAIN! BUT HE MAY YET AVOID WAR. 93 ' 


pacific overture, in the hourly expectation of receiving that 
succour which he has eagerly solicited for the prosecution of 
his favourite purposes of ambition and revenge. Disappointed 
in his hopes of immediate vengeance and conquest, he now 
resorts to subterfuge and procrastination; and, by a tardy,’ 
reluctant, and insidious acquiescence in a proposition which he! 
had so long and repeatedly declined, he endeavours to frustrate - 
the precautions of the allies, and to protract every effectual : 
operation, until some change of circumstances and of season, 
shall revive his expectations of disturbing the tranquillity of, 
India, by favouring the irruption of a French army. 

The allies are equally prepared to repel his violence, and to 
counteract his artifices and delays, 

The allies are, therefore, resolved to place their army in such 
a position as shall afford adequate protection against any 
artifice or insincerity, and shall preclude the return of that 
danger which has so lately menaced their possessions, The 
allies, however, retaining an anxious desire to effect an adjust- 
ment with Tippoo Sultaun, Lieutenant General Harris, Com- 
mander-in-Chicf of his Majesty’s and the Honourable Com- 
pany’s forces on the coast of Coromandel and Malabar, is 
authorized to receive any embassy which Tippoo Sultaun may 
despatch to the head quarters of the British army, and to concert 
a treaty on such conditions as appear to the allics to be indis- 
pensably necessary for the establishment of a secure and per- 
manent peace, 

Dated Fort St. George, 22nd February, 1799, by order of the 
Right Honourable the Governor General in Council, 

Jos. WEBBE. 


| 


A true Copy, N. B. Epmonstone, 
Persian Translator to Govt. 


18. From the Governor-General to General Harris. 


Advantageous circumstances under which the War was 
undertaken, 
(Private.) Fort St. George, February 23, 1799. 
My dear General, 

‘Having answered all your public and private Ictters, adopted 
every arrangement suggested in your several minutes, and 
furnished you with detailed instructions applicable to every 
contingency for which I can provide, I now proceed to com. 
municate to you without reserve my private sentiments with 


* 94 ‘YOU ARE. STRONGER THAN CORNWALLIS. 


‘regard to your own ‘situation, and to my expectations of the 
‘result of the important expedition which I have entrusted to 
-your charge. The army of the Carnatic immediately under 
-your command is unquestionably the best appointed, the most 
completely equipped, the most amply and liberally supplied, 
-the most perfect in point of discipline, and the most fortunate 
Gin the acknowledged experience and abilities of its officers in 
‘every department, which ever took the field in IndiaX. It com- 
prises a more numerous and better appointed -corps of cavalry 
’ than any European power in India ever brought into action. 
‘The army on the coast of Malabar appears by all accounts to 
-be in an equally efficient state, and the command on that coast 
never before was lodged in such able hands. (All the depart- 
ments relating to supplies from that quarter promise to afford a 
‘fae more effectual assistance than was derived from thence during 
the last war. \The powerful force which is destined to co-operate 
from the southward is an advantage not possessed in the last 
war, and which will become doubly useful sigder the conduct of 
‘Lieutenant-Colonel Brown; and in the Baggmahl, Lieutenant- 
Colonel Read has already contributed the fruits of his experience 
in the collection of supplies, and every measure has been taken 
to secure the earliest benefits from his exertions. The appear- 
ance of so large a fleet on Tippoo’s coasts is a circumstance of 
advantage not possessed in the last war, and which cannot fail 
to aid your operations, by intimidating the enemy and by en- 
couraging defection among his subjects. With regard to the 
allies, the Nizam’s force has appeared in the field at a much 
earlier period than in the Jast contest with Tippoo; and the 
cordial zeal of the court of Hyderabad for our success (which 
was so questionable during the last war) now admits of no 
doubt 
The Mahrattahs have accepted a detachment from Bombay ; 
and during the siege of Seringapatam there is no reason to 
apprehend that the Peishwa will not make every effort to assist 
you with a large body of cavalry. (You are invested with powers 
fully adequate to the management of these extraordinary and 
numerous advantages, and you are surrounded by a staff ap- 
pointed in the most liberal manner, and uniting every species of 
knowledge and ability which can tend to give additional force to. 
the efforts of your own experience and zeal. The object of your 
operations is single, distinct, and definite, and the means of 
attaining it have been the continual study of yourself, and of 


AND TIPPOO IS NOW WEAKER THAN IN 1792. 95 


those acting under your orders, The enemy’s country, the 
nature of his resources, the strength of his defences, and the 
character of his force, are subjects perfectly familiar to the 
whole of your staff, and to most of your principal officers. e 
cannot make a movement which they will not anticipate, nor is 
any contingency likely to arise against which they will not have 
provided) On the other hand, Tippoo Sultaun’s army is known 
to have suffered essentially both in numbers and discipline since 
the last war. His finances are in great disorder ; he no longer 
possesses the confidence of his army, his councils are distracted 


by a variety of contending factions, and ‘his spirits are dejected | 


and broken by the disappointment of his hopes of French 
assistance, by the retreat of Zemaun Shah, by the failure of his 
intrigues at the courts of Poonah and Hyderabad, and by the 
unexampled vigour, alacrity, and extent of our military pre- 


parations. You possess, therefore, every advantage which the | 


etree ae ee a 


most sanguine mind could expect, or the most anxious could ‘ 


desire, in the strength of your own army, in the cordiality of the 
allies, in the comparative weakness and dejection of the enemy, 
in the efficiency of your power, in the support of the Government 
under which you are to act, in the ability of the counsels which 
you can command, and in the unity and simplicity of the object 
which you are directed to pursue. Under such circumstances, it 
is not presumption to expect the most decisive success. Witha 
full confidence that you will make a just use of the. unprece- 
dented and unlimited advantages of your present enviable and 
commanding situation, and with a persuasion that you will con- 
duct your army with a degree of vigour and alacrity proportioned 
to that with which you have equipped it, I cannot entertain the 
smallest doubt that (under Providence) the issue of the expedi- 
tion will be as speedy and prosperous as the means which you 
possess are abundant and unexampled. I am, however, aware 
that, in all great enterprises, difficulties will.occur; but where 
previous measures have been well combined, and every season- 
able precaution provided, a manly firmness will surmount 
obstacles even of a formidable appearance, and the trivial 
ordinary embarrassments of detail are conquered the moment 
they are despised. Recollect the difficulties which opposed 
the detachment of a. large: portion of the central: army to ac- 
complish an arduous undertaking at the court of the Nizam; 
you encountered every impediment with resolution and spirit, 
and within two months you saw the happy effects of your own 


g6 ALL BODES SUCCESS TO YOU, 


firmness in the complete and easy success of that important 
measure, and you now feel those effects in the great accession of 
strength which has resulted from that measure to the common 
cause of the allies. 

Recollect that the equipment of the very army which you 
now command was long represented to be utterly impracticable 
within the present season; and that difficultics absolutely in- 
surmountable were supposed to preclude the possibility of raising 
the necessary funds for carrying on the present campaign. Every 
impartial mind must zow admit that a more striking example 
of the efficacy of perseverance and resolution in overcoming 
practical obstacles of detail cannot be exhibited than that which 
appears in the actual state of your order of battle, and of your 
tumbrils. These reflections will naturally animate you to an 
unremitting exertion of the same spirit of alacrity and prompti- 
tude, which has brought your army to its present unrivalled and 
admirable condition. The magnitude of the enterprise, and the 
means which you possess of commanding its success by a vigor- 
ous use of your extensive powers, will raise your mind above the 
consideration of all temporary inconveniences, will enable you to 
overcome every delay, and will accelerate the rapidity of your 
progress towards that object, which however great and valuable 
is easily attainable by diligence, fortitude and despatch. With 
these sentiments, my dear Gencral, I take my leave of you (I 
trust for a very short period of time), in the firm conviction, that, 
within a few weeks, I shall have the satisfaction of congratulating 
you on the prosperous issue of a service, combining more solid 
advantages and morc brilliant distinctions than the favour of 
fortune, season, and circumstances, ever placed within the reach 
of any British subject in India, from the carlicst success of our 
arms to the present day. 

Believe me, my dear General, 
With the greatest regard and good wishes, 
Your faithful friend and servant, 
MORNINGTON, 


14. The Earl of Mornington to the Honourable the Court 
of Directors. 
Vindication and plan of the Mysore War. 
-Fort St. George, 20th March, 1799. 
Hon, Sirs, 
My separate despatch, under date the 21st November, for- 


IMPROVED SPIRIT AT MADRAS. 97 


warded by the Eurydice, will have apprized your Honourable 
Court of the measures which I took for the purpose of restoring 
to his Highness the Nizam the power of fulfilling his defensive 
engagements with the Company. 

At the same time my endeavours were employed with equal 
assiduity to give vigour and effect to the treaties subsisting with 
his Highness the Peishwa. The return of Nana Furnaveese to 
the administration afforded for some time a just expectation 
that our alliance with the Mahrattas would speedily be restored 
with additional vigour and advantage, but the increasing dis- 
tractions of the Mahratta empire unfortunately frustrated the 
wise counsels of that experienced and able statesman, and dis- 
appointed my views at the Court of Poonah. I had, however, 
the satisfaction to ascertain that the disposition of that Court, 
under the administration of Nana, continued perfectly favourable 
to the British interests, and that want of power would be the sole 
cause of its inaction in the event of a war with Tippoo Sultaun. 

From the moment of my arrival at Fort St. George all the 
inhabitants of this settlement, and every officer, civil and mili- 
tary, appeared to be animated by an unanimous determination 
to discharge their respective dutics with a degree of cheerfulness 
and ardour correspondent with the exigency and importance 
of the occasion; and I was soon satisfied that the disposition, 
of which I lamented the appearance in the months of July 
and August, had either been subdued by the just exercise of 
authority, or corrected by reflection, and by the more full 
disclosure of the views of the enemy. The zeal, alacrity, and 
public spirit of the bankers and commercial agents at Madras, 
as well as of the most respectable of your civil servants at this 
Presidency, enabled me, within a few wecks, to raise a large sum 
of money, by loan, for the public service. Previous to my 
departure from Bengal, I had remitted twenty lacs of rupces 
in specie for the use of this Presidency; I now despatch the 
Sybille to Calcutta for a further supply; and the extraordinary 
exertion of his Excellency the Vice-President in Council, 
assisted by the diligence and ability of Mr. Thomas Myers, the 
Accountant-General of Bengal, furnished me with an additional 
aid of twenty lacs within so short a time, that the movement of 
the army was not delayed for an instant on account of a de- 
ficiency of treasure, and Lieutenant-Gcneral Harris was pro- 
vided with a sufficient supply of specie to maintain his army in 
the ficld until the month of May. 

Il 


98 TIPPOO’S ARTFUL SILENCE—HOW FOILED. 


Tippoo Sultaun remaining silent for a considerable time, after 
the receipt of my letter of the gth of January, I concluded that 
his object must be to delay his answer until the season should 
be so far advanced as to render the capture of Scringapatam 
impracticable during the present year. 

. Inthe mean while the advices from Bussorah, Bagdad, Con- 
stantinople, and Bombay were of so uncertain a nature as to 
leave me still in doubt with respect to the condition of the 
' French army in Egypt; the only safe conclusion which could 
be drawn from those advices being, that the French still main- 
\tained the possession of that country with a large army. 

No intelligence had been received from the Red Sea re- 
specting the arrival of any of his Majesty’s ships on that station, 
nor had I been able to ascertain, with any degree of accuracy, 
what means the French might either have provided, or might 
find on the spot to enable them to reach the Sultaun’s 
dominions. 

In addition to these circumstances, I knew that, while Tippoo 
Sultaun had declined to receive an ambassador from the 
Honourable Company, and had omitted to answer my late 
letters, he had despatched native vakcels from Scringapatam, 
who, together with M. Du Buc, (one of the leaders of the French 
force, raised in the Isle of France under M. Malartic’s procla- 
mation,) were on the point of embarking at Tranquebar with an 
avowed mission from the Sultaun to the Executive Directory 
of France. 

On the 3rd of February I had received no answer from the 
Sultaun to my letter of the gth of January; although the com- 
munication between Seringapatam and Fort St. George docs not 
require, at the most, a longer time than cight, and is sometimes 
effected in four, days. 

In order, therefore, to defeat the object of the Sultaun’s 
silence, and to avail mysclf of the actual superiority of our 
force, and of the advantages of the present scason, before the 
French could effect any junction with him, I determined to com- 
mence hostilities without delay, and to* suspend all negotiation, 
until the united forces of the Company and of their allies should 
have made such an impression on the territorics of Mysore, as 
might give full effect to our just representations. 

With these views, on the 3d of February, I directed Lieut- 
General Harris to enter the territory of Mysore with the army 
assembled under his command; and on the same day I issued 


HIS OFFER TO TREAT WITH ME—TOO LATE / 99 


orders to Lieut.-General Stuart, to be prepared to co-operate 
‘from Malabar, and I significd to Rear-Admiral Rainier, and to 
‘the several allies of the Company, that I now considered the 
British Government in India to be at war with Tippoo Sultaun. 

At length, on the 13th of February, I received from Tippoo 
Sultaun the Ietter marked No. 7, informing me, that, ‘ being 
frequently disposed to make excursions and hunt,’ he was, 
‘accordingly, proceeding upon a hunting excursion,’ and de- 
siring that I would ‘ despatch Major Doveton slightly attended;’ 
or ‘unattended.’ 

But the season for negotiation, through the pacific channels, 
so often offered by me, was now elapsed. After mature de- 
liberation, on the grounds already stated, I had directed the 
advance of the army into the territory of the Sultaun, and I had 
signified to the allies my determination to proceed to hostilities, 
To have delayed the advance of the army, would at once have 
thrown the advantages which I then possessed into the hands of 
Tippoo Sultaun, and have rendered the sicge of his capital 
impracticable during the present season. On the other hand, 
an embassy, combined with the hostile irruption of our army 
into Mysore, would have been liable to the imputation of insin- 
cerity towards Tippoo Sultaun, and while it bore the appearance 
of indecision in the eyes of the allies, would have promoted, and 
perhaps, warranted a similar degree of instability in their councils 
and opcrations. 

The design of this tardy, reluctant, and insidious assent to 
the admission of an embassy from the British Government 
could be considered in no other light than that of a new artifice 
for the purpose of gaining time, until a change of circumstances 
and of scason might enable the Sultaun to avail himself of the 
assistance of France. This conclusion was now confirmed by 
my knowledge of the actual embarkation of M. Du Buc and 
two native vakeels on an embassy from Tippoo to the Exccutive 
Directory of France, an event which took place at Tranquebar 

n the 7th of February. 

I, therefore, replied to the letter of Tippoo Sultaun in the 
terms of the enclosure, No. 8, in which I have declared Licut.- 
General Harris to be the only person now authorized by me to 
reccive and to answer whatever communications the Sultaun 
may think fit to make, with a view to the restoration of peace 
on such conditions as appear to the allics to be indispensably 
necessary to their common security. This letter I directed 

HW 2 


100 WE CONQUER BUT TO SAVE/ 


General Harris to forward to the Sultaun, on the day on which 
the army under his command should pass the frontier, and at 
the same time I instructed him to issue, in the name of the 
allies, the accompanying declaration marked No. 9.! 


1 The declaration is as follows :— 


The Proclamation of Lieut.-General George Harris, Commander-in-Chief 
of all his Majesty's and the Honourable Company's forces on the coasts of 
Coromandel and Malabar, to the Zemindars or Poligars, Desmooks, De- 
spondtes, Canoongoes, Naurgours, Potails, Shambogues, and to all Aumut- 
dars, Serishtadars, Kelladars, and other inhabitants of Mysore, who shall 
receive the Company's Cowle. 


Whereas Tippoo Sultaun having concluded an offensive alliance with 
the French, the inveterate enemies of the English, the Peishwa, and the 
Nizam of Decan rejected all overtures on their part for effecting an ac- 
commodation, and giving proofs that he only waited the arrival of the 
French to involve all India in a war; the allies have sent their armies 
into this country, under my command, to frustrate his ambitious designs, 
and to secure their possessions against the future attempts of such in- 
sidious enemies. 

These being the views of the allies, I come not to make war upon the 
defenceless inhabitants of this country, but to receive you under their 
protection, and promise you perfect security under their government. 
To facilitate the carrying these intentions into execution, Lieut.-Colonel 
Alexander Read, the same officer under whose administration you expe- 
rienced last war the benefits of a British Government, is again appointed 
to superintend the affairs of all the districts dependent on Mysore that 
may be reduced by the armies of the English; and as a further indication 
thereof, cowle flags shall be distributed over the country, and safe-guards 
sent to all the villages in the vicinity of the armies, to sccure the inhabi- 
tants from depredation. 

These measures being taken, and the allied armies sufficiently powerful 
to afford all the districts in their rear effectual protection, you will re- 
main in your villages, proceed in the cultivation of your lands, and enjoy 
all the blessings of profound peace. 

Benefitting so considerably by the liberal policy of the allies, it will 
become a duty on your part to merit their protection by serving them as 
obedient subjects, and rendering them the dues of the Sirkar, in the ex- 
action of which will be evinced that moderation and justice, which distin- 
guish the British from all the other nations of Europe in their conduct 
towards natives of India. 

The general good of the people under them being the study of their 
Government, it evidently follows, that, whoever shall render them parti- 


“a =. 


EFFICIENCY OF THE ALLIED ARMIES. 1OL 


The Nizam’s contingent consists of above 6000 of the Honour- 
able Company’s troops subsidized by his Highness, of about the 
same number of his own infantry, (including a proportion of 
M. Peron’s sepoys, now commanded by British officers,) and of 
a large body of cavalry. 

This force, under the general command of Meer Allum, 
formed a junction with the British army on the 1gth February: 
and it is with the greatest satisfaction that I remark to your 
Honourable Court the beneficial effects which the Company has 
already derived from the recent improvement of our alliance 
with the Court of Hyderabad. The Nizam’s contingent actually 
arrived in the vicinity of Chittoor, in a state of preparation for 
the field, before General Harris was ready to proceed on his 
march from Vellore. 

I have annexed to this despatch the last return of Lieut.- 
General Harris’s army, previous to his passing the frontier; an 
army more completely appointed, more amply and liberally 
supplied in every department, or more perfect in its discipline, 
and in the acknowledged experience, ability, and zeal of its 
officers, never took the field in India. The army on the coast 
of Malabar is in an equally cfficient and respectable condition, 
and the extraordinary efforts which have been made by Lieut.- 
General Stuart and Major-Gencral Hartley, seconded by the 
cordial attachment and unremitting assiduity of the Rajah of 
Coorga, have collected within a very short period of time a 
supply so abundant, that I am induced to transmit the par- 
ticulars of it to your Honourable Court, as a testimony of the 
distinguished merits of those valuable officers, and of the loyalty 
and active gxcrtion of that faithful tributary of the Honourable 
Company. 

A considcrable force, under the command of Lieut.-Colonels 
Read and Brown, will co-operate with Lieut.-General Harris in 
the southern districts of the Carnatic and Mysore. 

Under these circumstances, Gencral Harris entered the terri- 
cular services during the present war, such as aiding Colonel Read in 
ascertaining the sources of the public revenue, in regulating the police, in 
procuring supplies for the army, or in’ giving intelligence of the enemy's 
designs, may be sure of rewards suitable to the importance and success 
of their endeavours, 

Written at Head Quarters, Georce Harrts, 

5th March, 1799. 


— 


102 MAGNITUDE OF OUR LATE DANGER. 


tory of Mysore on the 5th of March, with orders to proceed 
directly to Seringapatam. 

Having thus submitted to your Honourable Court, according 
to the order of dates, a detailed relation of the events which 
have led to the war in which we are actually engaged, and 
having declared to you the motives and objects of my conduct 
in every stage of this important transaction, I must request your 
permission to conclude this despatch, with such reflections as 
arise in my mind from the review of my past measures, and 
from the prospect of their ultimate consequences and permanent 
effects. 

From the first disclosure of the nature and object of Tippoo 
Sultaun’s embassy to the Isle of France, every principle of 
justice and policy demanded from your Government in India 
that an instantaneous effort should be made to reduce his power 
and resources before he could avail himself of the advantages of 
the alliance which he had concluded. The defect of means is 
the sole consideration which can justify me for not having made 
that effort at the early period when its success would have 
placed the security of your possessions on a foundation, which 
the invasion of India by a French force could not have impaired. 
For without the aid of some native power it is scarcely possible 
that the French should ever make any permanent impression 
on your empire in India; and no native power (excepting Tippoo 
Sultaun) is so infatuated as to be disposed to assist or reccive 
a French army. 

The progress of events since the date of my orders of the 
20th of June, 1798, has not only confirmed the principles of 
justice and policy, by which an attack upon the Sultaun was at 


that time demanded, but has manifested, that the designs of 


France as well as of the Sultaun, were of a much morc exten- 
sive and formidable nature, than any which have cver been 
attempted against the British Empire in India, since the hour 
of its first foundation. 

While the magnitude and danger of these designs were 
gradually disclosed, I had the satisfaction to feel, that the means 
of averting them were augmenting in a proportion ncarly equal 
by the success of the negotiations at Hyderabad, and by the 
progress of the military preparations which I had ordered 
throughout your possessions. 

At the commencement of the month of February the crisis 
arrived in which I was called upon to form my ultimate decision 


” 


WAS I RIGHT IN AVERTING IT BY ARMS? 103 


on the important question at issue with Tippoo Sultaun, and 
to determine the final result of the whole system of my 
measures, 

On the one hand, the apparent establishment of the French 
army in Egypt, and the uncertainty of the state of our naval 
power in the Red Sea, rendered the danger still urgent from 
that quarter; while Tippoo Sultaun’s repeated evasions of my 
proposals for negotiation, combined with his embassy to the 
Executive Directory of France, under the conduct of M. Du Buc, 
appeared to preclude all hope of detaching the Sultaun, from 
his recent alliance with the enemy. On the other hand, I now 
possessed ample means of frustrating the most dangerous effects 
of that alliance, by a seasonable application of the powerful 
force which the treachery and aggression of the Sultaun had 
compelled me to collect at a heavy expense to your finances. 

Your Honourable Court will determine whether in this state 
of affairs my orders of the 3rd of February were premature; and 
whether I should have been justified on the 13th of February in 
recalling those orders, for the purpose of admitting at that late 
period a negotiation, which would have enabled Tippoo Sultaun 
to defeat every object of the armament of the allies for the 
present scason, and would have afforded him ample time to reap 
the full benefit of his connection with France before the scason 
for besieging his capital should return. 

In deciding these important questions, you will necessarily 
consider, what degree of reliance could be placed on the sin- 
cerity of the Sultaun’s disposition to conclude an amicable 
adjustment with your Government at the very moment, when 
he had actually despatched on an embassy to the Exccutive 
Directory of France the commander of the French troops, raised 
in the Mauritius and admitted into the Sultaun’s service for the 
express purpose of carrying on a war of aggression against your 
possessions in India. 

The admirable condition of your armics on both coasts, and 
the uncqualled perfection of their equipment in every depart- 
ment, added to the extraordinary spirit and animation with 
which the campaign has becn opened, afford every reason to 
hope that the issue of the war will be speedy and prosperous, 
and that it must terminate in a considcrable reduction of Tippoo 
Sultaun’s resources and power, 

The wisdom of your Honourable Court will anticipate the 
extensive bencfits which must result to your interests from an 


104, FAITHLESS, POTENT, AND ALLIED WITH FRANCE, 


event now become essential to the peace and security of your 
possessions in India. 

The policy of the treaty of Seringapatam certainly was not 
‘ to maintain Tippoo Sultaun’s power in such a state as should 
leave him a constant object of alarm and apprchension to the 
Company. That he has been justly so considered for some 
years past, cannot be doubted by any person acquainted with 
the records of any of your Governments in India. The present 
is the second crisis, within the last three years, in which the 
Government General has thought it necessary to assemble the 
army‘on the coast of Coromandel for the sole purpose of check- 
ing his motions; and the apprehension of his intentions has 
obstructed our operations against our European enemies in India 
during the course of the present war. 

The continuance of Tippoo’s power on its actual scale, and 

under such circumstances, must have proved to the Company 
a perpetual source of solicitude, expense, and hazard. But the 
‘engagements which he has contracted with the French, the 
public proofs which he has given of his eagerness to receive in 
Mysore as large a force as they can furnish, combined with the 
prodigious magnitude of their preparations, and the incredible 
progress of their army, evidently directed to the destruction of 
the British power in India, form new and prominent features in 
our political situation in this quarter of the world. 
' Admitting the wisdom of that policy which dictated the pre- 
servation of Tippoo Sultaun’s power, at the close of the last war 
with Mysore, the spirit of our present Councils must be accom- 
modated to the variation of circumstances, and to the actual 
position, character, and views of our encmics. 

In such a conjuncture of affairs I am persuaded that your 
honourable Court will be of opinion, that no object can be 
deemed so urgent, or so necessary to the safety of your pos- 
sessions, as the effectual reduction of the only declared ally of 
France now existing among the native powers of India, 

If Tippoo Sultaun had been disposed to content himself with 
the quiet possession of his present dominions, if he could have 
been brought to a sense of his own peril in forming a connection 
with the French, the representations which I addressed to him 
would have produced an early and salutary impression ; what- 
ever speculative opinions might have been entertained with 
respect to his interests, views, and power, the justice and mode- 
ration of the British Government would never have disturbed 


TIPPOO WAS AMENABLE ONLY TO ARMS. 105 


his tranquillity. But he resolved to attempt the recovery of his 
lost dominions at the hazard of those which he still retains ; and, 
in the ardour of his passionate pursuit, he overlooked not only 
the certain destruction of his own independence (the inevitable 
consequence even of the most prosperous success of any alliance 
with France ;) but also the predominant influence of the English 
East India Company, and the vigilance of its Governments, 
which would probably detect his treachery, and turn against his 
own empire the ruin which he had meditated against theirs. 

The secrecy of his councils, the promptitude of his resources, 
his constant and active state of equipment for war, added to the 
facility of his intercourse with the French through his remaining 
territories on the coast of Malabar, are the most dangerous 
circumstances in the actual condition of his power and dominion, 
and constitute his principal means of offence. 

if success should attend your arms in this war, I entertain a 
firm confidence that those dangers will either be wholly averted, 
or so considerably diminished, as to afford to your government 
in India the prospect of durable security, and genuine peace. 

I cannot close this lctter without repeating to your honourable 
Court the cordial expression of my entire satisfaction in the 
zealous and honourable co-operation of Lord Clive, as well as of 
all the Members of this Government. The beneficial effect of 
their cheerful and ready concurrence in forwarding all my views, 
is manifest in the rapid progress and perfect completion of the 
equipments of the army in the ficld, and furnishes a striking 
and salutary example of the inestimable advantages of unanimity 
and concord among your servants in India. 

I have the honour to be, 
Honourable Sirs, with the greatest respect, 
your most obcdient and faithful Servant, 
MORNINGTON. 


15. The Earl of Mornington to the Court of Directors. 
Progress of the War. 
Fort St. George, zoth April, 1799. 

Honourable Sirs, 

I now procced to submit to you a detail of the operations of 
the armics in Mysore. 

The army of Bombay, under the command of Licutenant 
General Stuart, marched from Cananore on the 21st of Feb., 


106 PROOF THAT HIS OFFER TO TREAT WAS A RUSE. 


arrived at the head of the Poodicherrum Ghaut on the 25th of 
the same month, and took post at Sedapore and Sedasere on 
the 2nd of March, for the protection of the large supplies which 
had been collected at Verajunder Pett, in the district of Coorga. 
From these positions, on Licutenant-General Harris’s approach, 
Lieutenant-General Stuart intended to form a junction with the 
army of Madras. 

The army of Madras, under the command of Lieutenant- 
General Harris, entered the territory of Mysore on the sth of 
March, and its operations commenced by the reduction of 
several forts upon the frontier. Some of these forts surrendered 
without any resistance, and none of them were defended with 
spirit, although the Sultaun appears, from the improved establish- 
ment on which he had placed their garrisons, to have provided 
as well as he could for a different result. 

The progress of the army of Madras, owing to its ample 
equipments in every department, particularly in that of the 
ordnance necessary for the siege of Scringapatam, was unavoid- 
ably slow. Its movements, however, were but little impeded by 
the enemy. Considerable bodies of horse hovered about its line 
of march, but without any other effect than that of rendering the 
communications with the Company’s territories extremely diffi- 
cult. Some parties of horse attacked the Nizam’s contingent, 
and his Highness’s cavalry are reported by General Harris to 
have conducted themselves with great spirit, a circumstance 
which may partly be attributed to the improvements recently 
introduced into the discipline and establishments of his High- 
ness’s cavalry at the recommendation of the British Resident 
under my instructions. 

At the period when the army of Madras entercd Mysore, 
Tippoo Sultaun was supposed to be encamped in the vicinity of 
Maddoor, and to be preparing to move in the direction of Ban- 
galore for the purpose of opposing the progress of the Madras 
army, in the event of Licutenant-General Harris actually passing 
the frontier. But it soon appeared that although the Sultaun had 
so recen‘ly affected a disposition to admit an embassy from the 
British Government, he had probably no other vicw than to 
conceal the design which he had formed of striking a sudden and 
early blow against the army of Bombay. For without allowing 
me the same time to answer his last letter which he had taken 
for replying to those addressed by me to him, and without 
waiting to hear of the actual commencement of hostilitics on the 


STUART'S VICTORY AT SEDASERE, 107 


part of the British Government, he came to the resolution of 
attacking the army of Bombay then assembled beyond the line 
of his frontier, in the district of Coorga, under the command of 
Lieut.-General Stuart. 

For this purpose Tippoo, taking with him the flower of his 
army, appears to have marched from his camp near Cenapatam, 
on the 28th of February, (when General Harris was still within 
the Company’s territorics,) and moving rapidly in the direction 
of Periapatam, to have arrived there on the morning of the 5th 
of March, (being the same day on which Lieut.-Gen. Harris 
entered Mysore on the eastern frontier). 

On the 6th of March Tippoo Sultaun passed his own frontier, 
and attacked a detachment of the army of Bombay, under the 
command of Lieut.-Gen. Stuart, the total strength of whose 
entire army did not amount to more than 6,000 fighting men. 
The attack of the Sultaun’s force was resisted by a body not 
exceeding 2,000 men, and the Sultaun’s army was finally 
defeated and totally dispersed, before General Stuart could 
collect the whole of his divided force. It is with infinite satis- 
faction that I enclose for the information of your honourable 
Court the paper marked No. 1, containing Gen. Stuart’s account 
of this brilliant and important action which took place at 
Sedasere on the 8th of March. 

After this signal defeat, Tippoo retreated precipitatcly to his 
camp at Periapatam, and remained there until the 11th of March 
without making any further attempt to molest the army. The 
loss sustained by Tippoo’s army on the 6th of March appears to 
have amounted to near 2,000 killed, wounded, and prisoners, 
which included several officers of rank, and some of considerable 
distinction. That sustained by the army of Bombay will appcar 
in Liecut.-Gen. Stuart's letter. 

Adverting to the great disproportion of numbers, and to other 
circumstances of disadvantage, I am confident that your honour- 
able Court will be of opinion, that the conduct and success of 
the army of Bombay on that day has seldom been equalled, and 
never surpassed in India. 

Under this impression I take the liberty of recommending to 
your favourable notice the several officers and corps named by 
Licut.-Gen. Stuart, in his letter of the 8th of March, and I am 
anxious to request your particular attention to the distinguished 
conduct of Lieut.-Genceral Stuart and Major-Gencral Hartley, as 
well as of Licut.-Coloncl Montresor and of Licut.-Coloncl 


108 TIPFOO AGAIN DEFEATED AT’ MALAVELLY, 


Dunlop. Major-General Hartley had already received a public 
testimony of my particular approbation of his extraordinary 
merit in collecting stores and provisions in the district of Coorga, 
previously to the arrival of General Stuart on the coast of 
Malabar. 

Tippoo returned from Periapatam to Seringapatam, and ar- 
riving at the latter place on the 14th of March, moved from 
thence immediately to meet Lieut.-Gen. Harris and the army of 
Madras. 

Lieut.-General Harris had advanced on the 26th of March to 
a position between Sultanpetta and Malavelly, having met with 
no considerable impediment from the enemy. The enemy made 
their appearance in force on that day, but without attempting to 
disturb our army. On the 27th of March, when the army 
reached its ground at Malavelly, Tippoo opened a distant can- 
nonade upon it, which, though at first disregarded by Lieut.- 
General Harris, ultimately led to a general engagement, in which 
the enemy was completely defeated, and driven from every post 
which he attempted to maintain: our loss on this occasion was 
very inconsiderable, only seven rank and file being killed, and 
a few men (including four officers) wounded, while that of the 
enemy is supposed to have amounted to near 700. 

I refer your honourable Court to Licut.-General Harris’s letter 
of the 27th of March, which forms part of the enclosure No. |, 
for a more particular account of this important victory, requesting 
also your attention to the merits of the several officers and corps 
distinguished by the notice of Lieut-General Harris. 

General Harris marched on the 28th a few miles to the 
southward of Malavelly, without the Icast interruption from the 
enemy, from whence it may be inferred that Tippoo Sultaun 
was considerably dispirited by the defcat which he had sustained 
on the preceding day, added to the previous success obtained 
over him by the army of Bombay. 

On the 29th of March Gencral Harris happily accomplished 
a movement which must have greatly astonished and dis- 
concerted the enemy: instead of proceeding in the direction of 
Arakerry and Karagat, Licut-Gen. Harris suddenly turned 
towards the River Cavery, where finding a ford at some distance 
above the junction of the Cavery and Copany, he immediately 
crossed the Cavery with a part of his army, and occupied strong 
positions on both banks of that river, at the distance of about 
fifteen miles from Seringapatam. This movement was also made 


ADVANTAGES OF CROSSING THE CAVERY. 10g 


without the least opposition on the part of the enemy, who 
indeed does not seem to have entertained the most distant 
suspicion of the British General’s design. 

Lord Cornwallis, at a more advanced period of the year, 
having in vain sought for a practicable ford to the southward 
of Seringapatam, Tippoo probably concluded that Lieut.-Gen. 
Harris would have pursued his Lordship’s route to the ford of 
Caniambaddy, northward of Seringapatam, for the purpose of 
effecting a junction from thence with the army of Bombay. It 
is difficult to account otherwise for Tippoo’s inaction while 
General Harris executed this arduous and important movement. 

The advantages of the position thus acquired by General 
Harris must prove considerable. In addition to the immediate 
acquisition of cattle and forage, it must facilitate the junction 
with the army of Bombay; it must afford additional security 
to the abundant magazines which have been formed in the 
Coorga country, and favour the safe approach of our convoys 
from the southern districts, and from the Barramahl by the pass 
of Coveriporam ; and it promises to open to our army that range 
of forage, situated to the southward of Seringapatam, which 
Tippoo seems to have reserved for the consumption of his own 
army, : 

Licut.-Gen. Harris, with his whole army, having crossed the 
Cavery on the 3oth of March, halted near the village of Soselly 
on the 31st; on the ist of April he moved towards Sering- 
apatam, and on the 5th encamped two miles south-west of 
that city, having experienced no opposition from the enemy 
since the 27th of March. On the morning of the 6th of April, 
after an engagement in which the enemy appears to have made 
considerable resistance, Lieut.-General Harris took possession of 
Sultanpetta and an adjacent tope or grove, and about the same 
time Major-General Floyd, with a strong detachment, was sent 
to effect a junction with the army of Bombay: on the morning 
of the 6th of April Licut.-General Stuart reccived at Sedapore 
a note from Licut.-General Harris, announcing the arrival of the 
latter at Seringapatam, and also signifying that Major-Gencral 
Floyd was to be detached from the army of Madras on the 6th 
of April for the purpose already stated. In consequence of this 
intelligence, Licut.-Gencral Stuart had determined to march 
from Sedapore to Sedascre on the 7th of April, and it is pro- 
bable that the junction of the army of Bombay with the detach- 
ment under the command of Major-Gencral Floyd was effected 


Lio SUBSIDIARY OPERATIONS IN PROGRESS. 


on the 8th in the neighbourhood of Periapatam. ‘he last 
accounts received by me from General Harris are dated on the 
7th instant, when he states that he had taken up his position for 
the siege of Seringapatam. 

Tippoo Sultaun, on the 7th of April, had not returned any 
answer to my letter of the 22nd of February, nor had he mani- 
fested any disposition to propose a negotiation. Lieut.-Gencral 
Harris is instructed to propose preliminary articles of peace to 
the Sultaun before the British batteries shall be opened against 
Seringapatam. 

While General Harris was advancing towards Scringapatam, 
Lieut.-Colonel Read was employed in reducing the country to 
the northward of Ryakottah. His operations were intended 
to have embraced a wide range, and he had made considerable 
progress in them, when the more urgent service of convoying 
to the army the large supplies which were collected in the 
Barramahl, made it necessary for him to change the direction 
of his march. He is now drawing together in the vicinity of 
Coveryporam the numerous brinjarrics and other supplies in- 
tended for the army encamped before Seringapatam, which 
place it is hoped he may be able to reach early in May. 

To the southward of the Carnatic and of Mysore, Licut.- 
Colonel Browne, at the head of a respectable detachment, began 
his operations by the reduction of Carroor, which surrendered to 
him, without any scrious resistance, on the 5th of April. On the 
8th he sent a detachment against Errode, and marched himself 
on the 9th to reduce Aravacourchy. He would, however, be 
obliged to suspend his intended operations in the district of 
Coimbatoor, and to unite his detachment to that of Colonel 
Read, with the view of forming a force sufficiently strong to give 
due protection to the large and important supplics proceeding 
to Seringapatam. 

Aravacourchy, which had been considerably strengthened 
since last war, surrendered to Licut.-Colonel Brown on the roth 
instant, 

I have the honour to be, &c. 
MORNINGTON. 

P.S. 22nd April, 1799.—After closing my Ictter I had the 
satisfaction to receive despatches from Gencrals Harris and 
Stuart. 

I congratulate your honourable Court on the successful junc- 
tion of the detachment under General Floyd with the army of 


THE TOILS CLOSING ROUND TIPPOO. III 


Bombay, The final junction of the whole army of Bombay with 
the army before Seringapatam was expected to take place about 
the 13th instant. It may be safely affirmed not to be in the 
power of Tippoo, even materially, to retard this junction, which, 
when effected, must excite a serious alarm in the mind of the 
Sultaun for the safety of his capital if not of his person. 

Your honourable Court will perceive that Lieut.-General 
Harris, in his progress to Scringapatam, encountered the same 
difficulties which were experienced by Lord Cornwallis from the 
failure of the cattle provided for the service of the army, which, 
although amply sufficient in point of number at the commence- 
ment of the expedition, appear to have rapidly decreased on the 
entrance of the army into Mysore; the climate and water of that 
country are represented to be extremcly unfavourable to the 
cattle of the Carnatic. The delay which arose from this un- 
avoidable contingency seems to have been considerable; but 
your honourable Court will, no doubt, view with satisfaction the 
spirit and firmness with which this difficulty was met by the 
Commander-in-Chief, and the zealous exertion of the whole 
army by which he was enabled to procced on his march, 


16. The Earl of Mornington to the Court of Directors. 
Conclusion of the War. 


Fort St. George, rith May, 1799. 
Honourable Sirs, : _ menbee 

No particular comment is required from me to illustrate the 
numerous advantages which cannot fail to flow from the brilliant 
and decisive atchievement announced to your Honourable Court 
in the despatch of the Governor-Gencral in Council of this date. 
But I cannot refrain from offering to you my separate and most 
cordial congratulations on an event, the glory of which has never 
been surpassed (if it has ever been equalled), in the history of 
the military transactions of the British nation in India. 

The fall of Scringapatam, under all the circumstances which 
accompanied that event, has placed the whole of the kingdom of 
Mysore, with all its resources, at the disposal of your Govern- 
ment; and the only power in India to which the French could 
look for assistance, or which could be deemed formidable to your 
interests, is now deprived of all vigour, if not entirely extinct. 
When your Honourable Court recollects that these advantages 
have been acquired within four months from the date of my 


112 IMPORTANCE OF THE CONQUEST. 


arrival at this Presidency, and within two from the period of 
the army’s entrance into Mysore, I trust you will be of opinion 
that your servants have not been deficient in alacrity or dili- 
gence. 

When Lieutenant-General Harris took the field, I thought it 
my duty to invest him with the most efficient and extensive 
powers which it was possible for me to delegate; and he has 
carried with him to the gates of Seringapatam the full vigour 
and energy of your supreme Government. To the judicious 
exercise of this ample authority, combined with the liberal 
supplies which had been provided for the army, may be ascribed 
in a great measure the unparalleled rapidity and promptitude of 
its operations. I have the further satisfaction to add that the 
particular detail of those operations, which I shall hereafter 
submit to your Honourable Court, will furnish the most brilliant 
examples of judgment, skill, discipline, firmness and valour, 
under many trials of all those distinguished qualitics. 

The dreadful fate of Tippoo Sultaun cannot be contemplated 
without emotions of pain and regret ; but I trust it will serve as 

\: salutary lesson to the native Princes of India, and will prove 
‘the danger of violating public engagements, and inviting forcign 
invasion for the prosecution of schemes of ambition and hatred 
against the British power. He was interred within his own 
capital on the day following its capture, in the mausoleum of his 
father, with the honours of war, paid to his remains by the 
British army. I am persuaded that your Honourable Court 

! will derive peculiar satisfaction from the intelligence that his 

| family and palace suffered no insult or violence during the heat 

' of the assault, and have since been protected with the utmost 
care. 

T have the honour to be, &c. 
MORNINGTON, 


17. Lieut.-General Stuart to the Earl of Mornington. 
Battle of Seedasere. 
Seedapore, 8th March, 1799. 
My Lord, 

I had the honour to address your Lordship on the 2oth ultimo, 
and having marched from Cananore on the following day, agree- 
ably to my intimation of that date, I arrived at the top of Poo- 
diacherrim Ghaut, on the 25th of the same month. 


SUDDEN APPEARANCE OF TIPPOO’S CAMP. 113 


I informed your Lordship, that it was my intention to assume 
a defensive position close to the frontiers, and there await, in 
conformity to General Harris’s instructions under the 24th of 
December, his further orders. 

In pursuance of this plan I moved the corps successively 
forward, and placed them in such situations, as might enable me 
the most promptly, to form the proposed junction with the 
principal army. 

On the and instant, the right brigade consisting of three native 
battalions under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Montresor, 
took up their ground at Scedasere, the boundary of the Coorga 
country, and about seven miles distant from Periapatam. 

The main body of the army, with the park and provisions, 
remained at Seedapore and Ahmootenaar; the first eight miles 
and the latter twelve, from the advanced position. 

It may be necessary to inform your Lordship, that I was in 
some measure compelled from the nature of the country, which 
is every where covered by thick jungle, to place the army in 
several divisions ; but I had a further view in occupying the post 
at Seedasere, in order to preserve a more ready communication 
with General Harris, as this was the only spot from whence the 
signals established between the two armies could be observed. 
Although I had no reason to apprehend any immediate attack, 
I thought it advisable to adopt the precaution of encamping 
the corps at such short distances, as would either enable me to 
move without much loss of time into the enemy’s territory, or to 
support, if occasion should require it, any quarter that might 
stand in need of assistance. 

In the course of the morning of the 5th, an extensive encamp- 
ment was unexpectedly observed to be forming on this side of 
the fort of Periapatam. This circumstance was discovered at 
10 o’clock in the forenoon, as the enemy were taking up their 
ground, by a party of observation on the summit of the high hill 
of Scedasere, which commands a view of the Mysore almost to 
the environs of Secringapatam. Before the evening, this encamp- 
ment assumed a very formidable appearance and covered a great 
extent of ground. 

We were able to count from 3 to 400 tents, amongst the 
number some of large dimensions were distinguished, and par- 
ticularly one of a green colour, that seemed to denote the presence 
of the Sultaun. However much the probability of this circum- 
stance might be strengthened by the respectable appearance of 

I 


1i4 STEALTHY ATTACK ON DETACHED CORPS, 


the encampment, it was contradicted by the evidence of two 
hurcarrahs, who ‘had recently arrived from Seringapatam. These 
men generally reported, that Tippoo had marched with all his 
forces on the 20th ultimo, to oppose the progress of the Madras 
army, and that the Benky Nabob commanded the only force in 
the field, that remained in the neighbourhood of Seringapatam. 
This force was represented to be encamped at Caneambaddy and 
to consist of 5000 Piadas or irregular infantry, who were said to 
be intended as a covering party to 7000 Brinjaries, and directed 
to bring as much provisions, as tay could collect about Peria- 
‘patam to the capital. 

In this state of uncertainty, I thought it prudent to reinforce 
Lieut.-Colonel Montresor’s brigade with an additional battalion 
of Sepoys, and waited for more correct intelligence, which I 
expected hourly, to act with the whole of my forces as affairs 
might render necessary. 

On the morning of the 6th, Major-General Hartley went for- 
ward to reconnoitre, and at break of day from the hill of observa- 
tion, the whole of the enemy’s army was discovered to be in 
motion; but their movements were so well concealed by the 
woodiness of the country and the haziness of the atmosphere, 
that it was impossible to ascertain their object, nor in fact was 
this discovered, until they had penetrated a considerable way in 
the jungle, and commenced an attack upon our line, which 
happened between the hours of 9 and ro. 

The enemy pierced through the jungles with such surety and 
expedition, that they attacked the rear and the front of our line 
almost at the same instant. This despatch prevented more than 
three of our corps being engaged, as the fourth, which was posted 

‘two miles and a half in the rear, was unable to form a junction, 
from the enemy having cut in betwecn them and Sccdasere. 
The communication was effectually obstructed by a column, 
which, according to the reports of our prisoncrs, consisted of 
upwards of 5000 men under the command of Baber Jung. 

Fortunately before the enemy had accomplished their purpose, 
Major-General Hartley had time to apprise me of their attack, 
and remained himself to give any assistance that might be 
necessary. The best position was assumed for repulsing the 
enemy, and in this alarming situation the corps defended them- 
selves with so much resolution, that the Sultaun’s troops were 
unable to make any impression. The brigade was on every 
side completely surrounded, and had to contend against a 


STOUTLY RESISTED: REPELLED BY STUART. 15 


vast disparity of numbers, besides other discouraging circum- 
stances, ; 

As soon as I received intelligence of the perilous situation of 
the right brigade, I marched to their assistance with the two 
flank companies of his Majesty’s 75th regiment and the whole of 
the 77th. I arrived about half-past two in sight of the division 
of the enemy, who had penetrated into the rear, and -possessed 
themselves of the great road leading to Seedasere. The engage- 
ment lasted nearly half an hour, when after a smart fire of 
musketry on both sides, the ‘enemy were completely routed, and 
fled with precipitation through the jungles to regain their column, 
which still continued the attack in front. On arriving at Lieut.- 
Colonel Montresor’s post, I found his men exhausted with fatigue, 
and their ammunition almost expended. At 20 minutes past 3 
the enemy retreated in all directions. 

For this decisive, and, I. hope your Lordship will allow, brilliant 
success, considering the small number of troops who engaged, 
under very great disadvantages, probably the flower of Tippoo 
Sultaun’s army, I feel myself peculiarly indebted to the judicious 
disposition for defence_made by General Hartley. He embraced 
the opportunity of observing the motions of the enemy from the 
hill, I have above mentioned, and was thus enabled to advise 
Lieut.-Colonel Montresor of the best method for defeating them. 
I beg Icave also to inform your Lordship, that my -best thanks 
are due to Licut.-Colonel Montresor for his very active exertions, 
and to the officers and men, including the artillery of his brigade, 
for their gallant and steady behaviour throughout the whole of 
this arduous affair. Lieut.-Colonel Dunlop and. the European 
division under his command, are likewise entitled to my particular 
approbation for their spirited conduct, which finally routed the 
enemy. 

Our loss on this occasion is far less than could reasonably 
have been expected, and I have the honour to enclose for your 
Lordship’s information a return of this circumstance. 

It was impossible to ascertain the exact loss sustained by the 
enemy; but it must have been heavy, as in the course of so long 
an action they were often exposed in crowds to the fire of grape 
shot and vollics of musquetry. Several. men of distinction were 
killed, and some wounded officers have been made prisoncrs. I 
have the honour to enclose the information of Mozdin Khan 
Bhukhshy and the’ Commander of a Kutchcery, the prisoner of 
greatest rank, who has fallen wounded into our hands; but 

12 


116 WHAT WILL TIPPOO’S NEXT MOVE BE? 


concurring reports state that Meer Ghofar is amongst the 
slain. 

As the arrival of General Harris at Seringapatam will not 
happen at so early a period, as he first intended, the immediate 
possession of the post of Seedasere was no longer an object of 
such consequence, and to retain it, while Tippoo continued in 
force at Periapatam, became an affair. of serious difficulty. The 
secrecy and expedition, with which he had planned his late 
enterprise, and the correct intelligence, that the leaders of his 
columns appeared to have obtained of the private routes through 
the Coorga jungles, led to an opinion, that he would not remain 
satisfied with this abortive attempt, but might endeavour to pene- 
trate by another direction to the southward, still more open than 
the passage of Seedasere, where he would only be opposed by 
Coorgs. This consideration derived a greater weight, as if he 
succeeded in forcing this entrance, it would throw him into our 
rear and put him in all probability in possession of the great 
dcpét of rice collected by the Coorga Rajah. These motives 
have induced me to rclinquish the post at Sccdasere, and to 
collect the whole of my force at this place. I have accordingly 
made a disposition, cither to defend my position against the 
Sultaun, if he should again adventure to attack it, or to move in 
defence of any part of the Coorga Rajah’s territories that the 
enemy may threaten, provided it shall endanger our magazine of 
provisions; otherwise I shal] remain on the defensive, until I 
receive advice from General Harris. “ 

Since the action of the 6th, the enemy have continued in their 
camp at Periapatam, nor have I any intclligence cither of the 
Sultaun’s designs, or of the motives, that induced him to under- 
take his present enterprise. It is not likely that he will remain 
longer in this neighbourhood, than aftcr he receives intelligence 
of General Harris having entered the Mysore. 

As my communication with Gencral Harris is become insecure, 
I must take the liberty of requesting your Lordship to inform 
him of such part of these particulars as may appear to you 
necessary. 

I have the honour to subscribe myself most respectfully, 

My Lord, your Lordship’s 
Most obedient humble servant, 
J. STUART. 

P.S. By some prisoners, who have becn just now brought in by 

the Coorga Rajah’s people, I:am informed, that the loss of the 


ed gn them * 


| Pen, 


a 


C6 Ge igugrds © 


“ 


cAeies SURES 


« “Gj _ 
arge 
- 


ry ay ar 3 ‘i 
oe ase . ; SS | 
& , f os 
‘ 2 e es hers o,. Puy : a 3 
. 


tu : m~ 
SCALE of YARDS. 


sage 3000 


Sece sore woe 
= 


face Pagel. 


HE ENGAGES HARRIS; IS AGAIN WORSTED. Ti7 


enemy was very great, and that many men of the first distinction 
fell. They mention Seyed or Meer Ghofar and the Binky Nabob,, 
who led the center attack, among the killed. It is added, how- 
ever, that the Sultaun is collecting more forces and is determined 
to make a second attack. 


18. Lieut.-General Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 


Battle of Malvelly. 


Camp at Malvelly, 27th March, 1799. 
. My Lord, 
The army marched this morning, many horse were seen as it 
approached Malvelly, and a large force appeared posted on a high 
commanding ridge, three miles beyond that place. The ruins of 
the fort were occupied by a part of our advanced guard, when at 
1Q 0’clock A. M. Tippoo Sultaun opened a cannonade from several 
heavy guns, so distant, that I paid it little attention, and ordered the 
ground to be marked for encampment; the shot, however, falling 
in our lines, and horse menacing our picquet, the 1st European 
brigade, and two cavalry corps, were ordered to support it on the 
right, while Colonel Wellesley’s division advanced on our left ; this 
brought on a general action, in the course of which, a small body 
of horse charged the 1st European brigade, some individuals 
piercing the line, but most. of them falling before it. Colonel 
Wellesley’s division turning the right flank of the enemy, gave 
occasion to General Floyd, with three regiments of cavalry, to 
disperse a cutchery of infantry, cutting many of them in pieces. 
The enemy retired about one o'clock, having been driven com- 
pletcly from every position he attempted to maintain. It was 
my wish to have encamped on the ground he quittéd, but a total 
want of water obliged me to return to the ground I had first 
taken up at Malvelly. The whole of the encmy’s force was, I 
believe, in the ficld ; their loss I cannot ascertain ; ours is trifling. 
he conduct of the troops on this occasion was such as I could 
not but approve; our baggage was, during the action, well 
secured ‘by the left wing of the army, under Major-General 
Popham. I shall hercafter have the honour to transmit accu- 
rate returns of the small amount of our loss. I shall march to- 
morrow morning to a large tank in the direction, of the Cavery, 
to secure water by approaching the river. 
Captain Kinncdy,of the 19th dragoons, Leonard and Strachan, 


118 WANT OF BULLOCKS IMPEDES THE MARCH. 


native cavalry, Moore, 74th, are wounded. Part of his Highness 
the Nizam’s horse were engaged, and behaved extremely well. 
I have the honour to be, &c. 
GEORGE Harris. 


19. Lieut.-Gen. Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 
Malvelly, and March to Seringapatam., 


Camp before Seringapatam, April 5th, 1799. 
My Lord, . 

I have particular satisfaction in reporting to your Lordship 
that the army under my command, encamped this morning 
before Seringapatam ; taking up the position, which with little 
variation it will be expedient to occupy, till the Division under 
General Stuart joins me. A strong detachment, commanded by 
Major General Floyd, marches to-morrow morning to facilitate 
the junction, and I take the occasion of addressing your Lord- 
ship, by what I consider as a safe channel of communication, to 
report generally what I have by various hircarahs attempted to 
transmit to your Lordship as the Army advanced on its march. 

I left Killamungalum on the roth of March; and our first 
movement: shewed a very serious deficiency in the Bullock 
department, particularly in those attached to the Commissary 
General of Stores. The succecding march of the 12th, although 
short and with an intermediate day of halt, marked this de- 
ficiency more strongly; crippled in our movements from this 
cause, our marches have been tedious though short; our halts 
have been frequent and our progress has becn slow, unremitting 
attention to every species of arrangement by which the store 
department could be assisted or lightened, was indispensably 
necessary: some losses were daily sustained. The zeal of in- 
dividuals was called forth with considerable advantage, and we 
have succeeded in surmounting these difficultics, and taking our 
position before the capital of Mysore, with an ordnance equip- 
ment which J hope is amply sufficient for its reduction. 

The army marched by the route of Anicul, Talgautporam, 
Cagliaporam, Kankanhilly, and Sultanpett to Malavelly where 
I arrived on the morning of the 27th of March: The army of 
Tippoo Sultaun occupying the heights beyond the town from 
which at about 10 o’clock he commenced a distant cannonade; 
some shot falling in the line marked for our camp, and a body 
of horse menacing the picquets of our right, it became necessary 


TIPPOO’S LAST BATTLE-FIELD, 11g 


to advance corps for their support, which led to a general action. 
The Infantry line of the Enemy was on commanding ground in 
rear of his artillery. His Cavalry advanced under cover of his 
cannon, and a cutcherie or Brigade of Infantry was pushed for- 
ward in front of each flank of his Line, mixed with many rocket 
men. The right wing of the army under my command formed 
on the picquets of the right; Colonel Wellesley’s division, 
advanced from a considerable distance on the left to attack the 
right flank of the enemy, and Major General Floyd with the 
19th and two regiments of native cavalry moved between these 
corps. The 25th dragoons and a native regiment keeping in 
check a body of the enemy’s cavalry, which had assembled on 
our right, while the left wing of the army and a regiment of 
native cavalry remained halted to protect our stores and bag- 
gage. The weak state of the artillery bullocks considerably 
retarded the advance and formation of our line, with which 
they were unable to keep pace. A small body of horse, profit- 
ing by this circumstance, made a daring charge on the 1st 
European brigade; they were received with firmness, and re- 
pulsed with considerable loss; their infantry in front of our 
right, being at the same time driven from their position. On the 
left, the corps of infantry called the Kerim Ketcherie advanced 
on Colonel Wellesley’s column. His Majesty’s 33rd regiment 
which opposed soon put them in confusion, and the cavalry 
under Major Gencral Floyd advancing at this moment to the 
charge, cut them to pieces. Six colours were taken. The 
retreat of the enemy soon became general; their cannon were 
drawn off, and at two o’clock the action had entirely ceased ; 
our line halting on the heights whence theirs had been driven: 
a total want of water preventing our encamping there, the line 
returncd to the ground originally marked for its encampment 
at Malavelly. The loss of the enemy as collected from various 
accounts received since the action, amounted to near two 
thousand killed and wounded ; a return of the casualties of this 
army is enclosed. 

At an early period of our march it had occurred to me, that 
if it were possible to cross the Cavery, at a ford some distance 
below Seringapatam, the measure might be attended with con- 
siderable advantage, by embarrassing the motions of the enemy, 
defeating the preparations he might have made to oppose us on 
the Northern side of the river, and facilitating our communica~ 
tion with the army of Malabar and the force under Colonel 


120 HE IS OUTMANGUVRED BY HARRIS. . 


Brown and Read. In addition to these inducements the ford 
was said to be easy; we had reason to hope the country was 
still undestroyed, and the southern part of Scringapatam was 
considered as the least capable of defence. The destruction of 
the tanks on the road from Malvelly to Arakeery, rendered an 
oblique movement towards the Cavery less liable to suspicion 
than it might otherwise have been, and we arrived on the 29th 
of March at Sosilly on the Cavery, before any measures had 
been taken to oppose our movement, by destroying forage, or 
driving off cattle, of which we here procured a considerable 
supply. The army crossed the river the next day without 
difficulty, and after halting on the 30th to arrange our depart- 
ments, marched on the succeeding morning towards Harwelly, 
the weak state of our cattle, the barren nature of the soil, the 
total destruction of forage, which immediately followed our 
passage of the river, and the necessity for regulating our 
marches by the situation of water, the road leaving the river 
at some distance on the right, obliged us to make five marches 
from Sosilly to our present camp, three of which have been in 
sight of Seringapatam. Numbers of horse have daily watched 
our motions, but, although the ground was favourable, no 
attempt has been made to oppose our progress. 

The detachment with Major General Floyd consists of H.M. 
73rd regiment, three Bengal and two coast battalions of Sepoys 
with their guns, and one regiment of Europcan and three of 
native cavalry, with their galloper guns; and a party of the 
Nizam’s horse. During the absence of this party, I shall be 
employed in preparing materials for the more active operation 
of the siege, which will commence with the junction of General 
Stuart’s force; and Iam happy to add that on this side of the 
river, I apprehend no want of materials for the siege. We have 
a sufficient stock of provisions to subsist the troops beyond the 
time, when the union of our forces, from the opposite coasts 
may enable me to spare an army of sufficient force, to cover our 
communication with the stations, whence our supplies are pre- 
pared to join us; the cattle now with the camp must in the 
mean time suffer greatly, but this is no longer an object of 
consequence, 

Numbers of people are employed on this side of Seringa- 
patam, in repairing the fort. It seems to us to require all their 
labour, appearing to be in a very imperfect state. 

I cannot conclude without expressing to your Lordship, in 


THE FACT WITHOUT THE NAME. 121 


the strongest terms, the obligations I feel myself under to Meer 
Allum Bahadur, for the promptitude with which he has in every 
instance met my wishes in the co-operation, required from the 
forces of His Highness the Nizam. Their aid in transporting 
the shot, has been of the greatest use, and it is an act of justice 
due to Captain Malcolm, to report to your Lordship that his 
unceasing zeal, in pointing out the manner in which the con- 
tingent could promote the common cause of the allies, has been 
equalled only by the cheerful readiness shewn by Meer Allum, 
in adopting his suggestions. 
T have the honor to be, 
My Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient 
and faithful Servant, 
GEORGE HARRIS. 


20. Lieut.-Gen. Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 
Colonel Wellesley’s Repulse. 


Camp before Seringapatam, April 7, 1799. 
My Lord, 

After crossing the Cauvery on the joth ultimo at Sosilly, 
where the army halted the next day, I advanced by easy 
marches to this place, and took up my position within two miles 
south-west of Scringapatam without opposition. On the 5th of 
this month,wishing to occupy the post whcre Gen. Abercromby’s 
picqucts were attacked in 1792, and the large tope and village 
of Sultanpetta, both were attacked the night of our arrival, but 
owing (in great measure) to the darkness of the night, the attack 
on the first only was partially successful. We sustained some 
loss from the fire of the enemy, which continued heavily till late 
next morning, when the posts were again attacked with perfect 
and rapid success. They give this army a very strong position, 
and greatly confine that of the enemy. Major Colin Campbell, 
of the Ist native regiment; Licutenant George Nixon, and 
Tulla, of the 12th; and Fitzgerald, of the 33rd, were killed ; in 
these attacks Lieutenants R. Nixon and King of his Majesty’s 
12th regiment, and Brooke of Bengal artillery, wounded, Gen. 
Floyd marched on the morning of the 6th to join General 
Stuart, with his infantry and four cavalry corps, twenty field- 
pieces, and a body of the Nizam’s horse. This force I consider 


122 THE NAME WITH HALF THE FACT. 


superior to any thing that can be opposed to it by the enemy. 
The army has now taken up its position for the siege. 


GEORGE HARRIS. 


21. Major-General Floyd to the Earl of Mornington. 
Battle of Malvelly, and Colonel Wellesleys Repulse. 
Camp at Periapatam, April roth, 1799. 
My Lord, 

As it is possible General Harris’s despatches may not have 
reached you, I beg leave to give a short statement of events, as 
far as have come to my knowledge. 

On the 27th of March the enemy was secn, in force, on the 
high ground west of Malavilly. General Harris, with the right 
wing, attacked the enemy in front. Two regiments of cavalry 
supported. Colonel Wellesley, with the Nizam’s army, took a 
most judicious situation on the enemy’s right flank, and attacked 
it, and threw it into confusion. I was observing, with three 
regiments of cavalry, between the right flank of Colonel Welles- 
ley and the left of General Harris, and charged and destroyed 
a great number of the enemy’s infantry, taking six stands of 
colours. About the same period, a number of the enemy’s horse 
had charged the European brigade of the right wing ; several of 
them were killed, and the rest fled; the infantry also were re- 
pulsed by ours, and the whole retired out of our reach. It 
seems, from subsequent accounts, that about 500 wounded men 
reached the enemy’s camp, and that their loss was about 2000 
men. Our loss amounted to about 7 or 8 killed, and about 40 
wounded—and about 45 horses killed and wounded. No officer 
killed, and four only wounded. I have no copy of the return 
by me. 

On the 29th March the army encamped at Sosilly, on the 
bank of the Cavery. Here we found a great collection of 
inhabitants, and cattle, and rice, and a good deal of paddy and 
other grain. The army was considerably refreshed. 

30th of March, the army had all crossed the river at a good 
ford. 

5th of April, the army took its’situation before Scringapatam 

. at.the west point of the fort. That night Lieut.-Colonel Shawe 
took possession of a post between seventcen and cightecn hun- 
dred yards from the fort, An attack was also made by Colonel 
Wellesley on a tope, but the troops were withdrawn on our 


JUNCTION OF GENERALS FLOYD AND STUART. 123 


part—a spent ball, as I have heard, struck the Colonel on the 
knee, but it did not prevent his walking. 

6th April, early in the morning, I marched off for Periapatam 
with four regiments of cavalry, one regiment European (73d), 
and five battalions native infantry, and about 2000 of the 
Nizam’s horse. All last night, and most of this day, there was 
a continued peal of small arms, and, occasionally, heavy guns. 
We still hear heavy guns at intervals, but I have no account 
whatever since we left the army. 

8th April, I encamped at Periapatam. My signals were 
answered, and I had communication with General Stuart that 
night. 

gth April, I rode over to General Stuart, and after some 
arrangements, returned to camp; immediately a considerable 
number of the enemy’s horse appeared, and hovered round most 
of the day without effecting anything, but with some slight loss 
on their part. 

roth April, General Stuart joined me this day, with rice and 
some other articles for between 30 and 40 days for his army, 
and a quantity of military stores. We proceed to-morrow to 
join the army at Seringapatam, and shall probably reach it in 
five marches. Having no cypher I refrain from some particulars ; 
the troops are, in general, healthy, and in high spirits, and full 
of good-will. 

I have the honour to be, 
with great respect, my Lord, 
your most obedient and humble Servant, 
J. FLoyp, M. G. 

On my marching from hence to-morrow, the communication 

will be entircly closed on this side. 


22. Lieut.-Gen. Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 
Storming of Seringapatam. 


‘ Seringapatam, 7th May, 1799. 
My Lord, gap 7 Y, 1799 
On the 4th instant I had the honour to address to your Lord- 
ship a hasty note, containing in few words the sum of our 
success, which I have now to report more in detail. 
The fire of our batteries, which began to batter in breach on 
the 3oth of April, had, on the evening of the 3rd instant, so 


124 THE STORM—~‘IN THE HEAT OF THE DAY, 


much destroyed the walls against which it was directed, that the 
arrangement was then made for assaulting the place on the 
following day, when the breach was reported practicable. The 
troops intended to be employed were stationed gn the trenches 
early on the morning of the 4th, that no extraordinary move- 
ment might lead the enemy to expect the assault, which I had 
determined to make in the heat of the day, as the time best 
calculated to ensure success, as their troops would then be least 
prepared to oppose us. 

Two flank companies of Europeans, taken from those regi- 
ments necessarily left to guard our camps and out-posts, followed 
by the 12th, 33rd, 73rd, and 74th regiments, and three corps 
of grenadier sepoys, taken from the troops of the three Pre- 
sidencies, with 200 of his Highness the Nizam’s troops, formed 
the party for the assault, accompanied by 100 of the artillery, 
and the corps of pioneers, and supported in the trenches by the 
battalion companies of the regiment De Meuron, and four 
battalions of Madras sepoys. Colonel Sherbrooke, and Lieut.- 
Colonels Dunlop, Dalrymple, Gardner, and Mignon, commanded 
the several flank corps, and Major-General Baird was entrusted 
with the direction of this important service. 

At one o’clock the troops moved from the trenches, crossed 
the rocky bed of the Cavery under an extremely heavy fire, 
passed the glacis and ditch, and ascended the breaches in the 
Fausse Braye, and rampart of the fort, surmounting in the most 
gallant manner every obstacle which the difficulty of the passage, 
and the resistance of the enemy presented to oppose their pro- 
gress. Major-General Baird had divided his force for the purpose 
of clearing the ramparts to the right and left; one division was 
commanded by Colonel Sherbrooke, the other by Licut.-Colonel 
Dunlop; the latter was disabled in the breach, but both corps, 
although strongly opposed, were completely successful. Re- 
sistance continued to be made from the palace of Tippoo for 
some time after all firing had ccased from the works; two of his 
sons were there, who, on an assurance of safcty, surrendered to 
the troops surrounding them, and guards were placed for the 
protection of the family, most of whom were in the palace. It 
was soon after reported that Tippoo Sultaun had fallen. Syed 
Saheb, Meer Saduc, Syed Gofar, and many others of his chiefs 
were also slain; measures were immediately adopted to stop the 
confusion, at first unavoidable, in a city strongly garrisoned, 
crowded with inhabitants, and their property in ruins, from the 


TIPPOO SLAIN, GENERAL SUBMISSION. 125 


fire of a numerous artillery, and taken by assault. The princes 
were removed to camp. 

It appeared to Major-General Baird so important to ascertain 
the fate of the Sultaun, that he caused immediate search to be 
made for his body, which, after much difficulty, was found late 
in the evening in one of the gates under a heap of slain, and 
placed in the palace. The corpse was the next day recognised 
by the family, and interred with the honours due to his rank, in 
the mausoleum of his father, 

The strength of the fort is such, both from its natural position 
and the stupendous works by which it is surrounded, that all the 
exertions of the brave troops who attacked it, in whose praise it 
is impossible to say too much, were required to place it in our 
hands. Of the merits of the army I have expressed my opinion 
in orders, a copy of which I shall forward to-morrow; and I trust 
your Lordship will point out their services to the favourable 
notice of their king and country. 

T am sorry to add, that on collecting the returns of our loss it 
is found to have been much heavier than I had at first imagined. 
An accurate statement shall be sent to-morrow. 

On the 5th instant Abdul Khalic, the elder of the princes, 
formerly hostages with Lord Cornwallis, surrendered himself at 
our outposts, demanding protection. Kerim Saheb, the brother 
of Tippoo, had before sought refuge with Mcer Allum Behadur. 
A Cowl Namah was yesterday despatched to Futteh Hyder, the 
eldest son of Tippoo, inviting him to join his brother. Purneah 
and Mecr Cummer ul deen Khan have also been summoned to 
Seringapatam. No answers have yet been received, but I expect 
them shortly, as their families are in the fort. 

This moment Ali Reza, formerly one of the vakeels from 
Tippoo Sultaun to Lord Cornwallis, has arrived from Meer 
Cummer ul Dcen Khan to ask my orders for 4000 horse, now 
under his command. Ali Reza was commissioned to declare 
that Mcer Cummer ul Deen would make no conditions, but rely 
on the generosity of the English. He desired mercly to state, 
that his claim to the Jaghire of Gurramconda was well known, 
as was his family and character. If these and his connexion 
with the unfortunate family of Tippoo Sultaun should give him 
a claim to this ancient possession of his house, his sense of 
obligation would bind him ever to the British interests. If this 
could not be granted to him, he hoped he might obtain per- 
mission to retire with his family to Hyderabad. On this subject 


126 DETAIL OF THE STORMING PARTY. 


I have promised to ask your Lordship’s pleasure ; he will shortly 
arrive, and as the army of the late Sultaun look up chiefly to 
him, I hope through his means to be enabled *at once to restore 
tranquillity. Monsieur Chapuy and most of the French are 
prisoners. They have commissions from the French Govern- 
ment. 
I have the honour to be, &c. 
GEORGE HARRIS. 


23. To Lieut.-General Harris, Commander-in-Chief, &€c. 


Same Subject. 
Sir, 

Having in obedience to your orders taken the command of 
the troops ordered for the assault of the Fort of Seringapatam, 
consisting of a corps of six companies of European flankers from 
the Bombay army, under Lieut.-Colonel Dunlop ; a corps of four 
companies of European flankers from the Scotch brigade, and 
the Regiment de Meurone, under Colonel Sherbrooke; his 
Majesty’s 12th, 33rd, 73rd, and 74th regiments; ten companies 
of Bengal sepoy flankers, under Lieut.-Colonel Gardener ; eight 
companies of coast sepoy flankers, under Lieut.-Colonel Dal- 
rymple; six companies of Bombay sepoy flankers, under Lieut.- 
Colonel Mignan; one hundred artillerymen, with a proportion 
of gun lascars, under Major Bell; the European and Native 
pioneers under Captain Dowse;—amounting as per enclosed 
return of men actually under arms at the assault, to— 


: E eans . : 2,494: ; 
Firelocks Nog ; ; raga { Total . 4,376: 


I have now the honour to report to you the measures I took 
to secure the success of the important object entrusted to me, 
and the result, and to enclose a return of the killed and wounded 
on the assault. 

Having received your instructions to make the capture of the 
ramparts my first object, as the force under my command was 
not deemed sufficient to assault the ramparts and town at the 
same time, when defended by Tippoo’s whole army, I directed 
Lieut.-Colonel Dunlop, with six companies of Bombay European 
flankers, supported by his Majesty’s 12th and 33rd regiments, 
and ten companies of Bengal sepoy flankers, with fifty artillery- 
men, to assault the North ramparts, and to push on with the 


PLAN OF THE ASSAULT: PROMPT SUCCESS. 127 


European flank companies until he met the South attack, under 
Colonel Sherbrooke, consisting of the flank companies of the 
Scotch Brigade and Regiment de Meurone, reinforced by the 
Grenadier companies of his Majesty’s 73rd and 74th regiments, 
in consequence of the vigorous resistance, there was reason to 
apprchend at the several heavy batteries on the south face of 
the fort, and supported by his Majesty’s 73rd and 74th regi- 
ments, eight companies of coast native, and six companies of 
Bombay native flankers, with fifty artillerymen, when the whole 
were directed to form on the East face, until arrangements were 
made for the attack of such of the cavaliers as might not already 
have been seized on, or for proceeding to the attack of the body 
of the place, if with the force remaining such a measure should 
be deemed advisable. 

The assault commenced, in obedience to your orders, at one 
P.M. Colonels Sherbrooke and Dunlop were directed on no 
account to quit the inner rampart previous to their junction, for 
any other object but that of seizing on the cavaliers in the neigh- 
bourhood of their respective attacks, and to lose no time in 
regaining their situation on the ramparts, as soon as that object 
should be attained, and every cavalicr or post on the rampart, 
which it might be decmed essential to secure, were immediately 
to be occupied by a battalion company of companies from the 
supporting European regiments, so that the whole of the ground 
once captured might be secured, and the flankers on their junc- 
tion be in full force to follow up their success, by an attack on 
any of the cavaliers which had not fallen in their way, or by an 
assault on the body of the town and the palace of the Sultaun. 

In the success of every part of this plan my warmest wishes 
were gratificd ; the whole of the ramparts, and every cavalier in 
the fort, were in a vigorous assault of a few hours, in the pos- 
session of our troops, who were too well acquainted with the 
value of their conquest to render the retaining it against the 
whole of Tippoo’s army at all doubtful. The place, therefore, 
being so securely our own, I was not anxious, by an immediate 
attack on the palace, to bring on a fresh and unnecessary 
slaughter; and indced the exhausted state of the gallant fankers 
rendered it expedient for me to halt a short time before I pro- 
ceeded to the attack of the palace, which, if Tippoo was in it, 
there was every reason to suppose would be, if possible, as 
gallantly defended as attacked. 

During this halt, two fresh battalions of -sepoys arrived, and 


128 WHERE IS TIPPOO? BAIRD’S GRIM RESOLVE. 


trusting that by this time the Sultaun would see how fruitless 
any further resistance must prove, I requested Major Allen, 
Deputy .Quarter-Master-General, who had just arrived from 
camp, and who, from his knowledge of the language, was well 
qualified to execute the duty, to proceed with a flag of truce 
to the palace, and offer Cowle to Tippoo Sultaun, and every 
person in his palace, on his immediate and unconditional sur- 
render of himself and family to me; at the same time informing 
him, if there was the smallest hesitation in acceding to this offer, 
that an immediate assault on the palace would take place, and 
every man in it be put to the sword. The Grenadiers, and part 
of the 12th regiment under Major Craigie, with the 2nd battalion 
of the 9th regiment of sepoys, accompanied Major Allen to put 
this threat into immediate execution, if necessary; and I pre- 
pared the flankers, now a little recovered from their fatigues, to 
follow to the attack of the palace on the first signal of hostilities 
having recommenced (for the firing had ceased on all sides for 
upwards of an hour). In the mean time I received intelligence 
from one of the prisoners, of whom I caused enquiry to be made 
as to the place where the English soldiers, who had been taken 
in the different assaults on the enemy’s outposts during the siege 
were confined, that they had all been put to death about ten 
days before in the most barbarous manner, by having nails 
driven through their skulls. On this I immediately advanced 
with the flankers of the 74th regiment and the light infantry, 
and remaining part of the 12th regiment, resolved, if Cowle had 
not already been granted, and the dreadful accounts of the fate 
of our fellow soldiers were confirmed, to sacrifice the tyrant to 
their manes. 

On reaching the palace, Major Allen came out to me, and 
informed me he had been with Tippoo’s two youngest sons, who 
were ignorant where their father was, but were disposed to sur- 
render themselves and the palace on a promise of protection. 
Anxious, if possible, to discover Tippoo, who I had been in- 
formed was certainly in the palace, I hesitated to agree to these 
conditions unless they would inform me where their father was, 
and threatened to search the most secret recesses of the palace 
if he was not instantly produced; but not being able to Icarn 
from them where the Sultaun was, and wishing to get them out 
of the fort before it was dark, after giving them every assurance 
of protection and kind treatment, I sent them off to you, under 
charge of Lieut.-Colonel Agnew, your public Secretary, and 


DISCOVERY OF THE SULTAUN’S BODY. 129 


Captain Merriott, your Aid-de-Camp, escorted by the light 
infantry company of his Majesty’s 33rd regiment. The palace 
was then taken possession of without opposition. I now pro- 
ceeded to the search of the palace, accompanied by Lieut.~ 
Colonel Close and Major Allen, taking care, however, to avoid 
the Zenana, round which I had posted a sufficient forcé to make 
his escape from it impracticable. In the palace we found a man 
who, on being severcly threatened, said that the Sultaun was 
killed in attempting to escape through the Northern Sally Port, 
and offered to conduct us to the body. We accordingly pro- 
ceeded thither, and under a slaughtered heap of several hun- 
dreds, many of whom were men of consequence in his service, 
had the pleasure to discover the body of the Sultaun. He had 
been shot through the head and body, and was quite dead. 
I caused him immediately to be put into a palanquin, and 
conveyed to the palace, where the body was identified by some 
of the principal men who had fallen into our hands, and by two 
of the eunuchs belonging to his Haram. 

I now proceeded to give such protection to the inhabitants as 
was in my power, and although it was by this time dark, as 
I have heard no complaints of outrage or insult being offered 
to any after the conflict ceased, I may venture to say the natives 
of India will be satisfied that the British soldiers are not more 
brave than humane. 

Early the next morning Abdual Cawlic, the second son of 
Tippoo, and the clder son of the two who were delivered to 
Lord Cornwallis as hostages at the conclusion of the last war, 
was met by Licut.-Colonel Dalrymple coming from the island to 
deliver himself up. Ile was immediatcly assured of protection 
and the most liberal treatment, and I went to meet him ta show 
how much satisficd I was with the confidence he placed in us by 
thus delivering himself into our hands when the means of escape 
were perfectly in his power. 

Having becn led to expect you in the fort yesterday morning, 
I waited with Abdual Cawlic to deliver him into your own 
hands. But on being relieved by Colonel Wellesley, I procecded 
with him to camp, and delivered him over to you. I perceive, 
in the gencral orders of yesterday, that no mention is made of 
Colonel Sherbrooke. This, I perceive, is owing to that order 
being published before I had time to make my report to you of 
the conduct of the troops under my command on the assault, 
which was highly exemplary throughout, and if, where all 

K 
, 


130 THE SULTAUN’S CABINET OPENED. 


| behaved nobly, it is proper to mention individual merit, I know 
no man so justly entitled to praise as Colonel Sherbrooke, ta 
, whose exertions I feel myself much indebted for the success of 
{ the attack. 
I make no doubt but Lieut.-Colonel Dunlop, who commanded 

a party of equal force with that of Colonel Sherbrooke, would 
have merited equal praise for his exertions had he not most 
unfortunately been disabled by a wound very early in the 
assault, a circumstance I most sincerely regretted, as from the 
well known character of that officer, and the clear manner in 
which he understood the instructions I gave him relative to the 
attack he was to lead, I put the greatest confidence in the success 
of the attack, 

‘ I have the honour to be, Sir, 

Your most obedient, humble Servant, 
DaviID BAIRD, Major-General. 

Camp at Seringapatam, 

6th May, 1799. 


24. The Earl of Mornington to the Secret Committee of the 
Court of Directors. 


Documents, MSTA of Tippoo’s French alliance, found at 
Seringapatam. 


Fort St. George, roth May, 1799. 
Honourable Sirs, 

The accidental detention of the Sarak Christiana packet 
enables me to forward to your honourable Committee, by this 
despatch, documents of great importance, explanatory of the 
nature of the connexion between Tippoo Sultaun and the French 
republic. zs _ 

“These papers were found in the palace of Seringapatam, and 
were transmitted officially to my military secretary by the secre- 
tary of the commission appointed to assist Lieut.-Gencral Harris 
in all matters of a political nature. 

The paper No. 1 is a letter fromm Tippoo Sultaun to the 
Executive Directory, and appears to be an attested copy of that 
which was despatched by M. Dubuc with two native vakeels of 
the 7th of February, 1799. The Ietter, however, is dated the 
2oth of July, 1798, at which time the military preparations in 
the Carnatic had scarcely commenced. 


IT CONFIRMS THE CHARGES AGAINST TIPPOO. 131 


Your Honourable Committee will observe, that, Tippoo Sultaun, 
in the most distinct manner, states the nature of his late embassy 
to the Isle of France to have been the same which I have de- 
scribed in my minute of the 12th of August, and in my letter to 
Tippoo Sultaun of the 8th of November, notwithstanding that he 
had endeavoured to put a different colour on the transaction in 
his letter to me of the 18th of December, 1798, received at Fort 
St. George the 25th of the same month. 

It is equally remarkable that he does not attempt to allege 
against the British Government any ground of complaint since 
the conclusion of the last war. 

The objcct of his offensive and defensive alliance with France 
appears to have been not merely the recovery of his former 
dominions, but the expulsion of the English from all thejr rich 
possessions in India, and the utter annihilation of their power in 
Asia. 

You will further observe, that he declares it to be his intention 
to commence the attack on the first favourable occasion ; and 
on the whole, that he professes to make common cause with 
France, under the most solemn protestations of fidelity and zcal 
to the republic. 

The paper, No. 2, is a note of the demands which Tippoo 
Sultaun’s ambassadors were authorized by him to make upon 
the Executive Directory at Paris. They correspond in substance 
with the requisitions announced in M. Malartic’s proclamation at 
the Mauritius. 

In the articles 5 and 6 you will perceive that the Sultaun 
intended to commence his operations in the heart of the Carnatic, 
in concert with a French army to be landed at_Porto Novo, and 
that he did not propose to wait the actual arrival of the French 
force, but was resolved to make himself master of the coast of 
Coromandel as soon as he should find it convenient, after having 
received notice of the motions of the French. 

In article 7 it appears that the Portuguese colonies in this 
quarter of India were to have been divided between Tippoo 
Sultaun and the French. All the articles of this paper demand 
particular attention, as tending to prove, in the most conclusive 
manner, the entire devotion of this infatuated Prince to his 
alliance with France. This paper also is dated on the 2oth July, 
1798; both documents are signed in the Sultaun’s own hand- 
writing, according to the abbreviated form of signature, which 
he was accustomed to use in all his letters and other official 

K 2 


132 MYSORE OURS, AND THE NIZAQS, BY CONQUEST, 


documents. This mode of signature is usual among the natives 
of Hindostan, and no doubt can be entertained of the authenticity 
of the papers. 

‘Your Honourable Committee will observe, that the Ictter from 
Tippoo Sultaun to me, which was received at Fort St. George on 
the 13th of February, must have been written subsequently to 
the despatch of the papers now enclosed, as M. Dubuc, with the 
Sultaun’s two vakeels, embarked at Tranquebar on the 7th of 
February. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 
MORNINGTON, 


25. The Earl of Mornington to the Honourable Court of 
Directors. 


Partition and Settlement of Mysore. Treatment of the Sultaun's 
Jamily, Results of the War. 


Fort St. George, 3d August, 1799. 
Honourable Sirs, 

My last separate letter to your Honourable Court, was dated 
on the 6th of June, at which period I informed you, that I was 
occupied in framing a general scttlement of the conquered terri- 
tories of the late Tippoo Sultaun. In this despatch, I shall 
submit to your Honourable Court, a summary abstract of the 
Principles by which my conduct has been governed in framing 
this settlement, and of the means which I have employed for 
carrying it into effect. 

From the justice and success of the late war with Tippoo 
Sultaun, the Company and the Nizam derived an undoubted right 
to the disposal of the dominions conquered by their united arms. 


' This right of conquest entitled the Company and the Nizam, to 


retain the whole territory in their own hands; the cession of any 
portion of it toany other party, might be a consideration of policy 


, or humanity, but could not be claimed on any ground of justice 


or right. 

The Mahrattas, whatever might have been their disposition, 
having taken no share in the war, had forfeited every pretension 
to participate in the advantages of the peace. The numerous 
progeny of Tippoo Sultaun (even if it had been possible to adjust 
their several pretensions to the succession,) could plead no title 
which had not been superseded by the conquest of the kingdom ; 
Nor was it possible in estimating their claims, to forget the usur- 


INDEMNITY AND SECURITY STILL OUR AIM. 133 


pation of Hyder Alli, and the sufferings of the unfortunate family, 
expelled by his crimes from the throne of Mysore. A lineal 
descendant of the ancient house of the Rajahs of Mysore, 
still remained at Seringapatam; but, whatever might be the 
hopes of his family, from the moderation and humanity of the 
conquerors, this young Prince could assert no right to any share 
of the conquered territory. 

To the free and uncontrouled exercise of the right of conquest 
thus vested in the Company and the Nizam, no obstacle existed 
in the internal state of the kingdom of Mysore. The whole 
body of the people had manifested the most favourable dis- 
position to submit to our authority; the commanders of most 
of the principal fortresses had surrendered, or expressed their 
readiness to surrender to our arms; and within a few days after 
the fall of Seringapatam, I was satisfied that no difficulty would 
arise from the influence of the Mahommedans introduced into 
Mysore, under the usurpation of Hyder Alli and Tippoo Sultaun. 
It had been the uniform policy of the latter to destroy every 
vestige of hereditary right, established office, or territorial pos- 
session among his subjects, and to concentre not only the 
whole authority of the State, but the whole administration of 
the Government in his own person; during his reign, therefore, 
his numerous Mahommedan chicfs possessed neither individual 
weight, nor collective force ; many of them had fallen at Mala- 
velly, Sedasere, and Seringapatam, during the course of the 
war; and most of the survivors, together with their familics, 
were actually in the fortress of Scringapatam, subjected to our 
discretion, and confiding in the clemency of the British Govern- 
ment, without union, spirit, or strength to resist its power. The 
‘inclination and temper, both of the surviving chiefs and of the 
people, were also most happily disposed to receive any new 
settlement, which might promise to secure them against the revival 
of a despotism, the barbarity and caprice of which have never been 
surpassed even by any of the Mahommedan conquerors of India. 

In regulating the exercise of our right of conquest, it appeared 
to me that no principle could more justly be assumed, than that 
the original objects of the war should constitute the basis of the 
peace, and of the gencral settlement of our territorial acquisitions. 
These objects had been repeatedly declared by the Allies to be 
a reasonable indemnification for our expence in the war, and 
an adequate sceurity against the return of that danger, which 
‘originally provoked us to arms. 


134 TO DIVIDE IT BETWEEN US, SIMPLY, NOT RIGHT. 


With a view to each of these just and necessary objects, it was 
requisite that the Company and the Nizam should retain a large 
portion of the conquered territory; but it required much con- 
sideration to determine the precise extent of that portion, as well 
as the just rule of partition. The war had not been under- 
taken in pursuit of schemes of conquest, extension of territory, or 
augmentation of revenue. In proportion to the magnitude and 
lustre of our success, it became a more urgent duty to remember, 
that a peace founded in the gratification of any ambitious or 
inordinate view, could neither be advantageous, honourable, nor 
secure. 

The approved policy, interests, and honour of the British 
nation therefore required, that the settlement of the extensive 
kingdom subjected to our disposal, should be formed on princi- 
ples acceptable to the inhabitants of the conquered territories, 
just and conciliatory towards the contiguous native States, and 
indulgent to every party, in any degree affected by the conse- 
quences of our success. 

To have divided the whole territory equally between the 
Company and the Nizam, to the exclusion of any other State, 
would have afforded strong grounds of jealousy to the Mahrattas, 
and aggrandized the Nizam’s powcr beyond all bounds of discre- 
tion ; under whatever form such a partition could have been made, 
it must have placed in the hands of the Nizam many of the 
strong fortresses on the northern frofttier of Mysore, and exposed 
our frontier in that quarter to every predatory incursion; such a 
partition would have laid the foundation of perpetual differences, 
not only between the Mahrattas and the Nizam, but between the 
Company and both those powers. 

To have divided the country into three cqual portions, allow- 
ing the Mahrattas, (who had borne no part in the expence or 
hazard of the war,) an equal share with the other two branches 
of the triple alliance, in the advantages of the peace, would have 
been unjust towards the Nizam, and towards the Company; 
impolitic, as furnishing an evil example to our other Allies in 
India, and dangerous, as effecting a considerable aggrandizement 
of the Mahratta empire at the expence of the Company, and of 
the Nizam. This mode of partition also, must have placed 
Chitteldroog, and some of the most important northern for- 
tresses, in the hands of the Mahrattas, while the remainder of 
the fortresses in the same line, would have been occupied by the 
Nizam, and our unfortified and open fronticr in Mysore, would 


MYSORE TO BE A STATE, MAHRATTAS MAY SHARE. 135 


have becn exposed to the excesses of the undisciplined troops of 
both powers. 

The Mahrattas unquestionably had no claim to any portion of 
the conquered territory, and any considerable extension of their 
empire was objectionable, especially when accompanied by the 
possession of strong fortresses bordering on the line of our 
frontier. It was, however, desirable to conciliate their goodwill, 
and to offer to them such a portion of territory as might give 
them an interest in the new settlement without offence or injury 
to the Nizam, and without danger to the frontier of the Com- 
pany’s possessions. On the other hand, it was prudent to limit 
the territory retained in the hands of the Company and of the 
Nizam within such bounds of moderation as should bear a due 
proportion to their respective expences in. the contest, and to 
the necessary means of securing the public safety of their re- 
spective dominions. 

For the information of your Honourable Court, I have annexed 
to this despatch a comparative statement of several plans for 
the partition of Tippoo Sultaun’s dominions, drawn up under 
my instructions with a view to the relative interests and power 
of the Nizam, the Mahrattas, and the Company; to the nature, 
produce, and geographical boundaries of the country, and to the 
position and strength of the several fortresses and passes; an 
attentive investigation of every comparative view of these im- 
portant questions terminated in my decision that the establish- 
ment of a central and separate government in Mysore, under 
the protection of the Company, and the admission ‘of the 
Mahrattas to a certain participation in the division of the con- 
quered territory, were the expedients best calculated to recon- 
cile the interests of all parties, to secure to the Company, a less 
invidious, and more efficient share of fevenue, resource, com- 
mercial advantage, and military strength, than could be obtained 
under any other distribution of territory or power, and to afford 
the most favourable prospect of general and permancnt tran- 
quillity in India. 

Having decided these leading principles of the new settle- 
ment, I proceeded to determine the rule of distribution for the 
respective shares of the Company, the Nizam, and the Mahrattas, 
to fix the most eligible position for the ccssions to be made to 
cach party, and ‘to define the limits of the new government of 
Mysore. 

To the Company’s share naturally fell the Province of Canara, 


136 WHAT THE COMPANY’S SHARE SHOULD BE, 


the Districts of Coimbatoor and Daraporam, with all the terri- 
tory lying below the Ghauts between your possessions in the 
Carnatic, and those in Malabar. These acquisitions appeared 
the most eligible, not only on account of their intrinsic value in 
point of produce, but as securing an uninterrupted tract of 
territory from the coast of Coromandel to that of Malabar, 
together with the entire sea-coast of the Kingdom of Mysore, 
and the base of all the eastern, western and southern Ghauts. 
To these I thought it necessary to add the forts and posts 
forming the heads of all the passes above the Ghauts on the 
Table Land. The possession of the base of the Ghauts alone 
formed no effectual barrier for the inhabitants of the Low Lands 
against an enemy possessing the summits of those mountains; 
and I, therefore, considered the acquisition of all the entrances 
of the Passes situated above the Ghauts, to be an essential 
object of security, against every possible approach of danger 
from the Table Land. This acquisition derived a further im- 
portance in my opinion, from the means which it appeared to 
afford of curbing the refractory spirit of the Polygars, and of all 
other turbulent and disaffected subjects in the Carnatic, and on 
the coast of Malabar; I also considered the district of Wynaad 
to be an useful possession with a view to the tranquillity of 
your territories on the latter coast. The last addition which 
I deemed it necessary to make to your share of the conquered 
dominions, consisted of the fortress, city and island of Scringa- 
patam, the possession of which would effectually secure the 
communication between your territorics on both coasts, and 
consolidate all your lines of defence in every direction. 

To the Nizam, it appeared most expedient to allot the dis- 
tricts of Gooty and Gurrumcondah, bordering on the cessions 
which he acquired by the peace of 1792, together with a tract 
of country, the frontier of which should be drawn nearly along 
the line of Chitteldroog, Scra, Nundydroog, and Colar, leaving, 

however, these fortresses to the southward to form the frontier 
of the new Government of Mysore. The Nizam certainly could 
not assert any just claim to an cqual participation with the 
Company in the advantages of the peace. The operation of 
the 6th Article of the Treaty of Paungul, respecting an cqual 
division of conquests, was limited to the war which terminated 
in 1792. Since the peace of Scringapatam, the 10th is the only 
Article of the Treaty of Paungul which can be considered to 
continue in force; and no subsequent engagements had been 


THE NIZAMS, AND THAT OFFERED TO THE MAHRATTAS, 137 


contracted with the Nizam which could entitle him to any 
advantages in the present peace exceeding his relative propor- 
tion in the expences and exertions of the allied force during the 
late war. It was, however, desirable that the territorial revenue 
retained in sovereignty by the Company (after deducting what- 
ever charges might be annexed to the tenure) should not exceed 
the Nizam’s portion, and accordingly I determined that this 
principle should be observed in the partition; reserving, how- 
ever, to the Company, as a just indemnification for their superior 
share in the expences and exertions of the war, the principal 
benefit of whatever advantages might flow from any engage- 
ments to be contracted with the new Government of Mysore. 

For the Mahrattas, I resolved to reserve a portion of territory, 
the revenues of which should not exceed two-thirds, nor fall 
short of one-half, of the portions retained in sovereignty by the 
Nizam and the Company respectively, after deducting their 
respective charges: considering that any cession to the Peishwa 
must be viewed as a matter of mere favour, it appeared to me 
that the share to be allotted to him was amply sufficient; it 
would contain Harponelly, Soonda above the Ghauts, Anna- 
goondy, part of the district of Chitteldroog, part of Bednore 
above the Ghauts, and other districts, but the frontier fortresses 
of Chitteldroog and Bednore would remain for the protection of 
the new Government of. Mysore. I also determined that no 
portion of territory should be ccded to the Peishwa uncon- 
ditionally, and that the cession should form the basis of a new 
treaty with the Mahratta empire. 

The territory remaining unoccupied by this partition could be 
bounded to the northward by a strong line of hill forts and 
posts, forming a powerful barrier towards the southern frontiers 
of the Nizam and of the Mahrattas, from Punganoor on the line 
of the eastern, to Bednore on that of the western Ghauts, and 
would be entircly surrounded to the east, west and south, by the 
territories of the Company above and below the Ghauts, the 
Company also holding the Fort of Scringapatam in the centre 
of the Table Land. 

The necessity now occurred of determining in what hands the 
new Government of Mysore should be placed, and although no 
positive right or title to the throne existed in any party, it 
seemed expedient, that my choice should be made between the 
pretensions of the family of Tippoo Sultaun, and those of the 
ancient house of the Rajahs of Mysore. 


138 THE OLD, GR NEW DYNASTY YO RULE IN MYSORE ? 


The claims of humanity on both sides rendered the decision 
a painful and ungracious task. No alternative remained, but to 
depose the dynasty which I found upon the throne, or to con- 
firm the Mahommedan. usurpation, and with it the perpetual 
exclusion and degradation of the legitimate Hindoo sovereigns 
of the country. The usurpation, although not sanctioned by 
remote antiquity, had subsisted for such a length of time as to 
have nearly extinguished the hopes of the Hindoo family, and 
to have accustomed them to the humility of their actual fortunes, 
while the sons of Tippoo Sultaun, born in the state of royalty, 
and educated with the proudest and most exalted expectations 
of sovereignty and power, would be proportionably sensible to 
the sudden change of their condition, and to the unexpected 
disappointment of their splendid prospects. In this view of the 
subject it would have bcen more grateful to my mind (securing 
a munificent provision for the ancient family of Mysore) to 
have restored that of Tippoo Sultaun to the throne ;Uf such 
a restoration could have been accomplished without exposing 
Mysore to the perpetual hazard of internal commotion and 
foreign war, and without endangering the stability of the in- 
tended settlement of your interests and those of your allies in 
this quarter of India. ° 

Since the peace of Seringapatam, and more especially since 
the year 1796, the destruction of the British power in India has 
formed the favourite and unremitting object of Tippoo Sultaun’s 
hopes and exertions. His haughty mind never could be recon- 
ciled to the sacrifices which he was compelled to make for the 

_ Purchase of peace in 1792; and his increasing eagerness to 
recover the extensive portion of his dominions, then ceded to 
the allics, urged him to pursue a systematic course of intrigue 
against the British power among all the native states, and to 
revert to his ancient and hereditary connection with France, as 
the only effectual means of gratifying either his ambition or 
revenge, 

The proofs which I had obtained, previous to the war, of 
the nature and objects. of his machinations, were sufficient to 
satisfy my judgment; they have since been corroborated by the 
voluminous records discovered in the Palace of Scringapatam ; 
it is now incontestable that Tippoo Sultaun’s thoughts were 
perpetually intent upon the ruin of the British power, that he 
trusted to have accomplished our expulsion by instigating the 
French to invade India; and that he prosecuted this unalterable 


TIPLOUS BEIR INHERITS WIS DP'RINCIPLES AND PASSIONS, 139 


purpose with all the zeal and ardour of passionate resentment 
and vindictive hate, as well as with the steadiness of a deliberate 
maxim of state. 

Perhaps the most wise policy which Tippoo Sultaun could 
have pursued would have been to have rested satisfied with 
the dominions remaining in his hands after the peace of 1792. 
But a policy of so moderate and pacific a spirit being utterly 
incompatible with the impctuosity of his temper, with the prin- 
ciples of his religious faith, and with the military character of 
his government, it might be at least a matter of rational specu- 
lation, whether a close alliance with France (however dangerous 
in its remote consequences) was not his true interest, in the 
actual state of his immediate views and pursuits. The pos- 
session of his lost dignity, wealth, and power could not be re- 
covered without the conquest of a great part of the Company’s 
territory, nor effectually secured without the total subversion of 
the British interests in India;—a French army was the only 
instrument by which such an enterprize could be attempted ;— 
‘an alliance with France was, therefore, the necessary conse- 
quence of Tippoo Sultaun’s restless, but natural desire to restore 
his empire to its former splendour and strength. In addition to 
his correspondence with the French at Tranquebar, with those 
at the Isle of France, and with the executive Directory at Paris, 
his embassy to Zemaun Shah, his intrigues at Poonah and 

Hydcrabad, and his correspondence with Mons, Raymond, (all 
which transactions appear distinctly in the records discovered 
at Seringapatam) furnish abundant evidence that his antipathy 
to the English was the ruling passion of his heart, the main- 
spring of his policy, the fixed and fundamental principle of his 
councils and government.’ 

(The heir of Tippoo Sultaun must have been educated in the 
same principles, and encouraged to indulge in the same pre- 
judiccs and passions, and instructed to form the same views of 
the interests and honour of the throne of Mysore.) These senti- 
ments would necessarily acquire additional force in his mind 
from the issue of the late war. Our uncxampled success had 
subverted the foundations of his father’s empire, and transferred 
to our possession every source of the civil or military power of 
Mysore. [Placed on the throne by our favour, and limited by 
our controul, he would have felt himself degraded to a state of 
humiliation and weakness so abject as no Prince of spirit would 
brook Under such an arrangement our safcty would have 


T40 HE WILL ALWAYS BE IRRECONCILABLE TO US, 


required us to retain at least all the territory which we now 
hold by the partition Treaty of Mysore. Whatever we retained 
must have been considered by the prince as a new usurpation 
upon his royal inheritance, and an additional pledge of his 
degradation and disgrace. } In proportion to the reduction of his 
territory and resources he would have less to lose and more to 
regain in any struggle for the recovery of his father’s empire; 
nor does it seem unreasonable to suppose that the heir of Hyder 
Alli and Tippoo Sultaun, animated by the implacable spirit and 
bold example of his parents,and accustomed to the commanding 
prospect of independent sovereignty, and to the splendour of 
military glory, might deliberately hazard the remnant of his 
hereditary possessions in pursuit of so proud an object, as the 
recovery of that vast and powerful empire, which for many years 
had rendered his ancestors the scourge of the Carnatic, and the 
terror of this quarter of India. 

In the most narrow view of the subject, it must be admitted 
that the son of Tippoo Sultaun must have felt a perpetual 
interest in the subversion of any scttlement of Mysore, founded 
on a partition of his father’s dominions, and on a limitation of 
his own independence. , If, therefore, a prince of this race had 
been placed on the throne of Mysore, the foundations of the 
new settlement would have been laid in the very principles of 
its own dissolution With such a prince no sincere alliance, no 
concord of sentiments, or union of views could ever have been 
established ; the appearances of amity or attachment must have 
been delusive, even his submission must have been reluctant, 
if not treacherous; while all his interests, his habits, pre- 
judices, and passions,+ his vices, and even his virtucs must 
have concurred to cherish an irreconcilable aversion to our 
name and power, and an eager desire to abct the cause, to 
exasperate the animosity, and to receive the aid of every enemy 
of the British nation. Whatever degree of influence or strength 
might have been left to the native Government of Mysore in 
such hands, would always have been thrown into the scale 
opposed to your interests. (The hostile power of Mysore would 
have been weakened, but not destroyed; an enemy would still 
have remained in the centre of your possessions, watching every 
occasion to repair the misfortunes of his family at your expense, 
and forming a point of union for the machinations of every 
discontented faction in India, and for the intrigues of every 
emissary of France. / 


THE CONVERSE WOULD BE TRUE OF THE HINDOO LINE. I4l 


Under these circumstances, the same anxiety for the security 
and repose of your possessions, which originally compelled me to 
reduce the power of Tippoo Sultaun, now appeared to require 
that I should provide effectually against the revival of any degree 
of a Similar danger, in the person of his son. 

On the other hand, the restoration of the descendant of the 
ancient Rajahs of Mysore was recommended by the same course of 
reasoning which excluded the heir of the Mahomedan usurpation. 

The indignities which the deposed family of Mysore had 
suffered, especially during the cruel and tyrannical reign of 
Tippoo Sultaun, and the state. of degradation and misery to 
which they had been reduced{ would most naturally excite a 
sentiment of gratitude and attachment in their minds towards 
that power, which had not only delivered them from oppression, 
but had raised them to a state of considerable affluence and dis- 

_tinction., Between the British Government and this family, an 
intercourse of friendship and kindness had subsisted in the most 
desperate crisis of their adverse fortune.} They had formed no 
connection with your enemies. Their Elevation would be the 
spontaneous act of your generosity, and from your support alone 
could they ever hope to be maintained upon the throne, either 
against the family of Tippoo Sultaun, or against any other 
claimant. / They must naturally view with an eye of jealousy, all 
the friends of the usurping family, and consequently be adverse 
to the French, or to any state connectcd with that family, in its 
hereditary hatred of the British Governments The heir of the 
Rajahs of Mysore, if placed on the throne, must fecl that his 
continuance in that state depended on the stability of the new 
settlement in all its parts. His interest, must therefore be to 
unite with cordiality and zcal in every effort necessary to its 
harmony, efficiency, and vigour. The effect of such an arrange- 
ment of the affairs of Mysore would not be limited to the mere 
destruction of the hostile power which menaccd our safety. In| 
the place of that power, would be substituted one, whose intcrests 
and resources might be absolutely identified with our own, and 
the kingdom of Mysore, so long the source of calamity and alarm ' 
to the Carnatic, might become a new barrier of our defence, and 
might supply fresh means of wealth and strength to the Company, 
their subjects, and allics, 

In addition to these motives of policy, moral considerations, 
and sentiments of generosity and humanity, favoured the restora- 
tion of the ancient family of Mysore. Their high birth, the 


142 THE LATTER CHOSEN. TIPPOO’S FAMILY PENSIONED, 


antiquity of their legitimate title, and their long and unmerited 
sufferings, rendered them peculiar objects of compassion and 
respect ; nor could it be doubted that their government would 
be both more acceptable and more indulgent than that of the 
Mahomedan usurpers, to the mass of the inhabitants of the 
ada composed almost entirely of Hindoos. 

These considerations induced me to adopt the resolution of 
preferring the descendants of the Rajahs of Mysore to the heir 
of Tippoo Sultaun. 

I determined at the same time to grant to the families of 
Hyder Ali and Tippoo Sultaun a more magnificent maintenance 
than either had enjoyed during the late reign, and to provide 
with the same liberality for the principal Mahomedan officers and 
chiefs of the state, who had survived the Sultaun, and for the 
families of all those who had fallen in the course of the war. 

For the accomplishment of a settlement founded on the 
principles which I have had the honour to detail to your 
Honourable Court in the preceding paragraphs, I issued a 
special commission on the 4th of June, appointing Lieutenant- 
General Harris, The Honourable Coloncl Wellesley, The 
Honourable Hénry Wellesley, Licutenant-Colonel William 
Kirkpatrick, and Lieutenant-Colonel Barry Close, commis- 
sioners for the affairs of Mysore, with the ample powers spceci- 

, fied in the commission; and I named Captains Malcolm and 
Munro to be sccretarics, and Mr. Edward Golding and Licu- 
tenant Charles Pasley assistant sccretaries to the commission. 
As the favourable state of the country has rendered my presence 
at Seringapatam unnecessary, I accompanied the commission 
with instructions directing the commissioncrs to proceed without 
delay to lay the foundations of the new arrangement, and for 
the purpose of precluding the intrigues of the natives, and of all 
the great interests which were in suspense, I enjoined the com- 
missioners and their secretaries to take an oath of secrecy, in 
order that no part of my plan might transpire until the arrange- 
ments for the whole had been completed. 

The commissioners assembled at Seringapatam on the 8th of 
June, and under my instructions, their first act was to make 
provision for the principal surviving officers and chiefs of the late 
Sultaun, and for the families of those slain during the campaign. 
Iam happy to inform your Honourable Court, that this measure 
produced the most salutary effect in tranquillizing the minds of 
the principal Mahomedans remaining in Mysore, and in placing 


HYDER’S AND TIPPOO’S FAMILIES SENT TO VELLORE. 143 


the clemency and generosity of the British Government in the 
most conspicuous and honourable light. It was determined, 
that Mcer Kummur ud Deen should be settled at Gurrum- 
condah, with a jaghire from the Nizam, and another from the 
Company. This arrangement having been concluded, Kummur 
ud Deen departed from Seringapatam on the 19th of June, with 
many expressions of gratitude towards the Company’s Govern- 
ment. The Brahmin Poorneah, who had becn the principal 
financial minister of the late Sultaun, having given satisfactory 
proof of his readiness to serve the new Government in the same 
Capacity, it was determined that he should be appointed Dewan 
‘to the young Rajah of Mysore. 

The next procecding of the commissioners, in pursuance of 
my directions, was to undertake the painful, but necessary task 
of removing the families of Hydcr Ali and Tippoo Sultaun 
from Seringapatam to the Carnatic. 

I had previously given orders that the fortress of Vellore 
should be prepared for the reception of the families, and I had 
appointed Lieutenant-Colonel Doveton to the command of that 
fortress, and had also entrusted him with the payment of the 
stipends allotted to both families, directing him to spare no 
reasonable expense in providing for their accommodation, on a 
scale suitable to their former rank and expectations. The four 
princes, Futteh Hyder, Abdul Khaulik, Moyez oo Deen, and 
Moyee oo Deen, with their families, arrived at Vellore on the 
13th of July; they expressed thcir satisfaction in the accommo- 
dations provided for them. The remainder of the families of 
Hyder Ali and Tippoo Sultaun will be removed as soon as may 
be practicable. 

Previously to the departure of the princes from Scringapatam, 
the commissioners had cautiously abstained from all intercourse 
‘with the family of the Rajah of Mysore; but as soon as the four 
elder sons of the late Sultaun had Ieft the capital, the commis- 
sioncrs paid a visit to the young Rajah, whom they found with 
others of this persecutcd family, in a condition of poverty and 
humiliation, which excited the strongest emotions of compassion; 
it was determined to fix the residence of the Rajah in the ancient 
town of Mysore, as being the most eligible situation for the scat 
of his government. 

N On the 5th of June I had furnished the commissioners with 
the first draft of a treaty betwcen the Company and his Highness, 
the Nizam, for the partition of Mysore, and having received the 


I4f POWERS RESERVED TO THE COMPANY OVER MYSORE. 


fullest communication of their sentiments and of those of Meer 
Allum, on the subject, I made such alterations as appeared to 
be advisable. On the 22nd of June this treaty was executed 
by the commissioners and Meer Allum, at Seringapatam, and 
ratified by me in council at Fort St. George, on the 26th of the 
same month, and by-his Highness the Nizam, at Hyderabad, on 
the 13th of July. A copy of this treaty is annexed to this 
despatch under the title of the Partition Treaty of Mysore. 

On the 3oth of June the Rajah of Mysore was formally placed 
on the musnud, by the commissioners, assisted by Meer Allum. 

On the 8th of June I had forwarded to the commissioners the 
first draft of the subsidiary treaty, to be concluded betwecn the 
Company and the Rajah of Mysore. After an ample discussion 
‘with the commissioners who had communicated the whole 
arrangement to the Brahmin Poorneah, and conciliated his co- 
operation ; and after the adoption of several alterations, this 
treaty was executed in the fortress of Nuzzerbah, near Seringa- 
patam, by the commissioners, and certain proxies on the part 
of the young Rajah, on the 8th of July, and ratificd by me in 
council on the 23rd of July, under the title of the Subsidiary 
Treaty of Seringapatam. , 

Th framing this engagement, itt was my determination to estab- 
lish the most unqualificd community of interests between the 
Government of Mysore and the Company, and to render the 
Rajah’s northern frontier in effect, a powerful line of our defence. 
With this view, I have engaged to undertake the protection of 
this country, in consideration of an annual subsidy of seven 
lacs of star pagodas; but recollecting the inconveniences and 
embarrassments which have arisen to all partics concerned 
under the double Governments and conflicting authoritics un- 
fortunately established in Oude, the Carnatic, and ‘Tanjore, I 
resolved to reserve to the Company the most extensive and 
indisputable powers of interposition in the internal affairs of 
Mysore, as well as an unlimited right of assuming the direct 
management of the country (whenever such a step might appear 
necessary for the security of the funds destined to the subsidy), 
and of requiring extraordinary aid beyond the amount of the 
fixed subsidy, either in time of war, or of preparations for 
hostility. 

Under this arrangement I trust that I shall be enabled to 
command the whole resources of the Rajah’s territory, to improve 
its cultivation, to extend its commerce, and to secure the welfare 


TO AVOID EVILS OF DOUBLE GOVERNMENT. 145 


ofits inhabitants. It appeared to me a more candid and liberal, 
as well as a more wise policy, to apprize the Rajah distinctly, at 
the moment of his accession, of the exact nature of his depend- 
ance on the Company, than to Icave any matter for future doubt 
or discussion. The right of the Company to establish such an 
arrangement, either as affecting the Rajah or the allies, has 
already been stated in this despatch. 

I entertain a sanguine expectation that the Rajah and his 
ministers being fully apprized of the extensive powers reserved 
to the Company, will cheerfully adopt such regulations as shall 
render the actual exercise of those powers unnecessary. Much 
indulgence will be required at the commencement of the new 
Government, and it is my intention to abstain from any pressure 
upon the Rajah’s finances, which by embarrassing them, might 
tend to the impoverishment of the country, and to the distress of 
the people. 

Soon after the enthronement of the Rajah, the Brahmin 
Poorneah was appointed by the commissioners to be his Highness’ 
Dewan, 

The eminent talents and integrity of Licutenant-Colonel 
Close, added to his extraordinary skill in the country language, 
and his expcricnce in the manners, customs, and habits of the 
natives of India, induced me to select him for the important 
charge of resident with the Rajah of Mysore. He was accord 
ingly appointed to that office immediately after the Subsidiary 
Treaty of Scringapatam had been signed; and the commission 
was then dissolved on the grd of July. 

Although your Honourable Court will perccive in the com- 
mission the names of two persons, of whose merits it may be 
difficult for me to form an impartial judgment, I feel it to be 
my duty to recommend the conduct of the commissioners to 
your most public and distinguished approbation. — 

The conclusion within one month of two treaties, so extensive 
in their consequences, and complicated in their details, together 
with all the subordinate arrangements connected with this im- 
portant scttlement, will appear the most extraordinary effort of 
diligence and ability, when it is remarked, that reference was 
necessarily made to me at Fort St. George, in every stage of the 
business, It will also be satisfactory to your Honourable Court 
to observe, that the whole arrangement has been conducted at 
Scringapatam, with a spirit of humanity and liberality, which 
cannot fail to conciliate the good will of the inhabitants of Mysore, 

L 


146 COLONEL WELLESLEY TO COMMAND IN SERINGAPATAM. 


The command of Seringapatam will remain in the hands of 
Colonel Wellesley; it is a trust of great delicacy and importance, 
which it is my duty to repose in a person of approved military 
talents and integrity, and to superintend with peculiar vigilance 
and care. 

Although I shall deem it prudent to detain the army in the 
field for a short period of time, I have the satisfaction to 
assure your Honourable Court, that far the greater part of the 
dominions of Tippoo Sultaun is now in a state of perfect 
tranquillity. 

A detachment from the army of Bombay took possession of 
Mangalore on the 4th of June, and the province of Canara, with 
the exception of the fortress of Jemaulabad, appeared disposed 
to submit cheerfully to our authority. I have little doubt that 
the commanding officer of Jemaulabad will soon be induced to 
surrender to the Company’s arms; in any event, however, the 
fort will be reduced without difficulty. In this confidence, a 
collector has been appointed for the province of Canara. 

The remainder of the territory allotted to the Company in 
Coimbatoor, has passed into our hands without any difficulty, 
and collectors have been appointed for the administration of the 
revenue. The fort of Gurrumcondah is in the possession of his 
Highness the Nizam, and those of Sera and Chitteldroog are 
now garrisoned by the British troops. Some disturbances have 
taken place in Bidnoor, in which province an adventurer had 
assembled a banditti, which had distressed the inhabitants of the 
country ; a division of the army being now on its progress to- 
wards Bidnoor, I have every reason to expect that the com- 
motions in that quarter will speedily be quelled. 

Since the fall of Seringapatam, the conduct of the Mahrattas 
has been of the most conciliatory nature; it would be premature 
at present to enter into any detail on the subject of the nego- 
ciations depending at Poonah; but I have the satisfaction to 
assure your Honourable Court that no interruption to the set- 
tlement of Mysore is likely to proceed from the Mahrattas. 
Whatever may be the secret inclination either of the Peishwa 
or of Scindiah, their mutual weakness and reciprocal jealousy 
are sufficient securities against any danger from that quarter. 

The advantages resulting to your interests from the recent 
settlement of Mysore, are sufficiently obvious, as they appear in 
the preceding parts of this despatch, and in the papers which 
accompany it. It may not, however, be useless to submit to 


MYSORE WAS A GREAT AND CONSTANT EVIL TO FOU. 1497 


your Honourable Court, in a connected form, a general view 
of the whole of this important question, together with the re- 
flections which have arisen in my mind from an anxious and 
assiduous attention to every branch of the subject. 

Since the first war with Hyder Ali, the tranquillity of your 
possessions has been continually menaced by the power of 
Mysore. Even in the intervals of peace, which have succeeded 
to the several wars in which the Company has been engaged 
with Hyder Ali and Tippoo Sultaun, your security in the 
Carnatic has ever been precarious. During the cessation of 
actual hostilities, the designs of the Sovereign of Mysore have 
still continued uniformly hostile, and his means of executing 
them have always remained considerable, while the degrees of 
your safety have fluctuated with the state of your military 
establishments and preparations, and with the distribution of 
your force. 

The baneful effects of this perpetual state of uncertainty and, 
solicitude, have been fclt not only in the decay of agriculture, 
and of the arts of peaceful industry on the coast of Coromandel, 
and in the rebellious spirit of certain descriptions of your subjects 
on that coast, and on the coast of Malabar, but occasionally 
throughout all India, in the diminution of the British influence 
and consideration at foreign courts, in the rising hopes of the 
turbulent and disaffected, and in the decline of public and private 
credit, shaken by repeated rumours of war, and by the constant 
necessity of guarding against a surprise from the sudden ag- 
gression of an enemy, whom no clemency or moderation could 
conciliate, and no faith could bind. 

The reduction of Tippoo Sultaun’s power and _ resources 
effected by the treaty of Seringapatam in 1792, had weakened, 
but not extinguished the cause of these complicated evils. | Soon 
after the conclusion of peace, this cause and its effects appear 
to have recovered a considerable degree of activity and vigour, 
until in the year 1796, the intrigues and military movements 
of Tippoo Sultaun compelled the Government General to as- 
semble the army on the coast of Coromandel, and in the Autumn 
of 1797, such apprehensions were justly entertained of his de- 
signs and power, as induced the Government of Fort St. George 
to abandon the prosecution of an expedition ably planned, in- 
timately connected with your interests, and which had already 
brought a heavy charge on your finances, 

Judicious indeed, and provident was the policy which dictated 

L 2 


148 AGGRAVATED BY OTHER DANGERS IN 1798. 


the relinquishment of that enterprise, since subsequent dis- 
coveries and events have manifested the great probability, if 
not the absolute certainty, that the departure of the tfarge force 
destined for Manilla would have proved a signal to the watchful 
vengeance of Tippoo Sultaun to invade the Carnatic, or to attack 
the dominions of the Nizam, even without waiting for succours 
from France, the assistance of which might not, perhaps, have 
appeared to him necessary during the absence of so considerable 
a portion of our army. 

But the apprehension of the designs and movements of the 
power of Mysore had never, perhaps, been more anxiously or more 
justly entertained, than between the months of June and Sep- 
tember, 1798. It cannot be denied that during that period, 
your interests were menaced by a combination of the most 
serious dangers. The anxiety and fears hitherto entertained 
with regard to the designs of Tippoo Sultaun, were now con- 
firmed by a certain knowledge of his having actually pro- 
posed to the French projects of the most extensive hostility 
against your possessions in India. The alarm, as well as the 
danger, was considerably aggravated by the formidable pre- 
parations of the French in the Mediterranean, by the apparently 
desperate state of our alliances in the Deccan: by the peculiar 
situation of the Court of Hyderabad, subjected to the will of 
a powerful French army and French faction; by the menacing 
declarations and probable views of Zemaun Shah; by the dis- 
persed and defective condition of the army of Fort St. George; 
and above all, by the general persuasion, that an early attempt 
to assemble or to move that army, would serve only as a provo- 
cation to the enemy to invade and desolate the Carnatic, without 
furnishing the means of repelling the invader. 

The situation of our allies at this period of general despond- 
ency, is now well known to your Honourable Court. It will 
therefore be sufficient in this place to observe, that the degree 
of danger with which the Nizam and the Pcishwa were threat- 
ened by the impending storm, exceeded that which menaced 
our possessions in the same proportion, as the distractions and 
weakness of the Governments of Poonah and Hyderabad ren- 
dered them less able than the Company to counteract the 
machinations or to repel the assault of the cnemy. It is true, 
that Tippoo Sultaun’s views against the Courts of Poonah and 
Hyderabad, were ostensibly limited to the recovery of the 
cessions made by him to those powers in 1792. But it cannot 


THE EVIL HAS BEEN CONVERTED INTO GOOD, 149 


be doubted, that his ambition and rapacity would have aug- 
mented with the progress of his victories, and his revenge was 
not of a temper to be mitigated by success. 

Your Honourable Court is apprised of the changes which 
successively and rapidly took place in the condition of our 
alliances and of our army, substituting at Hyderabad in place 
of a French faction and a French army, British influence and 


a considerable British force, and producing ultimately the happy ° 


restoration of confidence and energy among your servants at 
Fort St. George. It is therefore unnccessary to dwell on that 
part of the subject; but it may be expedient to advert to the 
state of the gencral expectations at different periods of time 
previous to the war, and to compare our actual situation with 
those expectations, as well as with our position in the month of 
June, 1798. 

At that time, even the most sanguine dispositions, and those 
least affected by the prevalent panic, would probably have been 
content to have detached Tippoo Sultaun from his alliance with 
the French nation ; in the hope that, without the aid of a French 
force, he would not attempt to disturb the tranquillity of the 
Carnatic. 

Even at a later period, when the subversion of the French 
‘party at Hydcrabad, the restoration of the Nizam to the con- 
dition of an efficient ally, and the advanced state of our mili- 
tary preparations had inspired a general spirit of confidence 
and zeal, the most confident and zcalous would have deemed 
the issue of the approaching contest prospcrous as well 
as honourable, if it had effected a considerable reduction of 
the power and resources of Tippoo Sultaun, and had obtained 
.a reasonable indemnity for the expenses of the allics, 

The entire destruction of Tippoo Sultaun’s power, or the 
absolute transfer of his resources to any hand, Icss inimical or 
less violent, would have been deemed a glorious termination 
even of a long and expensive contest. 

But the success of your arms in the short period of the late 
campaign has not merely excluded the French from Mysore, 
provided an ample indemnity to you and your ally for the 
charges of the war, destroyed the hostile power of Tippoo 
Sultaun, and effectually precluded its revival, but has trans- 
ferred the sword of your implacable enemy into your own 
hands, and turned to your use the main springs of his wealth 
and strength, 


150 FOUR REVENUE HAS BEEN MUCH AUGMENTED ; 


By the partition treaty of Mysore you have acquired an aug- 
mentation of direct territorial revenue to the annual amount 
of about star pagodas 6,47,641,10, (£259,056 sterling.)' By the 
subsidiary treaty of Seringapatam, you have secured an annual 
subsidy of star pagodas 7,00,000, (£280,000 sterling), making 
together, with your new territorial revenue, the sum of star 
pagodas 13,47,641,10, (£539,056 sterling), and leaving (after 
deducting the provision allotted for the families of Hyder Ali 
Khan and Tippoo Sultaun) an annual increase of your funds 
in this quarter of India, equal to star pagodas 11,47,641,10, 
(£459,056 sterling). Buta reasonable expectation is entertained, 
that the territory acquired by the Company, under the treaty 
of Mysore, will yield, in the course of a few years, a sum not 
less than, star pagodas 14,78,698, (£591,479 sterling). If such 
an advance in the nominal revenue of the acquired districts 
should actually be realized, the positive augmentation of your 
available annual resources, in consequence of the late settlement 
of Mysore, will amount nearly to 20 lacs of star pagodas, 
(£800,000 sterling). But in estimating the increase of your 
annual available resourccs since the month of June 1798, the 
augmentation which took place in the subsidy payable by the 
Nizam, is not to be omitted. By the treaty of Hyderabad, 
concluded on the first of September 1798, the annual subsidy 
was augmented from Arcot rupees 6,44,556, to Arcot rupces 
24,17,100, making an increase annually of Arcot rupees 17,72,544, 
or star pagodas 5,64,982, (£225,992 sterling). Thus, the total 
augmentation of your available annual resources since June 1798, 
in this quarter of your possessions,-amounts actually to, star 
pagodas 17,12,623, (£685,048 sterling), and, if the incrcased 
revenue of the newly-acquired territory should be realized, (ac- 
cording to just expectation), it will amount to star pagodas 
2.5,43,680 (£1,017,472 sterling), 

Against these acquisitions must be placed the expense of 
whatever additions it may be found necessary to make to your 
military force, either in consequence of the extension of your 
territory, or of the subsidiary engagements which have been 
‘contracted with the Nizam and with the Rajah of Mysore. 

The subsidiary force at Hyderabad must be considered as 
a part of your efficient strength prepared for your service on 
any emergency, and ready to aid you in any future war, as 


’ Calculating the star pagoda at 85. 


MORE THAN IN PROPORTION TO NEW MILITARY WANTS, 15% 


it has aided you in the last. It does not appear to me probable 
that it will be necessary to make any considerable addition 
to the military establishment of Fort St. George, in consequence 
of the treaty of Hyderabad, nor do I apprehend that the re- 
quisite increase of that establishment, and of the army of 
Bombay, in consequence of the two treaties annexed to this 
despatch, will bear any proportion to the increase of your 
revenue and resources. | For it must never be forgotten that, 
while your territory has been extended, your frontier has been 
contracted and strengthened, your principal enemy utterly 
destroyed, and an ally, and dependant of the Company, sub- 
Stituted on his throne, 

LI do not yet possess the means of stating with sufficient 
accuracy to your honourable Court, either the amount of the 
charges incurred in consequence of the various measures of 
preparation and precaution, which became necessary on the 
discovery of Tippoo Sultaun’s hostile designs in June 1798, or 
the amount of the expense which is to be placed to the account 
of the operations of the late war. The accumulated charges 
both of our preparations and of the war must be considerable ; 
but whenever a statement of the expenscs of the late war can 
be submitted to your honourable Court, your wisdom and 
justice will necessarily distinguish the charges incurred for the 
purpose of asscmbling an effective army in the ficld, from those 
actually bclonging to the operations of your armies in Mysore, 
and to the sicge of Seringapatam,) 

From the moment that Tippoo’s negotiations had transpired, 
it became an indispensable duty to place the Carnatic in a 
posture of complete defence. The experience of former wars 
with Mysore, the nature of the fronticr of the Carnatic, exposed 
in various points by its almost innumerable passes to the in- 
cursion of the enemy, the actual state of affairs in India and 
in Europe, all concurred to convince me, that the only rational 
system of defence against Tippoo Sultaun was to assemble your 
armics on the coasts of Coromandel and Malabar, in such force, 
in such a state of equipment, and in such a position, as should 
excite in the mind of the Sultaun a just alarm for the safety of 
his capital ; no other plan was calculated to sccure the Carnatic 
against the ravages of his numcrous cavalry; because no other 
plan would have compelled him to concentrate his forces within 
his own territorics, for the defence of the vital point of his em- 
pire. His capital was not only the object of his pride, but the 


152 COST OF DEFENSIVE EQUIPMENT INEVITABLE, 


centre of his power; it was his strongest fortification, the prin- 
cipal granary of his army, his only arsenal, the repository of his 
treasure, and the prison of the legitimate claimant of his throne, 
as well as of the families of all his great chieftains; whose 
obedience he secured, by retaining the objects of their reverence 
and affection within the walls of the fortress of Seringapatam. 
On the preservation of that fortress, therefore, dependcd the fate 
of his kingdom, and (although I did not neglect any practicable 
precaution against a contrary course of events) my judgment 
was always decided, that he would never abandon the defence of 
Seringapatam, but with his life. 

The success of the plan (founded on this opinion) fully 
answered its primary purpose; since no part of the Sultaun’s 
force ventured to enter the Company’s possessions in the Car- 
natic during the late hostilities. It also fully answered the 
secondary purpose of enabling your armies (when our pacific 
negotiations had failed) to act offensively with promptitude, 
vigour, and effect. 

Neither the expense of the magazines of grain and other storcs 
on either coast, nor of the battcring train, with its equipment of 
cattle, ought therefore to be charged to the account of the war ; 
for every expense incurred previous to the 3rd of February 1799 
(the day on which Lieutenant-General Harris received orders to 
march) must, and would have been incurred, if no war had taken 
place; and ought to be charged to the account of the indis- 
pensable defence of your possessions, according to the only plan, 
which could provide effectually for that object. | 

The expenses of moving the battering train to Scringapatam, 
as well as of maintaining the army in Mysore, cannot have much 
exceeded the charges which must have been continued if the 
whole had remained within your frontier; and when it is con- 
sidered that, if the army, with the battering train, had not moved 
to Scringapatam, the expensive, but necessary, system of defence 
already explained, must have been protracted until all dangers 
from Tippoo Sultaun’s connection with the French should have 
been averted ; your honourable Court will probably sanction my 
decided opinion, that the rapid movement of the British forces 
towards the scene of their certain triumph, was not only the 
most effectual, but the most economical measure which could 
have been adopted, to frustrate the views of the enemy, and to 
secure the tranquillity of your possessions, 

For, on the one hand, no prospect appeared of any practicable 


OFFENSIVE MEASURES CHEAPEST IN THE END, 153 


reduction in the expense of a defensive system, during the con- 
tinuance of the war between Great Britain and France; while 
every hour of delay in the movement of our army afforded to 
Tippoo Sultaun the means of increasing his strength, of receiving 
succours from the French, and consequently of aggravating to 
the Company, both the expense and hazard of the impending 
contest. f 

On the other hand, the state of our army, the arrangements 
which had been made for its equipment and supply in every de 
partment, and the period of the season, left no doubt that the 
great object of the war would be attained in one short campaign. 
Nor did this calculation prove to have been in any degree san- 
guine; for although an alarm of a deficiency of grain prevailed in 
the army before Seringapatam on the 16th of April, it appeared 
soon after, upon an accurate examination, that at that time (ex- 
clusive of the immense depéot established in the district of Coorga) 
a quantity of grain remained in camp sufficient to maintain the 
whole of the fighting men of the army, at half allowance, until 
the 20th of May; and on the 13th of that month, Major-General 
Floyd returned to Seringapatam with the large supplics, which 
had been forwarded from the Carnatic, under the care of Licu- 
tenant-Coloncls Read and Brown. It may also be useful to re- 
mark in this place, that if any accident had protracted the opera- 
tions of the sicge beyond the 4th of May, ample time would 
still have remained for the reduction of the place previous to the 
rising of the Cauveri; since the four eldest sons of Tippoo 
Sultaun, with an escort of 1500 men, and a considerable train of 
attendants, crossed that river on the 18th of June, on which day 
the water was nearly as low as on the day of the assault. 

Reviewing all these circumstances, your honourable Court will 
hereafter compare the expense incurred by the movement of the 
army to Scringapatam, with the probable charges of any other 
practicable plan of policy, or of military operation ; in any vicw 
of the subjcct it will probably appear, that the increase of your 
revenue and pecuniary resources obtained by the issue of the war, 
far overbalances the combined expense of the preparations for 
your defence, and of the operations of the late campaign. 

But in addition to this positive indemnification for your ex 
penscs, your honourable Court will also consider the augmenta- 
tion of your commercial and military resources arising from the 
conquest of Mysore. 

Hitherto, all traffic between your subjects or dependants and 


154 TRADING CONNEXION & MILITARY RESOURCES INCREASED. 


those of the late Sultaun has been nearly prohibited, by the re- 
straints to which his hatred of the British Nation, or his ignor- 
ance and prejudice had subjected the communication with your 
possessions. , These restraints being removed, and every proper 
encouragement to commercial intercourse being substituted in 
their place, it may reasonably be expected that the neighbouring, 
and now united countries of the Carnatic and Mysore, will mutu- 
ally consume a considerable portion of their respective produc- 
tions and manufactures; and that even a proportion of British 
commodities will soon find a market in Mysore. My information 
with regard to the articles produced, manufactured, or consumed, 
in the countries acquired by the Company, and by the Rajah of 
Mysore, is at present too imperfect to enable me to form any 
accurate calculation of the imports from the coast of Malabar to 
Europe; but it appears probable, that your investment in the 
article of pepper, may_soon be augmented to any extent, which 
you may deem advisable. 

Your military resources may be considered to have received a 
great augmentation,) not only from the additional supplies of 
grain, provisions and cattle, which your connection with Mysore 
places at your disposal, but (from the new channels, which it 
opens for recruiting the native force, both of the Presidencies of 
Fort St. George and Bombay ;\under this head may also be con- 
sidered the superiority of the climate of Mysore, to any in this 
quarter of India, and the means which it affords of preserving the 
health and consequent efficiency of European troops. 

Highly as I estimate these immediate and direct advantages 
of revenue, and of commercial and military resources, I consider 
the recent settlement of Mysore to be equally important to your 
interests, in its tendency to increase your political consideration 
and influence among the native powers of India, together with 
your means of maintaining internal tranquillity and order among 
your subjects and dependants, and of defending your possessions 
against any enemy, cither Asiatic, or European. 

These are principles of substantial and durable security, the 
operation of which must be felt throughout every part of your 
possessions, and in every branch of your affairs both in India and 
Europe. 

_The balance which it was the policy of the treaty of Seringa- 
patam in 1792, to establish between the native powers of India, 
was soon deranged by the course of events; our influence in the 
general scale proved insufficient, not only to maintain peace 


POLITICAL POWER OF THE COMPANY AUGMENTED, 155 


between our allies, but to check either the rapid decline of their 
respective resources and strength, or the growing ascendancy of 
the French faction at Hyderabad, or the systematic machinations 
of Tippoo Sultaun.} Experience has manifested that the power 
preserved to that infatuated and restless Prince, must always 
have been thrown into the scale opposed to our interests, and 
that in no possible combination or conflict of the views of the 
courts of Poonah, and Hyderabad, could the interposition or 
neutrality of Tippoo Sultaun become favourable to our security. 
If he menaced war, or sought alliance with either, or with both 
those states, his uniform object was our disturbance. If he 
remained neuter either in their dissentions or union, it was 
in order to preserve his own strength unimpaired and unem- 
barassed for that contest with ours, which formed the favourite 
‘scope of all his views. In no case, has his power been brought 
into action, or remained at rest, without a hostile design, and an 
injurious effect upon our influence and consideration. |_The 
balance is now in our own hands, we now possess the irresistible 
power either of concentrating the most efficient part of the 
resources of Mysore in one mass, for our single defence against 
any possible combination; or of throwing the same weight into 
that scale, which shall appear to require such an aid for the pre- 
servation of the general tranquillity, on the solid basis of modera- 
tion and justice. 

If the Nizam or the Mahrattas, notwithstanding their real 
interest in maintaining the new order of things, should harbour a 
disposition to disturb it, our means of defence, as well as of offence 
with regard to both those states, are become so powerful, as well 
from the advancement and strength of our frontier, as from the 
other relative considerations already stated in this despatch, that 
the internal union of all the divided feudatory chicfs of the Mah- 
ratta Empire, or even a confederacy between the Peishwa and the 
Nizam, could no longer be formidable to your possessions; and 
your honourable Court is apprized, that the first of these events 
is highly improbable, and the latter nearly impossible—on the 
other hand,Lit is evident that, having annihilated the power of 
Tippoo, no injury can result to us from the interminable feuds of 
the Mahratta Empire, or from the mutual jealousy of the Pcishwa 
and the Nizam, 

C’The connexion between the Nizam and the French is entirely 
dissolved, under circumstances which, I trust, will render its re~ 
newal impracticable, at least, for many years.! 


156 YOU NEED FEAR LESS EITHER ENEMIES OR RERELS. 


It is certainly true, that an alliance between the Mahrattas and 
the French, might prove highly injurious to the British power in 
India ; but it is well known, that whatever may be the disposi- 
tion of the Mahrattas towards us, it would require a most violent 
exercise of injustice and oppression, on our part to dispose the 
suspicious and cautious councils of the Court of Poonah, to favour 
the progress of a French force in India. 

But, although we have nothing to apprchend from the Nizam, 
or from the Mahrattas,'danger may still perhaps be apprchended 
from an invasion of Oude by Zemaun Shah. I am not disposed 
to undervalue this danger, but I am satisfied that it is less for- 
midable now, than it has been at any former time. The loss of 
such an ally as Tippoo Sultaun, must materially affect the hopes 
of Zemaun Shah; and}it is obvious, that although he should 
persist in his threatened invasion, our means of repelling it are 
greatly increased ;’ since the army of Fort St. George, in a case of 
exigency, might now co-operate against Zemaun Shah with that 
of Bengal. Even during the late alarm of invasion from Zemaun 
Shah, (although war with Tippoo Sultaun was apprchended, 
and 3000 native volunteers with a considerable force of artillery, 
had been detached to the coast of Coromandel) we still were 
able to maintain an army of at Icast 20,000 men, on the fronticr 
of Oude. 

The intrigues of Tippoo Sultaun among the Rajahs inhabiting 
the coast of Malabar, among the Poligars in the Carnatic, and 
among every other description of your disaffected or refractory 
subjects, were the sources of continual commotion within your 
territories, while the vicinity of the hostile fronticr of Mysore, 
offered refuge and impunity to every offender against your autho- 
rity, and to every disturber of the public peace, {Jt may reason- 
ably be expected, that the establishment of your influence in 
Mysore, will operate as a powerful check on the spirit of disorder 
in your own possessions, and by removing the causes of internal 
weakness, will enable you to oppose every forcign attack with 
greater confidence and vigor. } 

With regard to any danger from the designs of France, it is 
evident that the probability of her making any cffort to disturb 
the tranquillity of India, will be greatly diminished from the mo- 
ment that the intelligence of Tippoo Sultaun’s fate shall reach 
Europe. Perhaps it is not too sanguine a view of our situation, 
to consider the annihilation of the only native ally of France in 
India, as the final ruin of all her ambitious and vindictive pro- 


THE PEISHWA AND NIZAM GRATIFIED BY THE EVENT, 157 


jects against this great source of the wealth and power of Great 
Britain., .The aid and co-operation of some native State must 
always be indispensably necessary to any European force, in 
attempting a serious impression on your possessions in India; 
without such aid, it seems impossible that any European army 
should be able to advance from the sea-coast, or even to maintain 
itself wherever it might land.‘ If, however, contrary to every 
reasonable expectation, France should still persist in her projects 
against the peace of India, she will have to contend unsupported 
by the arms, and (what is of more importance) by the resources 
of any Indian ally, with a British army, animated by recent suc- 
tess unembarrassed either by any native enemy in Mysore, or by 
any French faction at Hyderabad, and free to act on any point 
which France might venture to assail,] 7 

Such appear to me to be the consequences of the late scttle- 
ment, as they relate more immediately to the interests of the 
Honourable Company; but it will be proper to consider them 
also as they affect our allies. 

Although the advantages offered to the Peishwa by the treaty 
of Mysore, may not be calculated to satisfy the rapacious cha- 
racter of the Mahratta State it is reasonable to suppose, that 
under all the circumstances of the case, they will be reccived as 
a distinguished testimony of our amicable disposition towards 
the Court of Poonah and that they will tend to appease its 
characteristic jealousy, if not to conciliate its cordial attachment} 
The establishment of an Hindoo State in Mysore, with the re- 
storation of the temples and endowments of that rcligion, must 
be grateful to the Government of Poonah, independently of the 
advantages arising from the substitution of a power of the same 
religion, and of pacific views, in the place of an odious Mahom- 
medan usurpation, scarcely less hostile to the Mahratta than to 
the British nation 
[ With regard to the Nizam, his ambition would also have been 
more gratified with an arrangement, which should have thrown 
into his hands a larger share of territory and power F and the 
distribution of the property captured at Seringapatam, among 
the British troops and those of his Highness, disappointed his 
private expectations of appropriating a large portion of that pro- 
perty to his own use. The solid and permanent benefits however, 
which have resulted to his Highness from the recent improve- 
ment of his connection with the Company, and particularly from 
the new settlement of Mysore, are so obvious and considerable, 


158 THE SETTLEMENT SOLID, EQUITABLE, AND BENEFICIAL, 


that they may reasonably be expected to overbalance any tem- 
porary disappointment of his avarice or ambition. The existence 
of his throne was saved by the destruction of the French party 
at Hyderabad, in October, 1798.) The formidable power of 
Tippoo Sultaun, which perpetually menaced his Highness’s 
possessions, and filled his Court and dominions with intrigues 
and treason, has been annihilated, and a friendly and allied state 
established in Mysore,) His Highness has received a large in- 
crease of territory, revenue, and power; together with several 
important fortresses tending greatly to secure the tranquillity of 
his dominions.) His expenses in the war have been inconsider- 
able; and if a comparison were to be instituted of the advan- 
tages accruing to him, and to the Company from the whole 
arrangement, those obtained by his Highness would probably be 
found to preponderate; for, the danger from which he has been 
delivered was even more imminent than that which menaced the 
Company’s possessions; and while his expenses have borne no 
proportion to ours, he has attained equal bencfits both of indem- 
nification and security.) The collatcral benefits derivable by the 
Company from its connexion with the Rajah of Mysore, will 
necessarily extend to the Nizam, and be scarcely less felt by 
him than by us, while he shall remain faithful to his alliance 
with the Company;\and the advantages which his Highness 
would receive from the proposed mediation of the Company be- 
tween him and the Mahratta empire, are highly estimated by all 
those who understand the interests of the Court of Hyderabad. 
If that mediation should fail, his Highness will receive an in- 
crease of territory beyond the amount of the proportion acquired 
by the Company, in the general partition); @ have the satisfac- 
tion to know, that although his Highness’s extravagant expecta- 
tions have not been gratificd to the full extent, his most able 
and experienced counscllors are fully sensible of the extensive 
and solid benefits acquired by his Highness, under the general 
operation of the late treatics) {I am, therefore, persuaded, that 
his Highness’s just sense of the permanent interests of his state, 
will command his cordial co-operation in the maintenance of the 
new settlement! 

The interests of the Rajah of Mysore, being identified with 
those of the Company, and the safcty, prosperity, and honor of 
the Pcishwa, and of the Nizam, being amply sccured by the 
treaties of Hyderabad and Mysore, and by the subsidiary treaty 
of Seringapatam} I entertain a confident expectation, that the 


THE HINDOO LINE RESTORED IN MYSORE, 159 


recent settlement of the dominions of Tippoo Sultaun will 
prove not less durable, than I trust, it will be found equitable in 
its fundamental principles, beneficial in its general operation, 
and conformable in every point of view, to the liberal character 
of the English East India Company, and to the just and 
moderate policy prescribed by parliament, for the Govern- 
ment of the British empire in the East. 
Tam, &c. 
MORNINGTON. 


26. Subsidiary Treaty of Seringapatam. 


A Treaty of Perpetual Friendship and Alliance, concluded on the 
one part by his Excellency Lieutenant-General George Harris, 
Commandcr-in-Chief of the forces of his Britannic Majesty, and 
of the English East India Company Bahaudur in the Carnatic 
and on the Coast of Malabar, the Honourable Colonel Arthur 
Wellesley, the Honourable Henry Wellesley, Lieutenant-Colonel 
William Kirkpatrick, and Lieutenant-Colonel Barry Close, on 
behalf, and in the name of the Right Honourable Richard Earl 
of Mornington, K.P, Governor-General for all affairs, Civil 
and Military, of the British Nation in India, by virtue of full 
powers vested in them for this purpose by the said Richard Earl 
of Mornington, Governor-General, and on the other part by 
Maha Raja Mysore Kistna Rajah Oodiaver Bahaudur, Rajah 
of Mysore. 

Whereas it is stipulated in the Treaty concluded on the 22nd 
June, 1799, between the Honourable English East India Com- 
pany Bahaudur, and the Nabob Nizam ud Dowlah Asoph Jah 
Bahaudur, for strengthening the alliance and friendship sub- 
sisting betwecn the said English East India Company Bahaudur, 
his Highness Nizam ud Dowlah Asoph Jah Bahaudur, and the 
Peishwa Row Pundit Purdhaun Bahaudur; and for effecting a 
scttlement of the territories of the late Tippoo Sultaun( that a 
separate government shall be established in Mysore, and that 
his Highness Maha Rajah Mysore Kistna Rajah Oodiaver 
Bahaudur shall possess certain territories specified in Schedule 
C, annexed to the said Treaty, and that for the effectual estab- 
lishment of the government of Mysore, his Highness shall be 
assisted with a suitable subsidiary force, to be furnished by the 
English East India Company Bahaudur,] 

Wherefore, in order to carry the said stipulations into effect, 


160 TREATY TO BIND—WHILE SUN AND MOON ENDURE. 


and to increase and strengthen the friendship subsisting betweett 
the said English East India Company and the said Maha Rajah 
Mysore Kistna Rajah Oodiaver Bahaudur, this treaty is con- 
cluded by Lieutenant-General George Harris, Commander-in- 
Chief of the forces of His Britannic Majesty, and of the said 
English East India Company Bahaudur in the Carnatic, and on 
the Coast of Malabar; the Honourable Colonel Arthur Welles- 
ley, the Honourable Henry Wellesley, Lieutenant-Colonel W. 
Kirkpatrick, and Lieutenant-Colonel Barry Close, on the part, 
and in the name, of the Right Honourable Richard Earl of 
Mornington, Governor-General aforesaid; and by his Highness 
Maha Rajah Mysore Kistna Rajah Oodiaver Bahaudur, which 
shall be binding upon the contracting parties as long as the sun 
and moon shall endure. 

Article 1st—The friends and enemies of either of the contracting 
parties shall be considered as the friends and enemies of both. 

Article 2nd.— The Honourable the East India Company 
Bahaudur agrees to maintain, and his Highness Maha Rajah 
Mysore Kistna Rajah Oodiaver Bahaudur agrecs to receive, 
a military force for the defence and security of his Highness’s 
dominions. In consideration of which protection his Iighness 
engages to pay the annual sum of seven lacs of star pagodas to 
the said East India Company. The said sum to be paid in 
twelve cqual monthly instalments; his Highness further agrees, 
that the disposal of the said sum, together with the arrangement 
and employment of the troops to be maintained by it, shall be 
left entirely to the Company. 

Article 3rd. “If it shall be necessary for the protection and 
defence of the territorics of the contracting partics, or of cither 
of them, that hostilities shall be undertaken, or preparations 
made for commencing hostilities against any state or power, his 
said Highness Maha Rajah Mysore Kistna Rajah Oodiaver 
Bahaudur agrces to contribute towards the discharge of the 
increased expense incurred by the augmentation of the military 
force, and the unavoidable charges of war, such a sum as shall 
appear to the Governor-Gencral in Council of Fort William, on 
an attentive consideration of the means of his said Highness, to 
bear a just and reasonable proportion to the actual nct revenues 
of his said Highness. 

Article 4th—And whereas it is indispensably necessary that 
effectual and lasting security should be provided ‘against any 
failure in the funds destined to defray cither the expense of 


RESERVED POWERS OF THE COMPANY. 165 


maintaining the permancnt military force in time of peace, or 
the extraordinary expense described in the 3rd article of the 
present treaty; it is hereby stipulated and agreed between the 
contracting parties, that whenever the Governor-General in 
Council of Fort William in Bengal shall have reason to appre- 
hend such failure in the funds so destined, the said Governor- 
Géneral in Council shall be at liberty, and shall have full power 
and right either to introduce such regulations and ordinances as 
he shall deem expedient for the internal management and col- 
‘lection of the revenues,jor for the better ordering of any other 
branch and department of the government of Mysore; or to 
assumne and bring under the direct management of the servants 
of the said Company Bahaudur, such part or parts of’ the 
territorial possessions of his Highness Maha Rajah Mysore 
Kistna Rajah Oodiaver Bahaudur as shall appear to him, the 
said Governor-General in Council, necessary to render the said 
funds efficient and available either in time of peace or war. 
Article 5thtAnd it is hercby further agreed, that whenever 
the said Governor-Gencral in Council shall signify to the said 
Maha Rajah Mysore Kistna Rajah Oodiaver Bahaudur that it 
is become_nccessary to carry into effect the provisions of the 
\4th Article| his said Highness Maha Raja, Mysore Kistna Rajah 
Oodiaver Bahaudur \shall immediately issue orders to his 
Aumils, or other officers, either for carrying into effect the said 
regulations according to the tenor of the 4th Article, or for 
placing the territories required under the exclusive authority 
‘and controul of the English Company Bahaudur;] and in case 
his Highness shall not issue such orders within ten days from 
the time when the application shall have been formally made to 
him, then the said Governor-General in Council shall be at 
liberty to issue orders by his own authority, cither for carrying 
into effect the said regulations and ordinances, or for assuming 
the management and collection of the revenues of the said 
territorics, as he shall judge most expedient for the purpose of 
securing the efficiency of the said military funds, and of pro- 
viding for the effectual protection of the country, and welfare of 
the people; provided always, that whenever and so long as any 
part or parts of his said Highness’s territorics shall be placed, 
and shall remain under the exclusive authority and controul of 
the said East India Company, the Governor-General in Council 
shall render his Highness a true and faithful account of the 
revenues and produce of the territories so assumed; provided 
M 


162 DIPLOMATIC ISOLATION. EXCLUSION OF EUROPEANS. 


also that in no case whatever shall his Highness’s actual receipt 
or annual income arising out of his territorial revenues, be less 
than the sum of one lac of star pagodas; together with one-fifth 
of the net revenues of the whole of the territories ceded to him 
by the 5th Article of the treaty of Mysore, which sum of one 
lac of star pagodas, together with the amount of one-fifth of the 
said net revenues, the East India Company engages at all times, 
and in every possible case, to secure and cause to be paid for 
his Highness’s use. 

Article 6th.—His Highness Maha Rajah Mysore Kistna Rajah 
Oodiaver Bahaudur engages, that he will be guided by a sincere 
and cordial attention to the relations of peace and amity now 
established between the English Company Bahaudur and their 
allies ;[and that he will carefully abstain from any interference 
in the affairs of any state in alliance with the said English Com- 
pany Bahaudur, or of any state whatever; and for securing the 
object of this stipulation it is further stipulated and agreed, that 
no communication or correspondence with any forcign state 
whatever shall be holden by his said Highness without the pre- 
vious knowledge and sanction of the said English Company 
Bahaudur./? 

Article 7th—His Highness stipulates and agrees, that he will 
not admit any European forcigners into his service without the 
concurrence of the English Company Bahaudur;\and that he 
will apprehend and deliver up to the Company’s Government 
all Europeans of whatever description who shall be found within | 
the territories of his said Highness, without regular passports 
from the Company’s Government, it being his Highness’s deter- 
mined resolution not to suffer, even for a day, any european 
foreigners to remain within the territories now subjected to his 
authority, unless by consent of the said Company. 

Article 8th.—Whercas the complete protection of His High- 
ness’s said territories requircs that various fortresses and strong 
places, situated within the territories of his Highness, should be 
garrisoned and commanded, as well in time of peace as of war, 
by British troops and officers ;{ His Highness Maha Raja, Mysore 
Kistna Rajah Oodiaver Bahaudur engages that the said English 
Company Bahaudur shall at all times be at liberty to garrison, 
in whatever manner they may judge proper all such fortresses 
and strong places within his said Ilighness’s territorics as it shall 
appear to them advisable to take charge of. 

Article 9th—And whereas in consequence of the system of 


FORTS, GARRISONS, AND USE OF COMPANY'S TROOPS. 163 


defence which it may be expedient to adopt for the security of 
the territorial possessions of his Highness Maha Rajah Mysore 
Kistna Rajah Oodiaver Bahaudunt i may be necessary that 
certain forts and strong places within his Highness’s territories 
shall be dismantled or destroyed, and that other forts and strong 
places should be strengthened and repaired; it is stipulated and 
agreed, that the English East India Company Bahaudur, should 
be the sole judges of the necessity of any such altcrations in the 
said fortresses; and it is further agreed, that such expenses as 
may be incurred on this account shall be borne and defrayed in 
equal proportions by the contracting parties.| 

Article 1oth.—+In case it shall become necessary for enforcing 
and maintaining the authority and government of his Highness 
in the territories now subjected to his power that the regular 
troops of the English East India Company Bahaudur should 
be employed, it is stipulated and agreed, that upon formal 
application being made for the service of the said troops, they 
shall be employed in such manner as to the said Company shall 
seem fit; but; it is expressly understood by the contracting 
parties that this stipulation shall not subject the troops of the 
English East India Company Bahaudur to be employed in the 
ordinary transactions of revenue) 

Article sith—It being expedient for the restoration and 
permanent establishment of tranquillity in the territorics now 
subjected to the authority of his [lighness Maha Raja, Mysore 
Kistna Rajah Oodiaver Bahaudur; that suitable provision should 
be made for certain officers of rank in the service of the late 
Tippoo Sultaun, his said Highness agrecs to center into the 
immediate discussion of this point, and to fix the amount of the 
funds (as soon as the necessary information can be obtained) to 
be granted for this purpose in a separate article to be hereafter 
added to this es 

Article 1ath—Lest the garrison of Seringapatam should at 
any time be subject to inconvenience from the high price of 
provisions and other necessarics, his Highness Maha Rajah 
Mysore Kistna Rajah Oodiaver Bahaudur agreed. that such 
quantitics of provisions and other necessarics as may be required 
for the use and consumption of the troops composing the said 
garrison, shall be allowed to enter the place from all and every 
Part ‘of his dominions free of any duty, tax, or impediment 
whatever. | 

Article 1 3th {T he contracting partics hereby agree to take 

M 2 


164 RAJAH TO HEED ADVICE OF BRITISH GOVERNMENT. 


into their early consideration the best means of establishing such 
a commercial intercourse between their respective dominions 
as shall be mutually beneficial to the subjects of both govern- 
ments, and to conclude a commercial treaty for this purpose 
with as little delay as possible.) 

Article 14th.—His Highness Maha Rajah Mysore Kistna 
Rajah Oodiaver Bahaudur\hereby promises to pay at all times 
the utmost attention to such advice as the Company’s Govern- 
ment shall occasionally judge it necessary to offer to him, with a 
view to the economy of his finances, the better collection of his 
revenues, the administration of justice, the extension of com- 
merce, the encouragement of trade, agriculture, and industry, or 
any other objects connected with the advancement of his High- 
ness’s interests, the happiness of his people, and the mutual 


- welfare of both states. 


Article 15th—Whereas it may hereafter appear that some 
of the districts declared by the treaty of Mysore to belong 
respectively to the English Company Bahaudur, and to his 
Highness, are inconveniently situated with a view to the proper 
connection of their respective lines of frontier, it is hereby stipu- 
lated between the contracting parties that in all such cases they 
will proceed to such an adjustment, by means of exchange or 
otherwise, as shall be best suited to the occasion. 

Article 16th.—This treaty, consisting of sixtcen articles, being 
this day, the 8th of July, A. D. 1799 (corresponding to the 3rd 
of Suffer, anno Hegere 1214, and to the 7th of the month Assar 
of the 1221st year of the Salluwunt zra), settled and concluded 
at the Fort of Nuzzabar, near Seringapatam, by his Excellency 
Lieutenant-General George Harris, Commander-in-Chicf of the 
forces of his Britannic Majesty, and of the Honourable Company 
in the Carnatic, and on the Coast of Malabar, the Honourable 
Colonel Arthur Wellesley, the Honourable Henry Wellesley, 
Lieut.-Colonel William Kirkpatrick, and Licutenant-Colonel 
Barry Close, with the Maha Rajah Mysore Kistna Rajah 
Oodiaver Bahaudur, the aforesaid gentlemen have delivered to 
the said Maha Rajah one copy of the same in English and 
Persian, scaled and signed by them; and his Highness the 
Maha Rajah has dclivered to the gentlemen aforesaid another 
copy, also in Persian and English, bearing his scal, and signed 
by Luchuma, widow of the late Kistna Rajah, and sealed and 
signed by Purneah, Dewan of the Maha Rajah Kistna Rajah 
Oodiaver; and the aforesaid gentlemen have engaged to pro- 


COMPANY'S DETACHMENT TO BE INCREASED. 165 


cure and deliver to the said Maha Rajah, without delay, a copy 
of the same, under the seal and signature of the Right Honour- 
able the Governor-General, on the receipt of which by the said 
Maha Rajah, the present treaty shall be deemed complete and 
binding on the Honourable the English East India Company 
Bahaudur, and on the Maha Rajah Mysore Kistna Rajah 
Oodiaver Bahaudur respectively, and the copy of it now dce- 
livered to the said Maha Rajah be returned. 
Ratified at Fort St. George, by the Right Honourable 
the Governor-General in Council, on the 13th day of 
July, A.D. 1799. 


Il. THE NIZAM. 


27. Treaty of Hyderabad. 


An enlarged perpetual subsidiary treaty between the Honourable 
United English East India Company and his Highness the 
Nawanb, Nisam ul Mulk Asoph Fah Behadur, Subadar of the 
Deccan, his ‘children, heirs, and successors, settled by Captain 
Sames Achilles Kirkpatrick, by virtue of the powers delegated to 
him by the Right Honourable Richard Earl of Mornington, 
Knight of the most illustrious order of St. Patrick, one of his 
Britannic Majesty's most Honourable Privy Council, Governor 
General in Council, appointed by the Honourable the Court of 
Directors of the said Honourable Company, to direct and control 
all their affairs in the East Indies. 


Whercas his Highness Nizam ul Mulk Asoph Jah Behadur, 
(has from the greatness of existing friendship, expressed a desire 
for an increase of the detachment of the Honourable Company’s 
troops at present serving his Highness, the Right Honourable 
the Earl of Mornington, Governor General, has taken the 
Proposals to that cffect into his most scrious consideration, 
and the present juncture of affairs, and the recent hostile con- 
duct and evil designs of Tippoo Sultaun (as fully evinced by 
his sending ambassadors to the Isle of France; by his pro- 
posing to center into a treaty offensive and defensive with the 
French Republic against the English nation; and by actually 
receiving a body of French troops into his dominions and im- 
mediate pay), rendcring it indispensably necessary that effectual 


166 TO CONSIST OF 6000 SEPOYS, WITH ARTILLERY. 


measures for the mutual defence of their respective possessions, 
should be immediately taken by the three allied powers, united 
in a defensive league against the aforesaid Tippoo Sultaun, the 
aforesaid Governor General has, in consequence, empowered 
Captain James Achilles Kirkpatrick, Acting Resident at the 
court of his Highness the Nizam, to enter in behalf of the 
Honourable United English East India Company, into certain 
engagements with his Highness Nizam ul Mulk Asoph Jah 
Behadur, for a permanent increase of the Honourable Company’s 
troops in his Highness’s pay, in the proportion and on the con- 
ditions specified in the following articles, which must be under- 
stood to be of full validity, when this treaty shall be returned, 
signed and sealed by the Governor General :— 

Article 1st-——Such parts of the letter from Earl Cornwallis to 
his Highness the Nizam, dated 7th July, 1789 (and which has 
always been considered in the light of a treaty), as rclate to the 
stationing of troops with his Highness, are to be considered as 
in full force, that the services of the new permanent subsidiary 
force are to be regulated precisely by the same restrictive 
clauses that operate on the present detachment, unless the 
Peishwa shall hereafter consent to any alterations in those con- 
ditions, and his Highness likewise approve of the same. 

Article 2d—Agrceably to the practice in the Company’s 
service, the new subsidiary force shall be subject to relicfs, either 
partial or entire, as often and in such manner as the Company’s 
Government may require, provided withal, that no diminution 
takes place by such means in the stipulated number to be 
stationed with,his Highness. 

Article 34+The proposed reinforcement of subsidiary troops 
shall be in the pay of this state from the day of thcir crossing 
the peaadiee) Satisfactory and effectual provision shall be 
made for the regular payment of this force, which, including the 
present detachment, is to amount to 6000 sepoys, with firclocks, 
with a due proportion of ficld pieces, manned by Europeans, and 
as at the monthly rate of two lacs, one thousand four hundred 
and twenty-five rupees, the yearly amount of subsidy for the 
aforesaid force of 6000 men, with guns, artillery-men, and other 
necessary appurtenances, is twenty-four lacs, seventeen thousand 
one hundred rupees} The said sum shall be completely dis-. 
charged in the coufse of the_year by four equal instalments, . 
that is, at the expiration of every three English months, the 
sum of six lacs, four thousand two hundred and seventy-five 


PAY AND DUTIES OF DETACHMENT. DISMISSAL OF FRENCH, 167 


tupees,{in silver of full currency, shall be issued without hesita- 
tion or demur from his Highness’s treasury.) [And should the 
aforesaid instalments happen to fall at any time the least in 
arrears, such arrears shall be deducted, notwithstanding any 
objections thereto, from the current kist of Peishcush, payable to 
his Highness on account of the Northern Sirkars, Should it, at 
any time, so happen, moreover, that delay were to occur in the 
issue of the instalments aforesaid, at the stated periods, in such 
case, assignments shall be granted on the collections of certain 
districts in this state, the real and actual revenue of which 
shall be adequate to the discharge of the yearly subsidy of the 
aforesaid force. 

Article 4th.~LThe duties on grain and on all articles of con- 
sumption, as well as on all necessarics whatever, for the use of 
the new subsidiary force, shall be commuted agrecably to the 
practice that obtaincd with the former detachment.) (A place 
likewise shall be fixed on as the head quarters of the said force, 
where it shall always remain, except when services of importance 
are required to be performed ; and whenever either the whole, or 
part of the said force, is to be employed in the busincss of 
the state, a person of respectability, and who is a servant of 
this Sirkar, shall be appointed to attend it. The commanding 
officer and officers of the said subsidiary force shall be treated 
in all respects in a manner suitable to the greatness and dignity 
of both states/ 

Article 5th-AT he said subsidiary force will at all times be 
ready to exccute serviccs of importance, such as the protection 
of the person of his Highness, his heirs and successors, from race 
to race, and the overawing and chastizing all rcbels or exciters 
of disturbance in the dominions of this state} but it is not to be 
employcd on trifling occasions, nor like Scbundy, to be stationed 
in the country to collect the revenues thereof, 

Article 6th.{Immcediately upon the arrival of the aforesaid 
subsidiary force at Hyderabad, the whole of the officers and 
serjcants of the French party are to be dismissed, and the troops 
composing it, so dispersed and disorganised, that no trace of the 
former establishment shall remain.J And his Iighness hereby 
engages for himsclf, his heirs and successors, that{no Frenchman 
whatever shall ever hereafter be entertained in his own service, 
or in that of any of his chiefs or dependants, nor be suffered to 
remain in any part of his ITighness’s dominions.) Nor shall any 
Europeans whatever be admitted into the service of this state, 


168 EXCLUSION OF FRENCH; SURRENDER OF DESERTERS. 
nor be permitted to remain within its territories, without the 
knowledge and consent of the Gompany’s government. ! 

Article 7th. -LThe whole of the European and sepoy deserters 
from the Company’s service, that may be in the French or any 
other party of troops belonging to this state, are to be seized and 
delivered up to the British resident; and no persons of the 
above description are to be allowed refuge in future in his 
Highness’s territorics, but are (on the contrary) to be scized 
without delay, and delivered up to the British resident. Neither 
shall any refuge be allowed in the Company's territorics to sepoy 
deserters from the service of his Highness, who shall, in like 
manner, be seized and delivered up without delay. 

Article 8th—Whereas his Highness the Nizam, from con- 
siderations of prudence and foresight, and with a view of 
avoiding manifold evils, has determined on dismissing the 
French from his service, and on dispersing and disorganising 
the troops commanded by them, as specified in the 6th Article, 
and on entertaining a perpetual standing force, of the ITonourable 
Company’s, in their room, subject to the limitations and restric- 
tions prescribed by Earl Cornwallis’s letter to the Nizam, men- 
tioned in the rst Article; it is therefore hereby agreed, with a 
view to the mutual benefit of his Highness and the Pcishwa, and 
the happiness of their respective subjects, ‘that the Company’s 
government will use their best endeavours to have inserted with 
the consent and approbation of both, in the new treaty in con- 
templation between the three allicd powers, such a clause as shall 
set cach at ease with regard to the other. Should the Peishwa, 
however, not accede to a proposal so highly advantageous and 
profitable to both governments, and differences hereafter arise 
between the two states, namely, that of the Nawaub Asof Jah 
Behadur, and of the Rao Pundit Perdhaun, in such case, the 
Company’s government hereby engage, that interposing their 
mediation, in a way suitable to rectitude, friendship and union, 
they will apply themselves to the adjustment thereof, con- 
formably to propricty, truth and justice, The Nawaub Asof 
Jah Behadur accordingly hereby engages, never to commit on 
his part any excess or aggression against the Sirkar of Rao 
Pundit Perdhaun ; and in the event of such differences arising, 
whatever adjustment of them the Company’s government, weigh- 

ing things in the scales of truth and justice, may determine upon, 


shall without hesitation or objection, mect with full approbation 
and acquiescence. 


ENGLISH MEDIATION BETWEEN NIZAM AND PEISHWA, 169 


Article yth.—All former treaties between the Honourable East 
India Company and the governments of the Nawaub Asof Jah 
and the Peishwa, remain in full force. Should hereafter the 
Rao Pundit Perdhaun express a desire to enter into subsidiary 
engagements, similar to the present, with the Honourable Com- 
pany, the Nawaub Asof Jah will most readily give his concur- 
rence. 

Article 10th—This enlarged subsidiary treaty, consisting of 
Ten Articles, being this day settled by Captain James Achilles 
Kirkpatrick, with the Nawaub Asof Jah Bchadur, Captain Kirk- 
patrick has delivered one copy hereof in English and Persian, 
signed and scaled by himsclf, to the Nawaub, who, on his part, 
has also delivered to Captain Kirkpatrick one copy of the same, 
duly executed by himself ; [and Captain Kirkpatrick hereby 
engages to procure and deliver to his Highness, in the space of 
fifty days, a ratified copy from the Governor General, in every 
respect the counterpart of the one executed by himself; and on 
the delivery of such copy, which will then have become a full 
and complete instrument, the treaty executed by Captain Kirk- 
patrick shall be returned. In the mean while, no time shall be 
lost in writing for the advance of the proposed reinforcement. 

Signed, scaled, and exchanged at Hyderabad, 
ist September, A.D. 1798, or 19th Rubby 
ul-awul, A.IT, 1213, 
J. A. KIRKPATRICK. 


Separate article appertaining to the perpetual subsidiary treaty 
concluded between the ITonourable English Fast India Company 
and his Highness the Nawaub Asof Fah Behadur, on the ist of 
September, A.D. 1798, or 1gth of Rubby-ul-arwul, A. 1, 12413. 
Whereas in conformity to a wish expressed by his Highness 

the Nizam, the stipulation in the 6th Article of the Subsidiary 

Treaty respecting the delivering up of the French is agreed to 

be madc a separate one, his Highness hereby engages, that after 

the arrival of the Company’s troops at ITyderabad, the whole of 
the French officers and soldiers in his service shall be appre- 
hended in such way as Captain Kirkpatrick may point out, and 
be delivered up to him, or for a time be kept in confinement in 
an habitation belonging to this Sirkar, but in the custody of the 

Company’s troops, and upon the rcorganisation of the party 

lately under the command of the aforesaid French officers, they, 

the said French officers and soldiers shall, within the space of 


170 FRENCH TO BE SENT HOME. DIPLOMATIC ISOLATION, 


two months, be delivered up to the British resident. Strict 
orders shall, moreover, be issued to all talookdars on the frontiers, 
and to those in charge of all fords and passes, to seize any 
Europeans whatever, attempting to pass their respective stations, 
and send them immediately with all due precaution, prisoners to 
Hyderabad, where they shall instantly be delivered up to the 
British resident. On the above condition it is hereby agreed 
that the anaes te thus delivered up, jshall not be common 
prisoners of war,Jnor be in any respect maltreated. They shall 
be conveyed at the Company’s expense, and with as little 
restraint as possible to England, and from thence be sent by 
the first favourable opportunity to France, without being de- 
tained for a cartel or exchange of prisoners. 


Signed, sealed, and exchanged, at Hyderabad, 


Ist September, A.D. 1798, or 19th Rubby- 
ul-awul, A.H. 1213. 


Separate article appertaining to the perpetual Subsidiary Treaty 
concluded between the Honourable English East India Company 
and his Highness the Nawaub Asof Fah Behadur, on the 1st 
September, A. D. 1798, or 19th Rubby-ul-awul, A. H, 1213. 


No correspondence on affairs of importance, shall, in future, on 
any account, be carried on with the Sirkar of Rao Pundit Perd- 
haun, or with any of his dependants, either by the Nawaub Asof 
Jah Behadur, or by the Honourable Company’s government, 
without the mutual privity and consent of both contracting 
parties, And whatever transactions, whether of grcat or small 
import, may in future take place with the aforesaid Rao Pundit 
Perdhaun, or his dependants, a reciprocal communication of the 

same shall be made to the other contracting party, without delay 
and without reserve. 
Signed, sealed, and exchanged, at Hyderabad, 
ist September, A.D. 1798, or 19th Rubby- 
ul-awul, A.H. 1213. 

Ratified by the Right Honourable Richard Earl of Mornington, 
Knight of the most illustrious order of St. Patrick, &c. &ce. &c. 
Governor General in council. 

Fort William, 
18th day of September, 1798. 


GENERAL DEFENSIVE ALLIANCE WITH THE COMPANY. 171 


28. Treaty of Defensive Alliance. 


Treaty of perpetual and general defensive alliance, between the 
Honourable the English East India Company and his High- 
ness the Nabob Nisam ul Mulk Asoph Fah Behaudcr, Soubahdar 
of the Decan, his children, heirs, and successors ; settled by Cap- 
tain Fames Achilles Kirkpatrick, Resident at the Court of his 
Highness, by virtue of the powers delegated to him by the most 
noble Richard Marquess Wellesley, &c. &c. &e. 


Whereas, by the blessing of God, an intimate friendship and 
union have firmly subsisted for a length of time, between the 
Honourable Company and his Highness the Nabob Nizam ul 
Mulk Asoph Jah Behauder, and have been cemented and 
strengthened by several treaties of alliance, to the mutual and 
manifest advantage of both powers, who with uninterrupted 
harmony and concord, having equally shared the fatigues and 
dangers of war and the blessings of peace, are, in fact, become 
one and the same in interest, policy, friendship, and honour. 
These powers, adverting to the complexion of the times, have 
determined, on principles of precaution and foresight, and with 
a view to the effectual preservation of constant peace and tran- 
quillity, to enter into a defensive alliance, for the complete and 
reciprocal pratection of thcir respective territories, together with 
those of their several allics and dependants, against the un- 
provoked aggressions, or unjust incroachments, of all or of any 
enemies whatever, 

ArT. 1. The peace, union, and friendship, so long subsisting 
between the two states, shall be perpetual; the friends and 
encmics of cither shall be the friends and cnemics of both; and 
the contracting partics agrec, that ‘all the former treatics and 
agreements between the two statcs, now in force, and not con- 
trary to the tenor of this agreement, shall be confirmed by it. 

ArT. 2, (If any power or state whatever shall commit any‘act 
of unprovoked hostility or aggression against cither of the con- 
tracting partics, or against their respective dependants or allics, 
and, after duc representation, shall refuse to enter into amicable 
explanation, or shall deny the just satisfaction or indemnity 
which the contracting partics shall have requircd,[then the 
contracting partics will procecd to concert and prosecute such 
further measures as the case shall appear to demand. } 

For the more distinct explanation of the intent and effect 


172 INCREASED FORCE, DISTRICTS CEDED FOR ITS PAYMENT. 


of this agreement, the Governor-General in council, on be- 
half of the honourable Company, hereby declares, that the British 
Government will never permit any power or state, whatever, 
to commit with impunity, any act of unprovoked hostility or 
aggression against the rights or territories of his Highness the 
Nizam,} but will, at all times, maintain the same, in the same 
mannef as the rights and territories of the honourable Company 
are now maintained, 

ART, 3. (With a view to fulfil this treaty of general defence 
and protection, his highness the Nabob Asoph Jah agrees, that 
two battalions of Sepoys and one regiment of cavalry, with a 
due proportion of guns and artillerymen, shall be added, in 
perpetuity, to the present permanent subsidiary force of six 
battalions of Sepoys, of one thousand firclocks each, and one 
regiment of cavalry, five hundred strong (with their proportion 
of guns and artillerymen), so that the whole subsidiary force 
furnished by the Honourable East India Company to his High- 
ness shall henceforward consist of(eight battalions of Sepoys (or 
eight thousand firelocks) and two regiments of cavalry (or one 
thousand horse) with their requisite complement of guns, 
European artillerymen, Lascars, and pioneers, fully equipped 
with warlike stores, and ammunition; which force is to be 
stationed in perpetuity, in his Highness’s territorics.4 

ART. 4: The pay of the above-mentioned adglitional force 
shall be calculated at the rate of the pay of the existing sub- 
sidiary force, and shall commence from the day of the entrance 
of the said additional force into his Highness’s territories. 

ArT. §.(For the regular payment of the whole expense of 
the said augmented subsidiary force (consisting of eight thousand 
infantry, one thousand cavalry, and their usual proportion of 
artillery) his Highness the Nabob Asoph Jah hereby assigns and 
cedes to the honourable East India Company, in perpetuity, all 
the territories acquired by his Highness, under the treaty of 
| Seringapatam, on the 18th March, 1792, and also all the terri- 
tories acquired by his Highness, under the treaty of Mysore, on 
the 22nd June, 1799, according to the schedule annexed to this 
treaty. 

ArT. 6. Certain of the territories, ceded by the forcgoing 
article to the honourable Company, being inconvenient, from 
their situation to the northward of the river Toombuddrah, his 
Highness the Nabob Asoph Jah, for the purpose of rendering 
the boundary line of the honourable Company's possessions a 


EXTENT OF MUTUAL MILITARY AID, IN CASE OF WAR. 173 
« 


good and well defined one, agrees to retain the districts in 
question, namely, Copul, Gujjinderghur, and others (as marked 
in the annexed schedule) in his own possession; and, in lieu 
thereof, assigns and cedes, in full and in perpetuity, to the 
honourable Company, the district of Adoni, together with what- 
ever other territory his Highness may be possessed of, or is 
dependant on his Highness's Government, to the south of the 
Toombuddrah, or to the south of the Kistnah, below the junction 
of those two rivers. 


ArT, 12. | The contracting parties will employ all practicable 
means of conciliation to prevent the calamity of war; and, for 
that purpose, will, at all times, be ready to enter into amicable 
explanations with other states, and to cultivate and improve the 
general relations of peace and amity with all the powers of India, 
according to the true spirit and tenor of this defensive treaty.) 
But if a war should unfortunately break out between the contract- 
ing parties and any other power whatever, then his Highness the 
Nabob Asoph Jah engages, that, with the reserve of two bat- 
talions of Sepoys, which are to remain near his Highness’s 
person, the residue of the British subsidiary force (consisting of: 
six battalions of Sepoys, and two regiments of cavalry, with 
artillery) joined by six thousand infantry and nine thousand 
horse of his Highness’s own troops, and making together an 
army of twelve thousand infantry, and ten thousand cavalry, 
with-their requisite train of artillery, and warlike stores of every 
kind, shall be immediately put in motion, for the purpose of 
opposing the encmy; andj his Highness further engages to 
employ every further effort in his power, for the purpose of 
bringing into the ficld, as specdily as possible, the whole force 
which he may be able to supply from his dominions, with a view 
to the effectual prosecution and specdy termination of the said 
war, the honourable Company, in the same manner, engaging on 
their part, in this case, to employ in active opcrations against 
the enemy, the largest force which they may be able to furnish, 
over and above the said subsidiary force. 

ART. 13. Whenever war shall appear probable, his ighness 
the Nabob Asoph Jah engages to collect as many Benjarries as 
possible, and to store as much grain as may be practicable in his 
fronticr garrisons. ! 

ART. 14. Grain, and all other articles of consumption and 
provisions, and all sorts of materials for wearing apparel, together 


174 USE OF SUBSIDIARY FORCE AGAINST ALL REBELS. 
* 


with the necessary quantity of cattle, horses, and camels, required 
for the use of the subsidiary force, shall, in proportion to its present 
augmentation, be as heretofore, entirely exempted from duties. 

ART. 15. As by the present treaty the union and friendship 
of the two states are so firmly cemented, as that they may be 
considered as one and the same, his Highness the Nizam engages 

" neither to commence nor to pursue, in future, any negotiations 

“with any other power whatever, without giving previous notice, 
and entering into mutual consultation with the honourable East 
India Company’s Government ; and the honourable Company's 
Government, on their part, hereby declare, that they have no 
manner of concern with any of his Highness’s children, relations, 
‘subjects, or servants, with respect to whom his Highness is 
absolute. 

Art. 16. As, by the present treaty of general defensive 
alliance, mutual defence, and defence against all enemies, are 
established, his Highness the Nabob Asoph Jah consequently 

engages, never to commit any act of hostility or aggression 
against any power whatever; and in the event of differences 
arising, whatever adjustment of them the Company’s Govern- 
ment, weighing matters in the scale of truth and justice, may 
determine, shall meet with full approbation and acquiescence. 

ART. 17. By: the present treaty of gencral defensive alliance, 
the ties of union, by the blessing of God, are drawn so close, 
{that the friends of one party will be henceforward considcred as 
the friends of the other, and the enemics of the one party as the 
enemies of the other; it is therefore hereby agreed, that if, in 
future,! the Shorapoor or Gudwall Zemindars, or any other 
subjects or dependants of his Highness’s Government, should 
withhold the payment of the Sircar’s just claims upon them, or 
excite rebellion or disturbance, the subsidiary force, or such pro- 
portion thereof as may be requisite, after the reality of the fact 
shall be duly ascertained, shall be ready, in concert with his 
Highness’s own troops, to reduce all such offenders to obedicnce. 
And the particular interests of the two states being now, in every 
respect, identified {it i is further mutually agreed, that if disturb- 
ances shall, at any time, break out in the districts, ceded to the 
honorable Company by this treaty, his Highness the Nabob 
Asoph Jah shall permit such a portion of the subsidiary force as 
may be requisite, to be employcd in quelling the same, within 
the said districts.’ If disturbances shall, at any time, break out 
in any part of his Highness’s dominions, contiguous to the Com- 


PEISHWA, BONSLAY, & SCINDIAH,TO BE ADMITTED TO ALLIANCE, 175 
re 


pany’s frontier, to which it might be inconvenient to detach any 
proportion of the subsidiary troops, the British Government, in 
like manner, if required by his Highness the Nabob Asoph Jah, 
Shall direct such proportion of the troops of the Company, as 
may be most conveniently stationed for the purpose, to assist in 
quelling the said disturbances within his Highness’s dominions. 

ArT. 18. Whereas, by the favour of Providence, a perfect 
union, harmony, and concord, have long and firmly subsisted 
between the Honourable East India Company, his Highness the 
Nabob Asoph Jah, his Highness the Peshwah Rao Pundit Purd- 
haun, and Rajah Rhagojee Bhoosillah, therefore should his High- 
ness{ Rao Pundit Purdhaun, and Rajah Rhagojce Bhoosillah, or 
either of them, express a desire to participate in the benefits of 
the present defensive alliance, which is calculated to strengthen 
and perpetuate the foundations of general tranquillity, the con- 
tracting parties will readily admit both, or either of the said 
powers, to be members of the present alliance, on such terms and 
conditions as shall appear just and expedient to the contracting 
parties) 

ART.19. The contracting partics being actuated by a sinccre 
desire to promote and maintain general tranquillity, vil admit 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah to be a party to the present treaty, when- 
ever he shall satisfy the contracting parties of his disposition to 
cultivate the relations of peace and amity with both statcs, and 
shall give such sccurities for the maintenance of tranquillity, as 
shall appear to the contracting partics to be sufficicnt. 

ART. 20. This treaty, consisting of twenty articles, being this 
day scttled by Captain James Achilles Kirkpatrick with the 
Nabob Asoph Jah Bchauder, Captain Kirkpatrick has delivered 
one copy thereof, in English and Persian, signed and sealed by 
himsclf, to the said Nabob, who, on his part, has also delivered 
one copy of the same, duly executed by himself; and Captain 
Kirkpatrick, by virtue of special authority given to him on that 
behalf by the most noble the Governor-General in council, hereby 
declares the said treaty to be in full force from the date hereof, 
and engages to procure and dcliver to his Highness, in the space 
of thirty days, a copy of the same from the Governor-General in 
council, in every respect the counterpart of that exccuted by him- 
sclf; and on the delivery of such copy, the treaty executed by 
Captain Kirkpatrick shall be returned, but the additional sub- 
Sidiary force, specified in the third article, shall be immediately 
required by his Highness the Nizam, and furnished by the 


176 CONDITIONS ON WHICH PEISHWA TO BE ADMITTED, 


honourable Company, and all the other articles shall be in full 
force from this time. 

Signed, sealed, and exchanged, at Hydrabad, on the 1ath 
October, Anno Domini 1800, or 22nd Jemmadee ul Awul, Anno 
Higere 1215. 

(Signed) J.A. KIRKPATRICK, Resident. 
(A true copy.) Tuomas Sypennam, 
Secretary to the Residency. 


Separate and Secret Articles. 


ART. 1. The Peshwa, Rao Pundit Purdhaun, shall be ad- 
mitted to the benefits of this general defensive alliance on the 
following conditions : 

First. Rao Pundit Purdhaun shall accept the mediation of the 
honourable Company’s Government, for the amicable adjustment 
on the basis of the treaty of Mah, of all claims or demands of 
Choute, and of all other claims or demands whatever, on the 
territories or government of his Highness the Nabob Asoph Jah. 
\_ The British Government will also take into consideration the 
claims of his Highness the Nabob Asoph Jah to a total excmp- 
tion from Choute, and will arbitrate, on the principles of justice 
and equity, any question now existing, or which shall hereafter 
arise, relative to the same, betwcen Rao Pundit Purdhaun and 
the Nabob Asoph Jah, [provided Rao Pundit Purdhaun shall 
agree to accept the said arbitration, and Rao Pundit Purdhaun 
shall not be admitted to the benefit of this gencral defensive 
alliance, until he shall have agreed to accept the arbitration of 
the British Government, with respect to the said claims of the 
Nabob Asoph Jah to a total exemption from Choutg 

Secondly. Rao Pundit Purdhaun shall give full satisfaction 
to the honourable East India Company, on the various points 

* depending between him and the British Government in India. 

Thirdly. If Rao Pundit Purdhaun shall agree to the foregoing 
conditions, the honourable East India Company and his High- 
ness the Nabob Asoph Jah willl assist him in the restoration of 
his just authority in the Mahratta empire 

Fourthly. For this purpose, Rao Pundit Purdhaun shall agrce 
to subsidize, in perpetuity, such a body of the said Company’s 
troops, as shall hereafter be judged necessary for the restoration 
and maintenance of his authority. 

ART. 2. Rajah Rhagojce Bhooslah shall be admittcd to the 
benefit of this general alliance on the following conditions : 


AND BONSLAY. NIZAM’S EQUAL SHARE OF CONQUESTS, 177 


First. Rajah Rhagojce Bhooslah shall accept the Honourable 
Company’s arbitration of all unadjusted points between his 
Highness the Nabob Asoph Jah and the said Rajah, according 
to the tenor of subsisting treaties, 

Secondly. Rajah Rhagojce Booslah shall agree to such equit- 
able interchanges of territory with the honourable East India 
Company, as shall be judged necessary to complete or improve 
their respective frontiers, or to such cessions of territory (in con- 
sideration of a just pecuniary equivalent) as shall be judged 
necessary to the same purpose. , 

ART. 3. If contrary to the spirit and object of this defensive 
treaty, war should hereafter appear unavoidable (which God 
avert !) the contracting parties will proceed to adjust the rule of 
partition of all such advantages and acquisitions as may eventu- 
ally result from the success of their united arms. 

The contracting partics entertain no views of conquest or ex- 
tension of their respective dominions, nor any intention of pro- 
ceeding to hostilities, unless in the case of unjustified or unpro- 
voked aggression, and after the failure of their joint endeavours 
to obtain reasonable satisfaction, through the channel of pacific 
negotiation, according to the tenor of the preceding treaty. | It 
is however declared, that in the event of war, and of a conse- 
quent partition of conquests between the contracting partics, his 
Highness the Nabob Asoph Jah shall be entitled to participate 
equally with the other contracting parties, in the division of 
every territory which may be acquired by the successful exer- 
tion of their united arms, provided his Highness the Nabob 
Asoph Jah shall have faithfully fulfilled all the stipulations of 
the preceding treaty, especially those contained in the twelfth 
and thirteenth articles thereof. 

Signed, scaled and exchanged, at Hydrabad, on the 12th 
October, Anno Domini 1800, or 22d Jemmadce ul Awul, Anno 
Higera: 1215. 

J. A. KIRKPATRICK, Resident. 


N.B, The omitted articles provide for details of little historical in- 
terest, and, together with the schedule of ceded districts, are left out 
to save space, The seventh article is substantially identical with the last 
clause of the fifth in the Treaty of Basscin, i,c. from ‘the territories to 
be assigned’—ad finem: the ninth and tenth correspond to the seventh 
and eighth in the same Treaty of Bassein. 


N 


178 BENEFITS TO NABOB FROM ALLIANCE WITH THE COMPANY, 


Ill. THE CARNATIC. 


29. Declaration on the Annexation of the Carnatic. 


Declaration of the Right Honourable the Governor in Council of 
Fort St. George, by and with the authority of His Excellency the 
Most Noble the Governor-General in council of all the British 
possessions in India. 

July 27th, 1801. 
An alliance of the most intimate union and friendship has long 
subsisted between the Honourable English East India Company, 
and the family of their Highnesses Mahomed Ali and Omdut ul 

Omrah, late Nabobs of the Carnatic Payen Ghaut. By the aid 

of that alliance, his late Highness the Nabob Mahomed Ali was 

enabled under Providence, to support his pretensions to the pos- 
session of the Carnatic at the death of his illustrious father; to 
defeat the power of his enemics in arms, and finally to establish 
his authority in the Government of Arcot, and of its dependen- 
cies, on the foundations of the British power. For the defence 
and protection of the valuable possessions thus acquired by the 
united arms of the English Company, and of the Nabob of Arcot, 
various treaties and obligations have been established, by which 
it was intended that the interests, security and power of both 
parties in the Carnatic Payen Ghaut, should be cemented and 
identified. In conformity to the faith and spirit of those en- 
gagements the honourable Company has invariably employed 
not only the resources derived from that alliance, but the whole 
power of the British empire in India, to maintain the govern- 
ment of the late Nabobs of the Carnatic against all their enemies, 
and has caused them to be acknowledged by foreign states as 
the allies of the British nation. By these means, and by the un- 
abated exertion of its whole power, the Inglish nation was en- 
abled during the war which continued from the year 1780 to the 
year 1783, to support the pretensions of the Nabob Mahomed 

Ali, and to rescue his dominions from the violence of Ilyder 

Ali Khan, and of his successor Tippoo Sultaun, who, by the as- 

sistance of the French nation had been enabled to conquer a 

considerable part of the Carnatic, and to establish their authority 


over the greatest portion of the territorial possessions of the said 
Nabob. 


FINANCIAL PLAN, FOR COST OF DEFENCE, 179 


To support the authority of the Nabob Mahomed Ali, and to 
secure the British interests in the Carnatic, it became expedient 
for the contracting parties to enter into specific engagements 
for the maintenance of an adequate military establishment. The 
English Company accordingly bound itself by a treaty, bearing 
date in the month of February, 1787, to maintain the whole 
military force required for the protection of the territories of the 
allies ; in consideration of which engagement, the Nabob Ma- 
homed Ali agreed, among other conditions, and under e¢ertain 
penalties therein specified, to pay an annual subsidy amounting 
to fifteen lacs of pagodas. 

According to the further stipulations of that engagement, ren- 
dcred necessary by experience for the mutual safety of the con- 
tracting parties, the English Company in the year 1790, charged 
itself with the administration of the civil government in addition 
to the military defence of the Carnatic, in a critical juncture of 
affairs, when the ambition and implacable enmity of the late 
Tippoo Sultaun compelicd the British Government in India, to 
resort to arms for the support of its rights, and for the protection 
of its allies. 

At the conclusion of the war, in the ycar 1792, (the successful 
and glorious termination of which tended in the most direct 
manner, to secure the safety and prosperity of the possessions 
of his Highness the Nabob of the Carnatic) the British Govern- 
ment restored the civil government of the Carnatic to his 
Highness, thereby manifesting the strictest adherence to the 
stipulations of the existing engagement of 1787; but the British 
Government did not confine itsclf to the mere discharge of the 
stipulations of its existing engagements ; its views were extended 
to an enlarged and liberal consideration of the principles of the 
alliance subsisting between the Company, and the Nabobs of the 
Carnatic. 

At that period of time the Nabob Mahomed Ali, relying on the 
friendly disposition of the British Government, represented in the 
most urgent manner to the Marquess Cornwallis, the inadequacy 
of his Highness’s resources to discharge the pecuniary engage- 
ments of the treaty of 1787; and the Governor-Gencral, acting 
in conformity to the spirit of the alliance and fricndship so long 
subsisting between the Nabobs of the Carnatic, and the English 
Company, relieved his Highness from the burthensome terms 
of that engagement; thereby surrendering the pecuniary rights, 
acquired by the Company under the treaty of 1787, for the 

N 2 


180 INDULGENCE OF COMPANY, NABOB’S TUNCAWS, 


purpose of promoting the tranquillity, comfort and interests of 
the Nabob Mahomed Ali. 

With this liberal view of the principles of the connexion estab- 
lished between the British Government and the Nabob of Arcot, 
an indulgent modification of the treaty of 1787 was framed, and 
by a subsequent treaty, bearing date in the month of July, 1792, 
the pecuniary contribution of his Highness the Nabob of the 
‘Carnatic towards the general defence and protection of the rights 
and possessions of the allies was diminished from fifteen to nine 
lacs of star pagodas. The spirit of moderation by which the 
British councils were guided, in respect to this alliance, was un- 
equivocally manifested by a further stipulation for the purpose of 
securing to the Nabob Omdut ul Omra, the son and presumptive 
heir of the Nabob Mahomed Ali, the succession to the territories 
of his father, on the terms and conditions of the treaty of 1792. 

In return for this relinquishment of a considerable portion of 

its pecuniary resources, the English Company obtained no other 
advantages than an extended renewal of the territorial security, 
already provided by the treaty of 1787, for the performance of 
the Nabob Mahomed Ali’s pecuniary engagements, and a repe- 
tition of his Highness’s previous obligation not to contract 
alliances, nor to enter into correspondence with any European or 
native power, without the knowledge and concurrence of the 
British Government, Conformably therefore to this indulgent 
modification of the treaty of 1787, the government of the Car- 
natic was restored to the Nabob Mahomed Ali. On the death 
of his Highness the Nabob Mahomed Ali, in the year 1795, the 
Nabob Omdut ul Omra succeeded to the possession of his 
father’s territories, according to the provision of the treaty of 
1792. 
\ The Nabob Mahomed Ali, as well as his son and successor, 
had repeatedly granted tuncaws and assignments of revenue on 
the districts pledged to the Company, in direct violation of the 
treaty of 1792, and to the manifest injury of the territorial 
security provided by the Company, for its interests in the Car- 
natic. The British Government however, continued to extend to 
their Highnessces the indulgent opcration of the beneficial condi- 
tions of the treaty of 1792, by abstaining 'from the exercise of 
the just rights acquired against their Highnesses, under the ex- 
press stipulations of that engagement, and under the acknow- 
Iedged interpretation of the law of aa 

Under these circumstances, the British Government might 


FAITHLESS DEALINGS OF NABOBS WITH TIPPOO. 18t 


justly have required from the house of Mahomed Ali, not 
merely the exact and rigid observation of the treaty of 1792, 
but a zealous and cordial attachment to the spirit of an engage- 
ment, under which the Nabobs of the Carnatic had found the most 
ample protection, accompanied by the most indulgent and liberal 
construction of every stipulation favourable to their scparate in- 
terests, and by the most Icnicnt relaxation of those penal articles, 
the obligation of which their Highnesscs had respectively in- 
curred by violating the article of the treaty of 1792, relative to 
the grants of tuncaws, or assignments of revenue, on the districts 
pledged to the Company. 
\-t is with the deepest concern, that the Governor in council 
is compelled to declare, that these ancient allics of the Company, 
the Nabobs Mahomct Ali, and Omdut ul Omra, have been 
found not only deficient in every active duty of the alliance, but 
unfaithful to its fundamental principles and untrue to its vital 
spirit. 7 . 
_ In the full enjoyment of the most abundant proofs of the mo- 
deration, indulgence and good faith of the Honourable Company, 
the Nabob Mahomed Ali, and the Nabob Omdut ul Omra, 
actually commenced and maintained a sccrct intercourse with 
Tippoo Sultaun, the determined enemy of the British name, 
founded on principles, and directed to objects, utterly subversive 
of the alliance between the Nabob of the Carnatic and the Com- 
pany, and equally incompatible with the security of the British 
power in the Peninsula of India. 
L After the fall of Seringapatam, the British Government ob- 
tained possession of the original records of Tippoo Sultaun 3) the 
correspondence of that Prince’s ambassadors, during their re- 
sidence at Fort St. George, in attendance on his sons, the hostage 
princes, in the year 1792, and 1793, established sufficient grounds 
of apprchension, that their Highnesses, the late Nabob Mahomed 
Ali, and the late Nabob Omdut ul Omra, had entered into a 
secret intercourse with the late Tippoo Sultaun, of a nature hos- 
tile to the British intcrests in India. The enquirics of the British 
Government have been since directed to ascertain a fact so in- 
timatcly connected with the security of its rights in the Carnatic. 
(The result has established the following propositions by a scrics 
of connected written and oral testimony. } 
First. At the very period of time when the Nabob Mahomed 
_ Ali appealed to the gencrosity of the British Government for an 
indulgent modification of the treaty of 1787, his Highness had 


182 COUNTS OF THE INLICTMENT AGAINST THEM. 


already commenced a secret negotiation for the establishment of 
an intimate intercourse with the Nabob Tippoo Sultaun, without 
the knowledge of the British Government, and for purposes 
evidently repugnant to its security and honour. 

Secondly. The Nabob Omdut ul Omra (who was empowered 
by the Nabob Mahomed Ali to negotiate the treaty of 1792 
with the British Government, and who actually negotiated that 
treaty for himself and for his father) was actually employed 
at the same period of time under his father’s authority, in nego- 
tiating for himself and for his father the terms of the said 
separate and secret intercourse with Tippoo Sultaun. 

Thirdly. The tendency of the said intercourse was directed to 
the support of Tippoo Sultaun in victory and triumph over all 
his enemies. 

Fourthly. In the month of December 1792, the Nabob Ma- 
homed Ali imparted secret information to Tippoo Sultaun 
regarding the sentiments and intentions of the British Govern- 
ment in India with relation to the hostile views and negotiations 
of Tippoo Sultaun at the Courts of Poonah and Hyderabad ; 
and on the first intelligence of the war between Great Britain 
and France in the ycar 1793, the Nabob Mahomed Ali imparted 
secret information to Tippoo Sultaun respecting the views and 
power of France in India and in Europe, and respecting the 
intended operations of the British forces against the French 
possessions in the Carnatic; and the Nabob Mahomed Ali 
conveyed to Tippoo Sultaun secret admonitions and friendly 
advice respecting the most favourable season and the most 
propitious state of circumstances for the violation of Tippoo 
Sultaun’s engagements with the Honourable Company. 

Fifthly. -The Nabob Omdut ul Omra was employed by his 
father as one of the agents to convey secret intelligence, friendly 
admonition, and scasonable advice to Tippoo Sultaun, through 
the confidential agents of Tippoo Sultaun, who were furnished 
with instructions from the said Sultaun of Mysore to reccive 
such communications from the said Nabob of the Carnatic, and 
from the Nabob Omdut ul Omra. 

Sixthly. A cypher was composed an@ actually introduced 
into the scparate and secrct correspondence between the Nabob 
Mahomed Ali and Tippoo Sultaun. The original key of the 
said cypher, discovered among the records of Seringapatam, is in 
the handwriting of the confidential Moonshce (or secretary) of the 
Nabob Mahomed Ali, and of the Nabob Omdut ul Omra; and 


THEY THUS FORFEITED BENEFITS OF THE ALLIANCE, 183 


the said cypher was delivered by a confidential agent of the 
Nabob Omdut ul Omra to the ambassador of Tippoo Sultaun 
for the express purpose of being transmitted to Tippoo Sultaun.° 

Seventhly. The terms employed in the said cypher, par- 
ticularly those intended to designate the British Government 
and its allies, the Nizam and the Mahratta State, united in a 
defensive Icague against Tippoo Sultaun,| contain the most 
powerful internal evidence that the communications proposed 
to be disguised by the said cypher, were of the most hostile 
tendency to the interests and objects of the said alliance, and 
calculated to promote the cause of Tippoo Sultaun in opposition 
to that of the said allies.) 

Eighthly. The Nabob Omdut ul Omra, in his own hand- 
writing, in the month of August, 1794, corroborated the evidence 
of his intention to complete the purposes herein described of the 
secret intercourse which he had negotiated with Tippoo Sultaun ; 
and the continuance of the same intention is manifested by letters 
from the Nabob Omdut ul Omra, and from his confidential 
agent, addresséd to the supposed agent of Tippoo Sultaun in 
the year 1796, subsequently to the Nabob Omdut ul Omra’s 
accession to the government of the Carnatic under the treaty 
of 1792. 

Ninthly. At the commencement, and during the progress of 
the late just, necessary, and glorious war with the late Tippoo 
Sultaun, the Nabob Omdut ul Omra to the utmost extent of his 
mcans and power, pursucd the object of his secret intercourse 
with Tippoo Sultaun by a systematic course of deception with 
respect to the provision of the funds necessary to enable the 
British troops to march into Mysore, as well as by a systematic 
and active opposition to the supply and movement of the allied 
army through different parts of the said Nabob's dominions. } 

Tenthly. The stipulations contained in the fifteenth article 
of the treaty of 1787, and the tenth article of the treaty of 1792,| 
by which the Nabobs of the Carnatic were bound not to enter 
into any political negotiations or correspondence with any 
European or native power or state without the consent of the 
Government of Fort St. George or of the Company, formed 
a fundamental condition of the alliance between the said Nabob 
and the Company, and/the violation of the said stipulations 
necessarily involved the entire forfeiture on the part of the 
Nabob of all the benefits of the said alliance.) 

Eleventhly. The Nabob Mahomed Ali and the Nabob Omdut 


y 


184 AND BECAME PUBLIC ENEMIES TO THE COMPANY. 


ul Omra have violated the said stipulations, and have thereby 
forfeited all the benefits of the said alliance ;\, “and the Nabob 
Mahomed Ali, and the Nabob Omdut ul Omrah having violated 
_the said stipulations for the express purpose of establishing an 
union of interests with Tippoo Sultaun, thereby placed them- 
selves in the condition of public enemies to the British Govern- 
ment in India.- 
~ It is manifest, therefore, that the intentions of the Nabobs 
Mahomed Ali and Omdut ul Omra have been uniformly and 
without interruption hostile to the British power in India} and 
that those intentions have been carried into effect to the full 
extent of the actual power possessed by their Highnesses re- 
spectively at the several periods of time in which they have acted 
in pursuance of their system of co-operation with the enemy, | 
By acting on these principles of conduct, the Nabobs Ma- 
homed Ali and Omdut ul Omra not only violated the rights 
of the Company, but by uniting their interests with those of the 
most implacable enemy of the British Empire, the Nabobs 
Mahomed Ali and Omdut ul Omra actually placed themselves 
‘in the relation of public enemics to the British Government, : 
dangerous to the extent of their respective power, and active 
according to the means and opportunities afforded to them by 
the circumstances of the moment, and especially by the most 
severe exigency and pressure of war.j Every principle of public 
law, therefore, released the British Glee nment from the intended 
obligations of the treaty of 1792, and every consideration of self- 
defence and security authorized the Company to exercise its 
power in the manner most expcdicnt for the purpose of frus- 
trating the hostile councils of the late Nabob of the Carnatic, 
modelled upon the artful example, actuated by the Sead 
spirit, and sanctioned by the testamentary voice of his father! 
In procecding to cxercisc this right it was painful to the 
British Government to be compelled to expose to the world all 
these humiliating proofs of the ingratitude and treachery of the 
Nabobs Mahomed Ali and Omdut ul Omra towards the power 
which has uniformly proved their guardian and protector ; but in 
acting from the impression of this sentiment, the British Govern- 
ment was more desirous of consulting its own dignity than of 
admitting any claims on the part of those infatuated princes to 
its generosity and forbcarance, 
In conformity to this spirit of temperance and modcration, it 
was the intention of the British Government to have madc a 


WE ARE NOT BOUND BY TREATY TO OMDUT’S SON. 185 


formal communication to the Nabob Omdut ul Omra of the 
proofs which had been obtained of his Highness’s breach of the 
alliance, with the view of obtaining, by the most lenient means, 
satisfaction for the injury sustained by the British Government, 
and security against the future operation of the hostile councils 
of the Nabob Omdut ul Omra. 

Circumstances of expediency, connected with the general in- 
terests and policy of the British Government, interrupted the 
communication of this demand to the Nabob Omdut ul Omra: 
the intermediate illness of his Highness protracted the execution 
of that intention, and his subsequent dcath frustrated the wish of 
the British Government, to obtain from that Prince satisfactory 
security for the rights pledged to the Company in the Carnatic. 

The death of the Nabob Omdut ul Omra has not affected the 
rights acquired by the British Government under the discovery 
of his breach of the alliance. Whatever claim the reputed son 
of the Nabob Omdut ul Omra may be supposed to possess to 
the Company’s support of his pretentions to the Government of 
the Carnatic, is founded on the grounds of the rights of Omdut 
ul Omra himself: the right of the Nabob Omdut ul Omra to the 
assistance of the Company in sccuring his succession to the 
Nabob Mahomed Ali in the government of the Carnatic was 
founded on the express stipulations of the treaty of 1792: the 
result of the propositions stated in this declaration has established 
abundant proof that the fundamental principles of the alliance 
between the Company and the Nabob Omdut ul Omra, as well 
as the express Ictter of the treaty of 1792, had been absolutely 
violated and rendered of no effect by the Nabobs Mahomed 
Ali and Omdut ul Omra, previously to the ostensible conclusion 
of that instrument. It is manifest, therefore, that the Nabob 
Omdut ul Omra could derive no rights from the formal rati- 
fication of that treaty, the vital spirit of which had alrcady been 
annihilated by the hostile and faithless conduct of his Highness ; 
and that the Nabobs Mahomed Ali and Omdut ul Omra, by 
forming an intimate union of interests with Tippoo Sultaun had 
actually placed themselves in the rclation of public enemies to 
the British empire in India. 

Whatever claim to the Company’s protection and support the 
reputed son of Omdut ul Omra may derive from his supposed 
father had been utterly destroyed by the hostile conduct of 
Omdut ul Omra:\it follows, therefore, that the reputed son of 
Omdut ul Omra has succeeded to the condition_ of his father, 


186 WE HAVE TRIED TO MAKE A NEW TREATY WITH HIM. 


which condition was that of a public enemy, and consequently 
that, at the death of Omdut ul Omra, the British Government 
remained at liberty to exercise its rights, founded on the faithless 
policy of its ally, in whatever manner might be deemed most con- 
ducive to the immediate safety and to the gencral interests of 
the Company in the Carnatic. 

Before the British Government proceeded to exercise this right, 
founded on the violation of the alliance and on the necessity of 
self-defence, it was desirous of manifesting its attention to the 
long established connection between the Company and the house 
of Omdut ul Omra, by sacrificing to the sentiments of national 
magnanimity and gencrosity the resentment created by his 
Highness’s flagrant breach of the alliance. In the spirit of those 
councils, therefore, with which it had been the intention of the 
British Government to demand satisfaction and security from 
Omdut ul Omra, and to avoid the publication of facts so hu- 
miliating to the family of that Prince, the British Government 
communicated to the reputed son of Omdut ul Omra, knowledge 
of the proofs now existing in the possession of the Government 
of Fort St. George, of the violation of the alliance; at the same 
time the British Government manifested a consistent adherence 
to the principles of moderation and forbearance by opening 
a latitude to the reputed son of Omdut ul Omra to afford, by 
means of an amicable adjustment, that satisfaction and sccurity 
which the hostile and faithless conduct of his supposed father 
had entitled the British Government to demand, and which the 
dictates of prudence and self-defence compelled it to require. 

The reputed son of Omdut ul Omra, by and with the advice 
of the persons appointed by his father’s will to assist his councils, 
has persisted in opposing a determined resistance to this de- 
mand, thereby exhibiting an unequivocal proof that the spirit 
which actuated the hostile councils of the Nabobs Mahomed Ali 
and Omdut ul Omra, has becn transmitted with unabated vigour 
to the supposed son of Omdut ul Omra, secured in its operation 
under the sanctimonious forms of thcir testamentary injunc- 
tions, and preserved with religious attachment by the ostensible 
descendant of that Prince. { 

Frustrated in the hope of obtaining from the reputed son of 
Omdut ul Omra reparation for its injuries and security for its 
rights, the British Government is now reluctantly compelled 
to publish to the world the proofs of this flagrant violation of 
the most sacred ties of amity and alliance by the Nabobs 


IN SELF-DEFENCE, WE HAVE SET UP PRINCE AZIM. 187 


Mahomed Ali and Omdut ul Omra, and the hereditary spirit 
of enmity manifested by the reputed son of Omdut ul Omra 
to the interests of the British Government. [The duty and 
necessity of self-defence require the British Government, under 
the circumstances of this case, to exercise its power in the 
attainment of an adequate security for its rights. Justice and 
moderation warrant that the family of Omdut ul Omra shall 
be deprived of the means of completing its systematic course 
of hostility; wisdom and prudence demand that the reputed 
son of Omdut ul Omra shall not be permitted to retain the 
possession of resources dangerous to the tranquillity of the 
British Government in the Peninsula of India. } 

Whercfore, the British Government, still adhering to the prin- 
ciples of moderation, and actuated by its uniform desire of 
obtaining security for its rights and interests in the Carnatic 
by an arrangement founded on the principles of the long sub- 
sisting alliance between.the Company and the family of the 
Nabob Mahomed Ali,| judged it expedient to enter into a 
negotiation for that purpose with the Prince Azim ul Dowlah 
Bahadur, the son and heir of Ameer ul Omra, who was the 
second son of the Nabob Mahomed Ali, and the immcdiate 
great grandson by both his parents of the Nabob Anwer ud 
Deen Khan, of blessed memory; and his Highness the Prince 
Azim ul Dowlah Bahadur having entered into engagements 
for the express purpose of reviving the alliance between the 
Company and his illustrious ancestors, and of establishing, an 
adequate security for the British interests in the Carnatic,\the 
British Government has now resolved to exercise its rights and 
its power, under Providence, in supporting and in establishing 
the hereditary pretensions of the Prince Azim ul Dowlah Ba- 
hadur in the soubahdarry of the territories of Arcot and of the 
Carnatic Payen Ghaut. 

And for the more full explanation of the grounds and motives 
of this declaration, the Right Honourable the Governor in 
Council by and with the authority of his Excellency the most 
noble the Governor-General in Council has caused attested 
copies and extracts of several documents discovered at Seringa- 
patam to be annexed hereunto, together with an extract from 
the Treaty of 1792. 

By command of the Right Hon. the Governor-in-Council. 
J. WEBBE, 
Chief Secretary to Government. 


188 SETTLEMENT OF MYSORE, SOUTHERN POLYGARS, & TANFORE. 


IV. OUDE. 


30. The Earl of Mornington to the Secret Committee of 
the Honourable Court of Directors. 


Projected military reforms in Oude. Nabob’s alleged intention 
of abdicating. 


Fort William, 28th Nov. 1'799- 
Honourable Sirs, 

I. According to the latest accounts dated on the and of 
November, the affairs of Mysore were in the most favourable 
condition. The whole of the country (including Sondah and 
the rest of the reserved territory, now about to be divided 
between the Company and the Nizam) having bcen completely 
settled, with the exception of the inconsidcrable posscssions of 
the Polygar of Bullam, against whom a small detachment had 
been sent, the army in Mysore was on the eve of being dis- 
tributed in garrisons and cantonments. 

Under the disadvantages resulting from the recent military 
operations throughout the country, Purneah had discharged the 
first monthly kist of the subsidy stipulated by thc late treaty of 
Seringapatam, namely, that for the month of July, and had 
announced his intention of soon paying the kists for August and 
September. 

I have very great satisfaction in informing your honourable 
Committee that the measures which I concerted with Lord 
Clive, previously to my departure from Fort St. George, for the 
purpose of reducing the southern Polygars to order and legal 
government have been executed with the greatest ability and 
success by Major Banncrman, and that the military power of 
that refractory race of pcople is now completely extinct. 

The settlement of Tanjore has been arranged with the same 
happy success. Previously to my departure from Fort St. 
George, with Lord Clive’s assistance, I framed the outlines of 
a new treaty between the Rajah and the Company vesting the 
entire and exclusive administration, civil and military, of that 
country in the Company's government. This treaty was ratified 
by me in council on the 26th instant. 

II. The affairs of Oude have occupicd a considcrable share 


NABOB VIZIER’S RESOLUTION TO ABDICATE, 189 


of my attention. No probability existing that Zemaun Shah 
will be able in the course of the present season to renew his 
hostile attempts against Hindostan, and a conjuncture so favour- 
able coinciding with our successes in Mysore,lthe most eligible 
opportunity appeared to be opened for carrying into execution 
such a reform of the Nabob Vizier’s military establishments as 
should secure us from all future danger on the frontier of Oude, 
and should enable me to introduce a variety of yecessary 
improvements in the government of that country. With this 
view it was my intention to establish a considerable augmen- 
tation of our troops in Oude without delay, and to induce the * 
Vizier to disband, under certain regulations, a proportional part 
of his own useless and dangerous force.| I had accordingly 
given orders to the Resident at Lucknow to commence a 
negotiation with his Excellency for this desirable purpose, and 
had also directed the movements of several bodies of troops in 
the provinces to be so arranged as to enable me, before the 
expiration of the cold season, to increase our force in Oude 
considerably. (Before, however, the Resident at Lucknow could 
open the proposed negociation with the Vizicr, or had disclosed 
to him any part of my intended plans, his Excellency, of his 
own accord, made a proposition to the Resident which neces- 
sarily supersedes every other arrangement) 

T11.LFor several months past his Excellency had intimated 
to the Resident from time to time an carnest desire to commu- 
nicate to me an improved system for the government of Oude. 
But whenever the Resident had pressed his Excellency for a 
more full explanation of the nature of the proposed arrangement 
in order that it might be transmitted to me, his Excellency had 
evaded the discussion with evident symptoms of agitation of 
mind. \At length on the 12th of November, at an interview 
which his Excellency had himself desired{and it is important 
again to remark that at this period no proposition had reached 
his Excellency from the Resident or from me with relation to 
the increase of the force in Oude), his Excellency signified an 
anxious desire and a fixed determination to abdicate altogether 
the government of Oude, and requested the Resident to draw, 
for the purpose of being forwarded to me, the enclosed paper 
which I received last night, 

IV. His Excellency appears to have adopted the resolution_ 
of abdicating the government upon the maturest deliberation, | 
Your honourable Committee will observe that his Excellency 


190 WHY? GOVERNOR-GENERAL’S INTENTIONS THEREUPON, 


declares this resolution to have originated in the reciprocal 
aversion subsisting between himself and his subjects (an aversion, 
which, on his part, he declares to have grown into absolute 
disgust), and in his sense of his own incompetency from various 
other considerations, to administer the government either with 
satisfaction to himself or advantage to his people. | But although 
such considerations may in some degree have influenced his 
Excellency’s determination, I am inclined to believeethat the 
principal causes are to be traced in the timidity and the avarice 
of his disposition ;, for it is proper to apprize your honourable 
Committee that he has intimated an expectation of being per- 
mitted to retire with the treasures which he may have amassed. 

V. Your honourable Committee will remark that the Resident 
has used several arguments, but without effect, to dissuade his 
Excellency from the proposed abdication. If therefore his 
Excellency should ultimately persevere in this declared inten- 
tion, it must be deemed entirely and absolutely his own volun- 
tary act. 

VI. Whatever may have been the motives, or whatever shall 
be the ultimate decision of his Excellency on this occasion, it is 
my intention to profit by the event to the utmost practicable 
extent; and I entertain a confident hope of being able cither to 
establish, with the consent of the Vizier, the sole and exclusive 
authority of the Company within the province of Oude and its 
dependencies, or at least to place our interests in that quarter on 
an improved and durable foundation] 

VII. It occurs to me to be necessary to add in explanation of 
the close of the third paragraph of this letter, that although 
the necessity of a reform of the Vizicr’s military establishments 
had been for a considerable time under discussion between his 
Excellency and me, and had even been fully admitted by his 
Excellency, no detailed measures with a view to the exccution 
of such a plan had yet been suggested, nor had my intention of 
immediately augmenting our force in Oude been communicated 
to his Excellency when he opened his mind to the Resident at 
Lucknow. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 
MORNINGTON, 


I SHALL STATE, WHEREIN YOU ARE TO BE BLAMED. 191 


81. The Earl of Mornington to the Nabob of Oude. 


Necessity of carrying out the military reforms, Exposure of 
Nabob’s inconsistency in opposing them. Stern warning. 


Fort William, 9th February, 1800. 


The duty imposed on me by my public station, and the 
concern which I take in your Excellency’s personal honour and 
welfare, as well as in the prosperity and happiness of the in- 
habitants of Oude, compel me to communicate to you, in the 
most unqualified terms, the astonishment, regret, and indignation 
which your recent conduct has excited in my mind. . 

In order to apprize your Excellency in the most unequivocal 
manner of the causes and objects of this Ictter, I propose to state 
my observations with reference to the following distinct proposi- 
tions in your Excellency’s correspondence with me, and in your 
declarations made to the British Resident at Lucknow. 

st. Your Excellency, since my arrival in India, has repeatedly 
complained of the ruinous condition of your internal government, 
and earnestly solicited my direct interference, as being indis~ 
pensably necessary for the purpose of effecting a complcte reform 
in your affairs, and especially in your military establishments, 

and, After having received from me a plan for the reform of 
your military establishments, you expressed, in the most de- 
liberate and unqualified terms, , your approbation of the same, and 
your hope that it would be carried into effect. 

3rd. You have recently declared to Licut.-Colonel Scott, that 
this same plan for the reform of your military establishment 
never, in any measure, met with your approbation or acceptance, 
or was decmed expedient by you. 

4th. You have attempted, by various means, to delay, and 
ultimately to frustrate the exccution of the plan above mentioned, 
of which you had, after full deliberation, expressed your entire 
approbation, 

5th. The means which your Excellency has employed for this 
purpose are calculated to degrade your character, to destroy all 
confidence between your Excellency and the British Government, 
to produce confusion and disorder in your dominions, and to 
injure the most important interests of the Company to such a 
degree as may be deemed nearly cquivalent to positive hostility 
on your part. 

i In the beginning of August, 1798, your Excellency informed 


192 YOU ASKED ME TO INTERFERE AND HELP YOU. 


me, by letter, that the organization of your government, which 
had for a long period of time been very loose and confused, was 
become in the last degree ineffective and irregular, adding a 
request that I would instruct Mr. Lumsden (the Company’s 
Resident at Lucknow) to afford your Excellency his effectual 
aid in establishing your authority on a new dasis.- A varicty 
of circumstances having rendered it impossible for me to give 
immediate consideration to your Excellency’s representation, 
your Excellency in a subsequent letter, written in June, 1799» 
revived the subject, observing, ‘it will be impossible to remove 
the embarrassment under which I labour until I shall have 
carried into effect the retrenchment of superfluous expenses, and 
shall have established a systematic settlement of the country, 
and of the military (which is indispensable) for promoting the 
security and ease of the ryots, the prosperity of the country, and 
the tranquillity of the people.’ Your Excellency added ‘although 
I have been informed by Mr. Lumsden that your Lordship has 
written to him upon this subject ; yet nothing regarding it has 
been written by your Lordship to me; and I therefore hope 
you will repeat your orders to the Resident to be aiding and 
assisting me in all matters, so that I may concert with him the 
means of removing my embarrassments, and with his assistance, 
carry on the affairs of my government in a manner to produce 
ease and satisfaction to my mind.’ Your Excellency concluded 
by declaring, ‘I rely on your Lordship for support and assistance 
in everything,’ 

Such forcible representations of the disordered state of your 
Excellency’s government in its military as well as civil branches, 
combined with my own intimate knowledge of the actual exis- 
tence of the evils so repeatedly and emphatically described by 
your Excellency, authorized a full confidence in the sincerity of 
your Excellency’s reiterated wishes for my active interference in 
your affairs, and for my assistance in remedying the defects of 
which you so justly complained. I therefore determined to 
adopt, without delay, those measures now apparently not less 
requisite for the ease and satisfaction of your Excellency’s mind, 
than they had long been manifestly essential to the safety of 
your person and to the security and prosperity of your do- 
minions. Under this impression, while yet occupied by most 
important affairs at Fort St. George, I appointed Colonel Scott 
to reside with your Excellency, furnishing him at the same time 
with such instructions as appeared to me to be best calculated 


REFORM OF YOUR ARMY OBVIOUSLY REQUISITE, 193 


to enable him to accomplish the apparently earnest wishes of 
your Excellency for establishing an improved system of civil and 
military government within your dominions.} 

In considering the course of measures best adapted to this 

salutary purpose, I became satisfied that it was absolutcly 
necessary to commence with that reform of your Excellency’s 
military forces, which your Excellency had declared to be in- 
dispensable. I was originally led to this conclusion by a review 
of the correspondence and negotiations which had passed between 
your Excellency and Mr, Lumsden in consequence of the advance 
of Zemaun Shah to Lahore, towards the end of the year 1798 ; 
and I was further. confirmed in my opinion by a retrospect of 
the events which had followed the rebellion and flight of Vizier 
Alli. 
C The conduct of different corps of your Excclicncy’s army had 
in several instances previously to the approach of Zemaun Shah, 
abundantly manifested that no reliance could be placed cither 
in their fidelity or disciplinc. Many of them had mutinicd, and 
were prevented from proceeding to acts of open violence against 
your Excellency’s person by the presence of the Company’s 
troops. Your Excellency, when consulted by Sir James Craig 
and by Mr. Lumsden on the measures of defence to be adopted 
against the threatencd invasion of Zemaun Shah, declared that 
‘no confidence was to be placed in your troops,’ and you not 
only avowed your military force to be inadequate to contribute 
any assistance towards the defence of your dominions, but 
required the presence of part of the British army within your 
capital for the express purpose of protecting your person and 
authority against the cxccsscs of your own disaffected and dis- 
orderly troops, in the same moment when the services of the 
whole of the British army were most urgently demanded upon 
your Exccllency’s fronticr to resist the approach of Zemaun 
Shah. } Ifitherto, however, the fidelity and utility of your Ex- 
cellency’s troops had becn distrusted principally on grounds 
suggested by their repeated contumacy and disobedience. That 
they were actually capable of betraying the interests of your 
Exccllency in a crisis of positive danger, was subsequently proved 
beyond a possibility of doubt by( their treachcrous conduct during 
the commotions excited by Vizier Alli 

The necessity of commencing the general improvement of your 
Excellency’s government by a radical reform of your military 
cstablishment being then manifest, Licut.-Colonel Scott, together 

0 


194 YOU THOUGHT IT FEASIBLE, AND HOPED FOR IT. 


with a letter which Sir Alured Clarke addressed to your Excel- 
lency, by my desire, delivered to you such further explanations 
of the proposed measure as the occasion required. It is re- 
markable that the delivery of Sir Alurcd Clarke’s Ictter to your 
Excellency had been preceded within the short space of five 
days by repeated complaints on the part of your Excellency of 
the turbulent and disorderly state of your troops. 

In the plan of reform for your military cstablishment pre- 
sented to your Excellency at that period of time, I proposed 
that the greatest part of your uscless and dangerous forces 
should be disbanded, and should be replaced by a suitable 
number of the Company’s troops. The reception which your 
Excellency gave to the proposition corresponded with the ex- 
pectations which your Excellency’s repeated declarations and 
applications to me had Ied me to form. | Your Excellency 
perused the letter of Sir Alured Clarke with satisfaction, and 
declared your thorough concurrence in the sentiments which it 
contained. Your Excellency also, at a subsequent conference 
with the “Resident on ‘the 5th of September, observed, of your 
own accord, that the proposed measure wes not impracticable, but 
such as you hoped might be accomplished. 

It is of importance to remind your Excellency in this place 
that, soon after the opening of these discussions by Licut.-Colonel 
Scott, a fresh mutiny broke out among your I‘xccllency’s troops, 
which your Excellency was enabled to quell solely by the assist- 
ance of the British Resident at Lucknow. { 

Having in a letter to your Excellency dated the 26th of 
September, 1799, expressed my satisfaction in your ready con- 
currence in the expediency of the measure which had been 
generally proposed in the letter of Sir Alured -Clarke, and 
particularly explained by Licut.-Colone! Scott, and having at 
the same time earnestly cxliorted your Excellency not to 
suffer any considcration to delay for a moment the necessary 
alterations in your military cstablishment (referring to the plan 
which had been minutely detailed to you by Licut.-Colonel 
Scott), your Excellency in reply declares ‘the benefits, both 
immediate and future, of such a reform are even more strongly 
impressed upon my mind than they have been described by your 
Lordship ; a year before this time, under a sense of the benefits in 
question, and of the evils arising from the failure of my resources, 
and the increase of my expences, I planned, of my own accord, 
in my mind, a reform of the system, and was the first to propose it. 


FOU NOW IGNORE THIS, AND YOUR PRAISE OF MY PLAN, 195 


To the observation which I had submitted to your Excellency 
relative to the possible return, in a more formidable shape, of 
the dangers which had alrcady threatened the safety of your 
Excellency’s person and dominions, your Excellency answers, 
in the same Ictter, ‘please God, by introducing a reform in the 
military systent, all dangers and all apprehension of disturbance 
will be removed.’ 

These extracts from your Excellency’s own letters, and from 
Colonel Scott’s reports of your verbal communications noted 
and recorded at the time, warrant me in declaring that your 
Excellency, in the most direct terms, originally solicited me 
to prepare a plan for the reformation of your military establish- 
ment, and that you afterwards positively approved the plan 
prepared and submitted to you at your own request. I Icave 
it to your Excellency to judge with what emotions I now learn 
from Licut.-Colonel Scott, that you have not hesitated to assert that 
this identical plan framed at your own suggestion, and approved 
by your deliberate sanction, had never, in any measure, met with 
your approbation or acceptance, or been deemed expedient by you. } 

In this place it may not be inexpedicnt to observe, that even 
if your Excellency had not professed your approbation of the 
plan in question, it would have becn equally my duty and right 
to have required your Excellency’s adoption of a measure, the 
execution of which is indispensably necessary to cnable the 
Company to fulfil their engagement ‘of defending your do- 
minions against all cnemics,’ 

In my letter to you of the 5th of November last I have 
sufficiently established the right of the Company to augment 
their forces within your [Excellency’s dominions to whatever 
extent the British Government in India may judge requisite to 
the permanent security of the common interests. (1 have also 
explained in what manner your Excellency is bound by the 
ath Article of the Treaty concluded between yout Excellency 
and Sir John Shore, to defray the expense of any force which 
the British Government shall deem necessary far the effectual 
protection of your dominions, The right of the British Govern- 
ment to make such an augmentation, even against your Ex- 
cellency’s consent, in the event of an invasion of your dominions, 
or of any sudden or temporary alarm cither of domestic or 
pin danger, has never been disputed by your Excellency; 
but I understand that you have expressed to Licut.-Colonel 
Scott an intimation, that the same right docs not extend to 

02 


196 WE DEFEND YOU, AND MUST DECIDE ON MEANS. 


--& permanent increase of the standing army of the Company 


in Oude. Can your Excellency then suppose that the treaty 
was intended to provide against dangers merely of a temporary 
and transient nature, and that it did not embrace the permanent 
and perpetual security of your dominions, and the lasting in- 
terests of that party which has bound itself to protect them 
against every danger, whether existing or contingent? If a 
danger shall exist, permanent in its nature, but of which the 
immediate approach to your Excellency’s dominions may be 
so sudden and rapid as to preclude the possibility of pro- 
viding against it by any other means, than a consistent and 
permanent system of preparation and precaution; shall it be 
contended that the legitimate protector and guardian of your 
dominions is not bound by every principle of duty to provide 
such a system without delay? and is not the season of peace 
and tranquillity the most favourable for the establishment of 


external security and internal order? 
‘_ It is certain that the resources of your Excclliency are in- 


adequate to the double burthen of the proposed additional force 
of the Company, and of your own existing military establish- 
ment,’ But if your resources could bear this accumulated pres- 
sure, I should still feel myself bound to require that your 
Excellency should reduce your own disorderly troops. The 
expediency of disbanding as large a proportion of your own 
troops as can possibly be dispensed with in the business of the 
revenue collections, and in the purposes of ceremony and state, 
does not rest solely on the inefficiency of your troops in a mili- 
tary view,-but also on their disaffection, and insubordination, 
and on the danger with which such a body of armed men must 
ever menace your person, and the public tranquillity in time 
of peace; a danger infinitely aggravated in the scason cither of 
domestic convulsion, or of foreign attack. The dismission there- 
fore of the troops in question, is not only recommended by 
considerations of economy, but indispensably requisite by the 
soundest maxims of prudential policy. So long as these troops 
shall be entertained, a large proportion of the Company’s force 
must be constantly employed to maintain the peace of the 
Country; and in the event of an invasion of your Exccllency’s 
dominions by a forcign enemy, the necessity of diverting a still 
more considerable part of the British army from the defence of 
your frontier, for the purpose of controlling your own licentious 
and disaffected soldiery, would increase exactly in proportion 


ALWAYS: HENCE WE MAY INCREASE OUR FORCE. 197 


to the magnitude and imminence of external danger. It must 
therefore be obvious to your Excellency, that the continuance 
of these dangerous troops in your service, instead of leading 
to a diminution of the requisite amount of the British force in 
Oude, would require a far more consjderable augmentation of 
that force than any hitherto Seal 

Your Excellency always professing the utmost anxicty for the 
reform of your own troops, having however delayed to concert 
the necessary arrangements for that purpose with Colonel Scott, 

— it became my duty to accelerate the adoption of those measures 

for the defence of your Excellency’s dominions, which daily 
became more Een It would have been highly gratifying 
to me, if your Excellency’s activity on this occasion had becn 
proportioned to the exigency of the case, or to the earnestness 
and apparent candour of your own declarations ; but the respon- 
sibility in this case attaching, according to the stipulations of 
treaty, ‘solely on the Company I could not have been justified 
by any consideration, in suspending the measures incumbent on 
the Company’s Government. 
! On these grounds I determined early in the month of November 
last, to introduce immediately into your Excellency’s dominions 
as great a proportion as possible, of the force which I deemed 
necessary to their effectual and permanent defence, in addition 
to the Company’s troops already stationed in Oude. 

I communicated this determination to your Excellency, in 
a Ictter written on the 5th of November, and forwarded by me 
to Licutenant-Coloncl Scott. 

Before Lieut.-Colonel Scott could deliver this letter, your Ex- 
cellency had made a proposition to him, which, as he conceived, 
precluded the necessity of presenting any Icttcr to you; and 
accordingly it was not delivered until your Excellency thought 
proper to recall the proposition in question. 

In the meanwhile the additional troops which I had deter- 

mined to send into your Excellency’s dominions, continued to 
assemble for that purpose; because in every event the necessity 
of the intended reinforcements must have remained unalterable, 
. The proposition of your Excellency, to which I have adverted 
was, that you should abdicate the government of your dominions, 
and, appropriating to your private usc all the treasures of the 
state, retire from Lucknow. You signified at the same time, 
a desire that once of your sons should be substituted on the 
Musnud. / 


198 YOU PROPOSE TO ABDICATE; THEN. RETRACT. 


V Lieutenant-Colonel Scott remonstrated against your Excel- 
lency’s declared resolution to abdicate the government; but 
your Excellency persisted, and finally enjoined him to communi- 
cate it to me, as the result of your deliberate consideration 

This unexpected determination of your Excellency, although 
it induced Lieutenant-Colonel Scott to withhold my letter of 
the 5th of November, until further orders from me, did not 
prevent him from occasionally pressing upon your consideration 
the subject of the reform of your military establishment. Your 
Excellency however, invariably evaded the discussion by de- 
claring, that under the resolution which you had announced of, 
abdicating the government, it was totally unnecessary to proceed 
at present in the proposed reform. 1 

Your Excellency has been in possession for some time past, 
of a formal and detailed answer from .me (authenticated by my 
signature) to your declaration of your resolution to abdicate the 
sovereignty of your dominions. To the arguments by which 
I endeavoured to modify your Excellency’s original plan of 
abdication, and(to the terms on which I declared mysclf willing 
to facilitate your retirement from the cares of your government, 
(the administration of which you have acknowledged yourself 
to be utterly unequal to conduct,) your Exccllency has not yet 
returned any reply;\(you have decmed it sufficient to signify 
to Lieutenant-Colonel Scott, that under my determination not 
to admit your Excellency’s proposition in the terms stated by 
yourself, you were ready to abandon your design of retirement, 
and to retain the charge of the government}; supporting this 
apparently new resolution on general grounds of justice to your 
family (I will not at present enquire whether means might not 
still be devised for securing ample justice to your family, without 
reducing your Excellency to the painful and dangerous necessity 
of continuing in a station, the dutics of which you have declared 
yourself to be incompetent to fulfil, and of governing a pcople 
whom you have declared ‘neither pleased with you, nor you with 
them; with whose evil dispositions, cnmity, disobedience and 
negligence, you are disgusted; and from whose government 
your mind is utterly withdrawn.’ 

Having requested your Excellency to return a formal and 
precise answer to my detailed obscrvations and proposals, in 
consequence of your Excellency’s declared wish to abdicate the 
government, I shall abstain from entcring into any minute ex- 
amination of the nature of the Subsequent change in your Excel- 


WAS NOT THE QFFER A FEINT, TO SHIRK MY PLAN, 199 


lency’s mind, until I shall be furnished in a regular manner, with 
an explicit statement of the motives which induced that change. 
I must however remark, that every circumstance accompanying 
your Excellency’s conduct, which has hitherto fallen under my 
observation, on this extraordinary occasion, appears to me to 
indicate that your Excellency never previously entertained the 
design of abdicating your government, however convinced of the 
truth of those incontestible facts which you alleged as the mo- 
tives of your abdication, but that you professed such a design 
with the sole view of defeating by delay, the long meditated 
measure of a reform of your military establishment.) 

[ It is most painful to be compelled to state a charge of so 
serious a nature, against a person of your Excellency’s high rank 
and exalted dignity; but what other conclusion can I draw from 
your Exccllency’s conduct, when Licutenant-Colonel Scott in- 
forms me, that after you had engaged his attention and mine for 
nearly two months, by your ostensible intention to abdicate the 
government, you suddenly relinquished that intention, and at 
the same moment declared for the first time, that if ‘the reform 
of your military establishments were to be adopted on the prin- 
ciples proposed, it would annihilate your Excellency’s authority 
in your own dominions,’ although not only the general principles, 
but all the material details of that reform, to which you now 
object, had been repeatedly approved by your Excellency, as 
being essential to the maintenance of your authority, and indis- 
pensable to the peace and safety of your dominions. | 

- But your Excellency has proceeded to other measures of a 
tendency infinitely more dangerous, utterly incompatible with 
all your professions, and repugnant to the fundamental principles 
of your connection with the Company, and to every duty of 
friendship and honourable alliance, 

Licutenant-Colonel Scott informs me,‘that your Excellency, 
instcad of affording any cordial assistance for devising and 
carrying into execution a plan for the dismission of your bat- 
talions/ has thrown every possible impediment in the way of that 
measure, by endeavouring to restrict the additional British force 
to one position and by delaying to furnish Licutenant-Colonel 
Scott with the statements of your military establishments re* 
Peatedly required, and absolutely necessary to the commence- 
ment of the undertaking.J 

Licutenant-Colonel Scott informs me, that your Excellency 
is equally desirous |of impeding the progress of the additional 


200° CEASE, IN TIME, TO KICK AGAINST THE PRICKS. 


British troops, by exposing them to difficulties in obtaining supplies 
of provisions; to prove this intention on the part of your Ex- 
cellency, Lieutenant-Colonel Scott states, that although he had 
repeatedly applied to your Excellency for the necessary pur- 
wannahs to your several aumils, your Excellency had not yet 
issued a single purwannah ; the consequence of which was likely 
to prove not only seriously distressing to the British troops 
destined to the protection of your dominions, but dangerous to 
the peace of the country through which those troops proposed 
to march, 

It is impossible for me to express in terms of sufficient force, 

the sentiments which this intelligence has occasioned in my 
mind. : 
The conduct of your Excellency in both instances stated, but 
more flagrantly in the last{is of a nature so unequivocally hostile, 
and may prove so injurious to every interest, both of your 
Excellency and of the Company, that your perseverance in so 
dangerous a course, will leave me no other alternative than that 
of considering all amicable engagements between the Company 
and your Excellency to be dissolved, and of regulating my 
subsequent procecdings accordingly, I am however, always 
inclined to hope that your Excellency may have been inadvert- 
ently betrayed into these imprudent and unjustifiable measures 
by the insidious suggestions of evil councillors, and being ever 
averse to construe your Excellency’s actions in such a manner 
as must compel me to regard and to treat you as a Prince no 
longer connected with the Company, by the tics of amity and of 
a common interest ; I trust that my next accounts from Licu- 
tenant-Colonel Scott{may enable me to view your Excellency’s 
conduct in a more favourable light, but Iest my wishes in this 
respect should be disappointed, it is my duty to warn your 
Excellency in the most unreserved terms, that your Excellency 
alone will be responsible for all the evils which cannot fail to 
result from any further perseverance in the fatal and imprudent 
course of measures which you have recently pursued. I also 
think it necessary to entreat your Excellency not to delay for 
a moment, whatever further steps may be pointed out to 
you by Lieutenant-Coloncl Scott, as necessary to effect the 
two urgent and indispensable objects; namely, the reform of 
your military establishment, and the provision of funds for 
the a monthly payment of all the Company’s troops in 
Oude. 


NABOB’S BURDEN TOO HEAVY FOR HIM TO BEAR, ROL 


The least omission or procrastination in either of those im- 
portant points, must lead to the most serious mischief. 
MORNINGTON. 


32. The Marquess Wellesley to Lt.-Col. William Scott, 
Resident at Lucknow. 


Project of partial- or total-cession of the Nabob Visicr’s 


territories to the Company. 


Fort William, January 22nd, 180r. 
Sir, 

1. Having reviewed the series of your correspondence since 
the commencement of the reform of his Excellency the Vizier’s 
‘military establishments, my attention has been particularly 
directed to the declaration made by his Excellency in his Ictter 
to you of the 29th of Jummad us Sani, relative to a probability 
of a failure on his Excellency’s part, in providing the necessary 
funds for the regular payment of the additional troops furnished 
within the last year for the defence of his Excellency’s do- 
minions, J ; 

2.Jf the alarming crisis be now approaching in which his 
Excellency can no longer fulfil his public engagements to the 
Company, this calamity must be imputed principally to his 
Excellency’s neglect of my repeated advice and carnest repre- 
sentations.| The course of your correspondence manifests that 
the exertion of his Excellency in the reform of his own useless, 
dangcrous,:and expensive military cstablishments, especially of 
his cavalry, has by no means kept pace with my cfforts, to 
place the sccurity of his Excellency’s person and government 
beyond the reach of forcign and domestic danger. The aug- 
mented charges arising from the additional British force specified 
in the despatch to you from the Sccretary in the Secret De- 
partment of the 5th of November, 1799, would have been amply 
provided for by the amount of the reductions which might have 
been effected in his Exccllency’s establishment, if his Excellency 
had vigorously and cordially co-operated with me in the salutary 
and economical measure of disbanding his own undisciplined, 
licentious, and disaffected troops, } 

3. Iam perfectly satisfied that every exertion has been em- 
ployed by you to accelerate the exccution of my orders, and that 
his Excellency’s systematic counteraction is the sole cause of the 


202 THE RESULT OF HIS OBSTRUCTION OF GENERAL REFORM. 


delays which have arisen; his Excellency having, to my know- 
ledge, used every means within his power to frustrate the pro- 
gress of a reform which he himself had invited, and which he 
had declared to be indispensable to the security of his person, 
and to the prosperity of his dominions. 

4. The natural consequences of such a policy on the part of 
the Vizier are now necessarily felt by his Excellency ;\and it is 
now become the duty of the British Government to interpose 
effectually for the protection of his interests, as well as those 
of the Company, which are menaced with common and speedy 
destruction by the rapid decline of the general resources of his 
Excellency’s dominions. » 

5. The Vizier is already apprized that I have Jong lamented 
the various defects of the system by which the affairs of his 
Excellency’s Government are administered. Conscious‘ of the 
same defects, his Excellency has repeatedly expressed a wish to 
correct them by the assistance of the British Government. I 
have never been indifferent to his Excellency’s wishes on this 
subject, or insensible of the urgent necessity of an effectual 
change in the administration of the affairs of Oude ; but circum- 
stances, well known to you, have hitherto prevented me from 
executing all the dictates of my duty with respect to that dis- 
tressed country, and have compelled me to limit my efforts to a 
partial reform of his Excellency’s military establishments ; pro- 
viding for the security of his Exccllency’s dominions and govern- 
ment to the extent of furnishing an efficient and respectable force 
for their defence and support, and of commencing a proportionate 
reduction in his Excellency’s military establishments. , 

6. It was always evident that these precautions must prove 
fruitless if the defects in the civil administration of Oude should 
be suffered progressively to impair the fundamental resources of 
the state. [The continuance of the present system for a much 
longer period of time will not only render his Excellency unable 
to discharge the subsidy on account of the additional troops, but 
will exhaust the resources of the country to such a degree as to 
preclude the possibility of realizing the former subsidy:) 

4. The causes of this increasing defalcation of revenue are 
manifest, and daily acquire new strength. Had the territories of 
Oude been subject to the frequent or occasional devastations of 
an enemy, had they been visited by unfavourable seasons, or by 
other calamities which impair the public prosperity, the tapid 
decline of the Vizier’s revenues might be imputed to other causes 


WE MUST INTERPOSE, TO SECURE BETTER GOVERNMENT, 203 


than a defective administration ; but no such calamitous visita- 
tions have afflicted the province of Oude, while, in consequence 
of the protection which it derives from the presence of the British 
forces, it has been maintained, together with all the Company's 
possessions on this side of India in the uninterrupted enjoyment 
of peace. A defective administration of the government is, 
thercfore, the only cause which can have produced so marked a 
difference between the state of his Excellency’s dominions and 
that of the contiguous territorics of the Company. While the 
territorics of the Company have been advancing progressively 
during the last ten years in prosperity, population, and opulence, 
the dominions of the Vizier, although enjoying equal advantages 
of tranquillity and sccurity, have rapidly and progressively 
declined.| 

8. The operation of these evils has not commenced with the 
government of Saadut Ali; they necessarily flow from the 
system of administration which existed at the pcriod of his 
Excellency’s accession to the Musriud. But nonc of these evils 
have been diminished under his Excellency’s government} on 
the contrary, their daily increase and aggravation are notorious, 
and must be progressive, to the utter ruin of the resources of 
Oude, unless the vicious system of the native administration of 
the country be immediately abandoned] In place of inveterate 
and growing abuscs must be substituted a wise and benevolent 
plan of government, calculated to inspire the people with confi- 
dence in the security of property and of life; to encourage 
industry; to protect the fruits of honest labour; and to estab- 
lish order and submission to the just authority of the State, on 
the solid foundations of gratitude for benefits received, and 
expectation of continual security. 

g. The Vizicr must now be prepared for the active and de- 
cided interference of the British Government in the affairs of 
his country. His Excellency has repeatedly complained to me, 
and to the British Resident at his Court, of the ruinous condition 
of the internal government of Oude; he has repeatedly and 
earnestly solicited my direct interference, and has declared such 
interference to be indispensably necessary for the purpose of 
effecting a complete reform in his affairs. [In the month of 
November, 1799, his Excellency was so convinced of the in- 
curable defects of his government and of his own utter inability 
to administer it, that he signified to me, in the most formal 
manner, his deliberate determination to descend from the 


204 ONLY TRUE REMEDY—BRITISH RULE IN OUDE. 


Musnud, and to return into private life., He solemnly avowed 
(not ina moment of temporary anxiety and vexation, but after the 
most deliberate reflection)‘ that his mind was utterly withdrawn 
from the government of a people who were neither pleased with 
him nor he with them, and with whose evil dispositions, enmity, 
disobedience, and negligence he was completely disgusted.’ This 
resolution, so deliberately adopted, was suddenly abandoned, but . 
the cause of so sudden a change in his Excellency’s resolution 
cannot, unfortunately, be traced to any improvement in the 
general administration of his affairs, to any augmentation of his 
means of conducting the Government, or to the consequent 
establishment of reciprocal confidence and attachment between 
his Excellency and his people. Could any other fact be alleged 
to favour such an inference it would be totally precluded by his 
Excellency’s recent statement of the condition of his revenues, 
, and by recent and aggravated symptoms of the most alarming 
' disaffection towards his person and government. 

10, His Excellency’s life has been latcly attempted under 
circumstances of the most formidable description.’ Active and 
general support has been afforded by his subjects to the impostor 
who lately assumed the name of\Vizier Ali) and the acknow- 
ledged temper of his Excellency’s people, combined with the 
state of his government, exposes his situation every hour to 
increased anxiety, embarrassment, and hazard 

11. Having maturely considered these circumstances with the 
attention_and deliberation which the importance of the subject 
requires, am satisfied that no effectual security can be provided 
against the ruin of the province of Oude, until the exclusive 
management of the civil and military government of that country 
shall be transferred to the Company, under suitable provi- 
sions for the maintenance of his Excellency and of his family. 
No other remedy can effect any considerable improvement in the 
resources of the state, or can ultimately sccure its external safety 
and internal peace? 

12, Under this conviction, and with a view to the preservation 
of the common interests of the Company and of the Vizier, U 
have determined to propose to his Excellency a new treaty and 
arrangement similar \to that concluded in November, 1799, 
between the Company and his Highness the Rajah of Tanjore; 
and also conformable to the plan of the treaty proposed to his 
Excellency by me, in my letter of the gth of February, 1800, at 
the period of his Excellency’s proposcd abdication of the 


OR, WE MUST HAVE CESSIONS EQUAL TO SUBSIDY. 205 


Government. A copy of the treaty with the Rajah of Tanjore 
is enclosed ; I desire that you will frame frqm the articles of that 
treaty, and from the.treaty submitted to the Vizier in the month 
of December, 1799,\the plan of such an arrangement, as, while it 
shall effectually secure all the political benefits described in the 
eighth paragraph of this despatch, shall also consult, as far as 
may be compatible with that primary object, the inclinations and 
prejudices of the Vizier. Having framed such a treaty, you will 
submit it to ,his Excellency, and at the same time you will 
earnestly exhort him to consider the propositions contained in 
the new arrangement with calm and dispassionate deliberation. | 

13. If his Excellency should manifest a disposition_to adopt 
the general frame of the proposed arrangement, but should appear 
desirous of introducing any particular modifications into the pro- 
posed treaty, you will receive whatever propositions his Excel- 
lency may offer for that purpose, and you will communicate them 
to me without delay, adding such observations as may occur to 
you for my further information.' 

14. On the other hand, if his Excellency should unfortunately 
be persuaded by the intcrested councils of evil advisers abso- 
lutely to reject the proposed treaty, |you will then procced to 
inform his Excellency in firm, but respectful language, that the 
funds for the regular payment of the subsidy to the full extent of 
the augmented force must be placed, without a moment of delay, 
beyond the hazard of failure. 

15. For this purpose you will require his Excellency to make 
a cession to the Company in perpetual sovercignty of such a 
portion of his territorics as shall be fully adcquate, in their present 
impoverished condition, to defray those indispensable charges,] 
This cession must be framed upon the same principle which has 
formed the basis of the late treaty between his Highness the 
Soubahdar of the Deccan and the Company, by which his 
Highness has ccded to the Company in full sovercignty, a 
country rated at the annual revenue of sixty-two lacs of rupees 
in commutation fora subsidy of about forty lacs of rupees, 

16. With respect to the countrics to be ceded, it is sufficiently 
evident that no other portion of the Vizicr’s dominions possesses 
so many political advantages as would be-dcrived to the Com- 
pany from the possession of the Doab. \The cession of that 
province, including the tribute from Furruckabad, must therefore 
be required in the first instance. In selecting the other districts 
which may be necessary (after deducting the charges of collection) 


206 WHAT DISTRICTS TO BE THUS CEDED, AND WHY, 


to complete the amount of the augmented subsidy it will be ad- 
visable to regulate the demand in such a manner as shall place 
the Vizier beyond the reach of foreign connections and foreign 
dangers. For this purpose the new posscssions of the Company 
should be so arranged as to surround whatever territory may 
remain to his Biecelicncy: With this view [the country to be 
required, *in addition to the Doab, must be Ronen The 
cession of these two provinces may be made with less violence to 
the pride and prejudices of the Vizier, inasmuch as they were 
actually added to the possessionsGof his family by the British 
arms. 4 In this respect the arrangement proposed to the Vizier is 
similar to that concluded with the Nizam.) The greater part of 
the countries ceded to the Company by the Nizam having been 
originally acquired from the power of Mysore by the assistance 
of the Company. 

17. If the present produce of these two provinces, after deduct- 
ing the charges of collection, should be deemed unequal to the 
amount of subsidy to be defrayed, the deficiency must be sought 
in the |countries bordering on the district of Juanpoor ; and for 
this purpose either Azimghur or Goruckpoor, or both, must be 
required./ 

18. Under such an arrangement, the territorics which would 
remain to the Vizier would probably be sufficiently protected by 
the position which the Company’s troops would necessarily 
occupy for the defence of the ceded countries ; and no division of 
military force would be required for the express purpose of pro- 
tecting the Vizier’s territory. \The continuance, however, of a 
regiment of native infantry at Lucknow might be cxpcdient as a 
protection to the person of the Vizier, and a security for the 
peace of the City. Ifat any time the state of his Exccllency’s 
remaining territories should require the presence of any part of 
the British force, you would be empowered to issuc the requisite 
orders for that purpose. _ 

19. If the Vizier should manifest a disposition to accede to 
the first proposal, contained in the eleventh paragraph of this 
despatch, the transfer of the government will be considcrably 
facilitated by the early adoption of effectual measures for the 
purpose of conciliating the minds of all persons whose interests 
or personal consideration may. be affected by the dissolution of 
the existing government. \ With this view, it will be proper that 
suitable stipends or pensions should be scttled on the principal 
nobles and officers at present dependent on the Court of Lucky 


HOW TO RECONCILE THE PEOPLE TO TOTAL CESSION, 207 


now, as well as on all military officers of rank and particularly 
on those of the cavalry, who may lose their employments in con- 
sequence of the change of government, or of the reduction of the 
actual military establishments of Oude. Accordingly you will 
state for my information and ultimate orders your sentiments 
with regard to the persons for whom it may be expedient and 
just to provide; and you will suggest the amount and mode of 
the provision to be made for the several classes or descriptions of 
claimants. In the meanwhile, if the state of the negotiation 
with the Vizier for the relinquishment of the civil and military 
administration of his dominions, according to the plan of the 
Treaty of Tanjore, should require your attention to the object of 
providing for individuals before you can reccive any detailed in- 
structions from me on the subject, you will promulgate, in the 
most distinct manner, such general and particular assurances, in 
the name of the British Government, as shall appear to you 
calculated to tranquillize the minds of those affected by the change 
of the administration. 

20. In considering the measures to be adopted with the 
vicws stated in the preceding paragraph, it will occur to you 
that no proceeding can be more calculated to conciliate all de- 
scriptions and classes of pcople, than a liberal attention to the 
religious establishments and charitable foundations of the country. 
T accordingly authorize you in the case supposed to take the 
neccessary steps for affording to the people of Oude the most 
ample satisfaction on this subject ; and I desire that you will 
furnish me with a statement of such public endowments, of both 
the Hindoo and Mahommedan religion as you may propose to 
confirm or to extend. 

Tam, &c. 
WELLESLEY, 


33. To the Honourable the Secret Committee of the 
Honourable the Court of Directors. 


Advantages secured by the Treaty with the Nabob Visier, Ap- 
potntment of the\EIon, Henry Wellesley as temporary Commis- 
sioner in Oude! 

On the Ganges, near Benares, 
November 14, 1801. 

Honourable Sirs, 

1. I have the honour to transmit to you a copy of a treaty 
concluded by Mr, IIenry Wellesley, and Licut.-Colonel Scott, 


208 ADVANTAGES TO THE COMPANY FROM THE TREATY. 


with his Excellency the Nawaub Vizier, on the 1oth instant, at 
Lucknow, and ratified by my authority on this day.) 

2. The various discussions which have taken place during the 
administration of my two immediate predecessors relative to the 
state and condition of the interests of the Company in Oude, 
combined with the documents which have already been submitted 
to your honourable Committee, on the same subject during my 
administration, hvill render the general policy and objects of this 
treaty sufficiently manifest to your wisdom and experience. It 
is however my intention, by the Mornington Packet now under 
despatch to transmit to you a detailed statement of the means 
which I have employed to accomplish this important arrangement, 
and of the beneficial consequences which I expect to derive from 
it to various branches of your affairs, | 

3. By the present despatch, I shall content myself with re- 
questing your attention to some of the leading advantages ob- 
tained by the successful issue of this measure. 

4. The treaty effectually secures the reduction of the Nawaub 
Vizier’s military establishments within such limits as may be 
deemed sufficiently contracted to effect the entire extinction of 
his military power. 

5. Your honourable Committee is already apprized that a con- 
siderable progress has been made during the past year in the 
reduction of his Excellency’s army;,the third article of this 
treaty will accelerate the completion of that salutary reform, 
while it will afford perpetual security against the revival of a 
similar danger. ) 

6.\In the place of his Excellency’s irregular and precarious 
military power, is substituted such a British force as may be 
deemed adequate to our defence in that quarter in India) while the 
operation of this treaty exonerates the British Government from 
the obligation of maintaining any definite or specificd number of 
troops in the province of Oude, the Company being charged with 
the general defence of the Vizier’s dominions, and being relicved 
from all special engagement with regard to the description of 
amount of the force to be employed for that purpose 

7. A considerable augmentation is made in the amount of the 
subsidy for the purpose of embracing the expenses of the army 
to be maintained on our north-western frontier,{in the ceded dis- 
tricts, and in those reserved to the Vizier as well as the charges 
of administering justice, and of managing the revenuc through 
the channel of the Company’s servants. 


WELFARE OF THE PEOPLE OF OUDE PROMOTED BY IT. 209 


8. The payment of the subsidy no longer rests on the faith of 
the native government of Oude, nor is subject to be affected by 
the corruption, imbecility and abuse of that vicious and incorri- 
gible system of vexation and misrule. 

g. The security of the subsidy is now established on the solid 
foundation of territorial possession, and the result of all accounts 
which I have been able to obtain, warrants a confident expecta- 
tion, that under the wise and benevolent administration of the 
British Government\ the territories ceded by this treaty will 
prove more productive, in a considerable degree than they are 
represented to be in the statement of Jummah, contained in the 
first article of the treaty. 

ro, In addition to these advantages, your honourable Committee 
must derive great satisfaction from reflecting that the British 
Government under this treaty will become the instrument of re- 
storing to affluence and prosperity one of the most fertile regions 
of the globe, now reduced to a condition of the most afflicting 
miscry and desolation by the depraved administration of the 
native government of Oude. ' 

11, Since my departure from the Presidency, I have enjoyed 
frequent opportunities of contemplating|the bencfits diffused by 
the operation of the British system of government, over every 
part of the flourishing and happy provinces which I have 
visited. I can, therefore, declare my conscientious conviction, that 
no greater blessing can be conferred on the native inhabitants 
of India, than the extension of the British authority, influence 
and power. 

12, The authority of the Nawaub of Oude was sustained ex- 
clusively by his connection with the Company’s government, and 
the reputation and honour of the British nation in India, were 
deeply involved in the operation of that authority on the welfare 
and happiness of those countrics over which it was upholden by 
the terror of our name, or cxercised by the immediate force of 
our arms, i: Your | honourable Committee will, therefore, deem 
it natural, that, having frequently been reduced to the painful 
necessity of applying the influence of the British name, and the 
power of the British sword to the maintenance of a system so 
disgraceful in its principles, and ruinous in its effects, I should 
feel a considerable degree of satisfaction in substituting for such 
an administration, the salutary influence of those regulations and 
laws, of which I have recently witnessed and admired the prac 
tical wisdom and extensive benevolence. 

P 


» 


210 SPECIAL APPOINTMENT OF MR. H. WELLESLEY, AND WHY, 


13. Your honourable Committee will further remark that by 
the operation of the sixth article of the treaty, [the Company’s 
government has reserved the positive right of interference in the 
internal management of that part of the country retained by the 
Nabob Vizier, and you may be assured of my unremitting en- 
deavours to exercise this right to such an extent as shall afford 
every practicable degree of security for the lives and properties 
of the Vizier’s remaining subjects, and shall preclude any disturb- 
ance of the peace. and good order of our dominions from the 
vicinity of his Excellency’s administration. 

14.\It is my intention to proceed immédiately to vest the ad- 
ministration of the ceded districts in the hands of the Company’s 
civil servants./ This measure appears to me to be indispensably 
necessary for the purpose of securing all the important objects of 
the new arrangement. “I shall not however attempt to form any 
settlement of the revenues, or to introduce any spécial code of 
regulations and laws, until sufficient time shall have been afforded 
for ascertaining the resources of the country, and for investigating 
the local customs, usages, manners and dispositions of its inhabit- 
ants. The immediate introduction of the Company’s civil servants 
in the administration of all the details of the government in all 
its branches will operate as an effectual control upon such native 
officers and agents as it may be necessary to retain provisionally, 
and ‘will facilitate the acquisition of that knowledge which 
must constitute the foundation of a permanent settlement of the 
pare ; 
15. The peculiar character of the people of the ceded districts, 
and the obstacles which the artifice and treachery of the Vizier 
or his dependants may be expected to oppose to th¢ final settle- 
ment of the country under the British Government wl require 
the constant presence of an active and vigorous authority, until 
the foundations of the new arrangements shall be firmly cstab- 
lished. It is, therefore, my intention to place Mr. Henry Wellcs- 
ley in the ceded districts for some time, with the most ample 
powers, for the purpose of settling the country, with the aid and 
assistance of such of the Company’s Civil servants as I have 
selected to co-operate with him in this arduous and salutary task. 

16.\ The discretion, temper, judgment, and firmness which 
Mr. Wellesley has manifested, in the principal conduct of the — 
negotiation with the. Vizier have becn the most efficient cause of . 
its speedy, prosperous, and tranquil issuc. These qualitics, com- 
bined with the authority which he naturally derives from his neat 


4 


LIEUT.-COL, SCOTT STILL RESIDENT AT LUCKNOW. 211 


connexion with me, have induced me to consider him to be the 
most useful instrument which I can employ on this occasion. 
In the course of a ycar, or possibly within a shorter period of. 
time, I trust that the settlement of the ceded districts may be so 
far advanced as to enable me to withdraw Mr. Wellesley, and 
to leave the administration of the country nearly in the same 
form as that of Benares, with such differences as may be required 
by the Beaty superior magnitude of the dominion ceded by this 
treaty. | 

17, In the progress of the important arrangement which I 
have introduced into Oude, I have frequently had occasion to 
applaud the zeal, diligence, and address of Licut.-Colonel Scott. 
Since Mr. Wellesley’s arrival at Lucknow, Lieut.-Colonel Scott’s 
unremitting exertion of the same qualities has had its full share 
in the success of the negotiation: and Mr. Wellesley has, in an 
official Ictter to me, stated his high sense of Lieut.-Colonel Scott’s 


_ merits and his public acknowledgment of his eminent services, 
: ‘T therefore propose to leave Lieut.-Colonel Scott in the Re- 


2 


sidency at the Vizier’s Court, in which situation considerable 
talents, knowledge, and vigilance, will be required for the pur- 
pose of securing the timely accomplishment and continucd effect 
of the stipulations of the treaty relative to the territorics retained 
in the Vizier’s hands. 

T have the honour to be, 

Honourable Sirs, your's, &c. 
WELLESLEY. 


) 


V. MAHRATTAS. 


1, ENGLISH INTERVENTION. 


84, The Marquess Wellesley to the Secret Committee of the 
Honourable Court of Directors. 


The Crisis at Poonah, and the Governor-General’s views and 
action in consequence. 
Fort William, Dec. 24, 1802. 
Honourable Sirs, 

1. Your honourable Committee will receive by tha*ships 
which remain to be despatched to England from Bengal in the 
course of the present scason, a detailed narrative of the events . 

P2 


212 MAHRATTAS TO JOIN DEFENSIVE ALLIANCE SYSTEM, 


and transactions in the Mahratta empire, which have terminated 
in a crisis of affairs among the Mahratta powers, highly in- 
teresting to the political relations of the British power in India. 
The same conveyance will furnish you with a detail of the 
negotiations conducted by the resident at Poonah, under my 
authority, with a view to the accomplishment of the important 
object of comprehending the Mahratta states in the general 
system of defensive alliance with the honourable Company and 
its allies, on the basis of the treaty concluded with his Highness 
the ‘Nizam, in the month of October, 1800, .Your honourable 
Committee will also receive by the same channel every docu- 
ment relative to the system of measures which I have deemed 
it necessary to adopt for the security and promotion of the 
British interests in the present crisis of the affairs of the 
Mahratta empire. 

2. I am anxious, however, to submit to your honourable Com- 
mittee, at the earliest practicable period of time, a summary 
view of these important occurrences, of the principles by which 
I have been governed in the course of policy which I have 
pursued, and of my expectations with regard to the final result 
of the actual crisis of affairs in India. 

3. The annexed copy of the instructions of the Governor- 
General in council, to the resident at Poonah, under date 
June 23, 1802, (A.) contains a review of the conduct and dis- 
position of the State of Poonah towards the British Government, 
since the commencement of my administration, down to that 
period of time. 

4.LUnder those instructions, the resident at Poonah renewed 
the negotiations for the conclusion of an improved system of 
alliance with that Court. The increased distractions in the 
Mahratta state, the rebellion of Jeswunt Row Holkar (illegiti- 
mate son and successor of the late Tuckojee Holkar) against 
the combined forces of the Peishwa and Scindiah, appeared to 
constitute a crisis of affairs favourable to the succcss of our 
negotiations at Poonah. ° 

5. In the course of the discussions which ensued between the 
Resident and the court of Poonah, the Pcishwa manifested a 
solicitude to contract defensive engagements with the honourable 
Company, under circumstances of more apparent sincerity than 
had matked his conduct on any former occasion. {The Pcishwa, 
however,continued to withhold his conscnt to any admissible 

. ’ modification of the Governor-General’s propositions, until Jcs- 


PEISHWA’S LA TE, DESPERATE, & WAVERING ASSENT TO IT. 213° 


wunt Row Holkar, at the head of a formidable army, actually 
arrived in the vicinity of Poonah. The superiority of Jeswunt 
Row Holkar’s troops in number and discipline to those of the 
Peishwa and Dowlut Row Scindiah, rendered the issue of any 
contest nearly certain. The Peishwa, however, anticipated equal 
difficulty and hazard, and equal disgrace to his authority, in the 
success of either party. Nor was the menaced usurpation of 
Jeswunt Row Holkar more formidable to the Peishwa than the 
alternative, of the revival and confirmation of the ascendancy of 
Scindiah :| whose troops composed the greater proportion of the 
army destined to oppose the progress of Jeswunt Row Holkar, 

6.S;Under these circumstances the Peishwa, on the 14th of 
October, despatched his printipal minister to the British Re- 
sident, charged with definitive proposals for the conclusion of 
defensive and subsidiary engagements with the British Govern- 
ment.) Those proposals are detailed in the annexed memorial 
marked B. During the discussions which ensued on the basis 
of those propositions, the evasive conduct of the Peishwa excited 
considerable doubts of his sincerity, even at that stage of the 
negotiation; and on the 24th of October,’‘when the army of 
Jeswunt Row Holkar had arrived within a few miles of Poonah, 
the Pcishwa despatched a deputation to that chicftain with 
distinct proposals for an accommodation, which Jeswunt Row 
Holkar rejected. At the instance of the Pcishwa, Suddasheo 
Bhow, the commander of the combined forces of the Pcishwa 
and Scindiah, had previously marched with the army under his 
command from Poonah, and had occupicd a position in the 
vicinity of Jeswunt Row Holkar’s camp.| On the morning of 
the 25th the two armics engaged, and on the same day, with a 
view to be prepared for every event, the Peishwa moved from 
Poonah at the head of his remaining troops; and at the moment 
of marching sent his minister to the British Resident with a 
paper, of which a translation is annexcd to this despatch (C). 
The minister Ragonath Row offered to the British Resident 
the fullest assurances of the Pcishwa’s intention and meaning, 
that a gencral definitive alliance should be concluded and carried 
into effect at the earliest practicable period of time, between 
hhis Highness and the honourable Company, on the fundamental 
principles, and in conformity to the system of opcration detailed 
in the paper to which this paragraph refers. 

7.UIn consequence of this transaction, the British Resident 
judged it to be expcdient to suggest to the Right Honourable 


214 WELLESLEY SEES A PEACEFUL WAY TO HIS OBfECT. 


the Governor of Fort St. George, and to the Honourable the 
Governor of Bombay, the necessity of preparing a body of 
troops, under the authority of those presidencies respectively, 
for the eventual support of the Peishwa’s government, and for 
the protection of his person. The Resident at Poonah trans- 
mitted a similar application to the Resident at Hyderabad, for 
the eventual services of a considerable detachment from the 
subsidiary force stationed with his Highness the Nizam. 

8. The engagement between the combined army of the 
Peishwa and Scindiah, and that commanded by Jeswunt Row 
Holkar terminated in the total defeat of the combined army, 
‘with great loss. At the close of the action, the Peishwa retired 
with a small body of cavalry to a fortress in the vicinity of 
Poonah, whence he prosecuted his march towards the Concan. 
\The city of Poonah remained in the charge of an officer in the 
service of the Peishwa, while Jeswunt Row Holkar continued to 
occupy a_camp at the distance of four miles from Poonah,) The 
primary jobject of Jeswunt Row Holkar was to obtain possession 
of the Peishwa’s person, and to compel his Highness to establish 
such an administration as might secure Jeswunt Row Holkar’s 
ascendancy in the state, to the exclusion of Dowlut Row Scin- 
diah’s influence. If this plan should fail, the next project of 
Jeswunt Row Holkar was to invite to Poonah, Amrut Row (son 
of the late Rugghoonaut Row, or Ragobah,) to place the son 
of Amrut Row on the musnud, and to invest Amrut Row with 
the office of prime minister, while Jeswunt Row Holkar should 
assume the general command of the troops of the staté 

g. This crisis of affairs appeared to me to afford the most 
favourable opportunity for the complete establishment of the 
interests of the British power in the Mahratta empire, without 
the hazard of involving us in a contest with any party. | The 
power of Jeswunt Row Holkar possessed no solid foundation in 
the justice of his cause, in popular opinion, or in the extent of 
political or military resource.| It could not be doubted that 
Scindiah would employ every effort to retrieve the disgrace, and 
to avert the danger of his recent defeat. The continuation of 
the contest between those chieftains would probably weaken the 
power, and impair the resources of both, and would afford to the 
British Government an opportunity of interposing its influence 
and mediation for the restoration of the Pcishwa’s just authority, 
under terms calculated to secure our rclations with the Mah- 
ratta empire, on the basis of a gencral defensive alliance and 


BY RESTORING THE PEISHWA, WITH SCINDIAH’S AID, 215 


reciprocal guarantee, both with the Peishwa and with Dowlut Row 
Scindiah, according to the principles of the treaty of Hyderabad, 
concluded in October, 1800. No reasonable apprehension existed 
that the progress of this system of policy would be obstructed, 
either by the union of the contending parties, or by the decisive 
success of either chieftain; nor indeed could I apprehend any 
combined or separate opposition from either in the prosecution 
of my views, 

10. Under these considerations, I confirmed the engagement 
concluded between the Peishwa and the Resident at Poonah, on 
the day on which I received it, and I accordingly instructed the 
Resident to signify to his Highness my ratification of that 
engagement, and my resolution to employ every effort of the 
British power for the restoration of his authority. The British 
Resident was also instructed to direct his attention, to the im- 
provement of the terms of the proposed alliance, by endea- 
vouring to obtain the Peishwa’s consent to those stipulations, 
which his Highness had hitherto rejected, and to such additional 
concessions as appeared to be expedient for the better security 
and improvement of the British interests in that quarter of 
India ;\ and the Resident was further directed to avail himself 
of the earliest opportunity of reducing the proposed conditions 
of alliance to the form of a definitive treaty. | At the same time 
I transmitted instructions to the Governors of Fort St. George 
and Bombay, and to the resident at Ilydcerabad, confirming the 
requisition of the Resident at Poonah, for assembling troops at 
the proposed stations, with a view to fulfil the engagements con- 
cluded with the Pcishwa. Desirous of comprehending the prin- 
cipal branches of the Mahratta empire in a general system of 
defensive alliance and guarantce, on the basis of the cngage- 
ments so happily concluded with his Highness the Nizam, in 
October, 1800, I determined to combine with the measures to 
be adopted for the restoration of the Pcishwa, the renewal of 
my invitation to Dowlut Row Scindiah to partake the benefits 
of the defensive alliance; and I accordingly instructed the 
Resident at Scindiah’s Court to proceed from Futtchgur to that 
chicftain’s camp with the utmost practicable expedition, for the 
purpose of concerting with Scindiah the means of restoring the 
Peishwa to the musnud, and of proposing to Scindiah the terms 
under which that chicftain might be admitted to the benefit 
of the gencral defensive engagements concluded with the) 
Peishwa. 


216 THE PEISHWA’S FLIGHT. VIEWS & CONDUCT OF HOLKAR. 


11. -The details of the measures to be adopted for the com- 
pletion of our engagements to the Peishwa were necessarily 
confided to the direction and judgment of the Resident at 
Poonah; but that officer was instructed to adopt every prac- 
ticable precaution to preclude every risk of hostilities between 
the British troops and those of Jeswunt Row Holkar, and to 
endeavour to secure the accomplishment of our views by the 
means of amicable negotiation. 

12. In the actual state of the affairs of the Mahratta empire, 
it would have been a measure of indispensable precaution to 
have assembled a considerable army of observation upon the 
frontier of the Mahratta territories. This important considera- 
tion, combined with the communication which the right honour- 
able the Governor of Fort St. George had received from the 
Resident at Poonah, of the progress of our negotiation with the 
Peishwa, had induced his Lordship to issue orders for assembling 
a considerable army within the ceded districts, without awaiting 
the arrival of my instructions for that purpose. The honourable 
the Governor of Bombay pursued the same wise and salutary 
course of vigilance and prudence, by placing in a state of pre- 
paration, for immediate service, the disposable force at that 
Presidency. A considerable detachment of the subsidiary force 
at Hyderabad was also directed by the Resident at Hyderabad 
to be prepared for eventual service in the ficld in conformity to 
the requisition of the Resident at Poonah. 

13. By advices received subsequently to the despatch of my 
instructions to the Resident at Poonah, and to the Governors 
of Fort St. George and Bombay, Q@ was informed that the 
Peishwa had effected his retreat to Mhar, a fort situated on the 
river of Bancoote in the Concan; and that Holkar now despaired 
of the success of his endcavours either to obtain the Peishwa’s 
voluntary return to Poonah, or to scize his Highness’s person, 
that Holkar had detached a force to Jcjoory (a fort situated in 
the vicinity of Poonah, and being the actual residence of Amrut 
Row), and had brought Amrut Row to Poonah with the inten- 
‘tion of investing Amrut Row with the gencral administration of 
affairs, and of placing the son of Amrut Row on the musnud, 
while Jeswunt Row Holkar proposed to assume the gencral 
command of the army of the state. To this arrangement I was 
further informed that Amrut Row was not disposed to accede ; 
I also received advice that the Peishwa had signified to the 
Government of Bombay, through the officers stationed at Ran- 


REASONS FOR RECEIVING THE PEISHWA AT BOMBAY, 217 


coote, a desire of eventually seeking an asylum at Bombay, and 
that his Highness had solicited the Government of Bombay to 
direct a ship to be prepared at Bancoote for his Highness’s con- 
veyance to Bombay or to Bassein, if such a measure should 
appear to be necessary for the safety of his person. The honour- 
able the Governor of Bombay complied with the latter applica- 
tion, by directing the ship Herculean to proceed to Bancoote, 
and to be prepared for the Peishwa’s eventual accommodation. 
The Resident at Poonah being apprized of these circumstances 
suggested to the Governor of Bombay the expediency of dis- 
couraging the Pcishwa from seeking an asylum within the British 
territory, until my sentiments and intentions with respect to the 
affairs of the Peishwa should be made known, and the Resident 
recommended that the Peishwa should be advised to maintain 
his position at Mhar to the latest possible period of time con- 
sistently with the safety of his Highness’s person. / 

14.'Under the determination which I had adopted of employ- 
ing every effort for the restoration of the Peishwa’s authority, 
and in the actual situation of the Peishwa’s affairs, it appeared to 
me to be extremely desirable that the Peishwa should imme- 
diately place himsclf under the protection of the British power 
by retiring to Bombay} I considered that this measure would 
preclude all hazard of precipitating hostilitics with Jeswunt Row 
Holkar, by any advance of the British troops for the protection 
of the Peishwa’s person, and would enable the British Govern- 
ment to open a negotiation with Jeswunt Row Holkar for the 
restoration of the Peishwa to the musnud of Poonah, under 
every circumstance of advantage. This event would also enable 
us to combine with our other measures, under great advantage, 
the proposed negotiation with Scindiah for the conclusion of 
defensive arrangements. It was obvious, also, that the Pcishwa’s 
arrival at Bombay would afford the most favourable opportu- 
nity for the adjustment of the terms of the definitive alliance 
with the Pcishwa on the basis of my original propositions, with 
the addition of such stipulations as might appear to be expedient 
with reference to the actual crisis of affairs. 

15. With these sentiments, I transmitted instructions to the 
Government of Bombay for the reception and accommodation 
of the Peishwa at that Presidency, and for regulating the conduct 
of that government in conformity to the measures which I had, 
resolved to adopt. 

16. Since the despatch of those instructions, I have received 


218 PEISHWA REPEATS HIS PLEDGE. HOLKAR COURTS THE ENGLISH. 


advices from Poonah stating, that, although Amrut Row con- 
tinues to be adverse to the arrangement proposed by Jeswunt 
Row Holkar, the affairs of government are conducted under the 
authority of Amrut Row’s name, and that a considerable force 
had been detached to the Concan with a view to seize the person 
of the Peishwa. By advices from Bombay it appeared that the 
Peishwa had availed himself of the offer of the ship Herculean, 
and had proceeded on that ship to a strong fort in the Concan, 
named Severndroog, where his person might probably be secure 
against the attempts of the usurper. 

17. The: despatches from Bombay further state that the 
Peishwa had formally recognized the engagements concluded 
between him and the British Resident, and had applied for a 
detachment of British troops in part of the stipulated subsidiary 
force, for the immediate protection of his person. 

18. By the latest accounts it appears that Dowlut Row Scin- 
diah is collecting his forces with a view of opposing Jeswunt Row 
Holkar, and that Scindiah has actually commenced his march 
from his capital of Ougein towards Poonah. 

19. Both Jeswunt Row Holkar and Amrut Row have employed 
every endeavour to induce the Resident at Poonah to continue at 
that city, manifestly with the view to obtain the countenance 
of the British Government in sanctioning the projected revolution 
in the government of the Mahratta empire. The Resident has 
prudently rejected every advance of this nature, and has per- 
sisted in his resolution to retire to Bombay, for which presi- 
dency he with difficulty obtaincd permission to depart on the 
28th ultimo. 

20. At the conferences holden by the Resident with Amrut 
Row and Jeswunt Row Holkar, on the eve of the Resident’s 
departure from Poonah, both those chieftains expressed their 
solicitude for the preservation of the friendship of the British 
Government, and directly and earnestly appealed to the Resident 
for his advice in the present situation of affairs. Jcswunt Row 
Holkar expressly intimated a wish for the mediation of the 
Resident, for the express purpose of effecting an accommodation 
with the Peishwa. The Resident informed Jeswunt Row Holkar 
that for this purpose it was indispensably neccssary that both 
parties should consent to refer their differences to the mediation 
of the British Government: but that the Resident could not 
undertake such mediation without the orders of the Governor- 
General. The Resident at the same time advised Amrut Row 


THE DISPUTANTS APPEAL TO US—-A HOPEFUL FACT. 219 


and Jeswunt Row Holkar to explain their views by a direct 
application to the Governor-General. At the Resident's final 
interview with Amrut Row, that chieftain delivered three letters 
to my address, one from himself, and the others from the persons 
who at present exercise the functions of ministers of the State. 
The purport of those letters is to solicit the countenance and 
support of the British Government by the appointment of a 
Resident in the place of Colonel Close, whose departure from 
Poonah to Bombay is represented by Amrut Row and his 
Ministers to be an abdication of his station of representative 
of the British Government at the Court of Poonah. 

21. Ihave also had the satisfaction to receive from Dowlut 
Row Scindiah a letter soliciting the continuance of the friend- 
ship of this Government towards his state and that of the Peishwa, 
and containing a request that I will act in concert with him in 
the present crisis of affairs at Poonah. 

22. Thisappeal to the British power from all parties concerned 
in the actual commotions of the Mahratta states, affords the 
most favourable opportunity for our successful and pacific 
mediation. 

23. In the present conjuncture of the affairs of the Mahratta 
empire, your honourable Committce will remark that the British 
Government must either persevere in its pacific and equitable 
efforts for the restoration of the Peishwa’s authority, or must 
abandon all hope consistently with our faith, honour, or per- 
manent interests of concluding with any of the Mahratta statcs, 
those defensive engagements, which are essential to the complcte 
consolidation of the British empire in India, and to the future 
tranquillity of Hindostan. 

24. Reviewing the gencral state of affairs in the Mahratta 
empire, I entertain a confident expectation of the complete 
accomplishment of all our views, and of the restoration of 
tranquillity within the Mahratta dominions, by the means of 
amicable negotiation. It appears probable that Scindiah will 
cordially co-operate with the British Government in the re- 
storation of the Pcishwa’s authority, and will consent in the 
actual state of his own affairs to become a party in the pro- 
posed system of defensive engagement. It cannot be supposed 
that Jeswunt Row Holkar will reject any reasonable proposals 
of accommodation supported by the combined power and in- 
fluence of the British Government and Scindiah. The intentions 
of the Rajah of Berar appear to be uncertain. That chieftain 


220 BONSLAY DOUBTFUL: NIZAM FAVOURS US: PEISHWA EN ROUTE, 


now ostensibly favours the cause of Jeswunt Row Holkar ; but I 
have every reason to believe that the Rajah of Berar is actuated 
entirely by the cautious policy of apparently favouring the cause 
of the successful party. His Highness the Nizam is disposed to 
concur in any course of measures which the British Government 
may adopt for the success of our mutual views of defensive alli- 
ance with the Mahratta states. 

25. Since the commencement of this despatch I have received 
advices from Bombay, notifying the embarkation of the Peishwa, 
under convoy of the ship Herculean from Severndroog for Bas- 
sein, and the arrival of Colonel Close from Poonah at Bombay on 
the 3rd instant. 

26. These events will probably accelerate the conclusion of 
defensive engagements with the Peishwa, and will enable Colonel 
Close immediately to open a negotiation with Amrut Row and 
Jeswunt Row Holkar. 

27. [have directed Colonel Close and the Governor of Bombay 
to apprize your honourable Committce of the existing state of 
affairs at the time when this despatch shall pass through Bombay. 


T have the honour to be, 
with the greatest respect, 
honourable Sirs, 
your most obedient and faithful servant, 


WELLESLEY. 


35. The Marquess Wellesley to the Honourable the Secret 
Committee of the Court of Directors. 


The same subject. Conclusion of the Treaty of Bassein. 


Fort William, February 10, 1803. 
Honourable Sirs, 


In my despatch to your Honourable Committce dated 24th 
December, 1802, forwarded overland, I had the honour to 
submit to you a statement of the late transactions in the Mah- 
ratta empire, and to explain to your Honourable Committee 
the system of policy which I considered it to be my duty to 
pursue for the security and improvement of the British interests 
in India, in the actual crisis of affairs at Poonah, 

I am apprized by the Honourable the Governor of Bombay 
that in conformity to my instructions, it was his intention to 
forward to your Honourable Committce with that despatch 
a continuation of the narrative of events and proccedings in that 


CONCLUSION OF THE TREATY. HOW FAR FINAL. 22¥ 


quarter to the latest period of time. That narrative will com- 
prehend the occurrences of a date subsequent to my last advices 
from Bombay; I shall therefore confine the present despatch 
to a statement of my general sentiments on the actual situation 
of affairs in the Mahratta empire, and of the course of policy 
which I propose to pursue. 

Your Honourable Committee will be apprized by that de- 
spatch of the Honourable the Governor of Bombay to which 
the preceding paragraph refers, of the actual conclusion of a 
definitive treaty of defensive alliance between the British 
Government and his Highness the Peishwa. 

The terms of that treaty being strictly conformable to the 
tenor of my original propositions to his Highness, and to the 
spirit of my subsequent instructions to the Resident at Poonah, 
I have not hesitated to ratify and confirm the treaty. "A copy 
of the treaty is annexed to this despatch! The conclusion of 
this important arrangement promises to establish the British 
interests in the Mahratta empire on the most solid and durable 
foundation, and to afford additional security for the permanent 
tranquillity and prosperity of the British dominions in India, 

The complete operation of this beneficial arrangement is how- 
ever still subject to doubt. 

It has always been sufficiently manifest that the principal 
branches of the Mahratta state, are averse to an alliance betwcen 
the British Government and the sovereign power of the Mahratta 
empire. The distractions prevailing among the feudatory chicf- 
tains afforded the most favourable prospect for the conclusion of 
such an alliance. It is also evident that his Highness the 
Peishwa has been induced to conclude the treaty with the British 
Government by his conviction that no other means existed of 
recovering any portion of his just authority, or of sccuring the 
tranquillity of his dominions. | 

The knowledge of our arrangements with the Pcishwa may 
induce Dowlut Row Scindiah and Holkar, to compromise their 
differences and to offer to the Pcishwa proposals for restoring His 
Highness to the Musnud of Poonah, which |His Highness may 
be disposed to accept, notwithstanding the actual conclusion of 
engagements for that purpose with the British Government. Un 
such an event it is not my intention to attempt to compel the 
Peishwa to adhere to the faith of his engagements, at the hazard 
of involving the Company in a war with the combined Mahratta 
States, 


222 TREATY LIKELY TO TAKE EFFECT; AND PEACE FOLLOW, 


If however the Peishwa should adhere to the faith of his 
engagements, and if the majority of the Mahratta Jageerdars 
and Chieftains, subject to His Highness’s authority, should 
concur in the restoration of the Peishwa’s authority under the 
treaty with the Company, I shall consider it to be my duty to 
proceed, without regard to any partial opposition on the part 
of Scindiah, or of Holkar, either singly or united. 

_No reason, however, exists to justify an apprehension that in 
the event supposed, Scindiah would proceed to such an ex- 
tremity; nor is any such desperate course of proceeding to be 
apprehended from the Rajah of Berar. Uncombined with the 
power of Scindiah, Holkar will not probably venture to resist 
the Peishwa. Holkar has also anxiously solicited the arbitration 
of the British Government with respect to his claims. 

Your honourable Committee will be apprised by the Govern- 
ment of Bombay of the state of affairs in Guzerat, where, I trust, 
an establishment is now formed, from which great advantages 
may be derived to the political, military, and commercial interests 
of the Company, in that quarter of India. 

I have the honour to be, &c, 
WELLESLEY. 


Feb. 14, 1803. 

P.S.—Since the date of this letter I have reccived advices 
from the resident at Poonah to the 23rd ultimo; the general 
tenor of these advices appears to me to be of the most favourable 
description. 

His Highness the Peishwa has despatched two of his principal 
officers to Dowlut Row Scindiah for the express purpose of 
reconciling that chieftain to the arrangement which his Highness 
has concluded with the British Government. 

His Highness the Peishwa has addresscd letters to the several 
Mahratta chieftains subject to his Highness’s authority, who 
occupy the districts situated between Poonah and the river 
Kistna, apprising them of his alliance with the British Govern- 
ment, and directing them to join and co-operate with the British 
forces. These circumstances have considerably diminished my 
apprehensions with regard to the possibility of the Peishwa’s 
departure from the faith of his engagements, 

Dissensions have arisen between Amrut Row and Jeswunt 
Row Holkar, which may be expected to produce a separation 
of interests between those chieftains. | Jeswunt Row Holkar 
is extremely embarrassed by the want of moncy for the payment’ 


THROUGH BRITISH MEDIATION AMONG THE MAHRATTAS, 223 


of his troops, and is endeavouring to supply the failure of his 
resources by levying oppressive contributions from the inhabi- 
tants of Poonah] That chieftain has repeated his propositions 

in a modified form to the Resident, for an accommodation with 
the Peishwa, and has solicited the mediation of the Resident, 
and of the Peishwa, for the satisfaction of his demands upon 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah. As a proof of his sincerity, Jeswunt Rao) 
Holkar has signified his intention of sending the females of the ™ 
Peishwa’s family to his Highness at Bassein. Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar has been equally earnest in soliciting the mediation of 
his Highness the Nizam. 

The situation of affairs justifies a confident expectation of 
the speedy and happy conclusion of the late arrangements with 
his Highness the Peishwa, and of the amicable adjustment of 
the differences existing among the Mahratta chieftains, through 
the mediation and influence of the British power. 


36. The Marquess Wellesley to the Secret Committee of 
Directors. 


The same subject. Restoration of the Peishwa to Poona by 
Major-General Wellesley. 


Fort William, April 19, 1803. 


Honourable Sirs, 

On the roth of February, 1803, I had the honour to submit to 
your honourable Committee, my sentiments respecting the 
situation of affairs in the Mahratta empire, and the course of 
policy by which I expected to accomplish the objects of the 
treaty lately concluded with his Highness the Peishwa, without 
the hazard of involying the British Government in a war with 
the Mahratta power; and your honourable Committee has been 
apprized by a despatch from the Government of Bombay, trans- 
mitted in conformity to my directions, of the occurrences in the 
Mahratta state to the 19th of January last. 

Colonel Close will receive my directions to transmit to your 
honourable Committee, a narrative of the events which have 
occurred since the date of my last advices from the Peninsula, 
and he will relate to you the actual state of affairs at the time 
when this despatch shall reach Poonah and Bombay. 

No event of importance has occurred at Basscin since the date 
of the latest communications to your honourable Committee from 
‘that quarter. The Pecishwa has uniformly continued to manifest 


224 FIRST MUTTERINGS OF THE COMING STORM. 


unequivocal proofs of his disposition to adhere to the faith of the 
engagements which he has contracted with the British Govern- 
ment. His Highness has demonstrated the most implicit con- 
fidence in the protection of the British power, and has not 
appeared to entertain any disposition to accept the invitation 
of Scindiah to proceed to that chieftain’s camp. On tHe 18th 
of March, his Highness received the treaty of Basscin, ratified 
by the Governor-General in council, with demonstrations of the 
highest satisfaction. 

Your honourable Committee has been informed, that Dowlut 

Rao Scindiah had arrived at Indore with a considerable body 
of his forces; having prosecuted his march from that station, 
\Dowlut Rao Scindiah crossed the Nerbuddah, on the 4th of 
February, and arrived in the vicinity of Burhaunpoor, on the 
23d of that month, 
" Colonel! Collins arrived at the camp of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, 
on the 27th of February. The advices which I received from 
that officer, and from other quartcrs, induced me to entertain 
suspicions, that Dowlut Rao Scindiah (notwithstanding his ori- 
ginal application for the aid of the British Government in re- 
storing order to the Mahratta empire) meditated an accom- 
modation with Jeswunt Rao Holkar, and a confederacy with that 
Chieftain, and with the Rajah of Berar, for the purpose of frus- 
trating the success of the arrangements concluded between the 
British Government, and the Pcishwa, without however intending 
to proceed to the desperate extremity of provoking a contest 
with the British arms. J This suspicion was corroborated by the 
artifices practised at the camp of Scindiah upon the arrival of 
Colonel Collins, with a view of eluding the communication of 
the propositions, with which Colonel Collins was charged under 
my authority, and the appcarance of Scindiah’s intentions be- 
came still more unsatisfactory from the evasive and indirect, or 
vexatious replics which Colonel Collins reccived to my pro- 
positions, after he had at length obtained access to Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah. : 

Your honourable Committce will not fail to contrast these 
systematic delays and evasions, with the solicitude previously 
expressed by Scindiah for the early arrival of Colonel Collins, 
and for a full communication of my views and intentions in the 
present crisis. [This perverse course of policy, habitual to all the 
states of India, is the favourite practice of the Mahratta powers. 
_The most effectual mode of frustrating the objects of such a 


SCINDIAH SAYS,'HE MEANS NOT TO OBSTRUCT TREATY, 225 


system of artifice and deceit, is to pursue a direct and steady 
course with firmness and temper, avoiding every deviation which 
can tend to divert the counsels or arms of the British Govern- 
ment, from their destined purposes either of peace or war. This 
principle constitutes the spirit and tenor of all my instructions to 
the British Residents at the courts of the several native powers ; 
experience has proved that a direct and steady course of policy 
is not less advantagcous to our interests, than it is manifestly 
consistent with our dignity and honour. With the greatest satis- 
faction, I request the attention of your honourable Committee to 
a recent instance of the distinguished success of this system of 
proceeding at the Court of Scindiah. 

Colonel Collins having endeavoured, without success, to obtain 
from{ Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s ministers explicit replies) to the 
propositions which he had offered to that Chieftain’s acceptance 
in my name, at length demanded a private audience of Scindiah, ~ 

By the judgment, firmness, and ability, which Colonel Collins 
exerted on that occasion, an explicit declaration was obtained 
from Scindiah himself, disclosing in the most distinct and direct 
terms the views of that Chieftain. | 

Scindiah plainly declared to Colonel Collins, that, until the 
communications of the agent despatched to his Court, by his 
Highness the Pcishwa, (for the purpose of explaining the nature 
and extent of the engagements concluded between his Highness, 
‘and the British Government) should be received, Scindiah could 
not return a decided answer to the propositions which had been 
stated to him on the part of the British Government, with regard 
to his accession to the treaty of Basscin as a contracting party. 
Scindiah accompanicd this declaration with a positive assurance, 
that he had no intention whatever to obstruct the completion of 
the arrangements concluded between the Peishwa and the British 
Government, and that it was his wish to improve the friendship 
at present subsisting between the Pcishwa, the British Govern- 
ment, and his own State. 

Of the sincerity of Scindiah’s declaration, I entertain no doubt, 
because the course of policy which he has signified his intention 
of pursuing is manifestly the most consistent with his interests. 

The sccurity of Scindiah’s dominions, and of his state among 
the powers of India, cannot be placed on a permanent basis, 
unless it shall be connected with the restoration of order in the 
Mahratta empire, under the sanction and defence of the British 
Government. The interposition of our influence and protection 

Q 


226 HIS INTERESTS ARGUE, THAT HE MEANS WHAT HE SAYS. 


has already rescued Scindiah from destruction, has prevented 
the accumulation of the whole force of the Mahratta empire in 
the hands of a desperate and needy adventurer, and has pre- 
served the balance of power between the respective feudal States, 
by maintaining the paramount authority of the Peishwa. UThe 
extreme hazard to which Scindiah’s power has been recently 
exposed by the success of the insurgents at Poonah, may have 
opened a more distinct view of his real interests, which are 
entirely consistent with those of the British Government in the 
present crisis. Scindiah however, may have been desirous of 
recovering the exorbitant ascendancy which he had acquired 
at Poonah, and may apprehend a permanent diminution of his 
influence in the Peishwa’s counsels, under the operation of the 
treaty of Bassein. But the influence of Scindiah at Poonah had 
actually been subverted, by the success of the insurgents pre- 
viously to the interposition of the British mediation, and the 
existence of Scindiah’s Government had been greatly endangered 
by the same event> Kn this situation therefore, the regret with 
which he may view the probable diminution of his influence at 
Poonah, may be sufficiently counterbalanced by his confidence 
in the security of his dominions, under the protection of the 
British Government/ _On the other hand, from the moment that 
the intentions of the British Government had been avowed, it 
became the interest of Scindiah to avoid every measure tending 
to expose him to the jealousy of a power, which commands the 
frontier of the most valuable portion of his dominions. 

The sincerity of Scindiah’s declaration is further confirmed 
by his continuance at Burhaunpoor, in a state of inaction, until 
the season, together with the progress of our forces, had advanced 
‘so far, that no exertion on his part could have cnabled him to 
occupy Poonah, previously to the arrival of the British troops at 
that capital. 

This view of the subject is not inconsistent with Scindiah’s 
desire to delay his accession to the treaty of Basscin, and to the 
propositions immediately affecting his separate interests, until he 
shall have received a direct communication from the Pcishwa. 
Scindiah may wisely and justly withhold his assent to any new 
system of engagement, until he shall have ascertained the real 
sentiments of the Peishwa on the subject of the late treaty, 
together with the precise extent of the stipulations which that 
instrument contains. 


, Nér is the sincerity of Scindiah’s declaration incompatible with 


MAHRATTA LEAGUE PROBABLY DEFENSIVE ONLY. 227 


the project of a confederacy between Scindiah, Holkar, and the 
Rajah of Berar for purposes of a defensive nature, which I con- 
sider to be the extreme object of Scindiah, in negotiating such 
a confederacy, without any views whatever of hostility towards 
the British power. 

Jeswunt Rao Holkar has continued to manifest an anxious 
desire for the accommodation of his differences with the Peishwa 
and with Dowlut Rao Scindiah, by repeated applications to 
Lieut.-Colonel Close for the arbitration of the British Govern- 
ment, and by the despatch of an agent of rank to Hyderabad, 
charged with a statement of the demands of Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar and of Amrut Rao, and vested with authority to ne- 
gotiate, through the combined mediation of his Highness the 
Nizam and of the British Government, the adjustment of 
his demands on the Peishwa and on Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 
The demands of Holkar, however, have not been materially 
abated. 

Colonel Close has endeavoured to persuade his Highness the 
Peishwa to offer to Holkar such concessions as might induce 
Holkar to compromise the subsisting differences, and to admit 
his Highness’s peaceable return to his capital. His Highness, 
however, manifested an insuperable aversion to offer any con- 
cessions to Holkar, whom he considered to be a rebcl against 
the legitimate authority of the sovereign power of the Mahratta 
empire. 

Colonel Close, therefore, deemed it advisable to address a 
letter to Jeswunt Rao Holkar, communicating to that chieftain 
my sentiments on the subject of his demands, assuring him that 
the influence of the British Government would be exerted for 
the, satisfactory adjustment of his claims\on Dowlut Rao Scin- 
diah} and that the British Government would guarantce any 
adjustment which Holkar might be able to effect of his demands 
on the Pcishwa, and expressing an expectation that Holkar 
would refrain from any opposition to the establishment of a 
British force within the Pcishwa’s dominions, 

A negotiation appears to have been opened directly between 
‘Holkar and Scindiah for the accommodation of their differences, 

ut no certain accounts have hitherto been reccived of its con- 
clusion or progress, 

Holkar has continued to exercise the utmost degree of vio- 
lence and outrage upon the inhabitants of Poonah, for the 
purpose of extorting moncy for the relicf of his exigencics, This 


Q2 


/ 


228 HOLKAR’S MOVEMENTS. BONSLAY SORE, BUT TIMID. 


proceeding appears to have excited universal disgust, and to 
have confirmed the resolution of the majority of the Jageerdars 
and inhabitants of the Peishwa’s dominions to support his High- 
ness’s cause. 

Considerable bodies of Holkar’s army have moved in different 
directions without any other apparent objects than those of 
observing the movement of the troops assembled on the several 
frontiers of the Peishwa’s dominions, and of facilitating the sub- 
sistence of the soldiers and followers of Holkar’s camps. 

By the latest advices it appears that Holkar has actually 
evacuated Poonah, and has marched with the main body of 
his army in a northerly direction towards Burhaunpoor. The 
probable object of that movement is, either to accelcrate the 
issue of his negotiations with Scindiah, or to facilitate the means 
of acting offensively against Scindiah, and at the same time to 
avoid the hazard of hostilities with the united arms of the 
British Government, the Nizam, and the Peishwa, and to main- 
tain a position favourable to an amicable negotiation with the 
allied powers. 

This movement admits the uninterrupted march of the com- 
bined forces of the allies to Poonah. Holkar must, therefore, 
have abandoned his hopes of effecting a revolution in the govern- 
ment of Poonah, and of scizing a share in the administration. 
The force of Holkar is stated to amount to 40,000 cavalry and 
30,000 infantry, with 180 guns, 

The intelligence which I have received from the Court of 
the Rajah of Berar, indicates that chicftain’s dissatisfaction at 
the conclusion of defensive engagements between the British 
Government and his Highness the Peishwa. 

Whatever may be the aversion of the Rajah of Berar to the 
interposition of the British Government in the affairs of the 
Mahratta empire, any attempt on the part of that chicftain 
to obstruct the exccution of the treaty of Basscin, would be 
inconsistent with the systematic caution of his character and 
imprudent in the actual state of his military power, and in the 
exposed situation of his territorics. His just rights cannot be 
endangered, and may receive additional security by the restora- 
tion of a regular authority at Poonah, under the protection of the 
Company. 

In conformity to the plan of operations which I determined 
to adopt for the restoration of his Highness the Pcishwa to the 
musnud of Poonah, the whole of the subsidiary force stationed 


PREPARATIONS FOR RESTORING PEISHWA TO POONAH, 229 


with his Highness the Nizam marched from Hyderabad towards 
the western frontier of his Highness’s dominions at the close of 
the month of February. The troops of his Highness assembled 
for the purpose of co-operating with the subsidiary force, consist 
of nearly 6,000 infantry and 9,000 cavalry. The subsidiary 
force under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Stevenson consists 
of six battalions of native infantry or 6,000 men, two regiments 
of native cavalry, and sixteen field pieces. 

These combined forces reached Paraindah, a station on the 
western frontier of the Nizam’s dominions, situated at the 
distance of 116 miles from Poonah, on the 25th of March. 

I have great satisfaction in stating to your honourable Com- 
mittee that the conduct of his Highness the Nizam, during the 
whole course of the late transactions in the Mahratta state, has 
been uniformly consistent with the obligations of his alliance 
with the British Government, and that his Highness has mani- 
fested a sincere desire to co-operate with the British Govern- 
ment in the measures adopted for the restoration of order in the 
Mahratta state. His Highness has rejected every overture of 
the ruling authority at Poonah, and of the Rajah of Berar, for 
the adjustment of the affairs of the Mahratta empire through 
any other channel than that of the British Government, 

By my instructions of the 2nd of February, Lord Clive (aided 
by the judgment of Licut.-General Stuart, and regulated by 
contingent events) was empowercd to determine the actual 
period of time at which it might be proper for the British troops 
to advance into the Mahratta territory, and the amount of the 
force to be detached from the main body of the army for that 
purpose. 

Adverting to the expediency of securing the carly arrival of 
the British troops at Poonah, and of confirming the favourable 
disposition which had been manifested by the Jageerdars in the 
southern territorics of his Highness the Peishwa, as well as to 
the actual march of the subsidiary force towards the Nizam’s 
western fronticr, and to the necessity of terminating the depend- 
ing negotiations at the carlicst practicable period of time, Lord 
Clive was of opinion that the time was actually arrived at which 
it was necessary for the British troops to enter the Mahratta 
territory, and his Lordship accordingly, on the 27th February, 
instructed his Excellency Licut.-General Stuart (then present 
with the army on the fronticr of Mysorc) to adopt the necessary 
measures for that purpose. 


230 GENERAL WELLESLEY APPOINTED TO COMMAND THE FORCE. 


In consequence of the absence of Lieut.-General Stuart from 
the presidency of Fort St. George, Lord Clive deemed it to be 
necessary that the extent of the force to be detached from the 
main body of the army should be determined exclusively by the 
judgment of Lieut.-General Stuart, and his Lordship accordingly 
referred that point to Lieut.-Genera! Stuart’s discretion, under 
an additional reference to the general spirit of my instructions 
of the 2nd of February. 

The extensive local knowledge and influence possessed by 
the honourable Major-General Wellesley, the personal inter- 
course established between Major-Gencral Wellesley and the 
Mahratta chieftains on the frontier of Mysore, and the confidence 
reposed by those chicftains in the approved talents, firmness, 
temper, and integrity of that officer, rendered him peculiarly 
qualified to discharge the complicated duties of the command 
of the detachment destined to proceed to Poonah. That im- 
portant command required the united exertion of considerable 
military skill, and of great political experience and discretion, 
Lord Clive accordingly desired that Major-General Wellesley 
might be appointed to the command of the advancing dctach- 
ment, and requested his Excellency the Commander-in-Chief to 
furnish Major-General Wellesley with instructions for the regu- 
lation of his conduct according to the spirit of my instructions 
to his Lordship of the and of February. 

In conformity to the foregoing directions, the Commander- 
in-Chicf appointed a detachment from the main body of the 
army assembled at Hurryhur for the purpose of advancing into 
the Mahratta territory. The detachment consists of one regi- 
ment of European and three regiments of native cavalry, two 
regiments of European and six battalions of native infantry, with 
a due proportion of artillery, amounting altogether to 1500 cavalry 
and 6,800 infantry; and to that force was added 2,500 of his 
Highness the Rajah of Mysore’s horse. Licut.-General Stuart ap- 
pointed the honourable Major-General Wellesley to the command 
of that detachment, in conformity to Lord Clive’s suggestion. 

Lieut.-General Stuart directed the Honourable Major-General 
Wellesley— 

ist. To encourage the southern Jageerdars to declare in favor 
of the Peishwa’s cause; to employ evcry means to reconcile 
their mutual animosities, and to induce them to unite their forces 
with the advancing detachment for the purpose of re-establishing 
his Highness’s government. 


UNQUALIFIED APPROVAL OF LORD CLIVE’S CONDUCT. 231 


adly. To proceed to Meritch and form a junction with the 
Peishwa, or if the Peishwa’s march to that station should be 
deemed unadvisable or impracticable, to unite with such of his 
Highness’s chieftains and troops as might be there assembled. 

gdly. To open a communication and to form a junction with 
the subsidiary force advancing from Hyderabad, and with the 
contingent of his Highness the Nizam. 

4thly. To procecd eventually to Poonah, and to establish 
an order of things in that capital favourable to the return of 
the Peishwa, and to the accomplishment of the objects of the 
treaty lately concluded between his Highness and the British 
Government. 

It is a most grateful part of my duty to express to your 
Honourable Committee in the strongest terms, my entire ap- 
probation of the zeal, alacrity, and ability, with which the right. 
Honourable Lord Clive and Lieut.-General Stuart have com- 
menced the exccution of my orders. I entertain the highest 
estimation of the judgment, skill, and promptitude manifested by 
his Lordship and by Lieut.-General Stuart, in regulating the 
details of the arrangements for the successful accomplishment of 
the objects to which my’instructions were directed. 

The conduct of Lord Clive on this occasion, corresponds with 
the uniform tenor of that exemplary spirit, public zeal, and honour- 
able co-operation with the supreme authority in India, which 
have animated every act of his Lordship’s administration, Re- 
peated expericnce has inspired me with a deliberate confidence 
in the prospcrous issue of cvery important measure entrusted to 
his Lordship’s immcdiate execution. In the exigency of every 
public crisis, and in various and extraordinary difficulties and 
dangers, the exertions of Lord Clive in the service of the Com- 
pany, under my orders, have been employed with hereditary 
encrgy and success. My gratitude, respect, and affection, must 
ever attend his character and fame; and it would be a desertion 
of the most sacred duty of my station to omit any opportunity 
of recommending Lord Clive’s eminent public services to the 
deserved gratitude of the East India Company, and to, the justice 
and favor of his Sovercign and of his country. 

A long course of useful and honourable services has repeatedly 
obtained my public testimony to the distinguished merits of 
Licut.-Gencral Stuart, and has established the reputation of that 
revered and respectable officer with great lustre in the high 
esteem of the Company and of the nation. On all occasions of 


232 MAHRATTA SYMPATHY WITH WELLESLEY’S COURSE. 


service, I-have derived the utmost possible advantage from the 
zealous application of the numerous qualifications which Lieut.- 
General Stuart possesses. In the present instance, his extra- 
ordinary solicitude to execute my orders according to their true 
spirit, the judgment, skill, and temper which have marked all his 
proceedings and operations, and the ardent zeal which he has 
displayed for the success of the service entrusted to his discretion, 
demand my most cordial approbation. 

If the important arrangements now in progress should ter- 
minate with success, you will be indebted in a great degree to 
Lieut.-General Stuart for the happy accomplishment of a plan, 
which promises a most powerful augmentation to the security of 
the British possessions in India, nor can I conceive a more 
glorious termination of a long and illustrious career of public 
service. 

The detachment under the command of Major-General Wel- 
lesley commenced its march from Hurryhur on the 9th ultimo. 
By the latest accounts it appears that the detachment had ad- 
vanced to a station near Meritch, with the cordial support and 
‘co-operation of the majority of the southern Jageerdars, and with 
every appearance of general satisfaction among the inhabitants 
of the Mahratta territory, It was expected that the detachment 
would arrive at Mcritch on the 3rd of April. 

The Honourable the Governor of Bombay will communicate 
.to your honourable committce the progress of events in the pro- 
vince of Guzzerat to the period of time when this despatch shall 
reach Bombay. 

By the latest accounts from that quarter it appears that the 
rebels, after having sustaincd several defeats by the combined 
army of the British Government and the Guicowar, had evacuated 
Guzzerat under circumstances which justify a confident expecta- 
tion of future permanent tranquillity in that province. 

This situation of affairs in Guzzerat is highly favourable to the 
successful issue of the measures now in a course of operation for 
the restoration of the Peishwa to the musnud of Poonah. The arri- 
val, at Bombay, of his Majesty’s 78th regiment, which embarked 
from Fort William for that presidency, on the Joth of February, 
has probably coincided with the period of time when it might be 
expedient that his Highness the Peishwa should commence his 
march towards Poonah. 

Reviewing all the circumstances connected with the state of 
the Mahratta empire, I trust that your honourable committee 


THE TREATY A GREAT BLOW TO FRENCH INFLUENCE. 233 


will receive by this despatch intelligence from Poonah and Bom- 
bay, of the pacific settlement of affairs in the state of Poonah, 
and of the establishment of a British subsidiary force in the 
service of the Peishwa. 

- Your honourable committee will appreciate the importance of 
the successful accomplishment of the proposed arrangements at 
Poonah in its relation to the maintenance of peace, and to the 
general security of our interests in India, and in its particular 
reference to the exclusion of the interests and influence of France 
from the Mahratta empire. 

The importance of this object is considerable, with a view to 
the contingency either of peace or war between Great Britain 
and France, in India. In order to improve our relations with 
the Peishwa, and to oppose in the present crisis every attainable 
barrier to the progress of France in India, I deemed it necessary 
to issue instructions to Lieut.-Colonel Close, directing his atten- 
tion to the improvement of that article of the late treaty with the 
Peishwa, which provides for the eventual exclusion of Europeans, 
subjects of any state which may be at war with Great Britain, 
from the territories of the Peishwa. 


I have the honour to be, 
with respect, 
Honourable Sirs, 
your most obedient and faithful servant, 
WELLESLEY, 


87. Treaty of Bassein. 


Treaty of perpetual and general defensive alliance, between the 
Honourable English East India Company and his Highness the 
Peishwa Badjce Rao Ragonaut Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahau- 
der, his children, heirs and successors, settled by Licutenant 
Colonel Barry Close, Resident at the Court of his Highness, by 
virtue of the powers delegated to him by his Excellency the Most 
Noble Richard Marquis Wellesley Knight of the most illustrious 
order of Saint Patrick, one of his Britannic Majesty's Most 
Honourable Privy Council, Governor General in Council, ap- 
pointed by the Honourable Court of Directors of the said Com- 
pany to direct and controul all their affairs in the East Indies. 


Whereas, by the blessing of God, the relations of peace, and 
friendship, have uninterruptedly subsisted for a length of time 


234 OBYECT—A GENERAL G& PERPETUAL DEFENSIVE ALLIANCE, 


between the Honourable English East India Company and his 
Highness Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder, and have been con- 
firmed at different periods, by treaties of amity and union; the 
powers aforesaid adverting to the complexion of the times have 
determined, with a view to the preservation of peace and tran- 
quillity, to enter into a general defensive alliance, for the complete 
and reciprocal protection of their respective territories, together 
with those of their several allies and dependants, against the 
unprovoked aggressions or unjust encroachments of all or any 
enemies whatever. 

“ARTICLE 1st. The peace, union and friendship, so long sub- 
sisting between the two states, shall be promoted and increased 
by this treaty, and shall be perpetual. The friends and enemics 
of either, shall be the friends and enemies of both, and the 
contracting parties agree, that all the former treaties and agree- 
ments between the two states, now in force, and not contrary to 
the tenour of this engagement, shall be confirmed by it. | 

ARTICLE 2nd. ! If any power or state whatever, shall commit 
any act of unprovoked hostility or aggression against either of 
the contracting parties, or against their respective dependants 
or allies, and after due representation, shall refuse to enter 
into amicable explanation, or shall deny the just satisfaction 
or indemnity, which the contracting partics shall have re- 
quired, then the contracting partics will proceed to concert 
and prosecute such further measures, as the case shall appcar 
to demand. 

For the more distinct explanation and effect of this agreement 
the Governor General in Council on behalf of the Honourable 
Company, hereby declares, that the British Government will 
never permit any power or state whatever to commit with 
impunity, any act of unprovoked hostility or aggression against 
the rights and territorics of his Highness Rao Pundit Purdhaun 
Bahauder, but' will at all times maintain and defend the same, in 
the same manner as the rights and territorics of the Honourable 
Company, are now maintained and defended. 

ARTICLE 3rd. With a vicw to fulfil this treaty of general 
defence and protection, his Highness Rao Pundit Purdhaun 
Bahauder agrees to receive, and the Ifonourable East India 
Company to furnish] a permanent subsidiary force of not less 
than six thousand regular native infantry, with the usual pro- 
portion of field pieces, and European artillery-men attached, and 
with the proper equipment of warlike stores and ammunition, 


THE PEISHWA TO RECEIVE A SUBSIDIARY FORCE, 235 


which force is to be accordingly stationed, in perpetuity in his 
said Highness’s territories. 

ARTICLE 4th. For the regular payment of the whole expence 
of the said subsidiary force, his Highness Rao Pundit Purdhaun 
Bahauder hereby assigns and cedes in perpetuity to the Honour- 
able East India Company, all the territories detailed in the 
schedule annexed to this treaty. 

ARTICLE 5th. As it may be found that certain of the terri- 
tories ceded by the foregoing article to the Honourable Company, 
may be inconvenient from their situation, his Highness Rao 
Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder, for the purpose of rendering the 
boundary line of the Honourable Company’s possessions, a good 
and well defined one, agrees, that such exchanges of talooks or 
lands shall be made hereaftcr, on terms of a fair valuation of 
their respective revenues, as the completion of the said purpose 
may require, and it is agreed and covenanted, that the territories 
to be assigned and ceded to! the Honourable Company by the 
4th article, or in consequence of the exchange stipulated eventu- 
ally in this article, shall be subject to the exclusive management 
and authority of the said company and of their officers, 

ARTICLE 6th. Notwithstanding the total annual expence of 
the subsidiary force is estimated at 25 lacs of rupecs, his said 
Highness hath agreed to cede by article 4th. lands estimated to 
yield annually the sum of 26 lacs of rupees, the additional lac 
being intended to meet possible deficiencics in the revenucs of 
the said lands, and save the Honourable Company from loss. 

ARTICLE 7th. After the conclusion of this treaty, and as 
soon as the British Resident shall signify to his Highness Rao 
Pundit Purdhaun Bahaudcr, that the honourable Company’s 
officers are prepared to take charge of the districts ceded by 
article 4th. his Highness will immediately issue the necessary 
Purwannahs or orders to his officers to deliver over charge of 
the same to the officers of the honourable Company, and it is 
hereby agreed, and stipulated that all collections made by his 
Highness’s officers, subsequently to the date of this treaty, and 
before the officers of the honourable Company shall have taken 
charge of the said districts, shall be carried to the credit of the 
honourable Company; and all claims to balance from the said 
districts, referring to the periods anteccdent to the conclusion of 
jthis treaty, shall be considered null and void. 

ARTICLE 8th. All forts situated within the districts to be 
Jeeded as aforesaid shall be delivered to the officers of the 


236 AND PAY IT BY CESSIONS, ITS DUTIES, CHOUTE OF SURAT. 


honourable Company with the said districts: and his Highness 
Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder engages, that the said forts shall 
be delivered to the honourable Company without being injured 
or damaged, and with their equipment of ordnance stores and 
provisions. 

ARTICLE 9th. Grain and all othct articles of consumption, 
and provisions and all sorts of materials for wearing apparel 
together with the necessary numbers of cattle, horses and camels, 
required for the use of the subsidiary force shall be entirely 
exempted from duties, and the commanding officer, and officers 
of the said subsidiary force shall be treated in all respects in 
a manner suited to the dignity and greatness of both states, 
The subsidiary force will at all times be ready to execute 
services of importance—such as the protection of the person 
of his Highness, his heirs and successors, the overawing and 
chastisement of rebels, or exciters of disturbance in his High- 
ness’s dominions, and due correction of his subjects or depen- 
dants, who may withhold payment of the sircar’s just claims ; 
but it is not to be employcd on trifling occasions, nor like sibundy 
to be stationed in the country to collect the revenues, nor 
against any of the principal branches of the Mahratta Empire, 
nor in levying contributions from Mahratta dependants in the 
manner of Moolkgeery. 

ARTICLE 10th. Whereas much inconveniencc has arisen from 
certain claims and demands of the Mahratta state, affecting 
the city of Surat, it is agreed, that a just calculation shall be 
made of the value of the said claims by his Highness Rao 
Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder and the government of Bombay ; 
and in consequence of the intimate fricndship now established 
between the contracting parties, his Highness Rao Pundit 
Purdhaun Bahauder agrees for himself, his heirs and successors, 
to relinquish for ever, all the rights, claims, and privileges of the 


-Mahratta state affecting the said city of Surat, and all collec- 


tions on that account shall ccase and determine from the day 
on which this treaty shall be concluded ; in consideration of 
which act of friendship, the Honourable East India Company 
agrecs, that a piece of land yiclding a sum equal to the estimated 
value of the said claims of the Mahratta state, shall be deducted 
from the districts ceded by article 4th. And on the same principle, 
and from similar considcrations, his Highness further agrccs, 
that the amount of the collections made for the Poonah state, 
under the title of Nagabundy, in the Purgunnahs of Chourassy 


( 


OUR EUROPEAN ENEMIES TO BE DISMISSED, 237 


and Chickly shall be ascertained, by an average taken from the 
receipts of a certain number of years, or by such other mode of 
calculation as may be determined on; and his said Highness 
doth further agree, for himself, his heirs, and successors, to re- 
_linquish for ever the Nagabundy collections aforesaid, and they 
~ shall accordingly cease from the conclusion of this treaty, and it 
is agreed and stipulated that a piece of land yiclding a sum equal 
to the amount of the said Nagabundy collections, shall be de- 
ducted from the districts ceded by article 4th. inthe samé 
manner as stipulated in regard to the Choute of Surat] 

ARTICLE 11th. Whereas it has been usual for his Highness 
Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder to enlist and retain in his 
service Europeans of different countries, his said Highness hereby 
agrees and stipulates, that in the event of War breaking out 
between the English and any European nation, and of discovery 
being made that any European or Europeans in his service 
belonging to such nation at war with the English, shall have 
meditated injury towards the English,‘or have entered into in- 
trigues hostile to their interest, such Europcan or Europcans, so 
offending, shall be discharged by his said Highness, and not 
suffered to reside in. his iene 

ARTICLE 12th. \Inasmuch as, by the present treaty, the con- 
tracting partics are bound in a general defensive alliance, for 
mutual defence and protection against all enemies, his Highness 


‘Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder consequently engages, never to 


commit any act of personal hostility and aggression against his 
Highness the Nabob Asoph Jah Bahauder, or any of the IIonour- 
able Company’s allies or dependants, or against any of the 
principal branches of the Mahratta Empire, or against any power 
whatever, and in the event of differences arising, whatever adjust- 
ment the Company’s Government, weighing matters in the scale 
of truth and justice, may determine, shall mect with full appro- 
bation and acquiescence. 

ARTICLE 13th. And whereas certain differences, referring to 
past transactions, are known to subsist between the Sirkar of his 
Highness Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder and the Sirkar of 
his Highness the Nabob Asoph Jah Bahauder, and whereas an 
amicable adjustment of those differences must be highly desirable 
for the welfare and benefit of both the said Sirkars, his Highness 
Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder with a view to the above end, 
agrees, and accordingly binds himsclf, his heirs, and successors, 
to fulfil and conform to the stipulations of the treaty of Mahr; 


238 COMPANY'S MEDIATION, AFFAIRS OF GUICKWAR. 


and his Highness Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder further agrees, 
that on the basis of the fulfilment of the said treaty of Mahr, and 
of the claims of his Highness the Nabob Asoph Jah Bahauder, to 
be totally exempted from the payment of Choute, the Honourable 
Company’s Government shall be entitled to arbitrate and deter- 
mine all such points, as may be in doubt or difference between 
the Sirkars of their Highnesses above mentioned ; and his High- 
ness Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder further agrees, that in the 
event of any differences arising between his government and that 
of his Highness the Nabob Asoph Jah Bahauder, at any future 
period, the particulars of such differences shall be communicated 
to the Honourable East India Company, before any act of 
hostility shall be committed on either side, and the said Honour- 
able Company interposing their mediation, in a way suitable to 
rectitude, friendship, and union, and mindful of justice and 
established usage, shall apply themselves to the adjustment of 
all such differences, conformable to propricty and truth, and shall 
bring the parties to a right understanding. | And it is further 
agreed, that whatever adjustment of any such differences the 
Company’s Government, weighing things in the scale of truth 
and justice, shall determine, that determination shall, without 
hesitation or objection, meet with the full approbation and 
acquiescence of both partics. It is however agreed, that this 
stipulation shall not prevent any amicable negotiations which 
the Honourable Company and the Courts of Poonah and 
Hyderabad, respectively, may be desirous of opening, pro- 
vided no such negotiation shall be carried on between any of 
the three parties, without full communication thereof to each 
other. 

ARTICLE 14th. Whereas a treaty of fricndship and alliance 
has been concluded between the Honourable Company and 
Rajah Anund Row Guickwar Bahauder, and whereas the said 
treaty was mediated and executed, without any intention that 
it should infringe any of the just rights or claims of his High- 
ness Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder affecting the Sirkars of the 
said Rajah, his said Highness adverting thercto, and also to the 
intimate alliance now established between the contracting parties, 
doth hereby formally acknowledge the existence of the said 
treaty between the Honourable Company and Rajah Anund 
Row Guickwar Bahauder; and inasmuch as, by reason of certain 
unfinished transactions, the conclusion of which has been sus- 
pended from time to time, various demands and papers of: 


EXTENT OF MUTUAL MILITARY AID, IN CASE OF WAR, 239 


es 
accounts are found to subsist between the Government of his 
Highness Row Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder and the Sirkar of the 
Rajah aforementioned, his said Highness, placing full reliance 
on the impartiality, truth, and justice of the British Government, 
doth hereby agree, that the said government shall examine into, 
and finally adjust, the said demands and papers of accounts; 
;and his said Highness further stipulates and binds himself, his 
heirs, and successors, to abide by such adjustment as the British 
Government shall accordingly determine. 

ARTICLE 15th. The contracting parties will employ all 
practicable means of conciliation to prevent the calamity of war, 
and for that purpose will, at all times, be ready to enter into 
amicable explanations with other states, and to cultivate and 
improve the general relations of peace and amity with all the 
powers of India, according to the true spirit and tenor of this 
defensive treaty. But if a war should unfortunately break out 
between the contracting partics and any other power whatever, 
then his Highness Row Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder engages, that 
with the reserve of two battalions of Sepoys, which are to remain 
near his Highness’s person, the residue of the British subsidiary 
force, consisting of four battalions of Sepoys with their artillery, 
joincd by six thousand infantry and ten thousand horse of his 
Highness’s own troops, and making together an army of ten 
thousand infantry and ten thousand cavalry, with the requisite 
train of artillery and warlike storcs of every kind, shall be 
immcdiatcly put in motion, for the purpose of opposing the 
encmy: and his Highness likewise engages to employ every 
further cffort in his power, for the purpose of bringing into the 
ficld, as speedily as possible, the whole force which he may be 
able to supply from his dominions, with a view to the effectual 
prosecution and speedy termination of the said war. The 
Wonourable Company, in the same manner, engage on their 
parts, in this case, to employ in active operations against the 
enemy, the largest force they may be able to furnish, over and 
above the said subsidiary force. 

ARTICLE 16th, Whenever war shall appear probable, his High- 
ness Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder engages to collect as many 
Brinjarics as possible and to stow as much grain as may be 
practicable in his fronticr garrisons. 

ARTICLE 17th. As, by the present treaty, the union and friend- 
ship of the two states is so firmly connected, that they may be con-~ 
sidercd as one and the same, his Highness Rao Pundit Purdhaun 


240 DIPLOMATIC INTERCOURSE. SUPPRESSION OF REBELS, 


Bahauder engages neither to commence nor to pursue in future, 
any negotiations with any other power whatever, without giving 
previous notice, and entering into mutual consultation, with the 
Honourable East India Company’s Government: and the Hon- 
ourable Company’s Government, on their parts, hereby declare 
that they have no manner of concern with any of his Highness’s 
children, relations, subjects, or servants, with respect to whom 
his Highness is absolute. 

ARTICLE 18th. Inasmuch as, by the present treaty of general 
defensive alliance, the ties of union are, with the blessing of God, 
so closely drawn, that the interests of the two states are become 
identified, it is further mutually agreed, that if disturbances shall 
at any time break out in the districts ceded to the Honourable 
Company by this agreement, his Highness Rao Pundit Purdhaun 
Bahauder shall permit such a proportion of the subsidiary troops, 
as may be requisite, to be employed in quelling the same within 
the said districts. If disturbances shall, at any time, break out in 
any part of his Highness’s dominions contiguous to the Company’s 
frontier,to which it might be inconvenient to detach any proportion 
of the subsidiary force, the British Government, in like manner, 
if required by his Highness Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder, 
shall direct such proportion of the troops of the Company, 
as may be most conveniently stationed for the purpose, to 
assist in quelling the said disturbances within his Highness’s 
dominions. 

ARTICLE 19th. It is finally declared, that this treaty, which, 
according to the foregoing articles, is meant for the support and 
credit of his said Highness’s Government, and to preserve it 
from loss and decline, shall last as long as the sun and moon 
shall endure. 


Signed, sealed, and exchanged, at Bassein, 
the 31st of December, Anno Domini 
1802, or the 5th of Ramzaun, Anno 
Higerze 1217. 
A true Copy, B. CLOSE, 
Resident at Poona. 


Ratified by the Governor General in Council 
11 February 1803. 


i 


SCHEDULE OF TERRITORIES CEDED TO THE COMPANY. 241 


Schedule of the Territories ceded in perpetuity, by His Highness 
Bajece Rao Ragonaut Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder to the Hon- 
ourable English East India Company, rey to the fourth 
Article of the annexcd Treaty. ° 


ist. From the province of Guzerat and territories 
south thereof: Dundooka, together with Chooia, 
Komapoor, and Gogo, 1,05,000 
Cambay, Choute, and Nassoor, 60,000 
South of the Taptie, Purnair, 27,000; Bootscer, 
6,200 ; Banwanny, 8,800; Balsur, 85,000; Parchole, 
1,07,000 ; Soopa, 51,000; Sarbaun, 30,000 ; Wallow, 
30,000 ; Bamdoo Kusbah, 7,900 ; Waunsda Choute, 
7,000; Durumpoory do. 9,000; Surat do. 42,100; 
Customs, 83,000. 
Between the Taptie and Nerbuddah. Oolpah, 
3,16,000 ; Hansood, 85,000 ; Octisicr, 78,000; Nun- 
dary, 6 5 000, Total south of the Taptie, and between 
Taptic and Nerbuddah, 10,38,000. Deduct twenty 
per cent. on account of decrease of revenue, 2,07,600 —8,30,400 
Nahabundy of Chourassy and Chickley, 20,000 ; 
Phoolparra, Coomarria Cattergom, 5,000, 25,000 
2d, From the territories ncar the Toombuddrah ; 
Savanore, 26 Talooks, 10,22,838; from Bankapoor, 
550,762. 15,79,600 
Grand Total 2.6,00,000 
Signed, sealed, and exchanged at Bassein, 
31st December, Anno Domini 1802, or 
the 5th Ramzan, Anno Higere 1217. 
A true Copy, RB, CLOSE, 


Supplemental to the Treaty of Bassein, 1803. 


A treaty, consisting of ninctcen articles, was concluded at 
Basscin, between the Honourable English Fast-India Company 
Bahauder and his Highness the Paishwa Badjce Rao Ragonaut 
Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder. The following articles of engagement 
are now agrecd on and settled, as supplemental to the said Treaty, 
by Licutenant-Colonel Barry Close, on the part of the said 
Honourable Company, and Anund Rao Vakeel, on the part of 
the said Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder, under full power and 
authority granted to them respectively for the purpose. 

R 


242 DETAIL OF SUBSIDIARY, AND PEISHWA’S, FORCES ALTERED. 


ARTICLE 1st. That of the territory ceded in perpetuity to 
the Honourable East India Company by the said treaty of 
Bassein, the country of Savenore, and Taalooks of Buncapoor, in 
the Carnatic, yielding an annual revenue of sixteen lacks of 
Rupees, shall be restored, in perpetuity, to the Sircar of the said 
Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder, 

ARTICLE 2nd, That of the territory ceded in perpctuity to 
the English East India Company by the treaty of Bassein, the 
Purgunnah of Oolpah, in Guzerat, yielding a revenue annually 
of three lacks and sixteen thousand Rupees, shall likewise be 
restored, in perpetuity, to the Sircar of the said Rao Pundit 
Purdhaun Bahauder, in order that it may be restored to Nursing 
Khundy Rao, who has served the Sircar with fidelity and at- 
tachment. 

ARTICLE 3rd. That a regiment of native cavalry, of the same 
strength and complement as the cavalry regiments belonging to 
the Hyderabad subsidiary force, shall be added to the British 
Poona subsidiary force. 

ARTICLE 4th. In the fifteenth article of the treaty of Basscin 
it is stipulated, that: ten thousand cavalry and six thousand 
infantry, with a due proportion of ordnance and military stores, 
shall be furnished by the said Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder, 
and in addition thereto, such further force as the Sircar of the 
said Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder should be able to bring 
into the field. This stipulation is now annulled, and, in licu 
thereof, it is agreed and covenanted, that in time of war the said 
Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder shall appoint and furnish five 

‘ thousand cavalry and three thousand infantry} with a due pro- 
portion of ordnance and military stores, and, in addition thereto, 
such further force as the said Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder 
shall be able to bring into the ficld. 

ARTICLE 5th. That a corps of Mahratta cavalry, amounting 
to five thousand, shall be maintained by the British Government 
during the present war, for the service of the Poona State, 
under the orders of the British Government; of which five thou- 
sand horse, two thousand shall serve with his Highness the 
Paishwa, and the remaining three thousand with the British 
army in the field; and in the said five thousand Mahratta 
cavalry are not to be included the Mahratta troops serving with 
the British army under the chicftains Bapoojee, Gunneis Punt 
Goklah, and Sudojee Rao Nimalcar, which troops shall continue 
to be subsisted at the charge of Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder. 


CESSIONS FROM BUNDELCUND TO THE COMPANY, 243 


ARTICLE 6th. By the first and second articles of this agree- 
ment, territory, yielding an annual revenue of 19,16,000 rupees, is 
restored to the Sircar of Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder; in 
lieu thereof, and for the purposcs hereafter mentioned, the said 
Rao Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder agrees and stipulatcs to cede, 
in perpetuity, to the honourable English East India Company, 
from the province of Bundelcund, conquered for the Poona 
State by Ali Bahaudcr, territory yiclding an estimated annual 
revenue of 36,16,000 rupecs, agreeably to the following detail : 

1. In lieu of the country of Savenore, and Taalooks of Bunca- 
poor, in the Carnatic, and the Purgunnah of Oolpah, in Guzcrat, a 
tract of territory, yielding an annual revenue of 19,16,0Co rupees. 

2. On account of the stated high value of Oolpah, a tract of 
territory, yielding an annual revenue of 50,000 rupecs, in excess 
for that Purgunnah. 

3. To bear the entire expence of the regiment of cavalry 
mentioned in article III., a tract of territory, yielding an annual 
revenue of 7,50,000 rupees. 

4. To serve as an equivalent for the expence to be incurred 
by the British Governments in paying and maintaining, during 
the present war, the five thousand cavalry mentioned in article 
V., a tract of territory, yiclding an annual revenue of 5,00,000 
rupces, and lastly, a tract of territory, yiclding an annual revenue 
of 4,00,000 rupees, to meet the extraordinary expence which 
the British Government must be subject to, in cstablishing 
its authority in Bundelcund, which is disturbed and ravaged by 
rebels, who must be subdued and punished, 

Total ceded from Bundelcund 36,16,000 rupees. 

ARTICLE 7th. The whole of the foregoing territory, ceded, as 
above, from Bundclcund to the honourable English East-India 
Company, shall be taken from those quarters of the province 
most contiguous to the British possessions, and in every respect 
most convenient for the British Government. 

ARTICLE 8th. Inasmuch as the Purgunnah of Oolpah was 
particularly valuable to the honourable Company’s Government, 
by reason of its proximity to the city of Surat, in the prosperity 
of which the British Government bears an anxious concern, it is 
accordingly agreed and stipulated, that the said Purgunnah of 
Oolpah shall be so managed and governed, at all times, by the 
Mahratta authority, as to conduce to the convenience of the said 
city, by attention to the rules of good neighbourhood, and the 
promotion of an amicable and commercial intercourse between 

R 2 


244 PROVISION AS TO WRECK, AT MOUTH OF TAPTEE, 


the inhabitants of both sides. And inasmuch as the sovereignty 
of the river Taptee doth belong to the British Government, it is 
accordingly agreed and covenanted, that the Mahratta authority 
in Oolpah shall have no right or concern whatever in the wreck 
of any vessel that may be cast upon any part of the Oolpah 
territory, connecting with the said river Taptee, but be bound, in 
the event of any such wreck, to render the vessel all practicable 
aid, for which the parties assisting shall be entitled to receive 
from the owners of the wreck a just and reasonable compensation. 
Signed, sealed, and exchanged, at Poona, . 
the 16th December, Anno Domini 1803, 
or the ist Ramzaun, Anno Higere 1218. 
Ratified by the Governor General in Council, ue 
7th January, 1804, 


2. POLICY OF THE TREATY OF BASSEIN, 


88. The Honourable G. H. Barlow, Esq. to the Marquess 
Wellesley. 
e 
Approval of the policy of the Treaty. 
(Private.) July 12, 1803. 
My Lord, 

I do myself the honour of enclosing the draft of a note to your 
Excellency, which I had prepared this morning. I trust you will 
excuse my sending it in an almost illegible state, and on scraps 
of paper. I had intended to copy it fair, but it has extendcd to 
a greater length than I had expected ; and not being very well, 
T do not feel myself quite equal to the task. In its present state, 
it will, I trust, answer equally well the purpose of convcying to 
your Excellency what has occurred to me on the subject of the 
question discussed yesterday. 

I have the honour to be, with the highest respect, 
your Excellency’s most faithful, and obedient servant, * 
G. H. BARLOw. 
(Enclosure.) 


Conceiving it may be satisfactory to your Lordship to know 
what has occurred to me on a deliberate consideration of the im- 
portant question discussed yesterday, I shall do mysclf the 
honour of stating the result. No doubt was entertained, as far 
as related to the question of right and justice, that the British 
Government was at full liberty to prosecute the present plan of 


TO RENOUNCE THE TREATY, WILL BE ASCRIBED TO FEAR. 245 


measures, or to declare the alliance with the Peishwa void. If 
any difficulty existed with regard to this branch of the question, 
it was to assign reasons for declaring the alliance at an end with- 
out hazarding an impcachment of our good faith. 

It only remained, therefore, to determine whether good policy 
required our persevering or withdrawing, under the unexpected 
circumstances of the total inability of the Peishwa to fulfil his 
part of the engagements, of the probability of hostilitics with 
France, of the part taken by the Rajah of Berar, and the con- 
fedecracy formed between Scindiah, the Rajah of Berar, and 
Holkar, of the certainty of the approaching dissolution of the 
Nizam, and of the nature of the orders received from England. 

If we abandon the alliance, and withdraw our forces, (what- 
ever may be the reasons we may assign for the measure,) no other 
construction will be given, both by friends and enemies, to this 
change of policy but this; that we were at least doubtful of the 
success of the impending military operations. They will never 
belicve that in the present advanced stage of the business, and 
after all the declarations which have been made by our ministers 
at the Mahratta courts, that we should abandon a plan which 
has been pursued with unremitting perseverance for a course of 
ycars, and the advantages of which to our interests are so obvious, 
but from an apprchension of our inability to repel the opposition 
which has been raiscd to the consolidation of our alliance with 
the Peishwa. What will be the effect of this impression on the 
minds of our fricnds and enemics? Our friends will no longer 
entertain their present implicit confidence in our power and pro- 
tection, and our enemies will make all India resound with shouts 
of triumph at our having yiclded the ficld to them. The mis- 
chievous consequences which must be produced by this change 
in the sentiments of the states of India with respect to the 
British powcr, cannot be calculated. 
¢ But is it certain, in the event of our withdrawing our forces, 
that we should be allowed to retain the countries ceded to us by 
the Pcishwa to indemnify us for the expense of the measures un- 
dertaken for his support? Is it not to be apprehended that the 
power which might succeed in usurping the authority of the 
Poonah Government, would endcavour to compcl us to relinquish 
those countrics, by committing continued depredations in them, 
in the confidence that the same motives which induced us to 
avoid war when our armics were in the ficld, and in the most 
advantageous positions, would influcnce us still more strongly, 


246 WE SHO ULD BE BLAMED AT HOME; AND HELP FRENCH POLICY. 


when we had to collect those armics again, and which the opera- 
tions of the most successful campaign could not be expected to 
place in their present advantageous positions? There is no con- 
jecturing to what lengths the presumptuous character of the 
Mahrattas might impel them under such circumstances. Thus 
we might be compelled to go to war under the disadvantages of 
loss of national character, and of limited means, and probably 
after having afforded to the French an opportunity of connecting 
themselves as auxiliaries with some of the Mahratta states. 

Should this be the result, the Government would incur a 
heavy load of responsibility in England. Its conduct would be 
first censured for engaging in the alliance, next, for withdrawing 
from it, and lastly, for placing itself in a situation which reduced 
it to the alternative of engaging in a war under the disad- 
vantages above stated, or of sacrificing the national character by 
relinquishing the retained territories. 

With respect to the expected death of the Nizam, supposing 
the Mahrattas, or any of the disaffected members of the Nizam’s 
family, to have it in contemplation to take advantage of that 
event to destroy our connection with the Court of Hyderabad, 
our armics in the Deccan could not be more favourably stationed 
than they are at present for the purpose of frustrating any such 
designs. If such designs are entertained, I am persuaded it 
would have been your Lordship’s duty to have called the same 
armies into the field, supposing no alliance had been concluded 
with the Peishwa. 

With respect to the French, supposing the present questions 
in Europe not to lead to an immediate rupture, we are now 
certain that the whole course of their policy has for its object 
the subversion of the British empire in India, and that at no 
distant period of time they will put their plans into exccution. 
It is absolutely necessary for the defeat of these designs, that no 
native state should be left to cxist in India, which is not upheld 
by the British power, or the political conduct of which is not 
under its absolute control. The restoration of the head of the 
Mahratta empire to his Government through the influence of 
the British power, in fact, has placed all the remaining states of 
India in this dependent relation to the British Government. If 
the alliance with the Peishwa is maintained, its natural and 
necessary operations would in the course of time reduce Scin- 
diah (the power which may alrcady be said to be in the interests 
of France) and the Rajah of Berar, to a state of dependence 


PRESENT CRISIS MOST OPPORTUNE FOR PERSEVERANCE, 247 


upon the Peishwa, and consequently upon the British power, 
even if they had acquiesced in the treaty of Bassein, But their 
unjust opposition to this treaty affords us an opportunity of at 
once reducing thcir power to a state that will remove every 
obstacle to the consolidation of the alliance with the Peishwa, 
and to the attainment of all its advantages. When can we hope 
for another opportunity equally favourable, or (under all the 
probable consequences of withdrawing from the alliance,) when 
can we hope to have all India again at our command? With 
respect to the chiefs combined against us, have we any reason- 
able ground to apprehend that we shall not prevail in the con- 
test? The Guicowar state (always considered to form a con- 
siderable part of the strength of the Mahratta empirc,) is actively 
employed in our support. ' The Péishwa, although unable from 
imbecility of character, to command with effect the resources at 
his disposal, is with us. We have the aid and countenance of 
his authority, and his territorics to the south of the Godavery 
friendly to our cause, at Icast more so than to that of our 
enemics, Scindiah, thercfore, is the only chicf who possesses 
the mcans of making any scrious opposition) We know that the 
Rajah of Berar posscsscs neither military knowledge nor military 
resources, ‘We also know that Holkar’s army consists of a body 
of plunderer§, and that he has no means of maintaining a con- 
test of any duration. ‘Our army, well cquipped, has established 
itsclf within the heart of the dominions of these chicfs, and 
within a few marches of their camp, where they are collected 
without moncy, resources, or provisions, and where there is 
every prospect we shall destroy or disperse their whole force at 
onc blow. It is scarcely possible that their military power could 
be placed in circumstances more favourable for our effecting its 
destruction.) : 

With respect to the solicitude expressed in England for 
carrying into effect the plan for paying off the debt in the next 
six years, we can cstimate with tolerable accuracy to what 
degree the exccution of that plan is likcly to be interrupted by 
a perseverance in the present course of measures in the Mahratta 
empire. This interruption is likely to be less in extent and 
duration than that which may be expected from abandoning the 
alliance with the Peishwa, if there is any foundation for the con- 
jectures which I have stated as to the probable consequences of 
that measure. Every year would probably produce some of 
those calamitics which would inevitably attend our declining 


248 YOUR MAHRATTA POLICY JUST AND WISE, IN ALL RELATIONS. 


power and influence, and we cannot conjecture what would be 
our situation at the expiration of six years. On the other hand, 
if we persevere in the present measures, and succeed, we‘are 
certain, not only that the existing debt, with the addition to it 
which may be occasioned by the prosecution of the present 
measures, will be extinguished within the expected time, but 
that the British power will be established throughout India, in 
prosperity, glory, and security., 

The conviction of the justice and wisdom of the line of policy 
which your Excellency has pursued with respect to the Mahratta 
empire, is more strongly impressed on my mind in proportion 
as I consider it in all its relations. I am confident that the line 
of policy is entitled to this character, whether considered with 
reference to the discharge of the debt, to the augmentation of 
the investment, or the other objects which the authorities in 
England have in view, to the true interests of the Mahratta 
chiefs, to the happiness of the millions of wretched people who 
inhabit the countries subjected to their power, to the exclusion 
of the French, to the honour and reputation of our national 
character, or to the stability of the British empire in India. 


89. Lord Castlereagh, President of the Board of Controul ; 
to the Marquess Wellesley. 


Strictures on the Policy of the Treaty. 
(Most Secret.) 
Whitehall, March qth, 1804. 
My dear Lord, 

The Bombay letters of the 28th July, announcing the pro- 
bability of a rupture with the Mahrattas, induccd me to read 
over carefully our negotiations with the Court of Poonah, for 
a series of years, which from a variety of other important | 
subjects pressing upon my attention, I had till then omitted 
to do. 

The outline of the opinion I have been led to form upon this 
subject will be conveyed to your Lordship in a despatch through 
the Secret Committec, but I should not fecl satisfied in differing 
from your Lordship on some points of policy, as connected with 
the late treaty, if I did not put you in possession of the grounds 
upon which my opinions are founded ; I am induced therefore 
without attempting to throw the substance into the form of 
a letter, to send you without reserve, my sentiments in the 


SUBJECT DIVIDED. MAIN END OF TREATY-—PACIFIC TENDENCY, 240 


precise form in which they were first thrown together, trusting 
to their being not less acceptable to your Lordship so conveyed, 
than if transmitted in a more formal shape. 
I have the honour to be, 
My dear Lord, with great regard, 
Your faithful and obedient servant, 
CASTLEREAGII. 


[Lnclosure in Lord Castlercagh’s letter to the Marquess Wellesley 
of the 4th of March, 1804.] 


The question now depending between the British power and 
the Mahrattas is one of great difficulty and importance. 

What directions it may be expedicnt ultimately to give from 
home must depend on the precise issue of the present dis- 
cussions, whatever might have been originally wise as a rule of 
conduct may now require modification, with reference to events, 
to engagements, and to the collatcral effects to be apprchended 
from any particular course we may take. 

The next advices from India will probably ascertain whether 
the discussions have ended in actual war; in a jealous truce, still 
requiring the presence of a British army; or, in that apparent 
acquiescence on the part of the Mahrattas, which may lcad the 
Governor-General to consider that the professed objects of the 
treaty have been accomplished, and induce him to return the 
troops (with the exception of the subsidizing force) to their 
respective cantonments, 

It may be expedient in the meantime to examine—ist. The 
abstract policy of what has been aimed at. 2ndly. How far it 
has been judiciously pursued ; and 3dly. Whether the Governor- 
General has exceeded his legal authority, or gone beyond the 
instructions, under which, if his own authority were inadequate, 
his powers were derived. 

1st. As to the policy of a connexion with the Mahrattas : 

In considcring this question it is material to ascertain precisely 
what the zature of the connexion is, at which we have aimed. 
The professed end in view is, a defensive alliance and guarantee 
‘connecting the Mahrattas with the Nizam and the Company, 
and through that league preserving the peace of India, 

Although the apprehension of remote danger from French 
influence, acting through the Mahratta confederacy, is stated 
as a collateral object to be thus provided against, yct the main 
policy of the system, as rclicd upon, is, its pacific tendency) 


250 TREATY AROSE OUT OF THAT OF 1790, AGAINST TIPPOO, 


On this ground it must principally be tried, the British power 
in India is too firmly consolidated at this moment, and the 
prospect of attack from any quarter too remote to justify us in 
prudence in risking a war, with a view a providing against a 
danger merely speculative. 

The British empire in India may be considered (including 
allies and dependents) as comprehending nearly every thing in 
Hindostan (the Mahratta possessions excepted). In addition to 
our old possessions in Bengal, and on the coast, recently strength- 
ened by the treaties which have placed the whole of the Carnatic, 
and a large proportion of Oude under our immediate adminis- 
tration, we have by two wars, equally just and successful, bound 
up the entire of Mysore in our dominions, and by a negotiation 
conducted with great ability and wisely undertaken, expelled 
French influence from Hyderabad, and connected the Nizam 
indissolubly with our interests. | 

Whatever qucstions may have been hitherto raised on the 
justice of our conduct towards certain dependent states, upon the 
policy of our measures (always assuming them to be founded 
in justice) so far as concerns the consolidation of our authority 
in the Carnatic, in Tanjore, and in Oude, the reduction of the 
power of Tippoo, and the intimate connexion established with 
the Nizam, no well founded doubt can be entertained. 

Considering this as the well established sphere at this day of 
the British power in India, the next step towards a close con- 
nexion with another power, and that power necessarily involved 
in the complicated relations of the Mahratta confederacy, is 
a question of critical and delicate policy. 

The idea upon which the treaty of Basscin was concluded, 
seems originally to have arisen out of, and to have been founded 
upon the connexion subsisting, previously to the conquest of 
Mysore, between the Company, the Mahrattas and the Nizam, 
by the treaty concluded 1790, at Poonah. 

The object of this league was to watch and guard against the 
power of Tippoo, The treaty was defective, inasmuch as it did 
not specify, except with respect to the war then existing, the 
amount of force which the allics were bound to furnish to each 
other; nor did it zz ¢cerms bind their heirs and successors, which 
led to cavils on the part of the Pcishwa. 

It gave us however, in Lord Cornwallis’s war ending in 1792, 
the advantage of considerable succours both from the Nizam and 
the Peishwa against Tippoo. 


CORNWALLIS AVERSE TO CLOSE CONNEXION WITH POONAH. 251 


Upon the peace of Seringapatam, Hurry Punt pressed Lord 

Cornwallis to let the Peishwa subsidize in future a corps of 
British troops in like manner as the Nizam then did. Whether 
he was so authorized by the Peishwa is not known. 
‘ Lord Cornwallis, although the Mahratta General urged it 
strongly (stating that to refuse was acting towards them with 
less friendship than towards the Nizam) declined the proposal ; 
thinking it hazardous to mix ourselves in the unsettled policy 
of the Mahratta statcs, and that the principles, upon which it 
had been thought wise to connect ourselves with the Nizam 
(regard being had to the resources and position of his dominions, 
and also to the hazard of his being thrown into the hands of 
Tippoo, if not connected with the Company) did not apply 
to the state of Poonah; neither did he at that time think it 
essential to our general security, having materially reduced the 
power of Tippoo, to aim at establishing a commanding influence 
at Poonah. 

Whether an acquiescence in Hurry Punt’s proposal would have 
guarded against the decay of the Peishwa’s power, which after- 
wards happened, it is difficult now to determine; but we find 
that, previously to the war of 1798-9 against Tippoo, both the 
Peishwa and the Nizam were so reduced in authority, the former 
by the ascendangy of Scindiah; the latter by a strong French 
faction in his army, as to render it very little probable, that the 
Company, in the cvent of a rupture with Tippoo, could hope 
to derive any efficient aid from the alliance. 

The object of the Company was then to strengthen its allics, 
in order that they might be in a situation to fulfil their engage- 
ments; Scindiah’s purpose was to weaken the Pcishwa, and to 
get the power at Poonah into his own hands. Hence arose 
a jealousy between Scindiah and the Company, which produced 
a proportionate union of interest between him and Tippoo, The 
number of French officers in the armics of Scindiah, of Tippoo, 
and of the Nizam, rendered the danger very scrious of a for- 
midable combination of the native powers against us supported 
by France. 

In this state of things, Lord Wellesley wisely determined to 
use every expedient to revive our influence and authority both 
at the courts of Poonah and Ilyderabad. A British force was 
offered the Pcishwa to protect his person and re-establish his 
government, and an augmentation of the subsidiary force was 
Proposed to the Nizam, 


252 LESS NECESSARY AFTER SUPPRESSION OF TIPPOO & FRENCH. 


Under a varicty of pretences, evidently resulting from a 
jealousy of our power, as well as that of Scindiah, our offer was 
declined by the Peishwa. What then occurred is noticed here 
principally to mark the jealousy which even then disinclined the 
Peishwa to place himself in our hands, as well as to point out 
the strong defensive policy, which warranted us to risk much for 
the purpose of giving vigour and consistency to the only alliance, 
on which we could reckon, against the hostile confederacy with 
which we were threatened. 

The result was, that we derived no support from the Mahrattas 
in the last Mysore war; our connection with the Nizam was 
improved, the French force in his Highness’s service finally 
destroyed, and a commanding British corps established in its 
room. 

The termination of the war in the conquest of Mysore, and 
the absolute extinction of French influence in that quarter of 
India, as well as at Hyderabad, placed the Mahratta question 
entirely on new grounds. 

Hitherto, a connection with the Mahrattas had been sought as 
a defence against Tippoo and the French influence generally. 
The fall of Tippoo and the extinction of the French party in 
Mysore and Hydcrabad, leaving only what was to be found in 
Scindiah’s army, as any object of jealousy, put an end to the 
importance as a mcans of necessary and immediate sccurity of 
a connection with the Mahrattas. 

From this time it could not be argued to be of pressing 
necessity. The most that could be contended for was, its being 

| desirable on grounds of gencral expediency, and as tending to 
guard against remote and contingent dangers, we were certainly 
| justified in risking less to accomplish it. 

It was reasonable also to suppose, that in proportion as our 
power had been increased and consolidated, and as that of Tippoo 
was absolutcly extinguished, the Mahrattas would entertain 
additional jealousy of any subsidiary connection with us. 

We find accordingly, after the peace, that upon the Pcishwa 
being invited to accede to the treaty of Hyderabad, upon which 
condition we should have decmed him entitled to a certain share 
in the conquered territorics, he declined the proposal evidently 
from indisposition to receive a British force within his dominions. 

Between that period and the treaty of Basscin, several at- 
tempts were made by us to induce him to enter into subsidiary 
engagements with us. The same was proposed to the Rajah of 


MAHRATTAS POWERS ALL ADVERSE TO SUCH A CONNEXION, 253 


/ 
Berar, and an opening left in the treaty of Hyderabad of 1800, 
for Scindiah to accede on certain terms; but the connection was 
declined by all. ‘ 

The Peishwa, when most oppressed and in danger from Scin- 
diah, proceeded considerable lengths in entertaining the pro- 
position of a subsidiary alliance, but always resisted the idea of 
[the subsidiary force being stationed w¢thin his dominions.\ Even 
with this qualification, our connection was an alternative which 
the Peishwa never latterly shewed any disposition to adopt,[but 
under the pressure of extreme embarrassment, and it is even 
doubtful whether he was ever really sincere in the propositions he 
made, as his system invariably was to play off Scindiah and us 
against each other, and his overtures were gencrally accompanied 
by some stipulation which he had reason to suppose would not 
be acceded to by the Governor-General 

If the connection, after the fall of Tippoo, became of Icss 
pressing necessity, doubts may be entertained of the policy of 
appearing to pursue the object (with such unremitting anxictyi 
It will be necessary hereafter to examine under what circum- 
stances a Mahratta alliance would or would not be desirable ; 
but if the early conclusion of it was not of urgent importance to 
our immediate security, it might perhaps have been more suc- 
cessfully accomplished under a system of more reserve on our 
part. 

The eagerness with which we appeared to press our connection 
upon all the Icading statcs in succession, might naturally. Icad 
them to apprehend that we meant more than we avowed, }that 
our object was ultimatcly to be masters instcad of allies, and 
that, having obtained cither possession of, or absolute influence 
over every state, except the Mahrattas, with whom we had been 
in connection, our object was to obtain a similar influence over 
their councils. } 

Under whatever estimate of our views it may have been 
formed, the fact is indisputable, { that a general repugnance to 
the British connection on the terms proposed universally pre- 
vailed amongst the great Mahratta powers.] It was avoided 
by all as long as they had any choice} It was only embraced 
by the Peishwa, when an exile from his dominions; and the 
jealousy of it was such as to have since led Holkar and Scindiah 
to forget their animositics, and to appear disposed to league 
with the Rajah of Berar against the Company and the Pcishwa, 
How long the Pcishwa will continue faithful to engagements 


254 WE CANNOT RULE MAHRATTAS THROUGH A FEEBLE PEISHWA. 


which were contracted from necessity and not from choice, in 
opposition to the other Mahratta states, is yct to be scen. 

The practical question to be considered is, whether an alliance 
formed under such circumstances can rest upon any other 
foundation than mere force, and if not, whether the mcans by 
which it is to be upheld, are not destructive of its professed 
advantages, 

Supposing Holkar, Scindiah, and the Rajah of Berar adverse, 
and the Peishwa acquicscent, but in his heart not cordially . 
satisfied, can we expect that the subsidiary force alone will 

_ enable us to maintain our influence at Poonah? 

If such be the unqualified fecling of the Mahratta states. to 
a connection with us upon the principles on which the prcsent 
has been formed, unless we are prepared to. establish oursclucs 
by conquest in that quarter of India, it seems necessary either 
to abandon the connection (if it can be abandoned consistent 
with a due regard to our engagements), or to modify it (should 
such be practicable) so as to reconcile at Icast a proportion of 
the Mahratta states. 

It appears hopeless to attempt to govern the Mahratta empire 
through a feeble and perhaps disaffected Peishwa. The military 
power of the state of Poonah is at present inconsiderable. | 

It may be said the military power of the Pcishwa ynder our 
protection may be consolidated and restored, and other states 
may be gradually reconciled to the alliance. Both these results 
may be possible; but the true question is, whether they are 
probable in such a degree, and whether they are likely to occur 
withih such a reasonable period of time, and to be accomplished 
with so little hazard of expence as to makc it politic to persevere 
against present opposing difficulties ? \ Is the future effect likely 
to add so much to our prospects in point of sccurity and tran- 
quillity as to counterbalance the immediate inconveniences of 
war with the several Mahratta powers ? 

In examining this, the motive to alliance must be reverted to. 
Whatever may be the disposition amongst the Mahratta states to 
plunder cach other, they have hitherto respected our territory. 
They have seldom even levied contributions on the Nizam, not- 
withstanding the disputed claims for Choute, &c. since his close 
connection with us, 

The Mahrattas_have never in any instance commenccd hostili- 
tics against us, | When, by taking part in their internal disputes 
we have been at war with any of the Mahratta states, they have 


. 


MAHRATTAS NOT DANGEROUS, DISLIKE OUR ARBITRATION. 255 


always availed themselves of the first opening for peace, and 
have shewn forbearance and humanity to a British army, more 
than once, when in difficulty. So far then as past experience 
goes, there seems no special ground to apprehend future danger 
from the Mahrattas. The French officers in Scindiah’s army 
are just objects of jealousy, and thcir mixing themsclves in the 
affairs of the native powers must be watched, and be matter of 
alarm in proportion to the degree in which it takes place, and as 

_ those states are zcar to, or remote from our possessions ; but 
this alone cannot render the alliance prudent, nor is this danger 
at present of a magnitude to call for the adoption of a system, 
otherwise of dubious policy. 

As far as the Mahratta interests are concerned, what motive can 
they have in acquiescing in the ostensible head of their empire 
being placed in our hands? 

Whatever we may hold out to reconcile the Pcishwa to the 
alliance, and however we may profess to respect his independ- 
ence in the management of his own internal affairs, we cannot 
deny that in fact as well as in appearance, whilst a British army 
is at Poonah,(he can be considered in no other light than as 
politically dependent on us. 

The Mahratta contentions between the Icading states have 
been chigfly for influence at Poonah. To obtain this, Holkar 
attacked Scindiah. Having been deprived of this, Scindiah 
abandoncd the Pcishwa, and seems prepared to join his greatest 
enemy. The same motives which before opposed them to each 
other now oppose them both to us, and the Berar Rajah) perhaps 
with views to supplant the Pcishwa, and with common f¢clings 

fof jealousy, joins the confederacy. 

What will reconcile them to a different course? To talk to 
them of the advantage of our guarantee for preserving the peace 
of Hindostan, assumes that the genius of thcir government is 

| tndustrious and pacific, instead of being predatory and warlike j) 
nor is it to be expected that independent states, especially of the 
description in question, can feel any disposition to make us, or 
any other great power, an arbiter of their destiny. 

We not only place the Pcishwa as a prey out of their reach, 
but we declare our purpose is to prevent them from plundering 
each other. They wish to be unrestrained in carrying their 
arms wherever they can derive advantage\ Temporary distress 
may make them in their turn accept our support. Were it 
given as a temporary assistance it would frequently de sought 


256 MAHRATTA CONNEXION MEANS EXTENSION OF OUR DOMINIONS. 


for, and, as far as their means would go, paid for, but when it 
is to be given permanently, or not at all, it will only be accepted 
when no other resource remains.) It will be avoided by each 
state exempt from the pressure, when the danger is gone by 
it will be disrelished by the state which has submitted to it, 
and ultimately we must either alter the genius of thé various 
states, or rely upon our arms alone for the preservation of 
our authority. 

To aim at a connection with the Mahratta powers on these 
grounds is, to say the least, extremely hazardous. It is evidently 
against the grain. It may be difficult and expensive to be 
established, not less so to be maintained, and as it must, when 
accomplished,(rest 02 our authority and arms, rather than the 
disposition of our allics, it must practically operate as an exten- 
sion of our own dominions., 

Such a result we disavow as our object. In principle, as well 
as in policy, we are bound by the laws of the land to abstain 
from it, and it certainly would be a hazardous project to embark 
in the management of this half-civilized people, in addition to 
the widely extended empire of which we are now possessed) If 
we are not prepared to contemplate such a purpose, we should 
avoid being gradually led into a course of measures, the tendency 
of which leads to such a result as their natural consequence. 

Is there then no conncction with any of the Mahratta states, 
at which in policy we should aim? 

Tt does not follow because an alliance, which places a British 
force in immediate contact with a weak Mahratta power, and 
that pqwer the supreme head of the empire, in opposition to the 
will of all the stronger states, is unwise and dangcrous, that no 
relation can be established between the British power and certain 

statcs of that empire, which may have a tendency to protect our 
| interests against such dangers as might otherwise arise from, of 
- operate through, that confederacy. 

It may, however, be asserted, that to be cither safe or useful, 
it must be formed on a broader basis than the present, and as 
ithe British power, from its magnitude, must now have become a 
more natural object of jealousy to the Mahratta states than any 
other, it is not probable that any considerable portion of the 
Mahratta confederacy will be disposed to connect themselves 
with us, unless we can present to them that connection in a 
shape less inconsistent with thgir natural propensitics and inde- 
pendence than the late treaty. 


OUR PROBABLY BEST COURSE IN THE LATE CRISIS. 257 


When jealousy is once strongly aroused, any arrangement is 
become of more difficulty. Whether it might have been feasible, 
must remain matter of speculation, but I can conceive, lif Holkar 
and Scindiah had becn suffered to reduce each other, before a 
treaty had been proposed to the Peishwa, that a broader con- 
nection might have béen formed; especially if the introduction 
of the British force.to be subsidized zto the dominions of our 
allies had not been mdde a sine gud non. 

It may be said, if the treaty had not been pushed with the 
Peishwa when at Basscin, he might have refused it afterwards ; 
possibly so; but it may be doubted whether the treaty so ob- 
tained was a benefit, 

The benefit as well as the necessity of a Mahratta connection 
has for the last four years been in my conception always over- 
rated. The importance of not taking the whole of the burthcn 

upon ourselves of restoring the Peishwa, appears to have been 

strongly felt by Lord Wellesley, and he accordingly after the 
conclusion of the treaty wished to hold back, and leave Holkar 
and Scindiah to weaken and reduce each other; but as the 
treaty could not be concealed from Scindiah and the other 
powers, the success of this course depended upon their senti- 
ments with respect to the treaty itsclf. Our troops, however, 
were moved forward by Lord Clive’s orders, before the result 
could be distinctly ascertained. 

Perhaps our safest line would have been to have received the 
Peishwa hospitably, to have professed a disposition to assist the 
othcr Mahratta powers in repressing Holkar’s rebellion, and 
restoring the Peishwa to the Musnud, provided we found his 
Highness and his allics were disposed to connect themselves in 
interest with us. 

Had we remaincd with our army on the fronticts, pledged to 
neither party, and in a position to assist cither, our aid must 
have been an object of competition to both. 

Neither had any claim upon us, and conscquently ncither 
(whatever might be our opinion of the merits of their cause) had 
any right to expect our assistance without an equivalent. In 
postponing any negociation with the Peishwa, till he could 
treat in conjunction with Scindiah, we should have been able 
oo correctly to estimate the grounds upon which we were 
\procecding. 

It is probable the Peishwa and Scindiah united, could not 

have dislodged Holkar from Poonah without our aid. If so, ft 
$ 


258 OUR POSITION AT POONAH WEAKENS US ELSEWHERE, 


lay upon them to offer terms to us. But then, in treating with 
the Peishwa and Scindiah conjointly, we left the Peishwa in 
Scindiah’s hands*as before. And why not? Our motive for 
interference was not any principle of attachment to the Peishwa 
or any claim he had upon us. It was with a view of establish- 
ing an influence in the Mahratta empire, calculated to improve 
our general security and preserve the tranquillity of India.) This 
could alone be effectually accomplished by a substantial and not 
a nominal connection, which Scindiah and the Peishwa united 
might amount to, but not the Peishwa singly. 

The mistake appears to have been, the following up too 
strictly the policy acted upon before the fall of Tippoo. Then 
we were obliged to endeavour to take the Peishwa out of Scin- 
diah’s hands, inasmuch as the latter, with a view of strengthen- 
ing himself at Poonah, leant to Tippoo and against us, Had we 
on the present occasion not manifested any particular jealousy 
[of Scindiah, but expressed a willingness to receive proposals for 
connecting ourselves wth both, and limited our views to what 
would strengthen us, without either 7 appearance or in fact making 
them instruments in our hands, I see no reason (if practicable 
at all) why a treaty with both might not have been made, 

The main advantage of the treaty of Bassein I take to be, the 
increased footing it gives us in the Guzerat. (Our position at 
Poonah, abstractedly considered, appears to me more calculated 
to weaken our influence over the other statcs than to strengthen 
us by the power to be found there, and I should (as at present 
informed) much prefer having the subsidiary force stationed at 
certain positions_within our own territories than stationed in 
those of our ally. | 

Had we concluded subsidiary engagements with both the 
Peishwa and Scindiah, obtaining the Iaidad as now in the 
quarter of Guzerat, the troops never to be moved into the terri- 
tories of either state, except upon requisttion, we should have ob- 
tained an increase of force and territory in our weakest quarter, 
The right to call for this force would have raised these states in 
the scale of the Mahratta powers, without exposing them to our 
unsolicited interference, and as all our subsidiary engagements 
have been made with a reserve as to the application of the troops 
against certain powers named, we should have possessed a salu- 
tary influence in the councils of our allics not incompatible with 
their independence. 

The history of our own connections in India affords instances 


ALIENATES SCINDIAH, AS OFFER OF MEDIATION WOULD NOT. 259 


of both descriptions of alliances. By the treaty of 1768 with the 
Nizam, explained by Lord Cornwallis’s letter in 1789, we were 
bound to furnish to his Highness two battalidns of Sepoys, and 
six pieces of cannon, when called upon so to do, but not other- 
wise. The treaty of 1798 entreased the subsidiary force to six 
battalions, and that of 1800 to eight battalions, to be stationed 
wéthin the Nizam’s dominions, 

f The former principle of connexion appears most suited to 

) vemote and independent states. The latter to a power which 
circumstances have nearly incorporated in policy and interest 
with our own. 

' The former appears to me to be alone applicable to any por- 
tion of the Mahratta empire, consideration being had to its com- 
position and nature, and also to our position with respect to it. 
The latter under the circumstances was wisely applied to the 
Nizam, substituting British in the room of French influence, and 
throwing the shicld of our authority over that state, incapable in 
itself of preserving its territories against the contimual incursions 
of the Mahrattas. 

It may be said, had the Peishwa and Scindiah met, they would 
have declined all permanent connection with us. Supposing 
this to have been the case, there were other courses open to us, 
without supporting an usurper in opposition to the Peishwa. We 

-might either in conjunction with the Rajah of Berar have offered 
he disinterested mediation, and thercby dispelled much of the 
larm that had grown up, as to our views; or, if we preferred co- 
operating with Scindiah in the restoration of the Pcishwa with- 
out any permancnt alliance, we might have obtained, I have no 
doubt, an ample territorial indemnity in the quarter of Guzerat for 
our services, as well as our expences. At all events, in preserving 
an army of observation on the frontier, and not mixing ourselves 
in Mahratta politics, except upon sure grounds, if we gained no 
more than sccuring our own territory, as well as that of our ally 
the Nizam from insult, we escaped war, whilst the Mahratta 
powers wasted their strength , 

I cannot but doubt the policy of our making from the outset 
the Pcishwa our only,(or even our main object.) The determina- 
tion to take him out of the hands of Scindiah was, from the first 
apparent, if not avowed; and from that moment, if Scindiah 
could save himself by negociation with his opponents, he had 
every inducement to throw himself into the scale against us. 

His doing so, rendered our success without a war extremely 

$2 


260 AND RISKS WAR, WHICH OBSERVING ATTITUDE WOULD AVOID. 


doubtful, and more than any other circumstance rendered the 
Peishwa’s fidelity to our alliance precarious. 

It remains to be considered whether, as has been suggested, 
the Governor-General has exceeded his powers, and lastly, what 
instructions should now be given from hence for the future regu- 
lation of his conduct. 

The first question depends on his powers.—1st. Under the 
42nd section of the act of 1793. 2ndly. Under his instructions 
from home of the 1oth of September 1800, and 4th of December 
of the same year. 

The law clearly gives him no authority to conclude any treaty 
binding the Company to guarantee the territories of any state, 
except that state shall at the same time bind itself to support 
the Company in a war then actually existing, or in the case of 
preparations then making for war against the Company. It has 
not been alledged that Holkar, when this treaty was made, had 
either committed, or meditated hostilities against us or our 
allies; the treaty of Bassein was therefore clearly not within the 
scope of the 42nd clause. 

The next question is under his instructions. The instructions 
were necessarily general. The precise course pursued in acting 
upon them may in policy be questioned, but I think the Go- 
vernor-General, as far as powers go is clearly borne out in what 
he has done, regard being had to the tenor of those instructions, 
coupled with the recorded proceedings of his negotiations at the 
court of Poonah, of which the Government at home were from 
time to time put in possession, and which when acquiesced in, 
might be fairly considered by him as approved of, and consc- 
quently illustrative of those orders, 

The orders specifically approved of a subsidiary treaty with 
the Peishwa similar to that of the Nizam. 

‘- They enjoined a large subsidiary force as indispensable, and 
assumed that the Peishwa must facttly renounce his independence. 

In the letter of the 4th of December it is stated, that if by any 
arrangement wot likely to lead to hostilities, the Peishwa could be 
relieved from the influence of Scindiah, it would be highly de- 
sirable, &c. &c. 

In that of the roth of September, the Governor-General’s 
, plan for establishing a subsidiary force at Poonah is approved 
tof. Caution is recommended in renewing the negotiation, except 

at the instance of the court of Poonah, or at a crisés, when there 
can be no doubt of the proposition being accepted. 


in pets 


THE CRISIS CERTAINTY OPPORTUNE FOR THE CONNEXION. 261 


Now, although the alliance under a reasonable apprehension of 
hostilities is not authorized, yet it would be too much to suppose 
that it could be concluded without any risk being incurred, par- 
ticularly as it was declared and clearly understood, that nothing 

{ but the ast necessity would induce the Peishwa to sign such a 
treaty, and the object being to dispossess Scindiah of his in- 
fluence at Poonah, his opposition could not but be expected. 

In July 1800, the Peishwa fearing that his person might be 
scized by Scindiah, vested certain persons with the power of 
signing a treaty for him. | 

In this event of the flight or seizure of the Peishwa, Lord 
Wellesley ordered the Resident to conclude a subsidiary treaty 
with him, or those authorized on his part, also the British troops 
to occupy the Mahratta districts south of the Kistna. 

This was a stronger case of risk than the present, as Scindiah 
then must have been forcibly driven from Poonah, whereas the 
state of his own affairs lately afforded some prospect of his co- 
operation, and the chance of a rupture was more with Holkar an 
adventurer than with the established feudatories of the Mahratta 
empire. 

Early in May of the same year, Lord Wellesley authorized 
the Resident at Poonah to conclude a secret treaty with the 
Pcishwa, in which the Company were to engage to compel 
Scindiah to remove from the Deccan, and also to bind them- 

jeclves to maintain the Peishwa ix his just rights and authority 

over that chicf, and over the other acknowledged feudatories 
of the empire, the Nizam and Rajah of Berar, to be at liberty 
to acccde. 

The latter is even a stronger proceeding. In both these cases 
Scindiah was to be necessarily opposed. In the latter absolutely 
forced. ‘ Whereas previously to the treaty of Bassein our inter- 
fcrence was solicited by all partics. 

It is not here the question whether the negotiation was judi- 
ciously conducted, or whether the treaty in itself was the most 
advisable one that could have been framed under the circum- 
stances. It is only meant in this part of the argument to state, 
that in the position whercin the Mahratta states then were placed 
with relation to each other, no criss could have been found more 
propitious to the formation of a connexion if under any circum. 
stances it were attainable, 

It is also contended, that under the words of his instructions 
and the mode in which he had acted under them on the above 


262 NOR HAS GOVERNOR-GENERAL EXCEEDED HIS POWERS. 


occasions with the acquiescence of the Government at home Lord 
Wellesley might reasonably consider himself as authorized to 
pursue the course he took. 

Whatever therefore there may be to criticize in respect to the 
policy aimed at, or the management of the negotiations, it can- 

,not well be contended that Lord Wellesley’s conduct should be 
called in question, as having acted in breach of the instructions 
sent him. 

Before we proceed to apply the principles heretofore laid down 

to the existing case, or to consider what orders it may be advis- 
able to send from hence, it is material to mark, that the objec- 
tions above-stated are not against any and every description of 
.Mahratta connexion but against that which gives us the Peishwa 
alone, whilst it commits us in hostility with the three greatcst 
military powers of the empire. 

It is also considered that no alliance which does not give us a 
majority of the preponderating chiefs of the confederacy in cordial 
connexion with us can in the long run prove of advantage, inas- 

‘ much as such an alliance will occasion frequent recurrence to 
arms, and place the discontented statcs more in a situation to be 
tampcred with by France. 

That there is no rcason, certainly none from experience, to 
suppose an alliance can ever be formed with the Mahrattas by 
a European power on principles destructive of the independence 
of any leading state; but more especially of the ostensible head 
of the Mahratta confederacy, without making all the other 
powers enemies, and even occasioning the fidclity of the allied 
state to be precarious. 

That the Mahratta confederacy, though the power of the 
Peishwa is imperfectly defined, and feebly maintained, is yet so 
far a body politic as to make the acts of each member a matter 
of common concern to all. 

That Lord Wellesley when he looked to treat secretly for 
the expulsion of Scindiah from Poonah in terms recognized a 
paramount power to reside in the Pcishwa over Scindiah and 
ithe other Mahratta chieftains. This paramount authority as 
head of the empire, and not his individual strength, could never 
have suggested the policy of looking principally to the Pcishwa’s 
connexion. 

If that be the case, it is impossible to contend that the 
Peishwa can treat and act as a scparate and independent state ; 
and whilst he retains and asserts his authority over the Mahratta 


MAHRATTAS CAN'T SUFFER PEISHWA TO BE OUR DEPENDANT. 263 


feudatories, submit himself in the management of his external 
concerns in a great degree to a foreign power. If he does so 
act, he must do it at his peril, and the other states will naturally 
consider how those acts are likely to affect their security or 
independence. 

An alliance with the Peishwa and Scindiah jointly under the 
circumstances which took place subsequent to the defeat of the 
confederate forces before Poonah, perhaps might have been 
formed upon the basis of stationing the subsidiary force within 
our own territories, liable to be called on under certain con- 
ditions by each power in proportion as it contributed the funds 
towards its maintenance and support, not restricting either to 
a communication with us, before he concluded*any treaty, for 
such stipulation where it is not reciprocal, is upon the face of it 
an abrogation of independence; but trusting that and every 
other question which might touch our interests to the Icgitimate 
influence gradually arising out of a connexion framed with a 
view to support and not extinguish the authority of the other 
contracting party, and also to the known and acknowledged 
power of the British arms, which it could never be their wish or 
their interest to provoke. 

If an alliance framed on principles compatible with the feel- 
ings of a large proportion of that empire could not be formed 
under the circumstances which then prevailed, when so many 
partics had the strongest motives for cultivating our support, it 
may be doubted whether a Mahratta connexion is to be accom- 
plished on any grounds short of subjugation.{ To subdue the 
Mahratta empire would be (if at all practicable) to charge our- 
sclves with an incumbrance, and to bring ourselves in contact 
with ncighbours much more troublesome, it would be sacrificing 
a tolerable barricr for one infinitely more precarious; and it 
must never be forgot, that were our object accomplished, of 
placing a subsidiary force of equal strength with that which the 
Peishwa is to reccive under the treaty of Basscin, in the domi- 
nions of each of the four great military chicftains of the con- 
fedcracy, we should be only permanently extending our native 
force to the amount of 24,000 men, without any assurance that 
the empire at home can spare us, that additional proportion of 
European force, which, whether actually making a part of the 
subsidiary corps or not, ought always invariably to accompany 
every encrease of our Indian army. 

Success therefore whether in war, or in negotiation, so long as 


264 WE SHOULD CONSOLIDATE, NOT EXTEND, OUR EMPIRE. 


we are forcing, and not inviting this alliance, however, for the 
time it may give a lustre to our authority, can only embark us 
in difficulties, from which it may be embarrassing to recede.) 

The British empire in India contains above fifty millions of 
inhabitants, it produces a revenue of above thirteen millions 
sterling a year, encreasing with the general prosperity of the 
country at this moment rapidly advancing under the mild and 
beneficent administration of the Company. Our regular army 
native and European, on its peace establishment amounts to 
115,000 men, a force capable of immediate extension in time of 
war. With such an empire a Mahratta connexion may be a 
very good thing, if it can be had without mixing us too deeply 
in their internal disturbances, or leading to an extension of 
ea beyond our purpose, but we are too strong ¢o require 
zt,/ Our wisest policy is to place our dependence in that quarter, 
on the consolidation and improvement of what we already pos- 
sess. On the steady application of our resources to the reduc- 
tion of our debt, and approaching every native powcr posscssed 
of and valuing its independence, with offers of alliance and con- 
nexion (when any such are to be made) on grounds really com- 
patible with that independence, trust to the friends which such 
a course of conduct will make for us in the hour of trial, it being 
jittle probable that any competitor for castern dominion can 
deprive us of our share of alliances when the danger is at hand, 
unless we ourselves by a mistaken course of policy lay the 
grounds before he approaches, 

It has not been a matter of choice, but of necessity, that our 
existence in India should pass from that of traders to that of 
sovereigns. “If we had not, the French would long since have 
taken the Icad in India to our exclusion. | 

In the various contentions for power, in which our security 
was at the same time really involved, we have risen to an extent 
of possession and authority which can no longer be safely per- 
mitted {to rest on any other foundation than our own intrinsic 
strength.) Events have latterly accelerated our progress so much 
as in itself (the rather as most political transactions will admit 
of question) to give an impression, with respect to our policy, 
which, if Acightened, may be productive of scrious cmbarrass- 
ment to our interests both at home and abroad. Without being 
disposed to admit, or in truth fecling, that the tenor of our 
administration in India has been otherwise than highly honour- 
able to the national charactcr, I think it is material, having 


HOW FAR TREATY OF BASSEIN SHOULD BE ADHERED TO; 265 


| already accomplished so much in point of power and glory, that 

we should now be studious to give to our councils a complexion 

of moderation and forbearance, trusting, as we may safely do, 
the preservation of our Indian possessions to the resources 
abundantly contained within our present limits. 
In determining what it may be advisable to do, under present 
circumstances, it is necessary to decide to what extent we are 
| bound and prepared to support the treaty of Bassein, 

Lord Wellesley from the outset declared his determination 
not to persevere in the connection if the Peishwa’s conduct was 
such as to prove him averse and faithless to the alliance. » 

His Lordship also resolved not to force the restoration of the 
Peishwa contrary to the feelings and inclinations of the majority 
of the immediate jaggcerdars and feudatories of the Poonah 
state. 

(Should the conduct of the Peishwa have become such as to 
induce the Governor-Gencral to consider the alliance dissolved 
under the treaty of Basscin, the British Government will have 
an undoubted claim to retain the territories ceded by his 
Highness till he shall have fully discharged the extraordinary 
expense incurred in replacing him on the musnud.) 

In case the Pcishwa shall have performed his part of the 
treaty, he is entitled to our support, and having guarantced his 
dominions in good faith and character, we are bound to defend 
and maintain him on the musnud. 

The treaty itself may be considered as consisting of two parts, 
the first affecting the immediate intercsts of the Peishwa, the 
second principally affecting our own; the former, unless modi- 
ficd with his Highness’s concurrence, we are bound to adhere 
to; the relaxation of the latter depends principally on ourselves, 
and can mect with little difficulty on his part. 

The 3rd and 17th articles are obvious points of jealousy 
to all the Mahratta states, and from former experience of the 

\nis min reluctance to the receiving @ subsidiary force within 


his dominions, the third article is not likely to be in truth more 
acceptable to him. 

The 12th article also descrves consideration which binds the 
Pcishwa to accept our arbitration in all disputes with the other 
powers. If the rcasoning contained in the former part of these 
notes is right, doubts may be entertained of the policy of a con- 
nection with the Poonah state, which is necessarily calculated to 
mix the British Government so intimately in Mahratta politics, 


266 BUT ALTERED, THAT PEISHWA MAY SEEM LESS DEPENDANT; 


and must in appearance render the Peishwa absolutely de- 
pendent on us. 

As far as relates to arbitrating the differences between the 
Nizam and the Peishwa as allies of the Company, we were 
bound to contend for it under the treaty of Hyderabad of 1800, 

, but beyond this, having provided that our troops were not to be 

employed against any of the principal branches of the Mahratta 
empire, it would perhaps ibe better not to stipulate for a right, 
which being general, may alarm other states, and cannot be very 
acceptable even to the Peishwa himself, but rather to rely for 
the means of regulating his conduct upon pacific principles on 
the grounds we shall have to withhold the subsidiary force in 
cases where the Peishwa may be deemed the aggressor, than upon 
a positive right of arbitration in all cases binding upon him. 

Without therefore failing in the spirit of our obligations to the 
Peishwa, we have the means of altering so far the character of 
the treaty as to restore his Highness to a state of more ostensible 
independence, and to give to the alliance Icss the aspect of aiming 
at an interference in Mahratta affairs. 

Much of my doubt upon the policy of any Mahratta con- 
nection, however modified, arises from an apprehension of its 
tendency to involve us too much in the endless and complicated 
distractions of that turbulent empire. Much of my difficulty 
| would be removed by our connection being so far simplified as 
to confine it toa mere support upon requisition, and that claim 
| of support necessarily qualified by the principles which strictly 
-belong to every defensive alliance. We should then always have 
a good plea for keeping out of discussion, which appeared to us 
foreign to the principles of our alliance ; we should equally derive 
all the advantages connected with the late cessions, and being 
ess pledged to interference, we should perhaps be in a situation 
5 exercise a more beneficial influence than we can do by 
‘making ourselves absolute parties, in which light we must be 
iconsidered so long as the subsidiary force is at Poonah and the 
Peishwa actually in our hands. 

The object of the late treaty has been to obtain a complete 
and commanding influence: to render this at all sccure from 
interruption and contest, our authority must be introduced upon 

\ similar principles into other leading Mahratta states. The 
\ accomplishment of this seems little probable if desirable, and the 
reasons for not thinking it desirable have been already stated. 

The objections to forming a subsidiary connection with the 


JEALOUSY OF CHIEFS,AND WANT OF OUR TROOPS, BE LESSENED, 267 


‘Mahratta states upon the modified plan herein proposed appear 
less serious, as it throws less weight of management and inter- 
ference upon us, whilst in its nature it is less calculated to excite 
the resentment and jealousy of powers not included in the 
alliance; the stipulations may be fulfilled without so large an 

[ extension of our native force, but even upon this principle it 

7 ought not to be carried beyond what appcars absolutely requisite 
to unite some proportion of the confederacy in interest with us, 
as I am satisfied the limited number of men that can be ob- 
tained in Europe for general service in the present state of our 
manufactures and commerce, and the extended scale on which 
it will be thought necessary hereafter to provide for our home 
defence, renders it hopeless to aim at obtaining for India a 
larger establishment of King’s troop 

In any modification of the treaty of Bassein upon the prin- 
ciples above suggested, it is of great importance to guard against 
any impression calculated to make the Nizam discontented with 
the treaty of Hyderabad of 1800. 

This cannot be difficult to manage. The Nizam has a direct 
intcrest in the subsidiary force being so stationed as effectually 
to cover his dominions from Mahratta incursions ; it will be easy 
to make him feel the policy of modifying our connection with 
the Court of Poonah, the head of the Mahratta confederacy, 
so as to occasion less jealousy in the other states; and as war 
always augments his expenses, as our ally, he will have the 
same intercst in the adoption of measures tending to allay the 
uncasiness of the other Mahratta powers which we oursclves 
have. 

The object to be aimed at should be, to place the alliance 
with the Court of Poonah, as nearly as may be, on the footing 
of our connection with the Nizam previous to 1798, retaining 
however the assigned lands as a permanent provision for a per- 
manent force to be held always disposable for the protection of 
the Peishwa, although not stationed within his dominions; and 
it appears to me that so far from encouraging or wishing the 
Peishwa to order this force frequently and without adequate 
necessity to entcr his territory, that the object of the Resident 
at Poonah should be to discourage as much as possible his 
applying for it, when its services can be dispensed with, and 
whenever the service is performed on which it is required, that 
it should be our endeavour to have it returned to its station with 
the least possible delay. 


2.68 SUMMARY OF THE COURSE TO BE PURSUED. 


Such is the course of management which appears to me best 
calculated to strengthen our influence not only at Poonah, but 
in the other Mahratta Courts. Between this, and a system of 
authority founded on force, and not likely to be effected without 
continual struggles, I apprehend there is no safe medium. 

Whether this alteration of our engagements with the Peishwa 
had better be made a matter of general negotiation at the peace 
with the Mahratta states, or at once settled between the Peishwa 
and the Company, must be judged of on the spot; in the former 
case, it may lead to some equivalent arrangements on the part 
of our enemies; in the latter, it would bear less the complexion 
of a concession, whilst it would probably narrow materially the 
points at issue with the other powers. 

Our first object then seems to be, to fulfil our engagements to 
the Peishwa; our second, to alter to a certain degree the nature 
of our connection with that state. A third considcration is, 
what steps we are called upon to take in consequence of the 
part which the other Mahratta powers have acted on the present 
occasion, particularly Scindiah and the Berar Rajah, Holkar by 
the last accounts not having as yct joined the confedcracy. 

Whatever might have been their natural motives of jealousy, 
their conduct has throughout becn marked by the utmost 
duplicity. They appear to have taken their measures for war 
whilst they were professing fricndship. 

They did not remonstrate against the treaty of Basscin; on 
the contrary, Scindiah disclaimed any purpose of disturbing it, 
and declared he did not consider it to contain any stipulation 
inconsistent with his interest; the evidence we had of orders 
given by Scindiah to his chiefs on the Bengal fronticr clearly 
marks that his interview with the Berar Rajah, and the menacing 
posture taken by their united forces immediately on the Nizam’s 
territorics, was a prelude to hostilities. 

Not having demanded explanation, nor made any attempt to 
settle the question by amicable negotiation, but having on the 
contrary pursucd a course of cquivocation and deccit, we arc 
warranted in considering them as aggressors, 

In this case we are entitled to demand from them (subject to 
prudential considerations) indemnity for the expenses incurred 
by us and our allics in the war; in the application however of 
this right, it would be highly unadvisable to protract the war in 
the hope of obtaining such retribution. 

Pecuniary compensation is very much out of the question 


0 


THE RESTORATION OF PEACE THE PARAMOUNT OBJECT. 269 


with such states; they have little treasure and Icss credit, and 
any security given on lands is only keeping alive a question of 
litigation between them and us if our successes are such as to 
place within our reach any concession on their part without 
protracting the contest. Better take it in some absolute and 
unqualified surrender than any thing connected with a pro- 
tracted settlement ; and if the surrender is of a territorial de- 
scription, it is desirable that it should be some point of value 
rather as a means of security to our existing possessions than 
Selected with a view to their extension. 

The expelling the French now in the service of Scindiah is 
certainly a considerable object, and one to which the Governor- 
General’s attention appears already earnestly directed. As far 
as my means of information go I should conceive Baroach in 
the Guzerat belonging to Scindiah, and Cuttack to the Rajah 
of Berar, would be the points of most importance to insist on, 
as tending to deny to European intrigue their best channels of 
intercourse with the native powers. 

The object however of most importance will be, to bring the 


) 


, 


war to an end as early as is consistent with our good honour and ( 


good faith. Extension of territory not being our purpose, we 
have nothing to gain from the contest, whilst it suspends all our 


views to the reduction of debt, &c. 
CASTLEREAGII. 


40. The Secret Committee of the honourable Court of Directors 
of the East India Company to the most noble the Governor- 
General in Council, Bengal. 4 


Strictures on the Policy of the Treaty, Propriety of 
relaxing some of its Articles, 
East India House, London, 6th March, 1804. 

We have received despatches from our Presidency of Bombay, 
dated the 8th September, 1803, announcing to us the actual 
commencement of hostilitics between our forces and certain of 
the Mahratta powers, 

The successes with which the campaign has opened by the 
immediate reduction of Ahmednuggur and Broach, in a manner 
so highly creditable to the British arms and to the officers who 
directed those operations, could not fail to afford us the highest 
satisfaction. But as it was always our wish to avoid a con- 
nection with the Mahrattas at the expense or even at the scrious 
risk of a war with any of the lcading members of that con- 


270 PEISHWA’S ALLIANCE BAD, IF OPPOSED B¥ OTHER MAHRATTAS. 


federacy, we deeply regret that such has been the result of the 
treaty concluded with the Peishwa at Bassein, and we feel it 
necessary in consequence thereof at this early period, to convey 
to you our sentiments upon the present posture of affairs. 

Removed as we are from the immediate scene of action, much 
must necessarily at all times be left to the discretion of our 
governments on the spot, in applying the principles which we 
may think it necessary to prescribe for the direction of their 
conduct to the precise state of circumstances under which they 
may be called upon at the moment to act. We shall, therefore, 
confine ourselves in the present despatch, to a statement of the 
general considerations by which we desire your conduct may be 
governed. 

Whilst we are prepared to make every exertion which is due 
to the good faith, and which the character and honour of our 
government may require, we do not, as a measure of policy, 
attach that value to the provisions of the treaty in question, 
which would lcad us to wish that it should be maintained at all 
hazards in its present form, if by any modifications of the 
stipulations therein contained, our connection with the state of 
Poonah can be rendcred a measure of Icss alarm and jealousy 
to the other Mahratta powers, being firmly persuaded that no 
alliance with a Mahratta power, but more especially with one in 
military rank not standing higher than the third or fourth in the 
empire, can in the long run be consistent with our interests, 
unless the preponderating majority of the confederacy can be 
reconciled to that connection. 

The most prominent grounds of jealousy entertained by the 
Mahratta states of the late treaty, appear to arise out of the 
third and seventcenth articles, the former introducing and per- 
manently stationing a commanding British force in the Peishwa’s 
dominions, the latter binding his Highness without the stipula- 
tions being reciprocal, not to commence any negotiation with any 
other power without previous communication with the British 
Government, which two stipulations they consider as tending to 
place under our control and guidance the legitimate head of 
their Empire. 

Under a strong conviction of the embarrassment which must 
arise from our mixing ourselves too intimately in the com- 
plicated politics of this distracted empire, our wish is to confine 
the purposes of the treaty strictly to the support and defence 
of the Peishwa in the quict possession of his own immediate 


WHAT ARTICLES OF TREATY SHOULD BE ALTERED, AND HOW, 271 


dominions, and to avoid not only in fact but in appearance every 
thing which can be construed to affect the independency of the 
Mahratta confederacy through its legitimate head, or which can 
create distrust and jealousy between the Peishwa and the other 
great powers of the empire. We are therefore desirous whilst 
the support to which his Highness is entitled under the treaty 
of Bassein (so long as he shall remain faithful to his engage- 
ments), is afforded to him in the fullest manner, that we should 
not hesitate to relax in such stipulations as were introduced into 
that treaty rather for our, than for his Highness’s accommoda- 
tion, When we refer to the Peishwa’s former reluctance to the 
introduction of a subsidiary force within his dominions, and 
when we couple this with the decided repugnance which un- 
doubtedly exists to the arrangement lately’ concluded, on the 
part of the other states, we cannot doubt {that a relaxation of 
this condition of the treaty will prove highly satisfactory to his 
Highness, and we also flatter ourselves that by this relaxation 
a material objection in the feclings of the other states may be 
removed. In order more distinctly to mark that our object is 
sincerely to support and by no means to infringe the inde- 
pendency of our ally, our wish is that it should be expressly 
stipulated\ in an additional article to the treaty that the sub- 
sidiary force shall hereafter be stationed within the Company’s 
territories, in such a position as shall enable it to act on the 
shortest notice in support of the Peishwa, but that it shall upon 
no account, except upon a formal requisition from the Peishwa, 
(unless restraint should be put upon his Highness’s person) enter 
his dominions) We also are willing to abandon B seventonith 
article, and to rely on the interest his Highngss will have in 
cultivating a good understanding with the BritBh for his fidelity 
to the general stipulations of the alliance in any connections he 
may form with other powers. It is matcrial’further to call your 
attention to the twelfth article of the treaty. Having in con- 
formity to the treaty of Hydcrabad stipulated in article thirteen 
for a right of arbitrating all the differences subsisting between 
the Nizam and the Peishwa, we entertain great doubts whether 
it is desirable, regard being had to the character and complexion 
which it is our object to give to the alliance, to stipulate for a 
gencral, right of arbitration as between the Peishwa and other 
states, Such a right must in itself create much jealousy, and we 
are inclined to think that it would be on the whole better not to 
push our claim of arbitrating so far. ) This course seems the less 


272, THIS AN AFTERTHOUGHT. GOVERNOR-GENERAL NOT TO BLAME, 


hazardous as the treaty of Basscin is not only guarded by the. 
general principles which appertain to all defensive alliances, 
but is also specifically restricted with reference to certain states 
therein named. In thus conveying our instructions upon this 
important subject we think it due to the Governor-General in 
Council to state, that the objections which attach upon the 
treaty of Bassein in its present form did not when this subject 
was last under consideration in the months of September and 
December 1800, as circumstances then stood, impress themselves 
upon our minds with equal force. We therefore desire to be 
understood, as not attaching blame to the conduct of our 
government abroad with respect to the form of the treaty itsclf, 
however subsequent events may have convinced us of the hazard 
of aiming at so close a connection with the court of Poonah. 
We cannot close this despatch without adverting to the late 
proceedings of the other Mahratta chicfs. Whilst we are ready 
to admit that states jealous of thcir independency might natu- 
rally entertain some alarm at stipulations capable of being 
represented to them as placing the head of the empire under the 
immediate control of a forcign power, we cannot avoid noticing 
the deceitful and disingenuous conduct pursued by Scindiah and 
the Rajah of Berar previous to the rupture. Instcad of openly 
avowing their sentiments and endeavouring by amicable ex- 
planation to obtain relicf from any stipulations of the treaty 
which could be supposed to affect their interests, they in terms 
disclaimed any ground of objection, and disavowed any intention 
of obstructing this connection, Whilst such was their language 
it appears they were intent upon gaining time with a view of 
arranging a confcderacy and of acting hostilely against the 
Company and its allies so soon as their measures were ripe for 
execution and the scason favoured their operations. Such 
having been the conduct of these chieftainy the Company are 
clearly entitled to consider them as aggressors and (as far as 
prudential considerations will justify them in asserting the claim) 
to demand from the enemy a reasonable indemnity for the 
expences of the war. But you are to understand, however in- 
disputable this claim in strictness may be, that it is our positive 
direction the war may by no means be protracted in pursuit of 
such an object. Upon the whole our wish is that a modification 
of the treaty should at all events take place in conformity to 
the above instructions, not on the ground of concession but upon 
a deliberate consideration of the system of policy which appears 


HASTEN PEACE, THOUGH BY GIVING UP CONQUESTS, 273 


‘to us to be the best adapted to the genius and the character of 
this people. Determining to support the Peishwa on the 
Musnud unless his Highness by some act of his shall have dis- 
solved the alliance, as also the treaty of Bassein, upon the 
modified plan’ herein described, whenever the powers we are 
opposed to shall be disposed to recognize our rights and those 
of our ally the Peishwa as under the treaty so amended, we see 
no adequate motive for continuing the war, and should the 
success of our arms be such as under all the circumstances 
appear to you in prudence to warrant a demand of some con- 

ycessions from our opponents, we desire that the demand be 
framed upon principles of great moderation and with a view to 
the improvement of the military security rather than the ex- 
tension of our present dominions. 

We must however impress most strongly on your minds that 
the early termination of the war is the object to which we 
desire your efforts may be most earnestly directed, and although 
we have thought it right to advert to the possible expediency 
of requiring certain sacrifices in the nature of reparation from 
our opponents, you are by no means to consider such sug- 
gestions as controlling your conduct in case you should be of 
opinion under all the circumstances that peace is likely to be 
more firmly established and future causes of dissension more 
effectually obviated by an entire restoration of all our conquests. 


We are your affectionate friends, 


JacoB BOSANQUET, 
JouNn ROBERTS, 
W. DEVAYNEZ. 


41, Major-General Wellesley’s Observations on the 
policy of the Treaty. 


Reply to Lord Castlereagh’s strictures and proposals, 


As the author of observations on Mahratta affairs does not 
appear to me to have viewed the policy of the treaty of Basscin 
in the light in which I have viewed it, and as I conceive that 
much of his reasoning upon the subject is to be attributed to 
his erroncous view in my opinion of the political state of India 
at the time the treaty was made, I deem it necessary to advert 
shortly to the political situation of the great powers in India at 

T 


274 NEED OF EXCLUDING FRENCH, A MAIN CAUSF OF TREA TY. 


different periods in which any important change has taken place 
since the peace of Seringapatam, before I proceed to consider 
the amendments to the treaty of Bassein which have been 
proposed, 

' In the consideration of all questions of Indian policy, it is 
necessary to extend our views beyond those powers immediately 
possessing territory.. It is well known that the French have 
never ceased to look to the re-establishment of their power in 
India ; and although they possess no territory themsclves on the 
continent, they have at all times had some influence in the coun- 
cils of the different native powers, and sometimes great power 
by means of the European adventurers introduced into native 
armies. There can be no doubt but that the French govern- 
ment would avail themselves of an instrument, such as the 
influence or the power of these adventurers would give them, 
to prosecute their favourite plan in India; and it is equally 
certain, that whether at peace or at war with Great Britain, the 
object of every French statesman must be to diminish the in- 
fluence, the power, and the prosperity of the British Govern- 
ment in India. I therefore conclude, that in the considcration 
of every question of Indian policy, or in an inquiry into the 
expediency of any political measure, it is absolutely necessary 
to view it, not only as it will affect Indian powers, but as it will 
affect the French. 

When I establish this principle, I don’t mean that the asscr- 
tion ‘that the French interest has been affected,’ is to be ad- 
mitted in justification of every political measure of the govern- 
ment. It is necessary only that it should be recollected by 
those who are to judge of political affairs in India, that French 
power and French influence are important parts of every political 
discussion by the governments abroad; and it will appear by 
the view which I shall take of the political situation of the great 
powers in India at different periods that French influence was 
powerful, that to have omitted to guard against the French 
would have been ruinous to the Company, and that the necessity 
of guarding against French influence was one of the principal 
causes of the treaty of Basscin.| 

In order thoroughly to understand the relations in which the 
different powers of India stood to cach other at the period at 
which the treaty of Bassein was concluded, and to be able to 
comprehend the objects and bencfits of that treaty, it is necessary 
to advert to the situation in which they stood at the peace of 


CONQUEST OF NIZAM, FOR WANT OF CUR ARBITRATION, 275 


Seringapatam in 1792, and to trace their progress from that 
period. 

The three great powers, the English, the Pcishwa, and the 
Nizam, having each reccived injurics from Tippoo Sultaun, 
joined in the war, the result of which was that peace; and the 
object of the British Government was if possible to preserve the 
power of each in the situation in which it was left by the 
pacification. Lord Cornwallis, who foresaw the difficultics and 
dangers to which the alliance would be exposed from the claims 
_of the Mahrattas upon the Nizam, endeavoured to establish the 
alliance upon a more firm basis, by interposing the arbitration 
of the British Government in their disputes; but the Mahrattas 
who knew that their claims were without foundation, that they 
depended entirely upon their superior strength, and that the 
result of an arbitration by the British Government must be 
unfavourable to them, declined to accept the offer made by Lord 
Cornwallis. 

I conceive this to be the real history of the refusal of Lord 
Cornwallis to allow the Mahrattas to subsidize two British 
battalions as mentioned by the anonymous observer, if such 
a proposal was ever made to him. His Lordship found that 
without giving the British Government any additional strength 
or security, the Peishwa’s gencral wished to have the assistance 
of the British troops in the support of the Peishwa’s internal 
government; and his Lordship was not desirous of being in- 
volved in the internal disputes of the Mahrattas, without having 
some corresponding political advantage. 

The result of the refusal of the Mahrattas to allow the ar- 
bitration of the British Government was exactly what his Lord- 
ship had foreseen. In the course of very few years the Mah- 
rattas attacked the Nizam for the purpose of enforcing their 
unjust claims, The British Government of that day did not 
interfere, and the Nizam was obliged, in a treaty signed at 
Kurdlah, on the to cede half his territories, 
to pay a great sum of moncy, and to give up to the Mah- 
rattas his prime minister Mushcir-ool Mulk, and to appoint 
another minister, recommended by the enemies who had reduced 
his power. to that low state. His Highness was also obliged 
to consent to send out of his territories the two British battalions 
which had continued with him since the peace of Seringapatam. 

In the contest which had just taken place between the Mah- 
rattas and the Nizam, the troops principally employed, and 

T 2 


276 ASCENDANCY OF SCINDIAH THROUGH HIS FRENCH CORPS, 


whose gallantry had been most conspicuous, were the corps of 
infantry in the service of Scindiah on the one side, and those 
in the service of the Nizam on the other. Both these corps were 
commanded, and in general officered by Frenchmen and other 
foreigners. The corps in the service of the Nizam in particular, 
commanded by M. Raymond, had distinguished itself in an 
extraordinary manner, although unsuccessful. 

After the experience of the war, which had just terminated, 
the Nizam, seeing that he could not rely upon the assistance of 
the British Government against the Mahrattas, determined to 
increase the corps of infantry, officered by Frenchmen and other 
foreigners, to the greatest extent that his finances would admit, 
and to render it as efficient as was possible. With this view, a 
large territory was granted in Jagheer to M. Raymond, from the 
revenues of which he was to pay the troops under his command ; 
and the number of troops and French officers to command them 
was vastly increased. 

In a short time after the peace of Kurdlah, the Peishwa Madoo 
Rao Narrain died, and a scene of intrigue and confusion ensued 
at Poonah, the object of which was the succession to the Mus- 
nud of the Peishwa, and the possession of the power of the 
Poonah state. 

It is useless to the consideration of the question under dis- 
cussion to endeavour, and would be impossible to succeed in 
detailing the events which occurred upon that occasion; the 
result was the establishment, in the hands of Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah, of all the power of the Pcishwa. 

The predecessor of this chief had conquered the territorics in 
the Doab of the Jumna and Ganges, and those on the right of 
the Jumna; he was in possession of the person of the King, and 
of his power, by virtue of his office of Vakecl ul Muluck ; and, 
thus was established in the hand of one Mahratta, all the ter- 
ritory and all the power on the west side of India, extending 
from Hurdwar to the Toombuddra, along the frontiers of the 
Company, the Nabob Vizier, the Nizam, Tippoo Sultaun, &c. 
I have already observed that Scindiah had in his service a corps 
of infantry, commanded and generally officered by Frenchmen. 
This corps had conquered the territories in Hindostan, had ren- 
dered essential service in the war which preceded the peace 
of Kurdlah, and had been the principal instrument in the 
establishment of Scindiah’s power at Poonah. This corps, there- 
fore, commanded and officered by Frenchmen, may be fairly 


THE PEISHWA’S ALLIANCE NEUTRALISED BY SCINDIAH. 277 


stated to have been the principal instrument and support of the 
enormous power thus established in the western side of India. 

On the other hand a similar corps, officcred in a similar man- 
ner, was the principal, indced the only support of the state of 
the Nizam. The difference between the two was, that that of 
Raymond was the most powerful; and Raymond had the most 
influence in the councils of the Prince whom he was serving, 
owing to the destruction of the power and authority of the 
Nizam in his own territories, occasioned by the disgrace suffered 
at Kurdlah, 

In this situation, the Governor-General, Lord Wellesley, found 
political affairs when he assumed the government in the year 
1798. 

ae Lord Cornwallis had foreseen, the state of the Nizam was 

nearly destroyed by the Mahrattas; the policy of the British 
Government had obligcd the Nizam to support his tottering 
authority by the service of a body of troops commanded by 
French officers, in whose hands was the only power in the state. 

The Pcishwa’s power was lodged by another train of events 
in the hands of Scindiah, who possessed besides all the power 
of the north and west of India, and whose principal support and 
instrument was a corps of a similar description, likewise com- 
manded by Frenchmen. 

It is uscless to detail the measures adopted by Lord Wellesley 
to remedy the evils which resulted from this state of the govern- 
ments of the allics of the Company in the war with Tippoo 
Sultaun, of which he saw the probability in the year 1798. (It is 
sufficient here to observe, that his Lordship relieved the Nizam 
from the state of dependence in which he was held by the com- 
manding officer of the French corps in his service. The French 
officers were dismissed ; British troops were subsidized in licu 
of the corps which the French officers had commanded ; and the 
British Government enjoyed the advantage of the assistance of 
the Nizam in the war which ensued with Tippoo Sultaun. 

The measures by which the Governor-General proposed to 
rclieve the government of the Pcishwa from the state in which 
it was held by Scindiah failed to produce their effect. His 
Highness’s Government was in Scindiah’s hands, and the British 
Government derived no assistance from this branch of the 
alliance. 

After the destruction of the power of Tippoo Sultaun, on the 
4th of May, 1799, a new combination of politics appeared in 


a 


278 NEED OF OUR ARBITRATION RETWEEN PEISHWA & NIZAM. 


India. The native power, against whose enmity it had been 
necessary to provide, by an alliance with the -Pcishwa and the 
Nizam was no more, and the Governor-General was to deter- 
mine the relation in which the British Government should stand 
in respect to the powers which remained. These were that of 
the Nizam, and that of the Mahrattas. 

It was obviously the interest of the British Government that 
the power of the Nizam should continue to exist in a state of in- 
dependence. If there had been any reasonable ground for hope 
that his Highness’s state could continue in independence, there 
might possibly have been no occasion for an alteration of the 
treaty by which the Company was then allied with his Highness. 
But it could not exist in that state, unless the Peishwa should 
consent to admit the mediation and arbitration of the British 
Government in the questions or claims which his Highness had 
upon the Nizam. The Governor-General therefore offered to allow 
the Peishwa to participate in the acquisitions made by the de- 
struction of the power of Tippoo Sultaun, provided his Highness 
would admit the arbitration of the British Government in his 
disputes with the Nizam, and would reccive a subsidiary force. 
The Peishwa declined to accept this offer; and the acquisitions 
made in the war were divided between the parties concerned in 
carrying it on. 

The state of the Nizam’s government however, after this 
refusal of the Peishwa, must still have pressed upon the con- 
sideration of the Governor-General. 

By the treaty of 1798, his Highness was precluded from the 
employment of the British subsidiary troops against the Mah- 
rattas, or against certain tributaries of his, likewise tributarics 
of the Peishwa; and it was obvious that however advan- 
tageous the treaty of 17y8 had been to his government. in 
many respccts, his [lighness was still in the situation in respect 
to the Mahrattas, in which he had been in the year , with 
this difference, however, that he had no longer the support and 
service of the corps commanded by the French officers. It be- 
came necessary therefore for the Governor-General to decide re- 
specting the Nizam’s government, whether he would allow it to 
fall into the hands of the Mahrattas ; whether he would allow it 
to revert into the hands of the French adventurers from whom 
he had relieved the Nizam in the year of 1798; or whether he 
would by an alteration of the treaty of 1798 cxtend the objects 
of the alliance, and render it defensive against all powers what- 


AND OF GENERAL DEFENSIVE ALLIANCE WITH NIZAM. 279 


ever, and in this manner undertake the defence of the Nizam, 
against the vexatious claims which it was certain that the Mah- 
rattas would make upon him. 

It is scarccly necessary that I should advert to the conse- 
quences which would have resulted from the first. The Mah- 
rattas would shortly have exercised the power of the Nizam’s 
government, whose territory at that time extended to the south- 
ward of the Kistna and Toombuddra, along the frontier of the 
newly established government of Mysore. They would soon 
have found the means of making claims in his name, or in that 
of the Peishwa, on the Rajah of Mysore, or the Nabob of the 
Carnatic, or even the Company, and the consequence would have 
been a war with that restless power, of which the seat would 
have been the territorics of the Company or their allies, and 
the sources from which the means to carry on the war were to 
be drawn. 

The second mode would have been in direct contradiction to 
the opinion of parliament and the nation, and of every man 
who had given an opinion on the Governor-General’s conduct in 
his transactions with the Nizam’s government in the ycar 1798. 
It would have introduced Frenchmen, French influence, interests 
and power into the heart of India, after they had been expelled 
by the Governor-General. 

' There remained then only to take the Nizam under the pro- 
tection of the Company; and this measure was adopted by the 
general defensive treaty of 1800, although every man who knew 
anything of the politics of India foresaw that the consequence of 
this measure might be sooner or later a war with the Mahrattas. 

The probability of such a war was forescen by the former 
Governor-General Sir John Shore, in a iminute in which he 
discussed the question regarding a closer alliance with the 
Nizam; and it is supposed that Lord Wellesley saw clearly 
that the only mode of avoiding that war, was to induce the 
Peishwa to become a party to the alliance, and to submit his 
claims to the arbitration of the British Government. Consist- 
ently with this opinion, it was the duty of the Governor- 
General to repeat his offers of alliance as frequently as oppor- 
tunities might occur; and accordingly they were repeated upon 
different occasions. 

I cannot agree in opinion with the anonymous observer, that 
the offers to admit the Pcishwa as a party to the gencral de- 
fensive alliance were not accepted, because the Governor-General 


280 SUMMARY UF POLITICAL GROUNDS OF MAHRATTA CONNEXION. 


insisted that a body of British troops should be posted in his 
Highness’s territories. 

In the first place it does not appear that the Governor-Gencral 
insisted upon that object as a sive gud non. He may, for reasons 
into which I will enter hereafter, have thought it desirable that a 
body of British troops should be at Poonah; but he did not 
insist upon it. However, I shall consider this point upon the 
facts stated by the anonymous observer. 

Till the end of the year 1800, Scindiah was at Poonah with an 
army; it was obvious that he would not willingly consent to the 
defensive treaty because it would put an end to all his projects 
of ambition in the Deccan ; and the Peishwa could not consent 
to it, because he would have been exposed to the tyranny of 
Scindiah from the time at which he would sign the treaty to that 
at which the British troops would arrive at Poonah. 

When circumstances obliged Scindiah to quit Poonah with his 
army, he appointed the Peishwa’s ministers, who still continued 
to negotiate with the British Resident; and it is a fact well 
known that the Peishwa did not know even of the existence of a 
negotiation, much less the nature of the objects offercd to his 
acceptance, and refused by his servants. 

The result of this statement and reasoning is, that the policy 
of a connection with the Mahrattas did not ‘arise from the con- 
nection subsisting previously to the conquest of Mysore, between 
the Company, the Mahrattas, and the Nizam, by the treaty 
concluded in 1790 at Poonah ;’ but subsequently to the conquest 
of Mysore; it originated, ¥st. In the necessity of preserving the 
state of the Nizam in independence. ‘ andly. In the unjust claims of 
the Mahratta nation on the Nizam. 3rdly. In the certainty that 
those claims would be asserted in arms, and that the Nizam must 
submit unless he should protect himself by raising an army to 
be officered by European adventurers, particularly Frenchmen. 
4thly. In the necessity of preventing the Nizam from entertain- 
ing those adventurers, and of affording him protection at lcast 
equal to that which he would have procured for himself by those 
means, even at the risk of a war with the whole Mahratta nation. 

In this view of the question I have entirely omitted the en- 
larged considerations which must be obvious to every statesman 
who discusses it. I have likewise omitted to advert to the 
peculiar situation of the British power in India, which requires 
that the funds applicable to the defence of the country should be 
applied to commercial purposes, and therefore renders it neces- 


PEISHWA’S JOINING DEFENSIVE ALLIANCE, BEST WAY TOPEACE, 281 


sary that the local government should derive means of support- 
ing armics different from those usually resorted to; I have con- 
sidered nothing but that which was absolutcly necessary for 
security in the first instance, and for peace in the second. 

There can be no question about the Mahratta claims, or that 
they would have been enforced with arms, or that the Nizam 
must have yielded unless supported by the French, or by the 
Company. The question is, whether the best mode of prevent- 
ing the war was to prevail upon the Peishwa to become a party 
to the defensive alliance. 

It is not necessary that I should consider the particular cir- 
cumstances of the times at the different periods at which 
proposals were made to the Peishwa to become a party to the 
defensive alliance. It will be sufficient for the purpose undcr 
consideration to state, that the consequence of the conclusion of 
the defensive arrangements with the Peishwa at any period 
since the year 1799, must have been to join against Scindiah a 
great proportion of the Mahratta nation. It is possible that 
under these circumstances Scindiah might have acquiesced in 
the arrangement, but supposing that he should have gone to war 
to oppose it, the war would have been onc of far less extent and 
difficulty than that in which the Company must sooner or later 
have been involved with the whole Mahratta nation, by the 
necessity of supporting the Nizam. The seat of it would have 

|been the territories of our enemies instead of our own, and the 
sources from which we were to draw the means of carrying it on. 

But the question is not properly referable to the admission of 
the Pcishwa to the defensive alliance, at any period antecedent 
to the treaty of Bassein, but to that treaty itsclf. 

In order to be able to form a judgment whether the circum- 
stances under which it was negotiated afforded the best chance 
of preserving the peace of India, it is necessary to advert to the 
situation of Mahratta affairs from the years 1798-9. 

Dowlut Rao Scindiah appcars to have possessed the power to 
which I have referred in the former part of this memorandum, 
from the time at which he placed the Peishwa Bajce Rao on the 
musnud, IIe was involved however in a contest in Malwa with 
the females of the family of his predecessor Madhajee Scindiah ; 
and after the death of Tuckojee Holkar, he was desirous of 
influencing the disposal of the succession of that chief, in such a 
manner as to forward his own political objects. In pursuance of 
these views, he murdered Mulhar Rao (the son of Tuckojce 


282 IN THE LATE CRISIS ALL PARTIES URGED US TO INTERPOSE. 


Holkar) at Poonah. Jeswunt Rao Holkar, the natural son of 
Tuckojee Holkar, fled upon that occasion, and after a varicty of 
adventures in the territorics of the Nizam and of the Rajah of 
Berar, he first joined the Bhyes, and then plundered them. He 
afterwards, in the year 1800, attacked and defeated a detach- 
ment of Scindiah’s army at Oujein. 

These events obliged Scindiah to quit Poonah. Towards the 
end of that year, he defeated Holkar in a pitched battlc fought 
at Indore ; and in 1801 and 1802, drove him out of Malwa into 
the Deccan. Holkar then attacked the Peishwa, and having a 
large body of troops defeated the united armics of Scindiah and 
the Peishwa at Poonah. In the month of October 1802, the 
Peishwa fled, and took refuge under the Company’s protection at 

. Bassein, having previous to the battle at Poonah signed an agree- 
ment, which contained all the principal objects of the treaty of 
Basscin. 

In this crisis, all the Mahratta powers pressed the Governor- 

General to interfere in their affairs. Scindiah repeatedly urged 

. the Governor-General to scttle the Peishwa’s affairs ; and begged 
that his Highness and himself might enjoy the benefit of the 
Company’s fricndship. 

I believe it might be proved that Scindiah was fully informed 
of every point in the negotiation of the treaty of Basscin. His 
vakeel Ballajee Koonjecr was the Peishwa’s dewan at the time, 
and he knew every thing. 

Holkar’s declared intention and apparent object was to establish 
anew government at Poonah under one of the sons of Amrut 
Rao as Peishwa. 

The government at Poonah would under this arrangement 
have been administcred in its military branch by Holkar ; and 
in its civil, by Amrut Rao. These persons both repeatedly 
requested the Company’s countenance for themselves; and in 
fact the arrangement failed because Amrut Rao saw that the 
British Government was determined to oppose it, and to support 
Bajce Rao) At all events, Holkar and Amrut Rao requested 
the Company’s mediation of their disputes with the Peishwa, and 
urged the Governor-General to interfcre to settle the affairs at 
Poonah. 

Although it cannot be asserted that the Pcishwa is a powerful 
prince, there is a large party in the empire attached to his person, 
all of whom were anxious in the expression of their wishes that the 
British Government should interfere in his affairs. The Peishwa’s 


GOV,.-GENERAL BOUND TOUSE IT, FOR ALLIANCE WITH PEISHWA. 2 83 


tight to the musnud is universally acknowledged, although his 
authority is from circumstances imperfect, and his orders but ill 
j obeyed ; and his cause supported by the British Government was 
(certainly popular in the southern parts of the empire. 

The southern chiefs who are the principal support of the 
government of Poonah had not submitted to Holkar ; they were 
in arms waiting for the arrival of the British troops, as the instru- 
ments of the interference of the British Government in the 
Peishwa’s affairs; and they joined the British army when it 
arrived in their neighbourhood. There was no probability that 
Holkay would make any serious opposition to the march of the 
British troops to Poonah.) He had not made his peace with 
Scindiah, indced neither party thought of it, and he would have 
opposed himself singly in an unpopular cause, to all the great 
powers in India. 

Under all these circumstances, and allowing for the treachery 
of the Mahratta character, there was every rcason to believe, that 
the close of the year 1802 was the most favourable period that 
had ever occurred, or that would occur, for the admission of the 
\Pcishwa as a party to the defensive alliance without a war. 

I have already stated my reasons for thinking that this mcasuré 
was the only one that could be devised to avoid a war which 
sooner or later must have occurred with all the Mahratta powers, 
in the support and defence of the Nizam; and the anonymous 
observer has pointed out with great truth and accuracy, the 
sentiments of the Court of Directors, and of the Government at 
home, on the subject of the admission of the Pcishwa to the 
defensive alliance. It is true that the Court of Directors do not 
appear to have had a very distinct knowledge of the objects of the 
defensive alliance; and like the anonymous observer, supposed 
that it was founded upon the triple alliance of the year 1790, to 
defend the allics against Tippoo, who was no more, However, 
whatever may have been the reasons of the approbation of the 
Court of Directors, and of the authoritics at home, they approved 
the measure, and ordered the Governor-General, according to 
the anonymous observer, to carry it into cxecution. Surely it 
will not be denied that if the Governor-General had_ passed | 
over the opportunity which offered at the end of the year 1802, | 
he would have been guilty of the most flagrant disobedience of 
orders, and dercliction of his own principles and measures re- 
peatedly reviewed by himself and by the first authoritics in India 
and in England. 


284 ARMED NEUTRALITY WOULD HAVE BEEN COSTLY AND USELESS. 


If the Governor-General had omitted to take advantage of the 
opportunity which presented itself at the close of the year 1802, 
I think the most probable result would have been a war with the 
Poonah state under the government of Holkar and Amrut Rao, 
and it is not improbable but that the war might have extended 
to the whole of the Mahratta states. 

The British Government might on this plan of proceeding 

have collected their armies, and have remained upon the frontier 
to watch the course of proceedings as recommended by the 
anonymous observer, or they might have passed over, as un- 
worthy of notice, every thing that was doing at Poonah; and 
have delayed to take any steps till the moment when they or 
their allies should be attacked. I cannot exactly discern the 
object in assembling the army upon the frontier, if it was to do 
nothing. The most expensive article in India is an army in the 
field; and the most useless is one destined to act upon the 
defensive. An army in a state of preparation to act offensively 
when opportunity will offer is indecd useful, and I believe no 
army ever seized so favourable an opportunity as that which 
marched to Poonah in March and April, 1803. 
* But the anonymous observer says, that we ought to have con- 
certed our arrangements with Scindiah ; that we ought to have 
offered a disinterested mediation, and to have actcd in concert 
with Scindiah at one time, and at another with the Rajah of 
Berar. 

I have already shewn, and the anonymous observer acknow- 
ledges that the British Government -were encouraged, nay, 
strongly urged, by all the principal Mahratta powers, amongst 
others by Holkar himself, to interfere in the settlement of the 
Peishwa’s affairs. In respect to a concert, the anonymous 
observer forgets the difficulty and length of every communica- 
tion with the chicf who was to be party to the concert. Sup- 
posing that it had been possible to bring Scindiah into our 
measures, the direct object of which was to take the Nizam out 
of his reach, and to deprive him of all objects of ambition in the 
Deccan, it would still have taken six months before the Com- 
mander-in-Chief of the army could receive the orders of the 
Governor-General to advance to Poonah, even if the diplomatic 
agent charged with the negotiations with Scindiah should have 
had occasion to make but two references to the Governor- 
Gencral. But in this case the objects of the British Government, 
of Scindiah, and of the Rajah of Berar would have been entirely 


WE COULD NOT ACT IN CONCERT WITH SCINDIAH & BONSLAY. 285 


different. That of the British Government would have been 
to restore the Peishwa to the exercise of his authority, inde- 
pendently of any of the feudatory Mahratta chiefs, in order that 
his Highness might perform his treaty with the Company, in 
favour of the Nizam. That of Scindiah would have been to 
restore the government of the Peishwa, in order that he might 
usurp and exercise its authority, and revive the old claims and 
objects of ambition in the Deccan. As far as it is possible to 
form a judgment of the course of politics of any Mahratta, 
the Rajah of Berar favoured Holkar’s usurpation at Poonah, 
and the establishment of the new government to be founded 
upon it. 

( Supposing that it had been possible, by placing the treaty of 
Bassein upon a broader basis, as proposed by the anonymous 
obscrver, to induce Scindiah to agree to its only important stipu- 
lation, viz., that of the mediation and arbitration of the Mahratta 
claims in the Peishwa’s name made upon the Nizam, it would 
have become a question of considerable importance to the 
British Government to decide whether that chief should be 
allowed to resume his situation at Poonah, and to usurp all the 
power and authority of the Peishwa’s government 

It must be recollected that Scindiah’s resumption of his power 
must have been preceded by the defeat of Holkar’s army in the 
Deccan. Scindiah’s power was already established in the whole 
of Hindostan and Malwa. The reduction of Holkar’s force, and 
the re-establishment at Poonah of Scindiah’s power would have 
replaced Mahratta affairs in the situation in which they had 
been since the death of Madhoo-Rao-Narrain, from which they 
had been relieved by a varicty of unforescen events. One 
powerful Mahratta chicf, with a French force as his principal 
support, would have possessed all the territory, influence and 
power, from the sources of the Ganges to the Toombuddra ; 
the situation which all Indian politicians have deprecated since 
the British nation have had any thing to do with Indian politics. 

It is therefore very probable that the British Government and 
Scindiah would not have agreed in a detailed concert for the 
settlement of the Pcishwa’s government; and it is certain that 
they would not have agreed with the Rajah of Berar. 

In this diversity of opinions and objects the negotiations would 
have been protracted possibly more than a year. 

In all military operations, but particularly in India, time is 
every thing ; and I am decidedly of opinion, that if we had not 


286 MEANWHILE, HOLKAR'S POWER WOULD HAVE GROWN MUCH: 


seized the opportunity which was taken, the march to Poonah 
would never have been effected. : 
If the British Government “had hesitated in the measures 


7] 
| which it should adopt, Amrut Rao would have consented to the 


arrangement proposed for his son. This boy would have been 

| placed upon the musnud with the title of Peishwa. The southern 
chiefs would soon have submitted to Holkar. They are generally 
connected with Amrut Rao, and that party in the state which 
favours his pretensions, and Holkar had already detached troops 
and adopted other measures to reduce them; and would have 
extended his authority to the frontiers of Mysore. 

We should then have seen at Poonah the Peishwa's govern- 
ment administered by the ablest Mahratta in the civil affairs of 
the empire, and served by a formidable army commanded by 
the most enterprising chief. This army, however, would have 
had no means of support; for the revenues of the Peishwa’s 
country are already assigned to the Jagheerdary chicfs in the 
southern districts, who, if they had not been certain of British 
assistance, would have submitted to Holkar, and would have 
joined his army with their troops. Holkar would have been 
under the necessity of keeping his army together; and after 
the southern chiefs would have submitted, he must have attacked 
the Nizam or the Company, in order to support his troops. 

It is well known that when he was at Poonah, he was collect- 
ing documents to enforce the claims of the Poonah state upon 
the Nizam; and that every discontented pretender of every 
description from the territorics of the Company or the Com- 
pany’s allies was received with distinction, and cncouraged to 
hope for the assistance of Holkar’s armics in enforcing his pre- 
tensions to portions of these territories. 

While the British Government would have been wasting its 
time and resources, according to the plan of the anonymous 
observer, with an army upon the frontier, and in a vain attempt 
to frame a concert with Scindiah or the Rajah of Berar, Holkar 
would have attained the greatest degree of strength. 

We have seen that the Rajah of Berar favoured Holkar’s 
usurpation at Poonah. Scindiah certainly was adverse to it, 
but I doubt much whether Scindiah would have done any thing 
against Holkar. 
| Scindiah certainly could have done nothing excepting he could 
bring his brigades to Poonah: the country had been already 
destroyed in a great measure by Holkar, and the destruction 


AND WE MUST HAVE GONE TO WAR WITH ALI THE MAHRATTAS. 287 


would have been completed if Scindiah had attempted to move. 
It may be said that he moved his brigades afterwards into the 
Deccan, for the purpose of opposing the British Government, and 
that he might equally have moved them to Poonah to destroy 
the power established by Holkar’s usurpation ; but in answer I 
observe that an opcration of this description is very different 
when opposed by British troops, and when opposed by such an 
army as Holkar’s. The former don’t, and indeed have not the 
means of destroying the country; to destroy the country is the 
only mode of warfare of the latter, and it is certain that this 
mode would have been adopted by Holkar to prevent Scindiah 


from entering the Deccan. 


If it be true, as I have supposed, that the concert proposed by 
the anonymous observer could not have been formed, if the 
Rajah of Berar favoured Holkar’s usurpation at Poonah, ance if 
Scindiah could not have advanced his troops into the Deccan, 
it is my opinion that the result of the negotiations would have 
becn a combination of all the Mahratta states to attack the 
Company and the Nizam. 

In the negotiations for the proposed concert the British 
Government must have kept aloof from the new government at 
Poonah. Neither our principles or our practice permit us to 
encourage by marks of favour or kindness an usurpation, while 


-we are negotiating with other powers the means of destroying it. 


But in this instance the state of our negotiations must have been 
known to those against whom they were to be directed. There 
is no secrct in a Mahratta Durbar; and it may be depended 
upon that this secret above all others would have transpired. 

Then would have commenced a counterplot conducted by 
certainly the ablest Mahratta in the empire ; Imcan Amrut Rao. 

In considering a question of this kind, respecting the remote 
consequences of any particular line of policy which never was 
adopted, it is not possible to do morc than to state the gencral 
principles and opinions of the parties concerned, their conduct 
upon other occasions, and to draw from these premises a con- 
clusion respecting their conduct in the supposed case. 

There can be no doubt whatever that the great object of every 
Mahratta statesman has been to combine their force to attack 
the British Government ; and if they had ever been free from 
disputes among themsclves, they would have carried that plan 
into execution. 

The person who I believe of all the Mahrattas to have been 


288 FOR THE BONSLA¥ WOULD HAVE UNITED THEM AGAINST US. 


the most determined enemy of the British Government, and who 


a 


was the soul of this plan/’was the Rajah of Berar, This person 
would have been the centre of the negotiations for the concert, 
supposing that the Governor-General had adopted the plan of 
the anonymous observer; and on the other hand, he would have 
been the instrument of Amrut Rao’s counterplot to support his 
own usurped authority. ‘ 

We have seen the Rajah of Berar, under circumstances very 

unfavourable, negotiate a peace between Scindiah and Holkar 
for the purposes of a combination against the Company. The 
question is whether, supposing the British Government had not 
brought back the Peishwa to Poonah, and had followed the plan 
of the anonymous observer, he would not have had in his hands 
materials which would have enabled him to effect that pacifica- 
tion with greater ease than he effected that under which the 
combination was formed in the summer of 1803. 
{ The loss which Scindiah sustained by the subversion of the 
Peishwa’s government was power and influence. He lost no 
territory in consequence of Holkar’s victories. Those which he 
had in the Deccan remained with him till he went to war with 
the Company.’ 

On the other hand, Holkar had claims to the possessions of 
his family in Malwa, and to certain portions of the territorics 
which Madhajee Scindiah had conquered in Hindostan. In the 
pacification which was effected through the mediation of the 
Rajah of Berar in the summer of 1803, with the view to the 
combination against the Company, all these territorics and claims 


. were ceded by Scindiah to Holkar. 


We have already scen that Scindiah would have found himself 
unable to do any thing against Holkar in the Deccan singly; 
and on the other hand, the British Government, according to the 
plan of the anonymous observer, would do nothing excepting in 
concert with Scindiah or the Rajah of Berar. We have seen 
Scindiah’s object in restoring the Pcishwa’s government would 
have been to usurp its authority again, and to assert its claims 
and revive the old plans of ambition in the Deccan. \Ours 
would have been to make the Peishwa so independent of all 
the Mahratta powers as that he would have been able to per- 
form his treaty with the Company in favour of the Nizam. 
That of the Rajah of Berar would have been to support the 
new government, established by Holkar’s and Amrut Rao's 
usurpation. These discordant views were to be reconciled by 


SCINDIAH’S INTEREST WOULD HAVE MADE HIM OUR ENEMY, 289 


negotiation before the British Government could have taken any 
step to overcome Holkar; and these negotiations must have 
been attended by all the’ tediousness which is the usual conse- 
quence of references to Calcutta, on account of the distance. 

Amrut Rao and the Rajah of Berar would in the meantime 
have endeavoured to bring about a peace on the basis of Holkar’s 
cession of his territories and claims in Malwa, &c., and of 
Scindiah’s acknowledgment of the new Peishwa and the state of 
affairs established at Poonah, and of a combination of the whole 
Mahratta nation to enforce their claims upon the Nizam, the 
Nabob Vizier, and the Company. 

We have seen that the negotiations for the concert with 
Scindiah would have turned upon the degree of power which 
Scindiah was to have at Poonah after the Peishwa’s government 
should be restored: the object of the British Government would 
have been, that the Peishwa should be independent; that of 
Scindiah to have the whole power of the state in his hands; and 
he would have been aware that the British Government would 
never consent to that arrangement. 

In this state of affairs he would have had to choose whether he 
, would co-operate with the British Government in restoring the 
Pcishwa’s government, in rendering it independent of himself, 
and in renouncing all its vexatious claims upon the Nizam; or 
whether he would Icave the power at Poonah in the hands of 
Holkar and Amrut Rao, kecping peaceable possession of what 
he had in Malwa, Hindostan, and the Deccan. 

In either case the power at Poonah would have been lost to 
him, and he would have derived no advantage from the arrange- 
ment with the British Government, excepting the gratification of 
his enmity against Holkar. On the other hand, by the pacifica- 
tion with Holkar and the combination against the British Govern- 
ment, he would have adopted a favourite and popular plan of 
policy among the Mahrattas, in the execution of which he would 
have played the principal part ; and if it had been successful, he 
would have been the greatest gaincr. 

I have no doubt respecting the choice which Scindiah would 
have made, and I declare that I conccive that peace betwcen 
Scindiah and Holkar, and a combination upon the basis sup- 
posed, would have included more interests, and would have been 
more practicable than that which was formed in the summer of 
1803. 

If the British Government had remained unarmed, and a tacit 

U 


290 TREATY OFFERED BEST, AND ALMOST SOLE HOPE OF PEACE. 


spectator of events in the Mahratta empire, the result would 
possibly have been the same. Holkar would certainly have 
been obliged to spread his armies into the Nizam’s country for 
subsistence, and we must eventually have been at war. But as 
we should not have been actively employed in negotiations for a 
concert against the new government at Poonah, it is possible that 
Amrut Rao might not have thought it necessary to commence 
his administration by combining all the Mahrattas against 
us. Nothing however would have been able to destroy the new 
government ; and whenever the peace between Scindiah and 
Holkar would have been effected, the British Government and 
its allies would have been attacked. 

In the consideration of this part of the question I have omitted 
purposely to introduce any reference to the French. ft must not 
be forgotten however, that at the time that the Governor-General 
decided on the part which he would take in the Mahratta affairs at 
the end of the year 1802, he had every reason to expect the French 
in India} and I leave those who will peruse this memorandum 
to judgé how much this event would have increased the diffi- 
culties of a protracted and complicated negotiation, against 
which one of the parties would have been plotting with Amrut 
Rao and Holkar. 

I may therefore conclude that the treaty of Bassein and the 
measures adopted in consequence of it, not only afforded the 
best prospect of preserving the peace of India, but that to have 
adopted any other measures would have rendered war with Hol- 
kar nearly certain, and war with the whole Mahratta nation more 
probable than it could be under any other course of events. 

Having now considcred the gencral policy of admitting the 
Peishwa as a party to the treaty of general defensive alliance, 
and the policy of concluding the treaty of Bassein, at the time 
at which it was concluded, and of the measures which were 
adopted in consequence of that treaty, I come to consider the 
particular articles of that treaty to which the anonymous observer 
objects, and the nature of his objections to them. 

I have already pointed out that the object of the Company in 
concluding any arrangement with the Peishwa was to secure the 
Nizam against the vexatious claims which might be made upon 
him either by the Peishwa or by one of the great chicfs acting 
in his name, and under the authority of the government of 
Poonah. It is obvious that the Company’s object could not 
have been gained unless the Peishwa should agree either to give 


CLAUSES AS TO ARBITRATION, & POSITION OF FORCE,NEEDED, 291 


up the claims upon the Nizam entirely, or to admit the mediation 
. and arbitration of the Company in deciding on the justice of 
those claims. 

To have insisted on the Peishwa's relinquishing his claims en- 
tirely, would have been‘an unjust and arbitrary proceeding, and 
would probably have occasioned the loss of the whole treaty. 
The only mode, therefore, which remained was to insist upon 
establishing the mediation and arbitration of the Company, as 
the mode of deciding all qucstions, disputes, and claims between 
the two powers. 

The Company were bound to the Nizam to settle the ques- 
tions and claims existing on the part of the Peishwa, or his 
Highness’s government. ; 

It does not appear practicable for the Company to be bound 
in a defensive alliance with both governments without stipulating 
to arbitrate their disputes; and this will appear more clearly 
when the.events are recollected which have occurred since the 
year 1792, 

In respect to the article by which it is required that a body of 
troops should be stationed within the territorics of the Peishwa, 
this will appear the more neccessary when the situation of the 
Pcishwa’s government in relation to the other great Mahratta 
powers is considered. 

The object of these powers, as stated by the anonymous ob- 
server, was to get possession of the power of the Peishwa’s go- 
vernment at Poonah. The attainment of this object, it is very 
evident, must have defeated the great view which the British 
Government must have had in admitting the Peishwa at all to 
become a party to the general defensive alliance. 

As soon as Scindiah or Holkar would have established them- 
selves at Poonah they would immediatcly have revived the old 
claims upon the Nizam; and the Peishwa without power would 
have becn unable to exccute his own treaty. 

The question then upon this part of the subject comes to be 
whether the Pcishwa is more likely to be able to maintain his 
independence in relation to the other great chiefs of the empire 
by having the British troops stationed in his territories, or by 
having the force subsidized by himsclf stationed in the territories 
of the Company. 

Upon this point I have to observe, that as in order to defend 
the Peishwa, against the attempts of either of those chiefs to es- 
tablish an influence at his Durbar by mcans of an armed force, 

U2 


292 BROADER BASIS OF TREATY OPPOSED TO OUR ORFECT. 


it would be necessary to bring the troops from a great dis- 
tance; and they would have to arrive and opcrate in a country in 
which no magazines or establishment would have been formed 
for them. I can have no doubt respecting the expediency, as a 
military question, of establishing the subsidiary force within the 
Peishwa’s territories. 

As a political question, I consider that inasmuch as the subsi- 
diary troops being on the spot, would provide a force ready at all 
times to support the Peishwa’s power, to have them in that 
situation would be more likely to prevent attempts to influence 
his Durbar by force of arms which must occasion war, than to 
station them in the Company’s territories. 

In respect to the notion of the anonymous observer, that by 
extending the basis of the treaty of Basscin, it might be hoped 
to include some of the other great Mahratta powers, I have to 
observe that the object is to make the Pcishwa powerful in his 
own government so that he may be able to keep his treaty 
with us. 

I have already shewn that there was no ground for hope that 
any of the great chicfs would consent to any arrangement which 
would place the power at Poonah out of their reach, and nothing 
short of such an arrangement would answer our purpose. 

It would not be desirable that any of them should become 
parties to the defensive alliance if the great object of our policy 
should be defeated by that measure. 

In this view of the question, it is scarcely necessary to advert 
to the assertion of the anonymous observer, that a subsidiary 
alliance, such as that formed in the year 1768 with the Nizam, 
is most applicable to the situation of the Pcishwa and of his ter- 
ritorics, The independence of the Pcishwa’s power is an object, 
and that we must effect by whatever means we may have in 
our hands; but if it were necessary to the argument, I could 
point out to the anonymous observer that the Peishwa is a 
power much nearer to us, and who touches us upon many more 
important points, than the Nizam does. 

When considering this objection to the 4th article of the treaty 
of Bassein, it is necessary that I should advert to the objection 
of the anonymous observer, that by placing the troops in the 
territories of the Peishwa it is necessary to increase the number 
of European troops in India; and that Great Britain cannot 
afford to supply the number of European troops required for the 
service in India, 


TREATY DOES NOT REQUIRE MORE EUROPEAN TROOPS. 293 


The 4th article does not specify that European troops shall be 
stationed in the Peishwa’s territorics, and therefore the objection 
does not apply to the treaty of Bassein. 

It is perfectly true that in the important services in which the 
Company’s troops may be engaged on the part of the Peishwa, 
European troops may be necessary; but as those services must 

-equally have been performed, if the troops had been stationed in 
the Company’s territories, European troops would equally be 
necessary, 

But the anonymous observer has not supposed that an increase 
of European troops would be required on the ground that their 
services might be necessary in the Peishwa’s territories, but on a 
general calculation of certain proportions of European to native 
troops in India in general. 

In the first place the increase of European troops would be 
necessary on this ground also, whether the subsidiary force were 
stationed in the territories of the Peishwa or not; the native 
army must still have been increased (unless indeed it should be 
proposed to take the Pcishwa’s subsidy and not furnish him with 
any troops) and the number of European troops must likewise 
have been increased in ordeg to keep up the duc proportion ; but 
in the second place, this calculation of proportions of European 
to native troops is certainly erroncous, and docs not cxist in the 
mind of any man who has ever conducted or considered the 
details of the service in India. If the proportion docs exist, 
on what calculation is it founded? In what part of India is it 
practically carried into execution ? 

In almost all services in India it is certainly necessary that 
there should be some European troops ; but the number in pro- 
portion to the native troops employed on the same services must 
vary according to the nature of the service required, and the 
description of the enemy against whom it is directed. 

For instance, in the wars against Tippoo Sultaun, the propor- 
tions of European to native troops were about one-third in the 
first, and one-fourth in the sccond. In the late war against the 
Mahrattas the number of Europcans employed in proportion to 
natives, was not more than one-tenth or onc-cleventh, 

I certainly agree with the idca of the anonymous observer so 
far, that a body of 8 or 10,000 native troops ought never to be 
assembled without some Europeans, for very obvious reasons ; 
but as there are few such collections of troops in India, I should 
conceive that I founded my calculations upon very erroncous 


294 PEISHWA ANXIOUS FOR FORCE IN HIS TERRITORIES. 


principles, and deceived those to whom I should communicate 

them, if I should upon this opinion state that the European 

troops ought to be in the proportion of one-eighth or one-tenth to 

the native troops throughout the Indian establishments. Thou- 

sands of native troops must necessarily be employed in garrisons 

in the interior and on various duties, in which it would be very 

inconvenient to employ Europeans; and on the other hand. 
Europeans are absolutely necessary in certain garrisons and 

stations and services, in some cases in equal proportions, in 

others one-third of the number of natives, 

The only safe mode therefore of forming an opinion respecting 
the number of European troops required in India is to call for 
and examine details ; and if this mode should be adopted, it will 
be found that the treaty of Bassein does not add, and does not 
render it necessary to add one European infantry soldier to the 
establishments in India. 

In respect to the increase of the European troops in general, 
it is my opinion that it will be found that they are not more 
numerous at this moment than they were in the years 1790, 91, 
and 92. According to the detailed distributions which I have 
seen, the number of regiments of Europcan infantry now required 
for the continent of India is twenty, including three of the Com- 
pany’s regiments, viz. six for Bengal, ten for Madras, including 
one for the subsidiary force at Hydcrabad, and four for Bombay, 
including one for Goa. This is the peace establishment. 

In the years 1790, 91, and 92, there were of King’s infantry in 
India nine regiments, two regiments of Hanoverians, six Com- 
pany’s regiments in Bengal, four at Madras, and two at Bombay; 
making altogether twenty-three regiments. The artillery at the 
different Presidencics were nearly of the same strength with the 
artillery at present. 

At all events if an increase of European troops is necessary, 
which in my opinion it is not, beyond twenty regiments complete 
to 1000 rank and file, the necessity of this mcasure must not be 
attributed to the treaty of Bassein. 

In respect to the proposal that the treaty of Basscin should be 
altered in this article, viz. that the troops should be removed 
from the Peishwa’s territories, I have reason to know that his 
Highness would be excecdingly alarmed if the proposal were 
made to him; and that it is more than probable he would move 
with the troops. 

I have now to consider the objection of the anonymous 


CAPRICIOUS ACTION OF ASIATICS, ESPECIALLY MAHRATTAS. 295 


observer to the 12th and 17th articles of the treaty of Bassein, by 
the former of which, the Peishwa is bound to abide by the Com- 
pany’s mediation and arbitration in all cases, and by the latter 
not to commence any negotiation with any power without giving 
previous notice to the Company’s government. 

In order to understand clearly the object of these articles, it is 
necessary to consider the nature and constitution of the contract- 
ing parties; to examine their political objects and systems, to 
see by what rulcs or systems of policy they are respectively 
bound, and in what manner affected by thcir respective connec- 
tions with other sovereign authorities. European governments 
were till very lately guided by certain rules and systems of 
policy, so accurately defined and generally known, that it was 
scarcely possible to suppose a political event in which the in- 
terests and conduct of each state would not be as well known to 
the corps diplomatique in gencral as to the statesman of each 
particular state. 

The Asiatic governments do not acknowledge, and hardly 
know of such rules and systems. Their governments are arbi- 
trary, the objects of their policy are always shifting, they have 
no regular established system, the cffect of which is to protect 
the weak against the strong ; on the contrary, the object of each 
of them separately, and of all of them collectively, is to destroy 
the weak ; and if by chance they should by a sense of common 
danger be induced for a scason to combine their efforts for their 
mutual defence, the combination lasts only as long as it is 
attended by success; the first reverse dissolves it; and at all 
events it is dissolved long before the danger ceases, the appre- 
hension of which originally causcd it. 

There cannot be a stronger proof of this defect of policy in 
the Asiatic governments than the dissolution of the combina- 
tion of the year 1790, between the English, the Mahrattas, and 
the Nizam, by the attack of the Mahrattas on the Nizam in the 
year 1795. 

These observations apply to the government of the Mahrattas 
more than to any other of the Asiatic governments. Their 
schemes and systems of policy are the wildest of any: they 
undertake expeditions not only without viewing their remote 
consequences upon other states or upon their own; but without 
considering more than the chance of success of the immediate 
expedition in contemplation. 

The Company’s government in India, the other contracting 


296 COMPANY BOUND BY POLICY, PARLIAMENT, AND CROWN, 


party to this alliance, is one bound by al! the rules and systems 
of European policy. 

The Company’s power in India is supposed to depend much 
upon its reputation ; and although I do not admit that it de- 
pends upon its reputation as distinguished from its real force, as 
appears to be contended by some, I may say that it is particu- 
larly desirable for a government so constituted as the Company’s, 
never to enter upon any political object, the probable result of 
which should not be greatly in favour of success. Besides this, 
the Company’s government in India is bound by acts of Parlia- 
ment not to undertake wars of aggression; not to make any but 
defensive alliances, and those only in cases in which the other 
contracting party shall bind itself to defend the possessions of 
the Company actually threatened with hostilities. 

The Company’s government in India is also connected with 
his Majesty’s Government, and as an Asiatic power is liable to 
be involved in wars with European powers possessing territories 
in India, whenever his Majesty shall be at war with those 
powers. 

The picture above drawn of the state of politics among Asiatic 
powers proves, that no permanent system can be adopted which 
will preserve the weak against the strong, and will keep all for 
any length of time in their relative situations, and the whole, in 
peace; excepting there should be one power, which, either by 
the supcriority of its strength, its military system, or its resources, 
shall preponderate, and be able to protcct all. This is proved 
by the history of the last fourteen years. 

The Company has been the preponderating power, and by 
the 2nd article of the treaty of Basscin has in so many words 
taken the Peishwa under its protection. 

I might contend that the stipulations of the 12th and 17th 
articles are only consequences of the protection promised, and 
really offered. But in my opinion these stipulations are the 
necessary consequence of the alliance between a power such as 
the Peishwa’s, and one such as the Company’s, bound by rules of 
policy, acts of Parliament, and by the acts of his Majesty's 
Government. 

It would be impossible to define the various claims, and 
grounds for war, existing not only between the Pcishwa and 
the Nizam, but between the Pcishwa and all the other powers 
of India. 

The Mahrattas claim the choute of all India; and all the 


COMPANY MUST BE ABLE T1'0 COMPEL PEISHWA TO PEACE, 297 


claims of this description centre in the Peishwa’s authority. 
Besides this general claim, there are others of various descrip- 
tions and denominations upon every power, of all which there 
are records at Poonah; and it is a mistake to suppose that the 
Peishwa, however weak in point of troops and resources, will 
not find persons in the Mahratta empire ready and willing to 
enforce these claims in his name. 

All the warfare which would be the consequence of bringing 
forward these claims will be prevented by the stipulation that 
the Company shall mediate and arbitrate in every case. 

But the anonymous observer says, that the benefit to be 
derived from the 12th article ought to have bcen left to the 
operation of the British influence in the Peishwa’s councils, and 
ought not to have been the subject of a treaty. To this objecc- 
tion to the article in question, the best answer is to state the 
fact, viz. that notwithstanding the right which we have acquired 
by treaty to mediate between the Peishwa and other powers, 
and the influence which we have in his councils, by that stipula- 
tion and a variety of events which have occurred since the 
treaty of Basscin was concluded, it is not so easy as the anony- 
mous observer imagines, at all times to prevent the evils which 
must result from the Peishwa’s enforcing these claims. 

The anonymous observer says, that if the Peishwa should 
contrary to our advice and opinion, commence an unjust war, 
he ought not to be supported by the British Government. 
This is perfectly true; but the object of the 12th article is 
to prevent the possibility of unjust wars, and to preserve the 
Peishwa’s government from the destruction which must be the 
consequence of his entering into any war without the Company’s 
assistance. 

This article is the bond of peace to India. It is this which 
renders the treaty really defensive, and makes the Governor- 
General really responsible for every war in which the British 
Government may be engaged. If this article were not in the 
treaty, the Peishwa would be the responsible person. 

If the general mediation on the part of the Company be neces- 
sary to ensure peace, there is certainly no occasion that the 
Peishwa should be in communication with other independent 
powers. All his foreign affairs must be transacted and eventu- 
ally settled by the Company; and any other communication 
must be intended only for sinister purposcs. 

The stipulation of the 17th article is necessary in order to 


298 DIPLOMATIC ISOLATION NEEDED TO PREVENT WAR. 


enable the British Government to have a knowledge of, and stop 
at once any intrigues which have a tendency to war. Those 
who have seen the course of proceedings of a Mahratta Durbar 
will not be at a loss to find reasons for this stipulation ; and in 
fact even this stipulation cannot entirely check the intrigues 
which are its constant operation. 

But the mode in which it will operate most beneficially will 
be by checking intrigues with European powers; and surely 
this cannot be deemed an inconsiderable object by the anony- 
mous observer. 

The principle and foundation of the treaty of Bassein, which 
is protection from the Company’s government to that of the 
Peishwa, would prevent the stipulation of the 17th article from 
being reciprocal. The Company’s government must have com- 
munication with some powers with which the Peishwa never had 
any; and it would be very inconvenient to be obliged to lay 
these communications before the Peishwa’s Durbar. 

But it must be recollected that the Company are constantly 
liable by the acts of his Majesty’s prerogative, to be at war, of 
hold communications with European nations having territories 
in India; and it would be a curious proceeding to lay these 
communications before the Peishwa’s Durbar. This measure 
would be necessary, if the stipulations of the 17th article were 
made reciprocal. 

ARTHUR WELLESLEY. 


3. WAR WITH SCINDIAH AND THE RAJAH OF BERAR. 


42, The Marquess Wellesley to the Honourable 
Major-General Wellesley. 


Delegation to General Wellesley of extraordinary powers for the 
conduct of the Mahratta War, &c. 
(Secret.) 
Fort William, June 26th, 1803. 
Sir, 

The present state of affairs in the Mahratta empire, and the 
security of the alliance lately concluded between his Highness 
the Peishwa and the British Government require, that a tempo- 
rary authority should be constituted at the least possible dis- 
tance from the scene of eventual negotiation or hostilities, with 


DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY REQUISITE FOR DESPATCH. 299 


full powers to conclude upon the spot whatever arrangements 
may become necessary either for the final settlement of peace, 
or for the active prosecution of war. In such a crisis, various 
questions may arise of which the precise tendency cannot be 
foreseen, and which may demand a prompt decision, The issue 
of these questions may involve the result of war or peace, and in 
either alternative the delay of reference to my authority might 
endanger the seasonable despatch and the ultimate prosperity 
of the public service. 

The success of the military operations now placed under your 
directions may depend on the timely decision of various political 
questions which may occur with relation to the interests and 
views of the several Mahratta Chiefs and Jaggeerdars, and of 
their Highnesses the Peishwa and the Nizam; on the other hand, 
the issue of every political arrangement now under negotiation 
with the powers of Hindostan, or the Deccan, must be in- 
separably blended with the movements of your army. 

It is therefore necessary during the present crisis to unite the 
general direction and control of all political and military affairs 
in Hindostan and the Deccan under a distinct local authority, 
subject to the Governor-General in Council. These powers 
could not be placed with advantage in any other hands than 
those of the general officer commanding the troops destined to 
restore the tranquillity of the Deccan. 

Your approved ability, zeal, temper, activity, and judgment, 
combined with your extensive local experience, your established 
influence, and high reputation among the Mahratta Chicfs and 
States, and your intimate knowledge of my views and senti- 
ments concerning the British interests in the Mahratta empire, 
have determincd me to vest these important and arduous 
powers in your hands. 

The nature of your military command under the orders of his 
Excellency Licut.-General Stuart is not likely to admit any 
doubt, or to lead to any embarrassment. In order, however, to 
obviate all possible difficulty on this point, I hereby appoint you 
to the chief command of all the British troops, and of the forces 
of our allies serving in the territories of the Peishwa, of the 
Nizam, or of any of the Mahratta states or chiefs, subject only 
to the orders of his Excellency Lieut.-General Stuart, or of his 
Excellency General Lake. 

I further empower and direct you to assume and exercise the 
general direction and control of all the political and military 


300 PURLIEU AND OBJECTS OF THIS DELEGATED AUTHORITY. 


affairs of the British Government in the territories of the Nizam, 
of the Peishwa, and of the Mahratta states and chiefs. 

The instructions addressed to the Resident at Poonah convey 
to you full authority to carry into complete effect all the 
measures therein provisionally prescribed, as far as the accom- 
plishment of those measures may depend upon your proceed- 
ings, without previous reference to my authority. 

I hereby confirm that authority, and I further vest you with 
full powers to decide any question which may arise in the pro- 
secution of the measures prescribed by those orders, according 
to the general spirit of my views and intentions concerning the 
affairs of the Mahratta state,\directing you however to refer to 
me in all cases in which a previous reference to my authority 
may not appear to hazard the public intcrests. Under the same 
reservation, I authorize and empower you to commence and 
conclude negotiations with any of the Mahratta Chiefs and 
Jaggeerdars on the part of the British Government, for the 
purpose of promoting the general objects of the alliance lately 
concluded with his Highness the Peishwa, or of that subsisting 
with his Highness the Nizam. 

( This general authority cspecially empowers you either directly 
or through the representatives or officcrs of the British Govern- 
ment to negotiate and conclude any engagements with Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah, with the Rajah of Berar, or with Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar, which may induce those chieftains to retire with their 
forces within the limits of their respective dominions, or to afford 
any other satisfactory pledge of their respective pacific inten- 
tions towards the British Government and its allies. You will 
be careful to form any such engagements on principles conform- 
able to the dignity, honour and intercsts of the British Govern- 
ment and of its allics, and to the spirit and tenor of our sub- 
sisting treaties. You are also authorized under this instruction 
to arbitrate on the part of the British Government the terms of 
any convention between his Highness the Peishwa and those 
chicftains respectively, for the settlement of mutual differences 
or demands, or for the adjustment of relative pretensions, and to 
pledge the guarantee of the British Government for the observ- 
ance of those terms by the contracting partics. You are also 
empowered to arbitrate and guarantee the terms of accommoda- 
tion between Scindiah and Holkar, if any points should yet 
remain unadjusted between those chicftains; and to frame, 
negotiate, and guarantee any terms between those chieftains 


PROVISIONAL INTERFERENCE WITH PEISHWA AUTHORISED. 301 


jointly or separately, and the Rajah of Berar. It is my par- 
ticular intention by these instructions to enable you to conclude 
such arrangements with any of those chieftains either separately 
or combined, as may preclude or frustrate any confederacy, or 
other measures directed to the subversion of the treaty of 
Bassein, or to the injury of our rights and interests, or those of 
our allies, 

You are also empowered to conclude such engagements with 
any subordinate chieftains of the Mahratta state as may appear 
to you to be expedient for the purpose of securing their co- 
operation in the event of hostilities between the British Govern- 
ment and Scindiah, the Rajah of Berar, Jeswunt Rao Holkar, 
or any other power. You are authorized further to adopt the 
necessary measures for conciliating the obedience of the sub- 
ordinate chiefs to the Peishwa’s authority. 

In the actual relation of the British Government to the 
Peishwa we posscss the right of securing to the Chiefs and 
Jaggeerdars of the Mahratta empire the satisfaction of their 
just and equitable claims, even independently of any dircct act 
of the Peishwa’s Government. The exercise of that right be- 
comes a duty in proportion to the danger with which the tardy, 
infirm, or crroneous procecdings of the Peishwa’s Government 
may menace the security of the alliance, and the stability of 
his Highness’s legitimate authority. 

The policy of the treaty, and my inclination, would induce 
me to limit our interference in the internal affairs of the 
Peishwa’s Government within the most moderate bounds. I 
am determincd, however, to pursue that course which shall Icad 
most directly and specdily to the full restoration and establish- 
ment of his Highness’s authority on a permanent basis, and to 
the efficient opcration of the benefits of the alliance. If the 
imbecility of his Highness’s councils, the defects of his personal 
character, or the intrigues of his servants should tend to frustrate 
or to retard the accomplishment of those salutary objects, the 
provisional interference of the British power must be seasonably 
and firmly applied to rescue his Highness from the immediate 
effects of evils which cannot be suffered to operate fora moment, 
without the hazard of every interest which the treaty of Bassein 
was destined to restore and to confirm. 

You will, therefore, proceed without delay to conclude all 
such arrangements with his Highness’s jaggeerdars and servants 
of all descriptions as may appear to you to be neccessary to 


302 RELATIONS OF GEN, WELLESLEY TO OTHER AUTHORITIES. 


enable you to meet the exigencies of the present crisis ; and you 
will not abstain from the most direct and even ostensible inter- 
position of the British authority, which may in your judgment 
be requisite to secure the exertions, to animate the zeal, or to 
reward the services of the Peishwa’s subjects and servants in the 
common cause of his Highness and of his allies. Whatever 
immediate expence may be necessary for this purpose will be 
defrayed at present by the British Government, and will here- 
after become a charge against the Peishwa, as being inseparably 
connected with his Highness’s restoration and establishment. 

All such engagements as you may conclude with his High- 
ness the Peishwa, and with any of the Mahratta chiefs and 
jaggeerdars, or other powers, wiJl be confirmed by me under the 
limitations and restrictions herein prescribed. 

In exercising the powers hereby entrusted to your sole discre- 
tion, I direct you to hold the most unreserved and confidential 
intercourse with the Residents at Poonah, at Hyderabad, 
and at the camp of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, and also with the 
Resident in the territory of the Guicowar; and you will regularly 
correspond with Lord Clive and with Mr. Duncan. 

You will necessarily continue to reccive the orders of his 
Excellency Lieut.-General Stuart, and to submit a full view of 
all your operations to the direction of his Excellency. I par- 
ticularly enjoin you to submit to his Excellency the earliest 
information of your proceedings of a political nature under these 
instructions. 

If circumstances should render it necessary for his Excel- 
lency Lieut.-General Stuart to unite the whole force of the army 
in the field,and to assume in person the general command in the 
Deccan, in that case I hereby vest the authority conveyed to 
you by this despatch in his Excellency Lieut.-General Stuart, 
under the fullest confidence that he will exercise it with the 
same advantage to the public service, which I have uniformly 
derived from the exertion of his Excellency’s distinguished 
talents, experience, and virtues. 

In the case supposed I empower his Excellency to delegate 
the whole or any part of the said authority to you; and I desire 
that in exercising the said authority or any part thercof in his 
own person, his Excellency will be pleased to communicate fully 
with you, and to receive your advice and opinion. 

In the execution of these instructions I authorize and direct 
you to employ any additional military staff, and to require the 


DISTRIBUTION OF THE SUBJECT. 303 


services of any civil officers; whose assistance you may deem 
necessary to the despatch of the arduous affairs connected with 
the subject of this order. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 


WELLESLEY. 


43. The Marquess Wellesley to his Excellency General Lake, 
Commander-in-Chief, &c. 


Necessity, Objects, and Plan of the War in Hindostan; and 
Principles to be observed in negotiating with M. Perron and 
the native Chicfs. 

(Secret.) 
Fort William, July 27th, 1803. 

Sir, 

1. The necessity of providing for the event of hostilities with 
Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar has already induced me to 
transmit to your Excellency, in the form of private notes, such 
suggestions as have appeared to me to be rcquisite for the 
purpose of enabling your Excellency to frame a plan of military 
operations, connected with the political considerations which 
have ultimately compelled me to engage in war against those 
chicftains, and with the objects which I deem most important 
to secure by the success of our arms in the final settlement of 
peace. 

2. These private communications from me have been answered 
by your Excellency in the same form, and I have hitherto 
deemed it to be expedient to return my observations upon 
your Excellency’s propositions through the channel of private 
correspondence. It is now expedient to adopt the regular course 
of official correspondence with your Excellency in the Secret 
Department, and I shall accordingly henceforth address you in 
the form observed in this Ictter, or through the secretary in the 
Secret Department, according to the nature of the subject under 
discussion. 

3. In this despatch I propose to state to your Excellency my 
views and intentions with regard to the following important points. 

First, The objects which appear to me to be the most de- 
sirable to be attained in the prosecution of hostilities against 
Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar on the north-western frontier 
of Hindostan. 

Secondly. The general plan of military operations by which 


304 NORTH-WEST FRONTIER OUR MOST VULNERABLE POINT. 


these objects appear to be attainable with the greatest degree of 
expedition and security. 

Thirdly. The course of political arrangements and negotia- 
tions which I propose to pursue under your Excellency’s super- 
intendance, for the purpose of facilitating the operations of your 
army, and of ensuring the stability of peace under the most 
favourable conditions to the British interests. 

4. With a view to render the statement of my sentiments 
on these questions more clear and distinct, I have annexed 
to this despatch copies of the documents enumerated in the 
margin. 

5. To every person conversant with the true nature of the 
British interests and power in India, the north-western frontier 
of Hindostan must have appeared to present the most vulnerable 
point of our extensive empire. 

6. The condition of the power of the Seiks, as well as of that 
of the Mahrattas and of the Rajpoots, and other petty states, 
offers considerable advantage to an invading enemy from the 
more remote north-western countries of Asia, or from the banks of 
the Indus; and it is unnecessary to remark to your Excellency’s 
judgment, experience, and knowledge, that the enterprizing spirit 
of France, or the ambition of Russia, or even the violence 
and rapacity of the Afghan tribes, or of other Asiatic nations 
inhabiting the northern and western countrics of Asia might 
have pursued projects of invasion in that quarter which might 
have occasioned considerable embarrassment to the British 
power in India. 

7. A sense of this danger concurred with other motives to 
induce me to conclude those arrangements with the Nabob 
Vizier, which terminated in the treaty of Lucknow, and which 
secured a considerable augmentation of the military, political 
and financial resources and power of the British nation on the 
north-western frontier of Oude. 

8. The result of that happy settlement has certainly afforded 
a great accession of security against the dangers which menaced 
the stability of our empire on that side of India. 

9. But the local position of Scindiah’s territories, the condition 
and nature of Scindiah’s military force in Hindostan, and the 
corrupt and profligate councils of that weak, arrogant, and faith- 
less chief, still constitutes a serious danger to the British interests. 
The territorics of Scindiah between the Jumna and the Ganges 
interrupt the line of our defence in that quarter; and some of his 


SCINDIAH’S STRENGTH DANGEROUS ,; HIS WEAKNESS MORE, 305 


principal posts are introduced into the centre of our, dominions, 
while the possession of Agra, Delhi and of the western and 
southern bank of the Jumna enables him to command nearly 
the whole line of our north-western frontier. 

10. In the event of any considerable accession to Scindiah’s 
power, or in the event of his forming any connection with 
France, or with any other enemy to the British interests, the 
actual position of his territories and forces tin Hindostan would 
furnish great advantages to him in any attack upon the Com- 
pany’s ‘ool 

11. Formidable as the power of Scindiah might have become 
in the event of any accession to his strength, a danger more 
urgent and more direct in all its consequences has grown out of 
the decline of Scindiah’s local authority in Hindostan, and 
has recently assumed a more alarming aspect in proportion to 
the accumulated embarrassment of Scindiah’s circumstances , 
in the, Deccan, (and to the general decay of his resources and ‘ 
power. | 

12( The regular infantry in the service of Scindiah under the 
command of European officers) is supported by funds derivable 
almost exclusively from the territorial possessions of that chicf 
situated between the Jumna, the Ganges and the mountains of 
Kumaon. 

13. A considerable portion, if not the whole of this territory 
thas been assigned to M. Perron, a French officer, who has suc- 
ceeded Mr. Duboigne in the chief command of Scindiah’s regular 
infantry. 

14. M. Perron has formed this territory into an independent 
state of which Scindiah’s regular infantry may be justly termed 
the national army. {That force is now stated to amount to 8,000 
infantry and an equal number of cavalry, 

15. The inhabitants of the districts comprehended in M, 
Perron’s Jagheer, consider that officer as their immediate sove- 
reign, while the troops supported from the revenues of the 
country regard M. Perron as the immediate exccutive authority 
from which the army is to receive orders, subsistence and pay. 
Possessing such means M, Perron dictates with the authority of 
a sovereign state of a superior rank, and with the vigour of 
efficient military powcr to the petty states occupying the coun- 
trics to the southward of the Jumna, and by the terror of his 
name and arms holds in abject submission the Rajpoot states of 
Jyenagur and Jodpore, together with the Jauts and the state 

x 


306 FRENCH STATE IN INDIA, A FIT TOOL FOR BUONAPARTE ; 


of Gohud, extending his influence even to Bundelcund and to the 
country occupied by the Seiks. 

16. Scindiah retains no efficient control over M. Perron or , 
over his regular troops. Various instances must be familiar to 
your Excellency’s knowledge in which M. Perron has either 
openly disobeyed, or systematically evaded the orders of Scindiah 
especially in the late crisis of that chief's affairs) 

17. M. Perron has for some time past manifested a systematic 
disposition to remove all British officers from the command of 
Scindiah’s /regular infantry, and to introduce French officers 
under his own immediate patronage. 

18. M. Perron is supposed to have amassed a considerable 
fortune, and your Excellency is intimately acquainted with his 
anxious desire to retire to Europe, and to dispose of his actual 
command, and of his territorial possessions to some person of the 
French nation. 

19. To these considerations it is important to add that M. 
Perron is in possession of the person of the unfortunate Emperor 
Shah Allum, and consequently is master of the nominal authority 
of that unhappy prince. ‘M. Perron therefore may transfer this 
valuable possession together with his property of any other 
description to any French adventurer, or officer, who may be 
enabled to complete such a purchase. 

20. Thus the coincidence of various extraordinary and uncon- 
trolable accidents, the weakness of Scindiah’s personal character, 
the rapacity and profligacy of his ministers, (who have engaged 
him in pursuits of aggrandizement, avarice, and ambition, at a 
distance from Hindostan, in the Deccan, at Poonah, and in the 
southern provinces of the Mahratta empire)—the treachery of 
many of his chiefs whose interests consist in diverting his attention 
from the affairs of Hindostan to those of the Deccan, and the 
recent shock which his power has reccived from Holkar, have 
contributed to found an independent French state on the most 
vulnerable part of the Company’s frontier. 

21. Under the influence of a succession of French adventurers, 
this state must be exposed to every intrigue of the French in 
India, and even to the ambition and hostile spirit of the person 
who now rules the French nation;(nor could an instrument of 
destruction more skilfully adapted to wound the heart of the 
British empire in India, be presented to the vindictive hand of 
the Chicf Consul of France. 

22. This French state actually holds possession of the person 


DANGEROUS TO US, HOWEVER SCINDIAH BE DISPOSED. 307 


and nominal authority of the Moghul, maintains the most efficient 
army of regular native infantry, and the most powerful artillery 
now existing in India, with the exception of the Company’s 
troops, and exercises a considerable influence over the neighbour- 
ing states, from the banks of the Indus to the confluence of the 
Jumna and the Ganges. ) 

23. In the supposition of the most intimate and established 
connection of amity and alliance between Scindiah and the 
British power, and in the event even of Scindiah’s accession 
to the treaty of Bassein, and to the general defensive alliance 
with the Company, the Nizam and the Peishwa, it is impossible 
to suppose that this French state would co-operate with cordiality 
in support of the British interests. The aid of this state could 
be least expected in the case which would most urgently demand 
it, and which would require the most active operation of the 
principles of the general defensive alliance. 

24. In the event “of an attack from France upon the British 
dominions or power in India, it would not be expected that a 
French state erected under the nominal and ostensible auspices 
of Scindiah in Hindostan, would afford any substantial aid to the 
ally of the British power in a contest against France, even if that 
ally should be disposed to‘assist us in such a crisis. 

a5£On the other hand no doubt exists that Scindiah would 
reccive the most zealous aid from the same state in any attempt 
which he might be disposed to makc either for the reduction of 
the British or for the aggrandizement of the French power in 
India. } 

26. In addition to these remarks, your Excellency is apprized 
that the vicinity of M. Perron’s regular infantry, operates as a 
constant drain upon the population of the Company’s provinces, 
and diminishes the sources of our agriculture, manufactures, 
commerce, and revenue as well of our recruits for the army in 
that quarter. 

27. In the present crisis when every circumstance announces 
the probability of a renewal of the war with France, and urges 
the necessity of resorting to every practicable mcasure of pre- 
caution and sccurity,(the safety of the British dominions requires 
the reduction of M. Perron’s military resources and power, inde- 
pendently of any question which might exist between Scindiah 
and the British Government.) 

28. In a state of profound peace and even of alliance with 
Scindiah, the necessity of providing for our own security would 

x2 


2 


308 WE HAVE A RIGHT TO GET RID OF THIS DANGER. 


justify a formal demand for the removal of a danger, so immi- 
nent, from the frontier of our dominions. The refusal of Scin- 
diah to comply with such a demand would afford’a just ground 
of war against that chief; and any true or false plea of inability 
on the part of Scindiah to control the movements or to reduce 
the power of this French state, would authorize and require the 
British Government to assume the protection of its own terri- 
tories, and to remove with his own hand the proximate cause 
of insecurity and alarm. Your Excellency will therefore be 
pleased to understand that (the most desirable object in pro- 
secuting hostilities against Scindiah on the north western 
frontier of Hindostan appears to me to be the entire reduction 
of M. Perron’s regular corps. This operation necessarily in- 
cludes the capture or destruction of all his artillery and military 
stores and espccially of all arms of European construction. 

29. Connected with this object and with, every principle of 
security bearing relation to it is the occupation of the whole 

- tract of country forming the Doab between the Jumna and 
Ganges to the mountains of Kumaon. And similar considera- 
tions will require the occupation of Delhi and Agra and of 
a chain of posts on the western and southern bank of the Jumna 
from the mountains of Kumaon to Bundelcund sufficient to 
secure to the British power the free navigation of the Jumna and 
the possession of both banks of that river. It is not my desire 
to extend the actual possessions of the Company beyond the 
line of the Jumna including Agra and Delhi, with a continued 
chain of posts to the westward and southward of the Jumna for 
the purpose already described. 

30. Within the described line my wish and intention is to 
establish the system of the Company’s Government in all its 
branches, but whatever connections may be formed beyond that 
line to the westward and southward of the Jumna must be 
regulated on the principle of defensive alliance or tributary 
dependence in such manner as shall form betwcen the actual 
possessions of the Company and the Mahrattas, a barrier of 
petty states cxercising the internal government of their re- 
spective dominions in alliance with the Company and under the 

- protection of our power. 

31. In drawing this line I am aware of the position of the 
' Jagheers of Sumroo’s Begum situated between the Jumna and 
the Ganges. For this special case I have accordingly provided 
in my instructions to Mr. Mercer. It is certainly necessary that 


SUMMARY OF OBJECTS OF WAR IN THE NORTH WEST, 309 


the Jagheers of Sumroo’s Begum should ultimately be brought 
under the immediate government of the Company,’ 

32.\1t is highly important to secure the possession of the 
person and nominal authority of the Moghul against the designs 
of Franc@. The Moghul has never been an important or 
dangerous instrument in the hands of the Mahrattas, but might 
become a powerful aid to the cause of France in India, under 
the direction of French avents. 

33. The person and authority of that unhappy monarch have 
been treated by the Mahrattas and by M. Pcrron with the most 
barbarous indignity and violence, and it would contribute to the 
reputation of the British name to afford an honourable and 
tranquil asylum to the fallen dignity and declining age of the 
King of Delhi. Nt would also be necessary to extend our pro-. 
tection to his majesty’s heir apparent and to any of the royal 
family who might otherwise fall into the hands of France. ) 

34. The reduction of M. Perron’s force would afford us the 
means of forming alliances with all the inferior states beyond 
the Jumna for the purpose of enabling us in the first instance to 
prosccute the war with the greatest advantage and finally by 
forming a barrier composed of these states, to exclude Scindiah 
and the Mahrattas altogether from the northern districts of 
Hindostan. e 

35. It is extremely desirable that Bundclcund shoufd ulti- 
matcly be placed under the immediate authority of the British 
Government.) Such an arrangement would afford great ad- 
ditional security to the rich province and city of Benares and 
would effectually check whatever power might remain to the 
Rajah of Berar or to any other Mahratta chief in that sree 

36. Reviewing these statements your Excellency will observe 
that the most prosperous issue of a war against Scindiah and 
the Rajah of Berar on the north-western fronticr of Hindostan 
would in my judgment comprize, 

ist. The destruction of the French state now formed on the 

banks of the Jumna together with all its military resources, 

adly. The extension of the Company’s fronticr to the Jumna, 
with the possession of Agra, Delhi and a sufficient chain of posts 
on the western and southern banks of the Jumna, 

L 3dly. The possession of the nominal authority of the Moghul. 

4thly. The establishment of an efficient system of alliance 

- With all the petty states to the southward and westward of the 
Jumna from Jyenagur to Bundelcund. 


310 GOV.-GENERAL’S CONCLUSIONS ON PLAN OF CAMPAIGN. 


5thly. The annexation of Bundelcund to the Company’s 
dominions. 

37. The result of such an arrangement would destroy the 
influence of the French and of the Mahrattas in the northern 
districts of Hindostan, and would enable us to commence the 
foundations of such an intercourse with the Seiks and with 
the tribes inhabiting the Punjab and the banks of the Attock, 
as might furnish sufficient means of frustrating any attempt of 
an invading enemy from the western side of the Indus. 

38. In stating to your Excellency my sentiments with regard 
to the general plan of military operations by which the proposed 
objects appear to be attainable with the greatest degrce of expe- 
dition and security, your Excellency will be pleased to under- 
stand that it is not my intention either to limit the free exercise 
of your discretion, or to interpose any ideas, which may not 
meet the full approbation of your Exccllency’s superior judg- 
ment, experience and professional skill. 

3g. I have however deemed it to be my duty under this 
restriction to communicate to you in my private correspondence 
such opinions on this branch of the subject as have appeared to 
me to merit consideration; and with the same view I have 
transmitted to your Excellency my observations on the plans 
which ¥ have reccived from you. I shall therefore proceed to 
state without further reserve in this official form such con- 
clusions as I have drawn from a review of the documents 
and suggestions which have been brought under my examina- 
tion. 

40. The first object of the campaign must be to destroy the 
military force and resources of M. Perron; and it is extremely 
important that this object should be accomplished previously 
to the close of the rainy season. 

41. It is therefore necessary that the main body of the army 
should be assembled at the point most favourable for the attack 
of M. Perron’s force, and in the state of preparation and of 
equipment which may be deemed by your Excellency most 
advantageous for the speedy exccution of that service. 

42. Your Excellency will have observed from the whole tenor 
of every communication which you have reccived from me, that 
I not only concur entirely with you in deeming the destruction 
of M. Perron’s force to be the primary object of the campaign, 
but that the most deliberate consideration of the actual state of 
affairs between his Majesty;and France would have induced me 


RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF DIFFERENT OLBFECTS. 311 


to have undertaken this service even independently of any 
contest with Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 

43. I shall therefore readily sanction any augmentation which 
your Excellency may think fit to make to the strength of the 
main army to be directed against M. Perron, by suspending the 
operations of the several proposed detachments or by con- 
centrating the movements of those detachments with a view to 
the principal object of the campaign, which is comprizced in the 
‘early and effectual demolition of the French state erected by 
MM. Perron on the banks of the Fumna, 

44. With this observation I desire that your Excellency will 
compose the main army and regulate the strength and opera- 
tions of the several detachments in the manner which shall 
appear to your judgment to afford the most absolute security 
for the ‘complete destruction of M. Pervon’s force previously to 
the conclusion of the rains. 

45. The point of most urgent importance connccted with the 
destruction of M. Perron’s force is in my opinion the security of 
the person of the Moghul, and of the heir apparent, and it is 
therefore my earnest wish that early measures should be taken 
for that purpose. The operations of the detachment proposed 
to cover Rohilcund, and eventually to invade Saharunpore might 
probably effect this object, and at the same time might tend to 
promote the success of the movements of the main army against 
M. Perron, 

46. I trust that the powers already furnished to your Excel- 
lency for the augmentation of the regular corps to the war 
establishment, and for raising such temporary and local corps as 
may be requisite for the maintenance of the internal tranquillity 
of the provinces, will enable you to provide effectually against 
internal commotion during the continuance of the war. But 
any temporary inconvenience of that nature must be hazarded if 
the security of the great objects of the campaign should require 
you to incur such a danger. The early success of the army in 
the field will cnable you to suppress without difficulty every 
effort of our domestic encmics whose number cannot be con- 
siderable and whose power is extremely contemptible. 

47. I consider the operations of the detachment stationed in 
the direction of Delhi to be next in importance to those of 
the main army. 

48. After the destruction of M. Perron’s power shall have 
been effected and the person of the Moghul shall have been 


. 


312 RELATION OF LAKE'S OPERATIONS TO THOSE ELSEWHERE, 


protected beyond the possibility of hazard, the operation of 
greatest importance will be the reduction of the fortress of Agra. 
Your Excellency will form the most correct judgment in de- 
ciding the time and mode of undertaking this service. Whether 
it would be possible either to blockade or to scize Agra during 
the time of the movements of the main army against M. Perron, 
or whether the siege of Agra should be postponed until the 
main army shall be at liberty to act against Agra, are points 
. which I submit implicitly to your Excellency’s determination, it 
is however important that Agra should be reduced previously to 
the close of the rainy season. 

49. The occupation of Bundelcund is the object next in 
importance to those already stated, and it appears to me that 
the detachment to be assembled at Allahabad and the detach- 
ment to be assembled for the purpose of covering Benares will 
effect that object in sufficient time to afford additional coun- 
tenance to the operations of the main army. 

50. The effectual protection of Benares is a point of con- 
siderable importance and your Excellency appears to have taken 
sufficient precautions for that purpose. 

51. It has appeared to me to be prudent to adopt a systematic 
and comprehensive plan of defensive measures on the whole line 
of the frontier from Mirzapore to Midnapore, and I have directed 
the Chicf Secretary to transmit to your Excellency a copy of 
the orders which I have issued on that subject. 

52- The occupation of the passes from the southward and 
westward of the Jumna to the Deccan, is an object which has 
already engaged your Excellency’s attention. If you should be 
enabled to bring the main body of M. Perron’s force to action, 
or should find it practicable to secure that force in any other 
manner, it appears improbable that Scindiah’s troops can occupy 
those passes in any considcrable strength. 

53. Major Gencral Wellesley may be cxpectcd to commence 
operations against Scindiah in the Deccan at the close of this 
month, and I entertain a firm confidence of the complete success 
of those operations in the entire defeat of Scindiah’s forces and 
of those of the Rajah of Berar in that quarter. It is however an 
object of importance and of prudent precaution, to secure the 
passes between Hindostan and the Deccan previously to the 
close of the rains. 

54. The expediency of occupying the post of Gwalior pre- 
viously to the defeat of M. Perron, must depend upon local 


MAHRATTA HYDRA TO BE SCOTCHED DURING MONSOON, 313 


circumstances upon which your Excellency will exercise your 
discretion, after having considered the tenor of my instructions 
to Mr. Mercer. 

55. Mr. Duncan has received my orders for the seizure of 
Scindiah’s sea-port of Baroach, and of all his other possessions 
in Guzerat; which objects will probably be effected whenever 
General Welleslcy shall seize the important fortress of Ahmed- 
nugger. The loss of these possessions will deprive Scindiah of 
the most efficient portion of his military resources in the Deccan. 

56. An expedition from Calcutta and Ganjam will occupy 
Cuttack in the month of August. 

57. It may be reasonably expected that these combined 
attacks will leave no other enemy opposed to your Excellency’s 
force during the rainy season than M. Perron’s troops, and what- 
ever force may have been assembled at Calpee: and I con- 
fidently expect that before the close of the rains, a material 
impression will have been made on every branch of the Mahratta 
power. It is however possible that M. Perron may have in- 
duced some of the Scik chiefs to aid him by predatory incursions 
into the Company’s northern territorics, and it will therefore be 
necessary for your Excellency to advert to that possible danger. 

58. The objects proposed to be attained in this campaign, and 
the gencral plan of military operations which I have described, 
will limit the movement of the main army to the Doab between 
the Ganges and the Jumna, with the addition of a narrow tract 
of country on the western and southern branch of the Jumna. 

59. No detachment of the army will probably be required to 
move beyond Gwalior before the close of the rains. It may 
therefore be expected that your Excellency will not experience 
any considerable difficulty cither in the supply or movements of 
the armies ; and that you will be enabled during the course of 
this campaign to establish such depdts of provisions, stores and 
other supplies, as may facilitate your advance into Berar, 
towards the Deccan, or towards the territorics of the Rajpoot 
chiefs, if such movements should become necessary in another 
campaign. 

60. Your Excellency has provided with great prudence for the 
maintenance of tranquillity and order within the reserved terri- 
tories of his Excellency the Nabob Vizier, by caving a respect- 
able force in that quarter. I entirely approve that precaution, 
leaving it, however to your discretion to vary the description or 
strength of the force stationed in the Vizier’s reserved territories 


314 LAKE, LIKE GEN. WELLESLEY, VESTED WITH SPECIAL POWERS. 


according to your judgment, and to the state of local circum- 
stances. 

61. I have written to the Vizicr, desiring his Excellency’s 
assistance in the supply of elephants and cattle, and as I have 
engaged to defray the whole expense of whatever assistance the 

} Vizier may contribute, I entertain a sanguine hope that his 
' Excellency will be desirous of making an effort to manifest his 
zeal and attachment on this important occasion. 

62. In stating these observations to your Excellency, I have 
purposely avoided all details relative to the disposition of corps, 
to the strength of the main army, or of the several detachments, 
to the formation of the staff, or of the different constituent parts 
of the army in the’ficld. The regulation of all questions of this 
description, is more properly your Excellency’s peculiar duty, 
and J entertain the most firm confidence that your Excellency 
will form your arrangements with that ability, public spirit, and 
honourable zeal for the service, which have distinguished your 
conduct in the various arduous situations, to which you have 
been called by the confidence of your Sovereign and of your 
country. 

63. With these sentiments, I am particularly anxious to 
abstain from any interference of my authority which might tend 
to contract the sphere of your Exccllency’s approved talents, 
activity, and integrity. It will be my constant endeavour to 
apply my authority in such a manner, as shall afford the most 
effectual support to your Exccllency in the display of those 
eminent qualifications, during a crisis, which demands their 
unrestrained exertion, and which promiscs to augment the repu- 
tation and honour of your Excellency’s name, together with 
the glory of the British arms, and the security of the British 
power. 

64. With regard to the political negotiations and arrange- 
ments connected with the operations of your Exccllency’s army, 
I have addressed to you on this day a letter, vesting you with 
special powers of the same nature as those which I have cn- 
trusted to Major-General Wellesley, and eventually to Lieut.- 
General Stuart in the Deccan. That Ictter connected with my 
instructions to Mr. Mercer, and with my separate letter to your 
Excellency of this date respecting the situation of his Majesty 
Shah Allum, will sufficiently apprize you of the course of political 
measures which your Excellency is empowered to pursue, with a 
view of facilitating your military operations. 


HOW TO NEGOTIATE WITH PERRON AND HIS OFFICERS. 335 


65. It may, however, be convenient to state in this place, the 
general principles by which I am desirous of regulating your 
Excellency’s proceedings, under the powers committed to your 
Management. 

66. It will be highly desirable to detach M. Perron from 
Scindiah’s service by pacific negotiation. M. Perron’s inclina- 
tion certainly is, to dispose of his power to a French purchaser ; 
but I should not be surprized if he were to be found ready to 
enter into terms with your Excellency, provided he could obtain 

sufficient security for his personal interests. i desire your 
Excellency, however to abstain from any negotiation which 
may afford M. Perron the opportunity of gaining time, or of 
preserving, by escape, or by any means, any part of his force, 
especially of his artillery, or ordnance. y 

67( I therefore request your Excellency not to commence any 
negotiation with M. Perron, until the success of the force to be 
employed against him shall appear to be perfectly secure, or until 
you shall be fully satisfied that the negotiation cannot afford ta, 
M. Perron any means of defeating the objects of the armament. ° 

68 Under these precautions, I empower your Excellency to 
conclude any agreement for the security of M. Perron’s personal 
interests and property, accompanicd by any reasonable remu- 
neration from the British Government which shall induce him 
to deliver up the whole of his military resources and powcr, 
together with his territorial posscssions, and the person of the 
Moghul, and of the heir apparent, into your Excellency’s hands. ) 

69.\The same principle applies gencrally to M. Perron’s 
European officers, and the proclamations with which I have 
furnished your Excellency, will enable you to avail yourself of 
the first proper opportunity of offcring propositions to thosc 
officers, or to the scveral corps under M. Perron’s command. 

70. It is probable that the blockade of Agra would enable 
your Excellency to obtain immediate possession of that place 
by offering favourable terms to Mr. Hessing and his garrison. 
You will act in this matter according to your judgment, 

71. This despatch together with those which you have already 
received from me, will relieve your Excellency from any difficulty 
with regard to the suspension of the question of war or peace. 
You are now in possession of my final determination ‘70 reduce 
the power of the I'rench state in Hindostan without delay, and to 
liberate the neighbouring chicfs and Rajahs from the yoke of 
that state, and of the Mahrattas, for the purpose of establishing 


316 PROPER OBJECT'S IN TREATING WITH NATIVE CHIEFS. 


an effectual barrier against the revival of a similar danger in 
Hindostan. 

72, My instructions to Mr. Mercer contain every detail which 
can be requisite to guide your Excellency’s judgment in forming 
engagements with those chiefs, either for the purpose of securing 
their assistance during the war, or of establishing a permanent 
system of alliance at the conclusion of peace. 

73. The general objects of the war, as described at the com- 
mencement of this despatch, sufficiently indicate the nature of 
the final settlement by which it is my desire to terminate 
hostilities, and to secure peace. 

74. Your Excellency will be pleased to fix your attention 
upon those objects as stated in the 36th paragraph of this 
despatch, and to frame every permanent arrangement with the 
native Chiefs and Rajahs, in conformity to the general principles 
of excluding the influence of the French and Mahrattas from the 
northern provinces of Hindostan, of extending the British terri- 
tory to the Jumna, and the British influence to the borders of 
the Deccan, and of engaging the petty chicfs and statcs to 
strengthen the proposed system by their aid and co-operation 
under the assurance of the protection of the British arms, and 
of the secure and free enjoyment of their respective rights, 
authorities, and posscssions, within the limits of their respective 
territories. 

75. The principles by which your Excellency will regulate 
your conduct towards the Moghul, are stated in my separate 
despatch of this date. 

I have the honour to be, Sir, 
Your Excellency’s most faithful servant, 


WELLESLEY. 


N. B. Edmonstone, Esq., Secretary to Government, 
to Greme Mercer, Esq. 


Lustructions for negotiations in Bundelcund, with Rajpoots, and 
Sumroos Begum. 


(Most Secret.) 


Fort William, July 22nd, 1803. 
Sir, : 
1, I am directed by his Excellency the most noble the 
Governor-General in Council to inform you that in consequence 


COMMAND OF BUNDELCUND TO BE SECURED TO COMPANY, 317 


of a probable rupture with Dowlut Rao Scindiah and other 
Mahratta chieftains who have manifested a disposition to form 
a confederacy with that chief against the interests of the British 
Government, his Excellency in Council has deemed it expedient 

{to appoint a special agent for the purpose of conducting certain 
political negotiations with the several states bordering on ‘the 
western fronticr of the British provinces under the Presidency of 
Bengal, and of forming defensive alliances with those states on 
the part of the British Government against the hostile designs 
of the Mahratta chieftains, ' 

2. His Excellency in Council, in consideration of the local 
knowledge which you have obtained of the state of those 
countries, and having a firm reliance in your zeal, ability, and 
discretion, has becn pleased to nominat¢ you as his special agent 
for the purposes abovementioned, and to direct that you will 
immediately procecd to Allahabad with all practicable cxpedi- 
tion, where you will enter upon the duties of the charge entrusted 
to you, under the following instructions. 

3. You arc already apprized of the proposals made some time 
since by Himmut Bchadur to the honourable Henry Welleslcy, 
through Mr. John Messelbeck at Allahabad, for the transfer of 
the province of Bundelcund to the authority of the Honourable 
Company. 

4. The importance which his Excellency in Council afiachies 
to the possession of this province, as covering the Company’s 
possessions from the inroads of a hostile force from Berar, has 
been considerably increased by the information received from 
Mr. Ahmuty, the Collector of Allahabad, that Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah has actually despatched a considerable body of his 
forecs to the north-western fronticr of the Company’s dominions, 
and has addressed Ictters to Himmut Bahadur, instigating those 
chicftains to commit depredations in the Company’s dominions 
contiguous to Bundelcund; and that Shumshcere Bahadur, the 
eldest son of the late Ali Bahadur, has arrived in the province, 
and assumed the authority over it, under a sunnud from Amrut 
Rao, and supported by a force in the service of Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar. 

5. Under these circumstances, the immediate interposition of 
the British Government in the affairs of Bundelcund has become 
necessary, as a part of the gencral system of defence against the 
meditated designs of Dowlut Rao Scindiah and his confederates 
the Rajah of Berar and Jeswunt Rao Holkar. 


318 TERMS OF NEGOTIATION WITH HIMMUT BAHADUR. 


6. His Excellency has, therefore, determined to enter into a 
negotiation with Himmut Bchadur for his aid and influence in 
establishing in the province of Bundelcund an arrangement 
calculated to afford to the British Government the military and 
political advantages of the local situation of that province in the 
present crisis of affairs, and his Excellency has accordingly ad- 
dressed a letter to that chieftain, stating, in general terms, his 
Excellency’s views with respect to the province of Bundclcund, 
and requesting him to despatch to Allahabad a confidential 
agent for the express purpose of conferring with you on the 
details of the proposed arrangement. Copies of this Ictter, 
and of the detailed proposals which Himmut Bahddur has 
lately transmitted through Mr. Ahmuty, are enclosed for your 
information. .- 

7. During the progress of the negotiation you will be cnabled 
to ascertain more precisely than has hitherto been done, the 
means which Himmut Bahadur may possess of effectually sup- 
porting the interests of the British Government in the province, 
and will accordingly be enabled to submit to his Excellency the 
claims which he may possess to a recompense from the Govern- 
ment for his co-operation. 

8. It appcars from the former communication with Himmut 
BahAdur that his objects are the attainments of a Jaghire in the 
Company’s provinces within the Dooab, and the relcase of his 
relation Omrao Geer, from confinement at Lucknow. 

9. The first of those objects his Excellency authorizes you to 
engage for on the part of the Government; the extent of the 
Jaghire to be hercafter proportioned to the mcans he may possess 
of forwarding the views of Government; and to the zeal and 
activity he may shew in the application of those means to the 
desired object. 

10. Omrao Geer was put into confinement on a suspicion of 
his having been engaged with the adherents of Vizier Ali in a 
conspiracy against the government of the Nabob Vizier. As the 
British Government is exclusively responsible for the protection 
of the dominions and government of the Nawaub Vizier, his 
Excellency is of opinion that an application from the British 
Government to the Nawaub Vizier for the release of Omra Geer 
would be acceded to on proper measures being taken to obviate 
the risk of any future attempts on the part of Omrao Gecr to dis- 
turb the tranquillity of the Vizier’s Government. This might, 
perhaps, be most effectually guarded against by rendering Him- 


INSTRUCTIONS FOR CONCILIATING BUNDELAH CHIEFS, 319 


mut Bahadur responsible in his person and Jaghire for the future 
conduct of Omro Geer. 

11. Our imperfect knowledge of the internal state of Bundel- 
cund and of the relative situations of the several chiefs of the 
Bundelahs possessing power or influence in that province, pre- 
cludes the practicability of determining at the present moment 
the specific arrangements which it may be advisable and practi- 
cable to enter into with them for the attainment of the object in 
view. Those arrangements must be regulated by the information 
you may be enabled to acquire on those points after your arrival 
at Allahabad, and by the general spirit of his Excellency’s views 
and intentions. General assurances may be given to those chiefs 
who may be inclined to support the British interests of a liberal 
attention on the part of Government to their rights and interests ; 
and the advantages which they will individually obtain from an 
emancipation from the yoke of the Mahrattas, may be urged in 
favour of their ready co-operation with the British troops for that 
purpose. 

12. His Excellency has becn informed that the strong forts of 
Calinger and Damounic in Bundclcund are still possessed by 
dependants of the former Bundelah Rajahs, and that the dcter- 
mined resistance which has been shewn by those pcople to the 
Government of Ali Bahadur and the present Regency, has arisen 
from the dread that, notwithstanding any engagements to the 
contrary, the very considerable property they possess would be 
plundered by the Mahrattas on their resigning the possession of 
those forts. As it is probable that an engagement on the part of 
the British Government for the security of their persons and 
property would induce those dependants of the former Bundclah 
Rajahs to resign the possession of these forts to the British 
Government, you are authorized to enter into engagements with 
them for that purpose, on the condition of their ready submission 
to the Government. This, however, is to be considcred as a 
secondary object, and you will attempt a negotiation of this 
nature only in the event of your deeming it in no measure incon- 
sistent with the general conciliatory measure to be pursued 
with the inhabitants of the country. 

13. His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief will be requested 
to take the necessary measures to support the arrangements which 
may be formed by the application of a military force to act in 
conformity to them. 

14. The province of Boghelcund or Rewah Mackunpore, 


320 AND FOR ALLIANCE WITH RANAH OF GOHUD g YAUT CHIEFS. 


situated to the south-cast of Bundclcund, is considered by his 
Excellency as tributary to the latter. As no permanent con- 
quest of this province has, however, been made by Ali Bahddur, 
and as Rajah Aject Sing, the hereditary chicf of the province, is 
in actual possession, it is his Excellency’s wish that every en- 
deavour should be made to conciliate that chief to the in- 
terests of the British Government, and the necessary assistance 
granted him, if required, to defend the province from the inroads 
of the Berar Mahrattas, by sending a detachment to assist him 
in securing the principal passes into his country from Nagpore. 

15. The countries adjoining to Bundelcund, on the north-west, 
formerly possessed by the Ranah of Gohud and other Jaut chiefs, 
are now, with the exception of Kalpee, (a Jaghire, held under 
the sunnud of the Peishwa,) exclusively under the dominion of 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah. It is understood that those chiefs are very 
gencrally averse to the authority of the Mahratta chieftain, and 
that they would readily embrace any effectual means which might 
be proposed to them for the purpose of obtaining an emancipa- 
tion from that authority. 

16, As a co-operation on the part of those chiefs would 
essentially forward the military operations which it may be 
found expedient to prosecute in those countries, his Excellency 
directs me to furnish you with the following observations on the 
general principles which it is his Exccllency’s wish to adopt in 
forming arrangements with those chiefs. 

17. In the event of a war with Dowlut Rao Scindiah, the 
security of the British possessions in the Dooab against the future 
designs of that chicf, would seem to demand the total abolition 
of his authority and interference in the north-western provinces 
of Hindostan. 

18. As it is not his Excellency’s intention, however, in the 
event of a successful war with Scindiah, to extend at present the 
British regulations beyond the Dooab, with the reservation of 
Bundelcund and of such cities, forts, or districts, on the western 
banks of the Jumna, as may serve effectually to secure the safe 
navigation of that river, and to protect the fronticr of the Dooab, 
it appears to his Excellency that engagements with those chiefs, 
formed on the basis of mutual sccurity and support, and excluding 
all interference on the part of the British Government in the in- 
ternal regulation of their respective possessions, would most cffect- 
ually sccure their co-operation, and present the strongest barricr 
to the efforts of Scindiah to regain an influence in that quarter. 


COURSE, TO BE TAKEN WITH RANAH OF GOHUD ; 321 


19. Upon this principle engagements may be entered into 
with those chiefs, securing to them the undisturbed possession of 
their hereditary tenures on the condition of their zealous and 
ready co-operation with the British Government, to the extent 
of their respective means, in expelling the troops of Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah from that quarter of Hindostan, and preventing any 
future attempts on the part of that chieftain, or of any other 
foreign power, to establish an authority in those provinces. 

20. The ancestors of the Ranah of Gohud possessed the 
principal authority and influence amongst the Jaut chiefs to the 
westward of the Jumna, and although the authority and property 
of the present Ranah have been completely subjugated by 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah, yet his influence amongst the Jaut tribes 
is supposed to be still considerable, and might, perhaps, be ad- 
vantageously used to assist in expelling the troops of Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah from the provinces of Hindostan. 

21. The poverty of the Ranah might, however, render it 
necessary that he should be supplied with sufficient funds to 
enable him to exert this influence to the effectual support of the 
British interests. 

22. If upon more minute and local information of the state of 
the Ranah’s circumstances, and of the influence which he may 
possess amongst the Jaut tribes, you should be of opinion that he 
is inclined to co-operate With the British forces in the expulsion 
of the troops of Dowlut Rao Scindiah from the country of 
Gohud, and that an advance of moncy from the British Govern- 
ment might enable him to give uscful support to the military 
operations of the British forces in that country, his Excellency 
directs me to authorize you to grant him such advance as you 
may decm immediately necessary for the purpose of enabling 
him to collect his adherents, not to exceed the amount of rupees, 
100,000, without recciving the further authority of his Excellency 
in Council. The enclosed letter addressed by his Excellency to 
the Ranah of Gohud (a copy of which is enclosed for your in- 
formation) will be forwarded by you only in the above event 
of your conceiving that his co-operation may be advantageously 
exerted. 

23. To complete the system proposed by his Excellency of 
defensive alliance against the future encroachments of Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah or other foreign powers into the north-western 
provinces of Hindostan, his Excellency attaches much import- 
ance to securing the accession of the Rajpoot chiefs of Jypore 

Y 


322 JYPORE, JODEPORE, AND SUMROO’S BEGUM. 


and Jodepore to the plan above laid down, of mutual security 
and support. 

24. Enclosed are copies of Ietters which his Excellency has 
with this view addressed to the Rajahs of Jypore and Jodepore, 
which sufficiently explain the principles on which it is his Excel- 
lency’s intention to form arrangements with those chiefs. The 
original letters have been forwarded through his Excellency the 
Commander-in-Chief, and duplicates have been delivered to the 
Nakcels of those chiefs at the Presidency for transmission to 
their principals. 

25. His Excellency considers it a desirable object to be 
attained in the negotiation with the Jaut and Rajpoot chiefs, 
that their fronticrs should be secured by a subsidiary force 
from the British Government proportionate to the extent of 
their possessions and means respectively. This will more par- 
ticularly be desirable with the Ranah of Gohud and the Rajahs 
of Jypore and Jodepore, the amount of whose revenucs his Ex- 
cellency conceives would easily admit of a subsidy being paid 
to the British Government for the defence of their possessions. 

26. From the enclosed copy of a Ictter, addressed to Zeib ul 
Nissa Begum, you will observe that his Excellency the Governor- 
General is inclined to extend the protection and favour of the 
British Government to the Begum. As the Jaghire possessed 
by the Begum is within the Doab, His Excellency is desirous 
that in any engagement entered into on the part of the British 
Government, such conditions may be inserted as may facilitate 
the introduction of the British regulations into the Jaghire in 
the event of a settlement of the adjoining parts of the Doab 
being formed upon the system of government established in the 
British possessions. 

27. His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief has already been 
furnished with the instructions of his Excellency the most noble 
the Governor-General, in regard to the measures to be pursued 
for dissolving the force under the command of M. Perron, and in 
the service of Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 

28. A general political authority will also be vested in his 
Excellency the Commander-in-Chicf by his Excellency in 
Council, founded on the spirit of these instructions, a copy of 
which will be forwarded to his Excellency, and subject to such 
further secret instructions as his Excellency the most noble the 
Governor-Gencral may decm expedient to forward to the Com- 
mander-in-Chief. 


ORDERS FOR OFFICIAL ROUTINE OF THE MISSION. 323 


29. As it will be of the utmost importance that the details of 
the measures, directed by the above general instructions, should 
be conducted under the inspection and with the sanction of his 
Excellency the Commander-in-Chief, his Excellency in Council 
desires that so soon as you may deem the negotiation in regard 
to Bundelcund, in such a state of forwardness as to admit of 
your proceeding to join his Excellency the Commandcr-in-Chief, 
you will entrust the further prosecution of the arrangement 
adopted for putting the British troops in possession of that 
province, to Mr. R. Ahmuty, the collector of Allahabad ; and 
proceed yourself to the head quarters of the army, under the 
command of his Excellency, where you will be furnished with 
such further instructions as may be deemed necessary, through 
the medium of his Excellency the Commander-in-Chief. 

30. To enable you to discharge the varied and extensive 
dutics now entrusted to you with promptitude and effect, his 
Excellency the Commander-in-Chief will be requested to au- 
thorize one or more of the military officers under his Excellency’s 
command, who may be spared from their military duties, and 
who may be otherwise qualificd, to be employed under your 
direction in carrying into effect the political arrangements com- 
mitted to the gencral superintendence of his Excellency the 
Commandcr-in-Chief. ’ 

31. The collectors of Allahabad, Cawnpore and Etawah, will 
be directed to honour your drafts on his Excellency the most 
noble the Governor-General for such sums as you may require 
for the purposes of the public service. 

32. You will be pleased to correspond with the Sccrctary to 
the Government in the Secret Department on all points con- 
nected with the objects of your mission, transmitting for the 
information of his Excellency the most noble the Governor- 
General, a regular detail of your proceedings, and you will com- 
municate copics of all your letters to the Sccretary to his Excel- 
lency the Commander-in-Chicf. 

Tam, &c. 
N. B, EDMONSTONE, 
Secretary to Government, 
Sceret and Political Department. 


324 SCINDIAH’S PREVIOUS CONSENT TO TREATY NOT NEEDED: 


44. WN. B. Edmonstone, Esq., Secretary to Government, to 
Colonel Collins, Resident at the Court of Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah. 


Argument against the right of the Confederated Chicftains to 
object to the conclusion, or to obstruct the execution, of the 
Treaty of Bassein. 

(Extract.) 
Sir, Fort William, June 3rd, 1803. 
yf * * * # * * * * 

~ You will be prepared to oppose any arguments founded on 

Scindiah’s alleged rights and privileges, as a branch of the Mah- 

ratta empire, by which Scindiah may contest the right of the 

Peishwa to conclude political engagements with the British 

Government, or with any forcign power, without the previous 

consent and concurrence of the feudatory chicftaing or may en- 

deavour to justify his interference in the late arrangements, or 
assert a right to participation in the future administration of the 

Peishwa’s affairs’ 

Under the instructions of his Excellency the Governor-General 
you have already successfully combated the principle assumed 
by. Dowlut Rao Scindiah that, as guarantce to the treaty of 
Salbye, his previous consent to the engagements between the 
British Government and the Peishwa should have been obtained. 
No such principle can, in his Excellency’s judgment, be main- 
tained by any arguments derived either from the original consti- 
tution of the Mahratta empire, or from the actual practice of the 
several chieftains composing the Mahratta confederacy. The 
exclusive right of concluding treaties and engagements with 
foreign states, not of a nature to compromise the separate rights 
and interests of the feudatory chicftains of the empire, must be 
considered to be inherent in the supreme exccutive authority of 
the Mahratta state, and it may be a question whether the Peishwa, 
acting in the name and under the ostensible sanction of the no- 
minal head of the empire, might not conclude treatics which shall 
be obligatory upon the subordinate chicfs and feudatorics with- 
out their concurrence, But even under a contrary supposition, 
it would be absurd to regulate any political question by the 
standard of a constitution which time and events have entirely 
altered or dissolved. (The late Mahajee Scindiah and his suc- 
cessor Dowlut Rao have uniformly exercised the powers of in- 
dependent dominion by making war on the neighbouring states, 
by concluding engagements with them, and by regulating the 


NOR THAT OF THE RAJAH OF BERAR. 325 


whole system of their internal administration without the partici- 
pation or previous consent of the Peishwa, whose supremacy, 
however, both Mahajee Scindiah and Dowlut Rao Scindiah have 
uniformly acknowledged. + 

Dowlut Rao Scindiah, therefore, cannot, even on the supposed 
principles of the original constitution, deny the right of the 
Peishwa to conclude his late engagements with the British Go- 
vernment independently of his concurrence, without impeaching 
the validity of his own proceedings and those of his predecessor ; 
nor can he, according to the more admissible rules derived from 
practice and prescription, justly rcfuse to admit the exercise of 
those independent rights of dominion on the part of the Peishwa, 
‘which both Scindiah and his predecessor assumed in a condition 
of acknowledged subordination to his Highness’s permanent 
authority. ) 

The Rajah of Berar is known to entertain pretensions to the 
authority of the Sahoo Rajah, and on the accession of a Peishwa, 
he is admitted to the privilege of investing the Pcishwa with a 
khelaut. Under these circumstances, the Rajah of Berar’s ac- 
knowledgement of subordination to the paramount authority of 
the Peishwa may be doubted. But while the Pcishwa continues 
to exercise that authority in his capacity of representative of the 
Sahoo Rajah, the Rajah of Berar cannot possess the right of 
controlling the Pcishwa’s actions. 

In proportion as the Rajah of Berar disclaims the supremacy 
of the Peishwa, he has less right to interfere in any degree in the 
Peishwa's concerns. The Pcishwa must be considered by the 
Rajah of Berar, cither as the representative of the Rajah of 
Berar’s paramount Sovercign, or as an independent state, in 
amity with the Rajah of Berar, or as a power\acknowledged by 
every other state in India, but which it is the secrct design of the 
Rajah of Berar to subvert, with a view to supersede its authority 
for his own aggrandizement. In any of these cases, and more 
espccially in the last, the other powers of India cannot admit the 
right of the Rajah of Berar to control the Pcishwa’s intercourse 
with other states, unless the Pcishwa shall attempt to injure the 
independence of the Rajah of Berar.’) 

The arguments stated in the preceding paragraphs Are equally 
applicable to Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s assumption of a right to 
interfere in any manner in the arrangement concluded between 
the British Government and the Pcishwa, or in the future 
administration of his Highness’s affairs; such interference is 


326 SCINDIAH DID NOT HELP US TO RESTORE PEISHWA, 


incompatible with the complete and effectual operation of our 
engagements with his Highness, and the right to secure their 
due operation, is necessarily combined with the right to contract 
them. 

Scindiah cannot justly deny the right of the Peishwa and of 
the British Government to conclude the terms of a defensive al- 
liance without his previous consent, nor claim the right of inter- 
fering in the arrangement or in the future administration of the 
Peishwa’s affairs on the grounds of his having employed his 
arms and resources in the support of the Peishwa’s cause. 

Scindiah did not originally take up arms for the defence of the 
Peishwa. He had long been engaged in a contest with Jeswunt 
Rao Holkar, whose frequent successes and increasing power 
menaced the security of Scindiah’s dominion, and the unsuccess- 
ful resistance which the forces of Dowlut Rao Scindiah opposed 
to those of Holkar in the vicinity of Poonah was mercly a con- 
tinuation of the contest. The efforts of Scindiah to check the 
progress of Holkar’s arms were necessary for the preservation of 
his own power, and the object of his exertions was not changed 
by the danger to which the state of Poonah was exposed by the 
approach of Holkar to that capital. The preservation of 
Scindiah’s usurped ascendancy in the state of Poonah, and the 
security of his own dominion, which would have been more 
than ever endangered by the establishment of Holkar at the 
‘capital of Poonah, rendered the protection of the person and 
government of the Peishwa an object of individual interest to 
Scindiah, and the same motives must be supposed to have 
influenced his subsequent operations. His exertions, however, 
have not contributed in any degree to the Peishwa’s restoration. 
Aware of the doubtful issue of a further contest with the arms 
of Holkar, Scindiah solicited the co-operation of the British 
power, and continued in a state of inactivity at a considerable 
distance from the scene of action. The energy, promptitude, 
and power of the British Government were the exclusive causes 
which compelled Jeswunt Rao Holkar to abandon his design of 
subverting the dominion of the Peishwa and of establishing his 
own authority upon its ruins, and to retire from Poonah; de- 
prived him of the means of supporting his military power, and 
secured the restoration of the Peishwa to his capital and govern- 
ment; and to these scasonable and arduous exertions of the 
British power, Scindiah is absolutcly indcbtcd for the present 
secure possession of his dominion. 


NEITHER CHIEF ENTITLED TO THWART THE TREATY. 327 


The combined result of all these facts and arguments is, that 
the interposition of the British power for the restoration of the 
Peishwa, and the conclusion of the late alliance with the state of 
Poonah, is not only warrantable upon every principle of justice, 
and the law of nations, but indispensably necessary for the pre- 
servation of the integrity of the Mahratta empire, and to the 
security of the legitimate rights and interests of its respective 
branches, and especially of Scindiah. That those rights and 
interests are effectually secured by the terms of the alliance, 
and consequently that any attempt on the part of any state 
or chieftain, to disturb the operation of the treaty of Bassein, 
may justly be considered to be an act of hostility against the 
British Government. 

Under all these circumstances we possess an undoubted right to 
require that Dowlut Rao Scindiah should afford the most un- 
equivocal proofs of his resolution to abstain from the adoption of 
any measurcs, which we may deem to be calculated to impede the 
accomplishment of the late arrangements in the Mahratta state. 

* * * * * * * * * 
I have the honour to be, &c. N. B. EDMONSTONE, 
Sec. to Government. 


45. The Marquess Wellesley to the Secret Committee of 
the Court of Directors. 


Progress of Mahratta affairs. In spite of rumours and appear- 
ances, the Governor-Gencral thinks war will not ensue. 


Fort William, June zoth, 1803. 
Honourable Sirs, 

In my despatch of the 19th of April, 1803, forwarded over- 
land, I had the honour to communicate to your honourable 
Committee the progress of transactions on the western side of 
the peninsula, to the period of my latest advices, and to state 
my sentiments respecting the situation of affairs in the Mahratta 
empire, The Resident at Poonah, in conformity to my instruc- 
tions, has transmitted to your honourable Committce a narrative 
. of occurrences in the Mahratta state to the 15th of May, 

The intelligence of the important event of his Highness the 
Peishwa’s restoration to the exercise of his just authority in the 
Mahratta state, under the protection of the British power, must 
have afforded great satisfaction to your honourable Committce. 
Every circumstance connected with that prosperous event justi- 


328 GENERAL WELLESLEY’S FORCED MARCH SAVED POONAH. 


fies a confident expectation of the complete and pacific accom- 
plishment of the beneficial objects of the late alliance with the 
Peishwa. 

It is my duty, on this occasion, to express to your honour- 
able Committee the high sense which I entertain of the dis- 
tinguished ability manifested by the honourable Major-Gencral 
Wellesley in conducting the British detachment, under his com- 
mand, from the frontier of Mysore to Poonah. 

The documents forming the enclosures to this despatch, and 
transmitted by the Devaynes, will afford to your honourable 
Committee a full view of the considerable military skill with 
which Major-General Wellesley surmounted the difficulties of 
his long and arduous march ; and combincd the various arrange- 
ments requisite to secure the supply and movement of his army, 
and the co-operation and junction of the troops from Hyderabad 
and Bombay. Your honourable Committee will also observe 
with pleasure the prudence, address, and temper with which 
Major-General Wellesley conciliated the Mahratta states occu- 
pying the countrics through which he passed, and you will 
approve the signal success with which he composed the various 
animosities and disscnsions of the several Mahratta chiefs, and 
united that discordant and turbulent race in the common cause 
of the Peishwa and of the British Government. 

The particular attention of your honourable Committee will 
be directed to the judgment, humanity, and activity manifested 
by Major-General Wellesley in saving the city of Poonah from 
destruction by the rapid march and scasonable arrival of the 
British troops. This happy event impressed the inhabitants of 
that city with the most favourable opinion of the British power. 
It is a circumstance equally honourable to our character, and 
propitious to our interests in that quarter of India, that the first 
effects of the British influence in the Mahratta dominions should 
have been displayed in rescuing the capital of the empire from 
impending ruin, and its inhabitants from violence and rapine. 

It will be satisfactory to your honourable Committee to be 
informed that his Highness the Pecishwa has expressed the 
utmost degree of admiration in observing the promptitude,- 
energy, and success of those exertions to which his Highness 
is indebted for his restoration to his government and dominions; 
and that the conduct of Major-Gencral Wellesley, and of Licut.- 
Colonel Close, on this occasion, has apparently cstablished in 
his Highness’s mind the most implicit confidence in the good 


CONFEDERATES NOT LIKELY TO RISK WAR WITH US. 329 


faith, justice, and power of the British Government, and in the 
valour, skill, and integrity of its officers, with a high sense of the 
benefits which his Highness must derive from the operation of 
the late alliance on every branch of his interests and affairs, 
From the enclosed copy of my latest advices from the Resi- 
dent at Poonah, your honourable Committce will observe the 
disposition of the Peishwa to conform to the advice and recom- 
mendation of the British Government, in the adoption of every 
measure necessary to consolidate his Highness’s authority, and 
to accomplish the objects of the treaty of Bassein; and you will 
find that his Highness’s confidence in the British Government 
has been increased, and has received additional confirmation 
by every event which has occurred since his Highness has 
resorted to our protection for the recovery of his rights. 
Although the information contained in Lieut.-Colonel Close’s 
address to your honourable Committee, and the tenor of my 
latest advices from the courts of Dowlut Rao Scindiah and the 
Rajah of Berar tend to countenance fhe rumours of a projected 
confederacy between those chieftains and Jeswunt Rao Holkar, 
the existence of any such confederacy is still a subject of con- 
siderable doubt. Ur any such combination has been formed, its 
object is probably restricted to purposcs of a defensive nature, 
without invelving any vicws of hostility towards the British 
power. The local situation and comparative power and re- 
sources of Scindiah and Ragojee Bhoousla preclude the appre- 
hension of any attempt of those chicfs to subvert the Peishwa’s 
government, or the treaty of Bassein, at the desperate hazard of 
a war with the British power. The situation of Holkar is pre- 
carious and accidental; the instability of the resources of that 
adventurer reduces the continuance of his power to the utmost 
degree of uncertainty, and absolutely deprives him of the means 
of opposing any systematic or formidable resistance to the 
operation of our alliance with the state of Poonah. With a 
view, however, to anticipate every possible contingency, I have 
framed and despatched the instructions and Ictters which are 
annexed to this despatch, and are noted in the margin,) 
Anxious to furnish the Resident at Poonah and Major-Gencral 
Wellesley with instructions for the regulation of their conduct 
immediatcly after the return of the Pcishwa to Poonah, I have 
transmitted directions to those officers, in a despatch to the 
former of which a copy is enclosed. 
That despatch contained a general statement of the principles 


330 OUR MILITARY DISPOSITIONS WILL OVERAWE THEM. 


on which the late treaty with the Peishwa is founded, of the 
objects to which it is directed, and of the measures necessary 
to be pursued for securing the complete operation and _ sta- 
bility of the alliance between the Company and the Mahrattas, 
I, therefore, deem it sufficient to refer your honourable Com- 
mittee to that document for information on those important 
points. 

With a view to- aid. the effect of the representations which 
Lieut.-Colonel Close was instructed in that despatch to address 
to his Highness the Peishwa, I deemed it to be expedient to 
address a letter to his Highness, a copy of that letter is also 
annexed to this despatch for the information of your honourable 
Committee. 

Your honourable Committee was informed by Lieut.-Colonel 
Close of the exactions levied by Jeswunt Rao Holkar upon his 
Highness the Nizam’s city of Aurungabad. No reason exists to 
countenance an apprehension that thcse depredations on the 
Nizam’s territory are connected with the supposed confederacy 
between Holkar and Scindiah. (Destitute of any permanent 
resources, Holkar is compelled to supply his exigencies by in- 
discriminate plunder) It is probable that Holkar has been 
induced to levy contributions from Aurungabad by the trea- 
cherous suggestions of the Nizam’s officer commanding at that 
station, who is believed to have participated in the booty. 

Major-Gencral Wellesley, however, deemed it to be proper to 
direct Lieut.-Colonel Stevenson to advance with the whole of 
the Nizam’s subsidiary force towards Aurungabad for the even- 
tual protection of his Highness’s dominions. I have lately 
received information that Holkar has retired with his army from 
the Nizam’s frontier towards the northward. 

The judicious arrangements which Major-General Wellesley 
has effected for the disposition of the troops under his command 
is calculated to mect every exigency of affairs, cven under the 
improbable supposition that Scindiah, the Rajah of Berar, and 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar have really entertained designs of a hostile 
nature against the British Government or its allics. Our early 
state of preparation, and the formidable force which Major- 
Gencral Wellesley has opposed to every possible operation on 
the part of any or of all those chieftains, must effectually 
deter them from the prosecution of war. In the same spirit of 
seasonable precaution Lieut.-General Stuart has judged it to be 
expedient to advance the army under his immediate command to 


HOLKAR NOT TO BE DEEMED AN ESTABLISHED POWER. 331 


a position which may enable him to co-operate with the troops 
under Major-General Wellesley and Colonel Stevenson. 

My instructions to Colonel Collins, of the 5th of May, and to 
Lieut.-Colonel Close, of the 7th of May, together with my wis 
of the 15th of May, to the Rajah of Berar, have probably alrdady 
produced an arrangement of a pacific nature with all the chiefs 
of the Mahratta empire, whose formal accesion to the treaty of 
Bassein has not yet been signified to me. “Phe Pcishwa having 
actually resumed his government, the stipulations of the treaty 
have been notified to Scindiah, and to the Rajah of Berar. The 
terms of the treaty must also have been known to Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar, and as the articles of the treaty provide a more effectual 
security for the possessions of Holkar and Scindiah than cither 
could have attained under any other arrangement compatible 
with the existence of the Peishwa’s power, it may be expected 
that a sense of their own interests will induce those chicfs to 
acquiesce in the settlement which has been effected at Poonah. ) 

The depredations which have been committed by Holkar on 
the territories of the Nizam, unquestionably would furnish a just. 
ground of war against that adventurer, if he were to be con- 
sidered in the situation of an established power in India. But 
as the exactions at Aurungabad appcar to have been levied with 
the concurrence of the Nizam’s officers, whose faith had been 
long suspected, and as no principle of justice or policy requires 
the acknowledgment of Holkar among the states of India, I 
propose to vicw this transaction as the combined offence of. tio’ 
unfaithful servants of the states of Poonah and Hyderabad a 
and I shall not attempt to prosccute hostilities against Holkar, 
unless he shall endeavour by force to obstruct the operation of 
the treaty of Basscin. It will not be difficult to obtain sufficient 
satisfaction for the Nizam by pacific accommodation with Holkar, 
after the latter shall have submitted, formally, to the legitimate 
authority of the Pcishwa. 

At the date of my latest advices from the Resident with 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah, that chicftain had not procecded beyond 
the fronticr of his own territory. ‘The Resident describes Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah to be personally disposed to pursue measures of 
an amicable nature towards the British Government, although it 
is possible that Scindiah may have been induced to signify a 
reluctant consent to the formation of the projected conspiracy 
by the urgency of his principal ministers, 

This circumstance is confirmed by the communications which 


332 THE TREATY LIKELY TO SECURE TRANQUILLITY. 


Colonel Collins has received from Ballajee Koonjur, the officer 
despatched by his Highness the Peishwa to Scindiah, for the 
purpose of explaining to that chieftain the detail of the engage- 
ments concluded by his Highness with the British Government, 

I have received intelligence that the Rajah of Berar had 
entered his tents with a view of commencing his march from 
Nagpore, for the purpose of meeting Scindiah, but that the in- 
formation of the arrival of the British troops at Poonah, which 
reached the Rajah of Berar soon after he entered his tents, 
would probably deter that chieftain from advancing. 

Under all these circumstances, any opposition from the Mah-. 
ratta chieftains to the complete accomplishment of the stipula- 
tions of the treaty of Basscin, appears to be improbable, and I 
entertain a firm hope that the British Government will be speedily 
relieved from the danger which menaced our possessions in the 
Peninsula during the recent commotion in the Mahratta empire, 
and that tranquillity will be permanently established on our 
frontier by the operation of the alliance happily concluded with 
his Highness the Pcishwa.| 

1* * * * * * % * * 


In closing this despatch, it will be satisfactory to your honour- 
able Committee, that I should add my expcctation that the 
necessary expense of the late military opcrations in the Pen- 
insula is not likely to occasion any derangement in the general 
prosperity of the finances of the Company in India, or in the 
accounts or services of the present year. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 
WELLESLEY. 


46. The Governor-General in council to the Honourable the 
Secret Committee of the Court of Directors. 


Unsatisfactory negotiations with Scindiah and the Rajah of 
Berar. War now appears probable, for which the Governor- 
General ts well prepared. 

Fort William, ist August, 1803. 

Honourable Sirs, 

The Governor-General has had the honour of communicating 
to your honourable Committec, in his several despatches of the 


' The omitted passage contains a high eulogy of Lieut.-Colonel Close, 
and his recent diplomatic services. 


SCINDIAH’S ADMISSION AS TO TERMS OF TREATY. 333 


24th of December, 1802, 1toth of February, 19th of April, and 
20th of June, 1803, the progress of transactions in the Mahratta 
empire, and of stating to your honourable Committee the 
measures which his Excellency deemcd it necessary to pursue 
for the security and improvement of the British interests, as con- 
nected with that empire, and his general sentiments with respect 
to the actual state of affairs at those several periods of time. 

The Governor-General in council now deems it proper to 
continue the narrative of events from the date of the Governor- 
General’s latest communication to your honourable Committce, 
a duplicate of which accompanies this despatch overland. 

At a conference between Dowlut Rao Scindiah, and the 
Resident at the court of that chieftain, holden on the 28th of 
May, the Resident communicated to Dowlut Rao Scindiah the 
representations which he was instructed to make in conformity 
to the notes of instruction, of which a copy formed an enclosure 
in the Governor-General’s address to your honourable Com- 
mittee of the 20th of June. 

The Resident began the conference by imparting to Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah the whole of the treaty of Basscin, of which he 
also delivered a copy to that chieftain, agreeably to the direc- 
tions of the Governor-General. After some discussion with 
regard to particular parts of that treaty, the Resident called on 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah{ to declare whether it appeared to him to 
contain any stipulations injurious to his just rights. In reply 
to which, that chicftain candidly acknowledged that it contained 
no such stipulations. The Resident then adverted to the 
reported confederacy between Dowlut Rao Scindiah, the Rajah 
of Berar and Jeswunt Rao Holkar, and to the actual approach ° 
of the Rajah of Berar, for the purpose of mecting Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah, and in conformity to the Governor-Gencral’s instruc- 
tions, required that chicftain to state the nature of the late 
negotiations between those Mahratta chiefs, and to disavow 
any intentions of confederating with the Rajah of Berar, and 
with Jeswunt Rao Holkar, for the purpose of obstructing the 
completion of the arrangements established by the treaty of 
Basscin. 

The Resident enforced these demands by every argument 
which the nature of the case suggested, and by the declaration, 
which he was instructed to make, of the determined resolution 
of the British Government to resist any attempt on the part of 
any state or power to obstruct the complete execution of the 


334 BUT HIS WORDS AND ACTS THREATEN WAR, 


treaty of Basscin, and the Resident apprized Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah, that in the event of his refusing to afford the just and 
reasonable explanations and assurances which the Resident has 
demanded, and of his continuing to prosccute military opera- 
tions in opposition to the Resident’s remonstrances, the British 
Government would be compelled to adopt measures of pre- 
caution on every boundary of that chieftain’s dominions. The 
Resident added, agreeably to the Governor-General’s instruc- 
tions, that certain intelligence of the accession of Dowlut Rao, 
Scindiah to any confederacy against the British power would 
produce immediate hostility on all parts of his frontier. 

These representations however, failed to produce the desired 
effect; Dowlut Rao Scindiah repeatedly declared to the Re- 
sident, that he could not afford the satisfaction demanded until 
a mecting should have taken place between that chieftain and 
the Rajah of Berar, whose arrival was expected in the course of 
a few days, and Dowlut Rao Scindiah closed the discussion by 
stating to the Resident, that immediately after his interview 
with the Rajah of Berar, the Resident should be informed 
‘whether it would be peace or war.’ 

This unprovoked menace of hostility, and the insult offered 
to the British Government by a reference of the question of 
‘peace or war, to the result of a conference with the Rajah of 
Berar, who, at the head of a considerable army, had reached 
the vicinity of Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s camp, together with 
the indication which it afforded of a disposition on the part of 
those chieftains to prosecute the supposed objects of their con- 
federacy, rendered it the duty. of the British Government to 
* adopt without delay, the most effectual measures for the vindica- 
tion of its dignity, and for the security of its rights and interests, 
and those of its allies, against any attempt on the part of the 
confederates, to injure or invade them._, 

The Governor-General accordingly issucd private instructions 
to his Excellency the Commandcr-in-Chief at Cawnpore, to 
make the necessary arrangements for assembling the army on 
the north-west frontier of the Company’s possessions, and the 
Governor-Gencral at the same time directed his attention to the 
formation of a plan of operations for the British army in that 
quarter, and to the accomplishment of a system of political 
arrangement with the neighbouring states and chieftains, calcu- 
lated to diminish the power and resources of the enemy, and to 
facilitate the success of the British arms in the event of our being 


MAHRATTA ARTIFICES TO GAIN TIME. 335 


compelled to proceed to measures of hostility against the power 
and possessions of Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 

The course of measures which the Governor-General deemed 
it advisable to adopt for those purposes, is described in the 
enclosed paper of notes, which was transmitted to the Com- 
mander-in-Chief for his immediate information and guidance, 

1% * * * * * * * * 


The Governor-General in council now proceeds to state the 
progress of the negotiations and transactions on the western side 
of India. 

Although the answer which Dowlut Rao Scindiah returned to 
the just and reasonable demands of the Resident, on the 28th of 
May, would have justified the Resident in immediately quitting 
the camp of that chieftain, the Resident in conformity to the 
desire expressed by the Governor-General to employ every 
practical endeavour to effect a pacific accommodation of subsist- 
ing differences, properly resolved to postpone his departure until 
a meeting should have taken place between Scindiah and the 
Rajah of Berar. 

On the 3d of June, the Rajah of Berar arrived within one 
march of Scindiah’s camp, and was met by the latter chieftain’ 
on the following morning. / On the 5th the Resident despatched 
his native Secretary with a complimentary message to the Rajah 
of Berar, who received him with distinguished attention The 
Rajah of Berar expressed with apparent sincerity, his solicitude 
to maintain the relations of friendship which had so long sub- 
sisted between the British Government and the state of Berar, 
and informed the Resident’s emissary that he had received the 
Governor-Gencral’s letter of the 13th of May, and that he should 
specdily return a replyy 

The two chieftains having held a private conference on the 
8th, the Resident despatched a message to Dowlut Rao Scindiah, 
on the following day, intimating that the intended interview 
between Dowlut Rao Scindiah, and the Rajah of Berar, having 
taken place, it was incumbent on Dowlut Rao Scindiah to return 
an immediate and explicit answer to the demands, which the 
Resident had stated on the 28th of May. ( To this message, 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah returned an evasive reply. The Resident 
being of opinion, that Dowlut Rao Scindiah systematically post- 


1 The passage here omitted explains the object and character of the 
special powers vested in Major-General Wellesley, as printed elsewhere, 


336 POLITIC LONGSUFFERING OF TIE RESIDENT. 


poned a dccisive reply with a view to gain time, and being aware 
of the necessity of bringing the question of peace or war to an 
immediate decision, addressed a memorial to that chieftain, In 
reply to this memorial, the Resident reccived a verbal message, 
purporting that the required explanation should be afforded in 
the course of two or three days. On receiving this message, the 
Resident signified to Dowlut Rao Scindiah that he considered 
that reply to be final, and apprized that chieftain of his intention 
to quit his camp without further delay. On the 14th the 
Resident received a reply to his memorial, containing excuses 
for the delay of a specific answer ‘on the subject of the question 
depending, and soliciting the Resident to postpone his departure. 

Dowlut Rao Scindiah having declared, that the decision of the 
question of peace or war rested with the Rajah of Berar, and the 
latter chicftain being equally concerned in the progress and issue 
of the depending negotiations, the Resident deemed it expedient 
to communicate with that chieftain, in the hope that the Gover- 
nor-General's letter of the 13th of May, might have induced the 
Rajah of Berar to manifest a disposition more conformable to 
the dictates of policy and justice, than that which appeared to 
actuate the conduct of Dowlut Rao Scindiah,) The Resident 
accordingly despatched his native secretary to the Rajah of 
Berar with instructions to ascertain whether that chicftain had 
prepared any reply to the Governor-Gencral’s letter of the 13th 
of May, and to apprize him of the contents of the memorial 
which the Resident had addressed to Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 
This message produced no other result than a continuation of 
the same system Of evasion, and delay, which the Resident had 
already experienced from Dowlut Rao Scindiah. The Resident 
therefore addresscd another memorial to Scindiah, respecting 
his determination to quit the camp on a specified day. The 
memorial produced a correspondence between the Resident and 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah, which terminated in a resolution on the 
part of the Resident to postpone his departure for a few days, in 
the expectation which he was induced to entertain of a change 
of conduct on the part of those chieftains, 

It is impracticable to comprise within the compass of a de- 
spatch overland the detail of the subsequent negotiations between 
the Resident and the confcderated chicftains to the date of our 
latest advices from the Resident. Those details will be com- 
municated to your honourable Committee by a sea conveyance. 
The particulars already stated will enable your honourable 


I HOPED FOR PEACE, I MUST NOT SHUN WAR. 337 


Committee to form a judgment of the spirit which has acthated 
those chieftains in the late important discussions. It is sufficient 
to add, that although they continued to practise the same artful 
evasions, the Resident was induced, by their promises and per- 
suasions, to protract the period of his actual departure from the 
camp of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, with a view to afford an unequi- 
vocal proof of the anxiety of the British Government-to maintain 
the relations of amity and peace with those chicftains, and to 
render them exclusively responsible for the consequences of their 
perseverance in a system of conduct inconsistent with those 
relations, and repugnant to every principle of justice and good 
faith. ) 

1% * * * * * ° & * * 

Your honourable Committee is apprized of the” grounds on 
which the Governor-General founded his reasonable expectation 
of the pacific accomplishment of the arrangements concluded 
between the British Government and the Peishwa. Every argu- 
ment deducible from the just and amicable nature of those 
arrangements, from the equitable and moderate course of pro- 
ceeding adopted by the British Government towards the Mah- 
ratta states, and from the relative power and resources of the 
British Government, and the confederated chieftains in the actual 
situation of their respective forces, favour that expectation. If, 
under the peculiar disadvantages with which those chieftains 
must now undertake a contest with the British power, they 
should continue to withhold the proofs which the Governor- 
General has demanded of their pacific intentions, it must be 
obvious to your honourable Committce that any delay in the 
prosecution of offensive operations Against the power and pos- 
sessions of those chieftains would hazard the sccurity of the 
British interests by enabling those chieftains to pursue their 
hostile designs at a future period of time under circumstances 
more favourable to their success: 

The Governor-Gencral in council confidently expects that 
under the powers vested in the honourable Major-General Wel- 
lesley, that officer will have required the Resident with Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah to quit that chieftain’s camp within a specified 
period of days, unless Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar shall 


* The omitted passage contains a justification of the Governor- 
General's conduct in insisting on his ultimatum, at the risk of war. It 
is repeated, and given, elsewhere. 

’ vA 


338 WE HAVE NO REASON TO FEAR THE ISSUE. 


previously separate their forces, and commence their return to 
their respective territories. 

By the latest accounts the united armies of Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar occupied a position within a 
few days’ march of the pass of Adjuntee, onc of the principal 
passes on the western frontier of his Highness the Nizam’s 
dqminions. The subsidiary force under the command of Lieut.- 
Colonel Stevenson, together with his Highness the Nizam’s 
contingent, was encamped at a short distance from Aurungabad. 

The honourable Major-General Wellesley marched from 
Poonah with the main body of the forces under his command 
on the 4th of June, and by the latest advices was encamped 
within a few marches of Ahmednuggur, a strong fort belonging 
to Dowlut Rao Scindiah, at the distance of about cighty miles 
from Poonah. The army under the command of Major-Gencral 
Wellesley is accompanied by an inconsidcrable portion of the 
contingent of troops which the Pcishwa is required to furnish by 
the treaty of Bassein. There is no reason, however, to ascribe 
this deficiency to. any want of inclination on the part of his High- 
ness to adhere to the faith of his engagements with the British 
Government. 

By the latest advices, Jeswunt Rao Holkar occupied a position 
with the main body of his army on the north side of the Taptce 
river. The endeavours of Dowlut Rao Scindiah and the Rajah 
of Berar to induce that chieftain to join them, appear to have 
been unsuccessful. It is not probable that Jeswunt Rao Holkar 
will ever be induced by any concessions cordially to connect his 
interests with those of Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 

The Governor-General] has great satisfaction in assuring your 
honourable Committee that in the event of hostilities between 
the British Government and the confedcrated chieftains, we shall 
enter upon the contest under every circumstance of advantage 
arising from the scason of the year, from the supcriority of our 
troops, and from the relative position of the British forces. 

The character of Major-General Welleslcy, the extent of our 
force, and the approved valour, steadiness, and discipline of our 

,troops, afford a prospect of the speedy and complete success 
of our arms on the western side of India, if the conduct of 
the Mahratta states should ultimately compel us to resort to 
hostility. 

The extent and efficiency of the British forces on the north- 
western quarter of the Company’s dominions under the command 


‘ IMPENDING DEATH OF THE NIZAM. 339 


of his Excellency the commander-in-chief, and his Excellency’s 
approved skill, activity, perseverance and prudence constitute a 
just foundation of confidence in the success of our military 
operations against the possessions of Dowlut Rao Scindiah in 
that quarter of Hindostan. 

The Governor-General is employed in framing the necessary 
arrangements for the occupation of the province of Cuttack 
in the event of‘hostilities, and the Governor-General in council 
entertains no doubt of the speedy success of the expedition 
which will be directed to that quarter in the event of hostilities 
between the British Government and the confederated Mahratta 
chieftains, 

The necessary measures have been adopted for defending the 
whole line of frontier from Allahabad to Midnapoor from the 
incursions of predatory bodies of the enemy’s troops. 

No events have occurred at Poonah of a nature to produce 
any change in the sentiments which the Governor-General has 
had the honour to state to your honourable Committee with 
respect to the stability and the bencfits of the alliance concluded 
between the British Government and the Peishwa. 

The accounts which the Governor-Gencral in council has 
received of the state of his Highness the Nizam’s health, lead to 
an apprchension of that prince’s immediate decease. Measures 
have long since been adoptcd for securing to his Highness’s 
eldest son, Mirza Secunder Jah, the succession to the Soobah- 
darry of the Deccan on the decease of his father, and the 
Governor-General in council has no reason to apprehend that the 
decease of his Highness the Nizam will occasion any commotion 
at Hydcrabad, or in any degree operate prejudicially to the 
political interests of the British Government in India, 


We have the honour to be, 
Honourable Sirs, 
your most obedient and faithful servants, 


WELLESLEY, 
G. H. BARLow, 
G. UDNY. 
Examined, 
W. B. Bayley, Assistant, 


340 YOUR TREATIES MUST RESPECT OUR TRIBAL COMPACT. 


47. Dowlut Rao Scindiah to the Marquess Wellesley. 
Conditional assent to the Treaty of Bassein. 


Received July 31st, 1803. 


I have received your Lordship’s friendly letter notifying the 
conclusion of new engagements between his Highness the 
Peishwa and the English Company at Bassein, together with a 
copy of the treaty; and I have been fully apprized of every word 
of its contents, which have also been fully communicated to me 
by Colonel Collins. 

Whereas the engagements subsisting between the Pcishwa and 
me are such, that the adjustment of all affairs and of the concerns 
of his state and government, should be arranged and completed 
with my advice and participation, by the favour of God! through 
a regard to what is above stated, the degrees of mutual concord 
have so increased, that to this time no interruption or dcrange- 
ment of them has occurred on cither side. Notwithstanding this, 
the engagements which have lately been concluded between that 
quarter (British Government) and the Pcishwa have only now 
been communicated ; and,on the part of the Peishwa, to this 
time of writing, xothing. ‘Therefore, it has now been determined 
with Rajah Ragojee Bhoosla, in presence of Coloncl Collins, 
that confidential persons on my part and the Rajah’s, be de- 
spatched to the Peishwa, for the purpose of ascertaining the 
circumstances of the (said) engagements, At the samc time no 
intention whatever is cntertained on my part to subvert the 
stipulations of the treaty consisting of nineteen articles, which 
has becn concluded at Basscin, between the British Government 
and the Peishwa/ on condition that there be no design whatever 
on the part of the English Company and the Pcishwa to subvert 
the stipulations of the treaty, which, since a long period of time, 
has been concluded between the Pcishwa’s Sircar, me, and the 
said Rajah and the Mahratta chiefs. 

Further particulars will be communicated by the letters of 
Colonel Collins. Let the receipt of fricndly letters continue to 
be the means of gratification to me. 


A true translation. 
N. B. Epmonsrone, 
Persian Sec. to Government. 


FOU MUST REAP AS YOU HAVE SOWN, 341 


48. Translation of a letter from the Honourable Major-General 
Wellesley, to Dowlut Rao Scindiah, dated 6th of August, 1803. 


Declaration of War. 


I have received your letter [the writer here repeated its sub- 
stance]. ; 

You will recollect that the British Government did not threaten 
to commence hostilities against you; but you threatened to com- 
mence hostilities against the British Government, and its allies; and 
when called upon to explain your intentions, you declared that it 
was doubtful whether there would be peace or war ;(and in confor- 
mity with your threats, and your declared doubts, you assembled 
a large army in a station contiguous to the Nizam’s frontier... 

On this ground I called upon you to withdraw that army to 
its usual stations, if your subsequent pacific declarations were 
sincere ; but instead of complying with this reasonable requisi- 
tion, you have proposed that I should withdraw the troops which 
are intended to defend the territories of the allics against your 
designs, and that you, and the Rajah of Berar, should be suffered 
to remain with your troops asscmbled in readiness to take 
advantage of their absence. 

This proposition is unreasonable and inadmissible, and you 
must stand the consequences of the measures which I find myself 
obliged to adopt, in order to repel your aggressions. 

I offered you peace upon terms of equality and honourable to 
all partics, you have chosen war, and are responsible for all the 
consequences. 

(A true Copy.) —_R. Barctay, Dep. Adj.-General in Mysore. 


49. The Governor-General in Council to the Honourable the 
Secret Committee of the Honourable the Court of Directors, 


‘Casus Belli’ against Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar. Vindi- 
cation of the Governor-General’s policy. Larlicr operations 
of the War. Death of Nizam Alt. Quiet accession of 
Secunder Fah, 

Honourable Sirs, Fort William, Sept. 25th, 1803. 
1% * * * * * * * * 
50. The preceding detail affords a convincing proof of the 

justice, moderation, and forbearance which have regulated the 


' The omitted paragraphs contain a tedious detail of abortive nego. 
tiations, the result of which is summed up in what follows, 


342 THE CONFEDERATES HOSTILE FROM THE FIRST. 


conduct of the British Government during the course of the 
late important discussions with Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar, 
and will satisfy your honourable Committce that the conduct of 
those chieftains has been actuated by a systematic design to 
employ the resources of their combined power and influence for 
the subversion of an arrangement founded on principles of un- 
disputed equity and of acknowledged security to the rights and 
independance of those chieftains, at the hazard of a contest with 
the united power of the British Government and its allies ; and 
that the object of their professions of amity, and their disavowal 
of any design to obstruct the execution of the treaty of Basscin, 
was to induce the British Government to abandon the arrange- 
ments and preparations necessary for the security of our rights 
and interests, or to suspend the prosecution of them until a 
change of season, and an accession of force should enable those 
chieftains to pursue their unwarrantable designs, with improved 
advantages and a better prospect of success. 

51. The belief that those chieftains entertained designs hostile 
to the British Government at the earliest stages of negotiation 
between the Resident and Dowlut Rao Scindiah, is supported by 
the information which the Governor-Gencral has from time to 
time received of the proceedings of that chieftain. 

52. In a letter from the Resident dated 28th of February, 
and received on the 22nd of March, the Resident apprized the 
Governor-Gencral in council that Ambajce Inglia (one of Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah’s principal ministers)\had informed one of the 
Resident's native agents, that orders had been issued to General 
Perron directing him to place the army under his command ina 
state of preparation for the ficld, with a view to an eventual 
rupture with the British Government. | 

53. At that time Ambajce Inglia was supposed to possess the 
greatest influence over the mind of Scindiah, whose procecdings 
were said to be principally regulated by the councils of that 
chieftain ; it appeared highly improbable, therefore, that Am- 
bajec would have communicated these orders to the Resident’s 
agent if they had really been issued. 

54. This circumstance induced the Governor-Gencral to discredit 
the despatch of those orders, and to belicve that the object of the 
communication was merely to discover the views and intentions 
of the British Government with respect to Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 

55. Adverting also to the established power and ascendancy 
of the British Government in India, to the comparative weakness 


THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL SLOW TO BELIEVE THIS, 343 


even of the combined power of Dowlut Rao Scindiah and of the 
Rajah of Berar, and to the peculiar disadvantages under which 
those chieftains must enter upon a contest with the British arms, 
it could not reasonably be supposed that Dowlut Rao Scindiah 
meditated any hostile designs against the British Government, 
and this obvious consideration induced the Governor-General to 
discredit the rumours which at that time prevailed of the con- 
federacy which that chieftain and the Rajah of Berar have since 
actually formed, for purposes hostile to the interests of the 
British Government. (These indications of an hostile disposi- 
tion on the part of those chieftains, therefore, did not appear to 
the Governor-General to be sufficiently manifest to warrant the 
immediate adoption of go erponding measures of precaution on 
the part of the British Government. 

56. The concurrent testimony of facts, and the state of M. 
Perron’s military force, however, which have subsequently been 
ascertained, induced the Governor-General to give entire credit 
to the information which the Resident communicated in the, , 
month of March respecting the despatch of orders to General , 
Perron to the effect above described, even at that early stage of , 
our negotiations with Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 

57. In a letter from the Resident dated the 14th of June, and 
received on the 6th of July, the Resident transmitted a paper of 
intelligence from his agent at Delhi, stating that messengers 
from Dowlut Rao Scindiah had lately come to the Rohilla chief- 
tain, Gholaum Mahomed Khan, who resides at Nadown, and 
Ictters had been received by that chicftain from General Perron 
inviting him to proceed with his followers towards the station of 
Gencral Perron’s army by the way of Suharunpore, for the pur- 
pose of exciting commotions in the Jaghire of Rampore, and 
assuring him of ample support both from Scindiah and General 
Perron, and that General Perron had clandestincly addressed 
letters to the principal persons residing in the Jaghirc, and other 
places, urging them to employ their exertions in disturbing the 
tranquillity of the Company’s possessions. { 

58. Notwithstanding Scindiah’s solemn disavowal of the orders 
said to have been issued by his authority to the commanding 
officer of the body of horse despatched from Scindiah’s camp to 
the north-western fronticr of the Company’s territories, and to 
the Pcishwa’s officers in Bundelcund_ for the prosecution of hos- 
tilc operations against the British territorics, as noted in the 3rd 
paragraph of this Ictter, the Governor-General in council js 


344 . CUMULATIVE PROOF OF SCINDIAH'S HOSTILITY. 


induced, by the many instances of insincerity manifested by 
that chieftain, by the general tenor of his conduct, by the au- 
thenticity of the source of the Governor-General’s information 
upon those subjects, and by circumstances which have subse- 
quently been ascertained, to give“entire credit to the intelligence 
originally received relative to those acts of aggression on the 
part of Scindiah. 

59. Those facts were communicated to the collector of Alla- 
habad by the express direction of Himmut Bahddur (one of the 
Peishwa’s officers in Bundelcund) to whom the letters of Scindiah 
were said to have been addressed, and who had previously 
transmitted proposals to the Governor-General for the transfer 
of that province to the authority of the British Government. 
The intelligence of the invitation to Gholaum Mahomed Khan 
from Dowlut Rao Scindiah and General Perron was corroborated 
by information repeatedly received and communicated to the 
Governor-General] by the Resident at Lucknow and the agent of 
the Governor-General in the ceded provinces of Oude of the 
preparations of Gholaum Mahomed Khan for the avowed pur- 
pose of complying with the suggestions which he had received 
from Scindiah and General Perron to excite disturbances in the 
district of Rampore, and to disturb the tranquillity of the Vizicr's 
and the Company’s dominions ; and on the 26th of July copics 
of letters from Dowlut Rao Scindiah to Gholaum Mahomed 
Khan and Bumboo Khan (the son of the late Nujceb ou Dowlah, 
who occupies a territory in the vicinity of Suharunporc) declar- 
ing the intention of Scindiah to commence a war of aggression 
against the British power, and instigating that chicftain to co- 
operate with the forces of Gencral Perron against the British 
possessions, were received by the Governor-Gencral from Mr. 
Leycester, the collector of Moradabad, to whom they had been 
transmitted by Bumboo Khan.’) 

60, A translation of those” documents is enclosed for your 
honourable Committee’s notice. 

61. Combining the tenor. of those documents with the facts 
and arguments above stated, the Governor-General in council 
entertains no doubt of the actual despatch of Ictters, in the 
terms of those documents, to the chieftains to whom thcy are 
stated to have been addressed by Dowlut Rao Scindiah. The 
Governor-General has, however, dcemed it proper to adopt 
measures for the purpose of procuring the originals of those 
important papers, 


THEY HAD NO GOOD REASON TO PREPARE FOR WAR. 345 


62. Your honourable Committee will observe that these docu- 
ments tend to confirm the original information received of the 
actual transmission of instructions from Scindiah to the Peishwa’s 
officers in Bundelcund, and the communication of orders to Dhur- 
rum Rao to the effect described in the third paragraph of this 
despatch. Those documents also state the nature of the direc- 
tions issued by Scindiah to General Perron for the prosecution of 
hostilitics against the British possessions. 

63. It appears from a passage in those documents that the 
letters of Scindiah to Gholaum Mahomed Khan and Bumboo 
Khan, were written subsequently to the march of Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah from Boorhaunpore on the 4th of May; but the de- 
Spatch of messengers to Gholaum Mahomed Khan and the trans- 
mission of the instructions to General Perron, under which that 
officer addressed letters to the principal persons in Rampore and 
other places as noticed in the 57th paragraph, must be referred 
to an earlier period of time. The complete state of preparation in 
which the army of General Perron was actually placed, is a cor- 
roborative evidence of the actual transmission of orders to that 
officer to the effect described in the 52nd paragraph of this letter. 

64. These facts reciprocally confirm each point of the evidence 
of Scindiah’s hostile projects, and combined with information at 
various times communicated by the Resident with Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah, of the proceedings of that chieftain with the repcated 
rumours of the formation of an hostile confederacy between 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar and Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar, and with the tenor and rasult of the Resident’s negotia- 
tions, must be considered to amount to full proof of the alleged 
design of subverting the alliance formed between the British 
Government and the Pcishwa. 

65. These proceedings of Dowlut Rao Scindiah indicate not 

Ymercly the resolution of that chieftain to oppose the execution of 
the treaty of Basscin by force of arms, but collectively and sepa- 
ratcly constitute acts of hostility against the British Government. 

66¢ At no period of time since the departure of the Pcishwa 
from his capital have the transactions of the British Government 
been such as to justify even precautionary measures of military 
preparation on the part of Scindiah» From those transactions 
no argument could arise to justify the adoption of measures 
either of hostility or precaution on the part of the confedcrated 
chicftains, unless such an argument could be deduced from a 
denial of the right of his Highness the Peishwa to contract de- 


346 CONCLUSION OF THE TREATY NO VALID GROUND. 


fensive engagements with a foreign state without the participa- 
tion of the feudatory chieftains of the Mahratta empire, or from 
a conviction that the engagements actually concluded with 
his Highness were injurious to the acknowledged rights of those 
chieftains, 

67. Various precedents might be adduced of the exercise of 
that right by his Highness the Peishwa in his negotiations with 
the British Government, and the uniform course of the political 
and military proceedings of Dowlut Rao Scindiah and of his 
predecessor Mahdajee Scindiah, affords numerous instances of 
the exercise of a similar right on the part of those chieftains, in- 
dependently of the Peishwa, to whose authority they have invari- 
ably acknowledged obedience. 

68, This question has been fully discussed in the Governor- 
General’s instructions to the Resident with Dowlut Rao Scindiah, 
dated the 3d of June. 

69. The treaty of Basscin is purcly defensive, and not only 
contains no stipulations injurious to the rights of the feudatory 
Mahratta chieftains, but provides additional security for those 
rights. 

70. In the course of the negotiations between the Resident 
and Dowlut Rao Scindiah, that chicftain maintained that in his 
capacity of guarantce to the treaty of Salbye, he ought to have 
been consulted previously to the conclusion of engagements with 
the Peishwa. The Resident successfully opposed that operation 
by the arguments stated in the Governor-General’s instructions 
of the 11th of February, and maintained the right of the Peishwa 
to conclude engagements without the participation of the fcud- 
atory chieftains, upon the obvious principles of acknowledged 
supremacy, and approved and established precedent; and at a 
conference between Scindiah and the Resident on the 23d of 
March, on the subject of the engagements concluded with the 
Peishwa, Dowlut Rao Scindiah abandoned that ground of argu- 
ment, and merely contended that the Pcishwa ought to have ap- 
prized that chieftain of the terms of the treaty concluded between 
his Highness and the British Government. 

71. At that period of time the details of the treaty of Basscin 
had not been communicated to Dowlut Rao Scindiah, but he was 
informed that it was purely of a defensive nature, and on that 
occasion Scindiah assured the Resident, in the most uncquivocal 
terms, that he had no intention to attempt the subversion of any 
engagements concluded between the British Government and the 


NOR OUR PRECAUTIONS AGAINST SCINDIAH. 347 


Peishwa, yet measures of decided hostility against the British 
Government were adopted by Dowlut Rao Scindiah in the 
ensujng months of April and May. 

72. No military preparations founded on a distrust of that 
chieftain’s pacific disposition were commenced on the part of the 
British Government, until the close of the month of June, and 
even the army under the command of Major-General Wellesley, 
did not commence its march from Poonah until the beginning of 
that month. ° 

73. It is manifest therefore, that the hostile mcasures pursued 
by Dowlut Rao Scindiah against the British Government, have 
been adopted on grounds distinct from any denial of the 
Peishwa’s right to contract his late engagements with the British 
Government, from the alleged existence of any stipulation in 
those engagements injurious to the rights of the Mahratta feuda- 
tories, and from any apprehension of the effect of any measures 
either of precaution, or of apparent hostility on the part of the 
British Government. 

94. The conduct of Dowlut Rao Scindiah towards the Peishwa 
during a long course of time antecedent to the Peishwa’s degra- 
dation from the musnud of Poonah, and the views which that 
chieftain and the Rajah of Berar are known to have entertained, 
with respect to the supreme authority of the Mahratta state, 
afford the means of forming a correct judgment of the motives 
which may have rendered those chieftains desirous of subverting 
the treaty of Basscin, although they had admitted that treaty to 
be cquitable in its general principle, and to furnish additional 
security for the just rights of the feudatory chicftains of the 
Mahratta empire, and especially for their own. 

75. The whole course of Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s proceedings, 
since his accession to the dominions of Mahdajee Scindiah, has 
manifested a systematic design of establishing an ascendancy in 
the Mahratta state upon the ruins of the Pcishwa’s authority. 

76. The government in the person of the Peishwa had long 
been placed under a degrading subjection to the oppressive 
control and unwarrantable usurpation of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, 
who had remained with a numerous army in the vicinity of the 
Pcishwa’s capital for a considerable period of time. 

97. The usurpation of Scindiah existed in full force at the 
commencement of the last war between the Company and 
Tippoo Sultaun, and the unduc influence of Scindiah in the 
Mahratta cmpire in that crisis, not only deprived the British 

e 


348 9 SCINDIAH’S FIXED POLICY-—-TO RULE AT POONAH. 


Government of every benefit from the nominal alliance of the 
Peishwa at the commencement and during the progress of the 
war, but afforded positive encouragement to the cause of Tippoo 
Sultaun, and menaced the Nizam’s dominions previously to the 
expulsion of the French from Hyderabad in October, 1798, and 
subsequently in 1799 while the Nizam’s contingent was actually 
employed with the British army in the common cause of the 
triple alliance against Tippoo Sultaun. 

78. At that time Scindiah was restrained from the actual 
invasion of the Nizam’s dominions by the direct interposition 
of the British Government; his influence however, and the 
terror of his violence and supposed power continued to rule the 
Court of Poonah, and to alarm the Court of Hyderabad, until 
the exigency of his affairs in the north of Hindostan, occasioned 
principally by the successful progress of Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s 
arms, compelled Dowlut Rao Scindiah to retire from Poonah for 
the protection of his own territorics. 

79. The complete establishment of Iolkar’s authority at 
Poonah by the defeat of Scindiah’s troops required the utmost 
exertion of Scindiah’s power against that active and successful 
enemy. 

80. Had Scindiah succeeded in subverting the power of 
Holkar, it cannot be doubted that he would have taken ad- 
vantage of that success for the complete establishment of his 
own undue authority in the state of Poonah. He would pro- 
bably have reinstated the Pcishwa Bajce Rao in the govern- 
ment or would have raised another to the musnud, to be the 
pageant of his own power, or would have usurped the supreme 
ministerial authority in his own name, if the disposition of the 
other chieftains of the Mahratta empire should have encouraged 
an expectation of their acquiescence in that ambitious project. 

81. The uniform tenor of Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s conduct, 
the invariable principles of Asiatic policy, and the personal 
character, habits and disposition of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, pre- 
clude the supposition that he would have abandoned the abso- 
lute power which he would have acquired by the subversion of 
Holkar’s usurpation, and would have adopted the liberal policy 
of restoring the exiled Peishwa to the exercise of the established 
authority of the empire. 

$2. In the moment of alarm which succeeded the signal suc- 

\ cess of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, Dowlut Rao Scindiah indirectly 
\ solicited the co-operation of the British Government, under the 


PRECLUDED BY THE TREATY; HENCE HIS ENMITY, 349 


pretext of restoring the Peishwa’s authority. He probably 
expected that the aid of a detachment of British troops would 
have insured his success against Holkar, without controlling his 
project of restoring his own undue ascendancy at Poonah on a 
more secure and extensive basis. It now appears that the active 
and powerful exertions employed by the British Government at 
the express solicitation of his Highness the Peishwa, for his 
Highness’s complete restoration to the musnud of Poonah, were 
neither desired nor expected by Dowlut Rao Scindiah. The 
actual re-establishment of- the Peishwa in the government of 
Poonah under the exclusive protection of the British power and 
the conclusion of engagements calculated to secure to his High- 
ness the due exercise of his legitimate authority on a permanent 
foundation, deprived Dowlut Rao Scindiah of every hope of 
accomplishing the objects of his ambition, injustice and rapacity, 
so long as that alliance should be successfully maintained. 

83. This statement of facts sufficiently explains the anxiety 
of Dowlut Rao Scindiah to effcct the subversion of an arrange- 
ment, the justice and equity of which he was compelled to 
acknowledge, and that chicftain’s unprovoked prosecution of 
hostile designs against the British Government and its allies. 

84. Adverting to the manifest design of Dowlut Rao Scindiah 
to aggrandize his power by annexing the dominion and re- 
sources of the Peishwa to his own, your honourable Committee 
will concur in the expediency of supporting an arrangement 
calculated to preclude the dangerous consolidation of the power 
and resources of two rival branches of the Mahratta state, in 
the hands of an ambitious and enterprizing chieftain, whose 
disposition is hostile to the British Government, and whose 
dominion has been cstablished and maintained on the most 
vulnerable part of our north-western frontier in Hindostan, by 
a formidable military force undcr the exclusive command of 
French officers. 

85. The motives which must be supposed to have influenced 
the Rajah of Berar in combining his power with that of Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah for the subversion of the alliance concluded between 
the British Government and the Pcishwa, were manifestly similar 
to those which actuated the conduct of Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 

86. The Rajah of Berar has always maintained pretensions 
to the supreme ministerial authority in the Mahratta empire, 
founded on his affinity to the reigning Rajah of Satara, and in 
the course of a conference with the native Secretary of the 


350 RAJAH OF BERAR’S MOTIVES SIMILAR. 


Resident with Dowlut Rao Scindiah on the 10th of June, the 
Rajah of Berar distinctly avowed those pretensions. 

87. Convinced that the permanency of the defensive alliance 
concluded between the British Government and the Pcishwa, 
would preclude all future opportunity of accomplishing the 
object of his ambition, the Rajah of Berar appears to have been 
equally concerned with Dowlut Rao Scindiah in the subversion 
of that alliance. 

88. Although the views ascribed to those chieftains were 
manifestly incompatible with the accomplishment of their re- 
spective designs, the removal of an obstacle which would effec- 
tually preclude the success of cither chieftain in obtaining an 
ascendancy at Poonah, constituted an object of common interest 
to both. It appears also to be highly probable that those chief- 
tains, sensible that the combination of their power afforded the 
only prospect of subverting the alliance concluded between the 
British Government and the Peishwa, agreed to compromise their 
respective and contradictory projects, by an arrangement for the 
partition of the whole power and dominion of the Mahratta state. 

89. But whatever may have been the specific objects of 
Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar, the operation of the treaty of 
Basscin was evidently calculated to preclude the accomplish- 
ment of any ambitious projects on the part of those chieftains, 
and to confine their power and authority within the just limits 
of their respective dominions. : 

go. Under this view of the subject, a sufficient cause will be 
discovered of the hostile conduct of those chieftains, although 
no just ground of complaint should even have been alleged by 
them against the British Government, nor any design imputed to 
us in any degree injurious to the security of the acknowledged 
rights and independence of Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar. 

gi. The inability of those chieftains to allege any ground of 
complaint against the British Government or its allies, affords 
the most unequivocal proof of the justice and moderation of our 
proceedings. 

92. The mere junction of the armies of Scindiah and the 
Rajah of Berar upon the fronticr of the dominions of our ally, 
for any purpose unconnected with the security of the rights of 
those chieftains, would have compelled the British Government 
to demand the removal of those armics from that menacing 
position, and would have required the adoption of measures of 
precaution on our part; and the refusal of those chieftains to 


WE WERE FORCED TO INSIST ON OUR ULTIMATUM. 351 


comply with that demand, would have justified an appeal to 
arms, for the security of our interests and those of our allies. 
Under actual circumstances, no other security for the pacific 
conduct of those chieftains could have been accepted, than such 
as should deprive them of the power of prosecuting with success 
the designs which they manifestly entertained against the rights 
and interests of the British Government and its allies. 

93. The Governor-General in Council deems it proper in this 
place to state, in a distinct and connected form, the leading facts 
of the late transactions, which have terminated in a dissolution 
of the relations of amity between the British Government and 
the confederated chieftains, Dowlut Rao Scindiah and the Rajah 
of Berar. 

94. When his Highness the Peishwa had been compelled by 
the violence and usurpation of a subject of his Government to 
abandon his capital, his Highness solicited and obtained the 
aid of the British power for the restoration of his authority, and 
concluded engagements with the British Government calculated 
to secure his Highness’s rights and independence against the 
hostile designs of any forcign or domestic enemy. Those 
engagements not only contained no stipulations injurious to the 
just rights of the feudatory chicftains of the Mahratta empire, 
but provided additional security for the unmolested exercise of 
those rights. 

y5. After Dowlut Rao Scindiah had distinctly expressed his 
concurrence in the propricty of the mcasurcs adopted by the 
British Government for the restoration of the Pcishwa’s autho- 
rity, and had been assured by the Resident, in the name of the 
British Government, that those engagements were mercly of a 
defensive nature; and after Dowlut Rao Scindiah had aban- 
doned the untenable assertion that the Pcishwa did not possess 
the right to conclude such engagements without the concurrence 
of the Mahratta feudatorics, that chicftain persisted in soliciting 
the junction of the Rajah of Berar with the whole body of his 
forces, for the purpose of eventually employing their united 
power and resources to subvert the arrangements concluded 
between the British Government and the Peishwa; and in 
conformity to Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s solicitation, the Rajah of 
Berar commenced his march for the purpose of effecting the 
Proposed junction of their numcrous armics in a menacing 
Position on the frontier of the ally of the British Government. 

96, Your honourable Committee will not fail to observe, that 


352 THEY THREATENED US WITH UNPROVOKED WAR. 


these measures were not’ adopted by those chieftains with a view 
to the defence of their rights and interests, against any appre- 
hended design on the part of the British Government to injure 
or invade them, nor to the protection or internal settlement of 
their possessions in the vicinity of the Nizam’s dominions. 
Those measures were avowedly concerted for the express pur- 
pose of enabling those chieftains to carry into effect their even- 
tual resolution, to undertake a war of aggression against the 
British Government and its allies. 

97. Under these indications of hostility on the part of those 
chieftains, the British Government merely required that they 
should retire with their armies to thcir usual stations in Berar 
and the north of Hindostan, proposing that the British army 
in the Deccan should also retire in a similar manner. 

g8. At the moment when Dowlut Rao Scindiah, after being 
apprized of all the stipulations of the treaty of Basscin, acknow- 
ledged that it contained no provisions injurious to the rights of 
the feudatory chieftains, that chicftain publicly declared to the?” 
Resident, that the question of pcace or war with the British 
Government, depended upon the result of a conference with the 
Rajah of Berar, whose arrival at the head of the whole body of 
his forces in the vicinity of Scindiah’s camp, was then daily 
expected, 

gg. The Governor-General in council requests your honour- 
able Committee's attention to the hostile and insulting nature 
of this declaration. Occupying a position with the whole body 
of his forces near the frontier of our ally, Scindiah publicly 
declared in open Durbar, to the representative of the British 
Government, that he awaited the arrival of the Rajah of Berar 
at the head of a numcrous army on the fronticr of the dominions 
of our ally, for the purpose of deciding whether the united arms 
of those confedcrated chieftains should be employed in the 
prosecution of a war of aggression against the British Govern- 
ment and its allics. The armies of these chieftains effected the 
proposed junction, and the chieftains met for the purpose, 
avowed by Scindiah, of deciding ‘whether it should be peace or 
war with the Company.’ Aftcr the junction of their armics, 
those chieftains continued by systematic delays and evasions, to 
withhold any declaration with regard to the nature of their 
designs during a period of two months, and although at the 
expiration of that period of time, the confedcrated chieftains 
disavowed all intention of obstructing the complete exccution of 


SUMMARY STATEMENT OF THE CASUS BELLI, 353 


the treaty of Bassein, they refused to abandon the arrangement 
avowedly adopted and the position occupied for the eventual 
prosécution of hostilities against the British Government. 

100. It is proper to observe, that during the whole course of 
the negotiation between the Resident and Dowlut Rao Scindiah, 
that chieftain and the Rajah of Berar employed their most 
assiduous endeavours to induce Jeswunt Rao Holkar to unite in 
the confederacy, and to form a junction with the allied armies ; 
and those chieftains even assigned the depending negotiation 

. with Jeswunt Rao Holkar as a cause for maintaining their 
united armies in the position from which they were required to 
retreat. 

101. From the preceding detail the following facts are 
established— 

First. That according to the evidence of facts, and to the 
distinct avowal of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, and the Rajah of 
Berar, those chieftains had no cause of complaint against the 

+ «British Government, nor any reason to apprehend that their 
just rights and interests were exposed to hazard, by the 
arrangements concluded between the British Government and 
the Pcishwa. 

Secondly. That the junction and continuance of the armies 
of those chieftains on the frontier of the Nizam, was avowedly 
unnecessary for any purpose connected with the security of their 
rights, or with the protection or internal arrangement of any 
part of their territorial possessions. 

Thirdly. That the general conduct and language of those 
chicftains indicated designs of an hostile nature against the 
British Government and its allics, the Pcishwa and the Nizam ; 
and that Scindiah had distinctly declared, that he and the Rajah 
of Berar meditated eventual war. 

Fourthly. That those chicftains assembled their armies in a 
menacing position on the fronticr of our ally the Nizam, for the 
purpose of enabling them eventually to carry those designs into 
exccution, 

Fifthly. That those chieftains procceded to acts of direct 
hostility, by a public and insulting menace of war against the 
British Government, and by various preparations and arrange- 
ments, hostile to the British Government and its allies, not only 
without any cause of complaint deducible from the measures 
and proceedings of the British Government, or of its allies, but 
under a distinct acknowledgment of the inoffensive nature of 

Aa 


354 ORIGINAL POLICY OF THE TREATY OF BASSEIN. 


our arrangements with the Peishwa, and an avowed conviction 
of our pacific intentions. 

Sixthly. That the hostile nature of the proceedings of those 
chieftains and their repeated violation of public faith, precluded 
all reliance on their promises and professions, and rendered it the 
duty of the British Government to require the separation and 
return of their armies to their respective territories, as the only 
security to the rights and interests of the British Government 
and its allies, against the meditated designs of those confederated 
chieftains. 

Seventhly. That this requisition was accompanied by a pro- 
posal to withdraw the British army from its advanced and com- 
manding position at Ahmednuggur in the Deccan, and that such 
a proposal was not only an incontrovertible proof of the just and 
pacific views of the British Government, but furnished ample 
security to the confederated chieftains against the possibility of 
any danger which could be apprehended by them from their 
compliance with our requisition. 

102. The preceding statement sufficiently demonstrates the 
equity of the arrangements concluded with the state of Poonah, 
and the justice and moderation manifested by the British Govern- 
ment in carrying those arrangements into effect. It may how- 
ever, be expedient to submit to your honourable Committee, 
some observations with regard to the general policy of the alliance 
which has been concluded between the British Government and 
the Peishwa, and to the period of time, at which that important 
arrangement was accomplished. 

103. The grounds on which the policy of concluding subsidiary 
engagements with the state of Poonah, similar to those which 
were concluded with the Nizam on the 1st of September 1798 is 
founded, were originally stated in the Governor-General’s instruc- 
tions to the Resident at Hyderabad, under date the 8th of July 
1798 of which a copy was transmitted to your honourable Com- 
mittee with our despatch of the 23d of August 1798; and that 
subject was resumed in our despatch of the 18th of January 
1800 which communicated to your honourable Committee the 
details of the unsuccessful negotiations bectwecn the British 
Government and the Peishwa, for the conclusion of subsidiary 
engagements after the termination of the war with Tippoo 
Sultaun; and those principles were further dctailed in the 
Governor-General’s separate letter to your honourable Com- 
mittee, under date the 9th of June 1800. 


YOU HAVE OFTEN SANCTIONED THAT POLICY. 355 


104. Your honourable Committee on various occasions has 
intimated to the Governor-General in council, your concurrence 
in the principles of that policy, and in the 22d paragraph of your 
honourable Committee’s despatch of the 1oth of September 
1800, your honourable Committee expressed your approbation 
of the basis of the proposed arrangements with the state of 
Poonah. Your honourable Committee on that occasion signified 
to the Governor-General in council your opinion, that with a 
view to secure the important objects of those arrangements, the 
subsidiary force stationed at Poonah, should not be less than 
6,000 regular infantry, with the usual proportion of artillery. 

105. The Governor-General’s acceptance of the propositions 
of the Court of Poonah in 1799, for subsidizing a force consisting 
of two battalions of native’ infantry, was founded on the expecta- 
tion that such an arrangement must necessarily lead to the intro- 
duction of a subsidiary force on a more enlarged scale. 

106, The extent of the subsidiary force actually stationed with 
his Highness the Peishwa, is conformable to the intimation of 
your honourable Committee; and at the express desire of the 
Peishwa, the amount of the subsidiary force to be stationed at 
Poonah, has been augmented since the conclusion of the treaty 
of Bassein, by the addition of a regiment of cavalry; it will be 
desirable to augment the detachment at Poonah still further, 
until it shall be equal to that at Hyderabad, which now consists 
of one regiment of Europcan infantry, six battalions of native 
infantry, and two regiments of native cavalry. 

107, The gencral defensive engagements concluded with the 
Nizam, in the year 1800, and subsequently proposed to the 
acceptance of the Peishwa, were founded on the same principles, 
and were calculated to provide improved means of accomplish- 
ing the original objects of the projected system of alliance 
between the British Government and the states of Hyderabad 
and Poonah. 

108, The detail of the improved arrangements at Hydcra- 
bad, was communicated to your honourable Committee in our 
despatch of the 31st of August, 1800, 

109. Although the Governor-Gencral in council has not been 
honoured by any intimation of your honourable Committee’s 
sentiments on the subject of the arrangements concluded at 
Wfyderabad in October 1800, your honourable Committce’s 
Previous concurrence in the principles, on which those arrange- 
ments were founded, and in the importance of the objects to 

Aaa 


356 LATE EVENTS, IN EUROPE AND ASIA, CONFIRM IT. 


which they were directed, has satisfied the Governor-General in 
‘council, that your honourable Committee would approve the 
resolution of the Governor-General, to avail himself of any 
favourable opportunity of reviving the negotiation for the con- 
clusion of defensive and subsidiary engagements with the state 
of Poonah, similar to those which were concluded with the 
Nizam in the month of October, 1800. 

110. The progress of events both in Europe and in Asia since 
that period of time, has tended to urge the expediency of the 
proposed alliance with his Highness the Peishwa, and the 
endeavours of the Governor-General have accordingly been assi- 
duously employed for the accomplishment of that desirable 
arrangement. 

111. The Governor-General’s instructions to the Resident at 
Poonah, of the 23d of June, 1802, a copy of which accompanicd the 
Governor-Gencral’s despatch to your honourable Committee of 
the 24th of December 1802, contains a review of the various un- 
successful attempts of the British Government to engage the 
Peishwa’s consent to the proposed alliance; and of the con- 

‘siderations, which rendered the improvement of our political 
connection with the state of Poonah, an object of essential im- 
portance to the complete security of the British empire in India, 

112. The justice of those considerations was confirmed, and 
the policy of accomplishing the proposcd alliance, was augmented 
by the events which subscquently occurred in the Mahratta 
empire. 

113. After the power of the Pcishwa had been annihilated by 
the success of Holkar against the united arms of the Pcishwa 
and Dowlut Rao Scindiah, it could not be expected that his 
Highness would have been restored to the efficient exercise of 
his authority, either by Jeswunt Rao Holkar, or by Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah. 

114. The design of the former chicftain to engross the whole 
power and authority of the state of Poonah, was demonstrated 
by his actual usurpation, and by the project which he formed 
and endeavoured to accomplish, of placing on the musnud of 
Poonah a new Peishwa, or of restoring Bajec Rao to the musnud, 
under circumstances which would have secured to Holkar the 
while military power, and civil authority of the state. It cannot 
be doubted, that motives of ambition and of invetcrate enmity 
against Dowlut Rao Scindiah would in that event have induced 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar to direct his arms against the possessions 


HOLKAR’S VICTORY COMPELLED US TO INTERFERE. 357 


of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, and the accession of military power 
and resources which Holkar would have acquired by the perma- 
nent establishment of his authority in the state of Poonah, would 
probably have enabled him to prosecute his views of conquest 
with success. 

115. If the arms of Dowlut Rao Scindiah had ultimately 
triumphed over those of Holkar, the power and resources of the 
state of Poonah, together with those of Holkar, would have been 
added to his own. 

116, Adverting to the consideration stated in the preceding 
paragraph, your honourable Committee will not fail to appreciate 
the peculiar danger to which the British interest would have 
been exposed, by such an accession of power in the hands of 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 

117. No ultimate issue of the distractions at that time existing 
in the Mahratta empire could reasonably be supposed, which 
would not have consolidated under one head, a degree of power 
and dominion dangerous to the British Government, to the 
extent in which the balance of contending interests in the 
Mahratta empire should have been disturbed, and in proportion 
to the mcans which a power so consolidated would possess, of 
eventually co-operating with the Government of France in hostile 
designs against the British empire in India. 

118, Those convulsions in the state might possibly have 
continued for some time, and might have afforded a temporary 
security to the British Government against any hostile designs 
on the part of the Mahrattas, eithcr singly or united with an 
European power. But the effects of such confusion must 
speedily have extended to the contiguous dominions of our 
ally the Nizam, and ultimatcly to those of the Company, and 
would have compelled the British Government to engage in the 
contcst. 

119, The establishment of Holkar’s power at Poonah, would 
probably occasion demands on the part of that chieftain upon 
his Highness the Nizam; but even under a contrary suppo- 
sition, it is demonstrable from the state of the country, that 
Holkar could not long have maintained an army in the Deccan, 
without invading the dominions either of the Nizam, or of the 
Company. 

120, The territory around Poonah, to a considerable extent, 
having been entirely desolatcd by the troops of Holkar, that 
chieftain would have been compelled to invade the territories of 


358 WE RESTORED THE PEISHWA IN SELF-DEFENCE. 


the Nizam, or to penetrate into the country situated to the 
southward of the river Kistna for the subsistence of his numer- 
ous troops and followers. 

121. The adoption of the latter alternative would have re- 
tarded for some time the predatory incursions of Holkar’s troops 
into the territory of the Nizam or of the Company. But when 
the immediate resources of the Peishwa’s southern provinces 
should have been exhausted, Holkar would have becn compelled 
to draw the means of subsistence for his troops from the plunder 
of the Company’s contiguous territories, on the resources of 
which we must principally have depended for the supply of our 
troops in the contest which that irruption would have rendered 
inevitable. If, therefore, the British Government had not adop- 
ted measures for the restoration of the Pecishwa’s authority, 
either the Company’s territories, or those of our ally the Nizam, 
would have been exposed to all the evils of war, while neither 
the Company nor the Nizam under such circumstances could 
have possessed the means which both now command, of avert- 
ing the war from thcir own dominions, and of accelerating its 
prosperous conclusion by a vigorous system of attack upon the 
enemy. 

122. The restoration of the Pcishwa, therefore, under the 
protection of the British power, was a measure indispensably 
requisite for the defence, not only of the territorics of our allies, 
but of our own possessions bordering the Mahratta dominions in 
the peninsula of India. 

123. The continuance of the existing convulsions in the Mah- 
ratta empire would have afforded a favourable opportunity to 
the Government of France for the successful prosccution of its 
favourite object of establishing a dominion within the peninsula 
of Hindostan, by the introduction of a military force to aid the 
cause of one of the contending partics; and the vicws of France 
would have been favoured by the strength of M. Perron’s forces 
established in the Doab of the Jumna and Ganges, at Agra, 
Delhi, and in the Punjab, and by the facility of communicating 
with the maritime possessions retained by Scindiah in Guzzerat. 
The sccurity and tranquillity of the British empire in India, 
therefore, might ultimately have been endangered, as much by 
the effects of a protracted warfare in the Mahratta state, as by 
the immediate consolidation of a dangerous extent of power and 
dominion in the hands of one of the contending partics. 

124. While the views of the Government of France shall be 


POLITICAL STATE OF INDIA CHANGED SINCE 1799. 359 


‘directed to the establishment of its authority within the pen- 
insula of Hindostan, it is manifestly the policy of the British 
Government to accomplish such a system of alliances with the 
powers of India as may preclude the occurrence of those internal 
convulsions which would afford to France the most favourable 
opportunity of effecting her ambitious purpose. Independently 
of this consideration, the prosecution of such a system of alliance 
is prudent and advisable in the degree in which the tranquillity 
and prosperity of our dominion is endangered by the disturbed 
and distracted condition of neighbouring states. 

125. The restoration of the Peishwa, therefore, to the just 
exercise of his authority under the protection of the British 
Government, and the conclusion of defensive and subsidiary 
engagements with his Highness, afforded the only means of 
precluding the dangers to be apprehended, either from the con- 
solidation of a formidable power, or from the continuance of the 
distractions in the Mahratta empire. 

126. In a letter which the Governor-General addressed to the 
honourable the Court of Directors, under date the 3d of August, 
1799, containing a review of the interests, the power, and dis- 
position of the several states of India under the change pro- 
duced in the relative condition of those states by the conquest 
of Mysore, the Governor-General expressed his opinion that a 
consolidation of the powers of the Mahratta empire was highly 
improbable, and that it would require a most violent exercise of 
injustice and oppression on our part to dispose the suspicious 
and cautious counsels of the Court of Poonah to favour the 
progress of a French force in India. 

127, That opinion was amply justified by the situation of 
affairs in the Mahratta empire at that period of time; since that 
time, however, the internal condition of the Mahratta empire 
has suffered a matcrial change. 

128, The ascendancy which Scindiah had then established 
in the state of Poonah was not such as to menace the actual 
dissolution of the constitutional form of the Mahratta empire, 
or to produce a civil war amongst its component branches ; and 
the contending interests of the several feudatory chieftains ap- 
peared to afford a sufficient security against any dangerous 
consolidation of the Mahratta power. 

129. Since that time a new power has arisen in the Mahratta 
state, under the direction of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, which ac- 
quired sufficient strength to endanger the stability of all the 


360 MAHRATTAS MORE OPEN SINCE TO FRENCH INFLUENCE, 


ry 


principal feudatory states, and was actually directed to the sub-' 
version of the constitutional form of the empire. : 

130. If the progress of the contest which ensued between that 
chieftain, the Peishwa, and Dowlut Rao Scindiah, had not been 
checked by the seasonable interposition of the British power for 
the restoration of the Peishwa’s legitimate authority, it is reason- 
able to conclude that in: the moment of extreme danger the 
Peishwa, or either of those chieftains, would have been disposed 
to accept the aid of a French force for the support of his cause, 
and that the contest would either have terminated in the con- 
solidation of a formidable power in the Mahratta state, accom- 
panied by the complete establishment of the authority of France 
in the peninsula of India, or would have required the inter- 
position of our arms after the aid of the French had actually 
strengthened one of the belligerent powers, and had conse- 
quently increased the difficulty, expense, and hazard of the war. 

131. The security, therefore, which the British Government 
might be supposed to derive from a balance of power and 
interests among the Mahratta states, and from the jealousy 
which the Mahratta nation has uniformly entertained of the 
influence and ascendancy of any European power, ceased to 
exist, and that security has bcen still further diminished by 
the augmented solidity and actual independence which the 
French force in the service of Dowlut Rao Scindiah has gradu- 
ally acquired since the termination of the war with Tippoo 
Sultaun, 

132. After the expulsion of the Peishwa from his capital, not 
only the Peishwa, but Dowlut Rao Scindiah and Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar afforded the most unequivocal proof that the character- 
istic jealousy of the Mahratta states would not have deterred 
those chieftains from having recourse to the aid of France, if 
an opportunity should have occurred in any crisis of affairs in 
which their danger or their interest should have suggested the 
expediency of such a measure. 

133. The Peishwa directly solicited and obtaincd the aid of 
the British power for the restoration of his authority, Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah indirectly invited our co-operation ostensibly for 
the same purpose, and Jeswunt Rao Holkar in his own name 
and in that of Amrut Rao signified his consent to the terms 
of alliance which had been proposed to the Peishwa on the 
condition of our support. 

134. If the danger or the interest of those chieftains was 


TREATY AVERTED MORE DANGER THAN IT CAUSED, 361 


so urgent as to induce them to seek the aid and alliance of an 

uropean state, of which the established power, extensive domi- 
nion, and unrivalled ascendancy in India had been the peculiar 
object of the jealousy and apprehension of the Mahratta states, 
it may reasonably be supposed that in such a crisis of affairs any 
of those chieftains would have been still more disposed to accept 
the aid of a military force from the French, who, being destitute 
of any regular establishment in India, could not in the same 
degree with the British Government be an object of jealousy 
and apprehension to the native powers, and especially to the 
Manhrattas. - 

135. If, therefore, the British Government had refused to the 
Peishwa the aid which he solicited, it is reasonable to conclude 
that his Highness would have availed himself of any oppor- 
tunity which might have occurred for obtaining the assistance 
and co-operation of a French military force, and the peace 
existing at that time with France, might have afforded a 
favourable opportunity to the French power in India for aiding 
the Peishwa or any of the contending parties in the Mahratta 
empire. Admitting, however, that the characteristic jealousy 
of the Mahratta nation might deter any of the Mahratta 
chieftains from accepting the aid of a considerable body of 
European troops furnished by the Government of France, it 
cannot be doubted that in a situation of emergency any of those 
chieftains would be disposed to receive into their service a 
number of French adventurers to be employed in improving the 
discipline of their armies, and in augmenting the strength and 
efficiency of their military establishments. The evils which have 
arisen from the employment of French officers in the service 
of the native powers have"becn abundantly manifested in the 
gradual establishment of the formidable French force in the 
dominions of his Highness the Nizam, which was happily dis- 
solved under the operation of the treaty concluded with his 
Highness in the year 1798,and in the growth and extension of 
the force lately under the direction of M. Perron. 

136. In the actual situation of affairs no argument unfavour- 
able to the policy of our engagements with the Pcishwa could 
justly be deduced from the jealousy with which the other Mah- 
ratta states might be expected to contemplate the establishment 
of the British influence in the state of Poonah. The dangers 
which eventually menaced the security of the British dominion 
in India under the circumstances above described, far exceeded 


362 TREATY TIMELY: PEACE, OR SUCCESSFUL WAR, HOPEFUL, 


any which could be apprehended from the effects of that 
jealousy, and could only have been averted by the interposition 
of the British power for the restoration of order and tranquillity 
in the Mahratta state. 

137. From the preceding remarks it appears that the acknow- 
ledged policy of contracting defensive and subsidiary engage- 
ments with the state of Poonah was never so urgent as at the 
moment when those engagements were actually concluded, and 
the course of recent transactions in the Mahratta empire (as 
detailed in the several despatches from the Governor-General to 
your honourable Committee) combined with the relative power 
of the British Government and of the confederated chiefs, with 
the commanding position of our armies, and with the exposed 
condition of the territories of Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar 
at that period of time, constituted a crisis of affairs apparently 
favourable to the pacific accomplishment of that arrangement, 
or to the complete success of our arms in the event of opposition 
on the part of Scindiah or the Rajah of Berar. 

138. The Governor-General in council now proceeds to state 
to your honourable Committee the progress of the British arms 
in the contest in which this Government has been unavoidably 
involved with the confederated Mahratta chieftains. 

139. The compass of this despatch will not admit the imme- 
diate communication to your honourable Committee of the 
detailed instructions issued by the Governor-General to his 
Excellency the commander-in-chief on the several points of 
political arrangement described in the Governor-General’s de- 
spatch to his Excellency of the 27th of July. Those details will 
be transmitted to your honourable Committce by a sea con- 
veyance: it is sufficient to state on®the present occasion that 
every measure has been suggested and adopted which the judg- 
ment of the Governor-General in council could devise for the 
successful accomplishment of those arrangements. 

140. On the 7th of August his Ex@ellency the commander-in- 
chief commenced his march with the main body of the British 
army in the ceded provinces from Cawnpore. 

141, On the 28th of August the commander-in-chief reccived 
a letter from General Perron indicating a desire on the part of 
that officer to effect an arrangement which might preclude the 
necessity of an actual contest between the British forces and 
those under the command of General Perron. It is proper to 
apprize your honourable Committee that General Perron had 


ALLYGHUR FORT TAKEN. RETIREMENT OF PERRON. 363 


some time before preferred an application to the British Govern- 
ment for permission to enter the British territories, in prose- 
cution of his intention to retire from the service of Dowlut 
Rao Stindiah, with which application the Governor-General 
immediately complied. Subsequent events, however, prevented 
General Perron from availing himself of that permission. The 
commandcer-in-chief replied to General Perron’s letter by de- 
siring him to despatch a confidential agent to his Excellency for 
the purpose of conferring on the subject of General Perron’s 
letter. A person on the part of M. Perron accordingly met the 
commander-in-chief on the morning of the 29th of August, but 
having evaded the propositions of the commander-in-chief for 
the surrender of M. Perron, he departed without effecting any 
arrangement. . 

142. On the 29th of August the British army arrived in the 
vicinity of Coel, the principal station in the territory under the 
authority of General Perron. The forces of General Perron 
were drawn up in a strong position near the Fort of Allyghur, 
and were immediately attacked by the British army with the 
utmost degree of skill, gallantry, and spirit. This vigorous attack 
compelled the enemy to retreat, after a very slight resistance. 

¥43. On the 4th of September the fort of Allyghur, hitherto 
deemed impregnable, was attacked and carried by assault, by 
a detachment from the British army. 

144. Your honourable Committee will unite with the Go- 
vernor-General in council in applauding the extraordinary 
activity, valour, and perseverance displayed by the British 
troops on this memorable occasion. 

145. To enable your honourable Committee to form a judg- 
ment of the importance of this acquisition, we have the honour 
to annex to this despatch copies of Ictters which were found in 
the fort after its capture. 

146. On the 7th of September the commander-in-chief re- 
ceived a letter from General Perron, renewing his application 
for permission to retire within the Company’s territories, with 
which application the commander-in-chief, with his usual judg- 
ment and promptitude, decmed it proper immediately to 
comply. 

147. The Governor-General considered the retirement of 
Gencral Perron in the present crisis of affairs to be an event 
highly favourable to the success of the British arms, and to the 
interests of the British Government in India. The defection of 


364 BATTLE OF DELHI. SUBMISSION OF NATIVE CHIEFS, 


that officer, may be expected to relieve the surrounding states 
and chieftains, from the dread which they entertained of his 
power, and to encourage them to manifest the desire which they 
are generally believed to entertain, of cmancipating themselves 
from the control of the Mahratta power, by co-operating with 
the British forces. This event must also diminish the confidence 
which the native powers of India, have been accustomed to 
repose in the fidelity of their French officers. 

148. On the 8th of September the Fort of Koorja, which the 
commander-in-chief represents to be of considerable strength, 
was evacuated. 

149. The Governor-General in council has the highest satis- 
faction in transmitting to your honourable Committec the ac- 
companying printed copies of Ictters from his Excellency the 
commandcer-in-chief, dated the 11th, rath, and 13th of September, 
containing the important intclligence of the entire defeat of the 
Mahratta army under the command of M. Louis, in the vicinity 
of Delhi. The glory of this most brilliant and decisive victory 
has not been exceeded by any of the numcrous achievements 
which have established the reputation of the British arms in this 
quarter of the globe. 

150. By this distinguished success the French force established 
in the dominions of Dowlut Rao Scindiah may be considered to 
be completely destroyed. Your honourable Committce will not 
fail to appreciate the importance of this event under the actual 
renewal of war between Great Britain and France. 

151. The Governor-General in council has the further satis- 
faction of apprizing your honourable Committee that the in- 
habitants of the Mahratta territory through which the British 
army has passed, have uniformly testificd the utmost joy at the 
success of our arms, and have been active in furnishing supplies 
and provisions to the British troops. 

152. Several of the chieftains, subjects or tributarics to the 
Mahratta Government, have expressed to the commander-in- 
chief their desire to place themselves under the protection of the 
British Government, and to co-opcrate with the British forces; 
and every reason exists to justify an expectation that their ex- 
ample will be followed by many of the Seik chieftains and others, 
whom the power and ascendancy of General Perron in that 
quarter of India had compelled to yield a reluctant acquiescence 
in the requisition of that officer for the aid of their respective 
forces in the present contest. 


THE EMPEROR UNDER BRITISH PROTECTION, 365 


153. Rajah Runjeet Sing, the Rajah of Lahore and the prin- 
cipal amongst the Seik chieftains, has transmitted proposals to 
the commander-in-chief for the transfer of the territory belong- 
ing to that nation south of the river Sutledge, on the condition 
of mutual defence against the respective enemies of that chieftain 
and of the British nation. 

154. His Majesty Shah Allum has manifested the utmost 
solicitude to avail himself of the protection of the British power, 
and your honourable Committee will anticipate from the contents 
of the commander-in-chief’s despatch of the 12th of September, 
the probability that his Majesty’s person and authority will 
speedily be entrusted to the defence of the British power, and 
that the honourable Company will soon obtain in the eyes of all 
the native states of India, the distinguished honour which must 
atgend the deliverance of that aged and unfortunate monarch 
from a condition of the utmost degree of misery and degradation, 
and his restoration under the protection of the British Govern- 
ment to a state of dignity, competency and comfort. 

155. The Governor-General in council is happy to inform 
your honourable Committee that no event has occurred to coun- 
terbalance these brilliant successes. Five companies of sepoys 
under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Coningham, occupied a: 
small frontier post at Shckohabad. That inconsiderable body 
of troops was attacked on the 2nd of September by a numerous 
detachment of cavalry under the command of a Frenchman 
named Fleury, and succeeded in compelling the enemy to re- 
treat, but being again attacked on the 4th of September by the 
same superior force, and having nearly expended its ammunition, 
the party of British troops capitulated to the enemy. On the 
receipt of this intelligencé his Excellency the commander-in- 
chief detached a considerable body of cavalry and infantry to 
oppose the Mahratta troops under the command of M. Fleury, 
and the Governor-Gencral in council has since had the satisfac- 
tion to learn that the approach of that detachment, combined 
with the fall of the fortress of Allyghur, induced M. Fleury to 
retire precipitatcly with the troops under his command across the 
Jumna; those troops have since dispersed. 

156. The Governor-General in council now proceeds to com- 
municate to your honourable Committce the course of military 
operations on the western side of India. 

157. The honourable Major-Gencral Wellesley who occupied 
a position within one march of Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s fortress of 


366 AHMEDNUGGUR TAKEN. FORCES OF CONFEDERATES. 


Ahmednuggur, having received intelligence of the issue of the 
Resident’s negotiation, commenced his march towards that for- 
tress on the 8th of August, and the same day attacked and 
carried by escalade the fortified town of Ahmednuggur. On the 
10th of August the batteries of the British army opened against 
the fort, which was surrendered on the 12th instant. For the 
details of this brilliant and important success, the Governor- 
General in council has the honour to refer your honourable Com- 
mittee to the enclosed publication, issued by the authority of the 
Governor-General in council, and the accompanying printed copy 
of Major-General Wellesley’s despatch to the Governor-General 
of the 1ath of August. 

158. The possession of this fortress is of peculiar importance to 
the prosecution of our military operations, by securing the com- 
munication with Poonah, and by affording a depdt for supplies 
of provisions and military stores. 

159. In the interval of time between the 12th and 2ist of 
August, the date of the latest advices from that officer, Major- 
General Wellesley took possession of all the districts dependent 
’ on Ahmednuggur, yielding an cstimated annual revenuc of six 
lacs, thirty-four thousand rupees; those districts were placed 
under the temporary management of a British officer. 

160, On the 21st of August, a part of the force under the com- 
mand of Major-General Wellesley had crossed, and the remainder 
was crossing the river Godaveree, on its march towards the enemy, 
and eventually to form a junction with the subsidiary force of 
Hyderabad under the command of Coloncl Stevenson, which 
occupied a position near Jafirabad. 

161. By the latest advices from the armics of the confederated 
chieftains, it appears that those chieftains had despatched their 
heavy baggage to Boorhanpore, and were moving towards the 
Budowlee pass, one of the passes into the territories of the 
Nizam. 

162. The following is the amount of the respective forces of 
the Rajah of Berar, and Dowlut Rao Scindiah, assembled near 
- the Nizam’s frontier on the 5th of July— 

Forces of Scindiah—Cavalry, 18,500; infantry, 11 battalions, 
matchlock men, 500; heavy ordnance, 35; ficld pieces, 170. 

Forces of the Rajah of Berar. —Cavalry, 20,000 ; infantry, 6,000 ; 
field pieces, 35; rocket men, 500; camel guns, 500, 

163. The foregoing statement includes troops of every descrip- 
tion. The Governor-General in council has reason to believe, 


DETAIL OF BRITISH ARMIES IN THE DECCAN, 367 


that the number of the confederated forces has been consider- 
ably diminished by desertion, in consequence of the scarcity of 
provisions. 

164. The force under the immediate command of Major- 
General Wellesley, consists of 1,731 European and _ native 
cavalry, 6,999 infantry?, exclusive of European artillerymen, 
and 653 pioneers, of the establishment of Fort St. George, 2,400 
cavalry belonging to the Rajah of Mysore, and about 3,000 Mah- 
ratta horse. Two battalions of sepoys were detached in the 
month of July with a large convoy of treasure, bullocks, and 
grain, from the army under the command of his Excellency 
Lieut.-General Stuart, to the army of Major-General Wellesley. 
The British force remaining at Poonah for the protection of that 
capital, consists of 1,778 infantry and artillery’, 

165. The forces under the command of Colonel Stevenson, 
consist of the whole of the subsidiary force, amounting to 7,920 
infantry, cavalry, and artillery*; and about 16,000 men, cavalry 
and infantry of his Highness the Nizam’s troops. 

166. The Resident at Poonah will receive instructions to 
communicate to your honourable Committee, the progress of 
the operations of the British armies to the date of his latest 
advices, at the period of time when this despatch shall reach 
Poonah. 

167, The most active measures have been adopted under the 
orders of the Governor-General, for the occupation of Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah’s sea-port of Baroach ; and the Governor-General 


? Cavalry.—H. M.’s roth light dragoons, 384; 4th, 5th, and 7th, regi- 
ments native cavalry, 1347—total 1731. Artillery, 173. 

* Infantry.—H. M.’s 74th regiment, and H. M.’s 78th regiment, 1368 ; 
first battalion and, N.1.; first battalion 8th, N.I.; second battalion 12th, 
N.I.; second battalion 18th, N. 1I.; and third regiment N. 1, 5631.— 
Total 8903. With 357 Madras artillery lascars, and 653 Madras 
pioneers. 

* H, M.’s 84th regiment, five companies, 470; European artillerymen, 
93; native infantry, 121g.—Total 1778. With 117 Bombay lascars, and 
a small park of artillery, 

* Cavalry.—3rd, and 6th, regiments native cavalry, 909 ; artillery, 120. 
Infantry,—-H. M.'s Scotch brigade, 778; second battalion and, N. I, 
first battalion 6th, N. I., second battalion 7th, N. I., second battalion gth, 
N. I, and rith, regiment N. L, 6113.—Total 7920. With 276 gun 
lascars, and 212 pioneers. 


368 EXPEDITION TO OCCUPY CUTTACK. 


in council confidently hopes, that the information from Bombay 
of the capture of that important place will accompany this 
despatch. 

168, By the latest advices it appears, that Jeswunt Rao Holkar 
still maintained his position between the rivers Taptee and Ner- 
buddah ; there is no reason to believe that the Rajah of Berar 
and Dowlut Rao Scindiah, have succeeded in their endeavours 
to obtain the co-operation of that chieftain. 

169. In our despatch of the ist of August the Governor- 
General in council informed your honourable Committee, that 
the attention of the Governor-General was directed to the forma- 
tion of an arrangement for the occupation of the province of 
Cuttack. For this purpose a part of the northern division of the 
army under the Presidency of Fort St. George, commanded by 
Lieut.-Colonel Campbell, was ordered to be holden in readiness 
to proceed on that expedition from Ganjam', and a detachment 
consisting of two companies of his Majesty’s 22nd regiment 
of foot, and a part of the 20th Bengal regiment was despatched 
from Bengal, to reinforce the troops under Licut.-Colonel Camp- 
bell’s command ; the whole of that force consists of 565 Euro- 
peans of his Majesty’s and the honourable Company’s troops, 
2,200 sepoys, and a party of native cavalry consisting of fifty 
men. 

170. The Governor-General also directed a detachment con- 
sisting of 500 Bengal volunteers, and twenty-one artillerymen, 
with four six-pounders to proceed by sca, under the command of 
Captain Morgan, for the purpose of occupying Balasore ; and 
another detachment has been formed at Jelasore, under the com- 
mand of Lieut.-Colonel Ferguson, consisting of 835 sepoys, and 
eighty-four men of the Governor-Gencral’s body-guard, for the 
purpose of advancing into the province of Cuttack, and forming 
a junction with the detachment at Balasore, when the state of 
the intermediate country, or the progress of the main army shall 
favour that movement. This dctachment is supported by a force 
of 1,400 scpoys, assembled at Midnapore under the command of 
Lieut.-Colonel Fenwick. 

171. It is proper to inform your honourable Committee, 
that in consequence of a severe illness which prevented Lieut.- 
Colonel Campbell from proceeding with the army, the Governor- 
General despatched Lieut.-Colonel Harcourt, of his Majesty's 


1 The detail, here given in a note, is omitted, to save space. 


JUGGERNAUT PAGODA UNDER BRITISH PROTECTION, 369 


rath regiment, his Lordship’s Military Secretary, to Ganjam, 
for the purpose of taking the command of that army. 

172, On the 8th of September, the troops under the command 
of Lieut.-Colonel Campbell commenced their march from Gan- 
jam. On the sith of September, Lieut.-Colonel Harcourt 
arrived at Ganjam and took the command of the troops, Lieut.- 
Colonel Campbell continuing in a state of health which rendered 
him unable to move with the expedition. 

173. On the r4th instant, the British troops conducted by 
Lieut.-Colonel Harcourt, took possession of Manikapatam with- 
out any resistance on the part of the Mahratta troops, who fled 
on the approach of our army. 

174. From that station Lieut.-Colonel Harcourt despatched a 
letter to the principal Bramins of the pagoda of Juggernaut en- 
couraging them to place the pagoda under the protection of the 
British troops. 

175. On the 16th instant, a favourable answer was received 
from the Bramins, and a deputation was sent to the British 
camp to claim the protection which had been offered by Lieut.- 
Colonel Harcourt. 5 

176, On the 18th instant, the army encamped at Juggernaut ; 
the Mahratta troops which were there stationed fled on its ap- 
proach. 

177. The inhabitants of the country subject to the Mahratta 
Government through which the British troops have passed, have 
manifested the utmost degree of satisfaction at their approach. 

178, On the 21st instant, the detachment under the command 
of Captain Morgan landed at Balasore, and succecded in occu- 
pying that station after a very slight resistance on the part of 
the enemy. 

179. From the accounts which have been received with regard 
to the troops of the Rajah of Berar in the Province of Cuttack, 
there is no reason to suppose that these troops are either 
numerous or formidable, nor is it probable that they can re- 
ceive any considerable reinforcements from Berar, while Major- 
General Wellesley’s operations engage the attention of the 
Rajah for the defence of his person and of his capital; at all 
events it may be expected, that the introduction of any additional 
force into the Province. of Cuttack will be effectually prevented 
by the previous occupation of the passcs Icading into that pro- 
vince, either by the British troops, or by the chicftains occupy- 
ing the territory on the frontier of Cuttack, whom we may 

Bb 


370 NIZAM DIES. SECUNDER JAH’S QUIET ACCESSION. 


be enabled to conciliate to the interests of the British Govern- 
ment. 

180, The Governor-General in council entertains a hope that 
the officers of the Rajah of Berar, may be induced to surrender 
the possession of that province to the British power without a 
contest ; and the Governor-General has adopted measures calcu- 
lated to produce that desirable event ; under any probable cir- 
cumstances, however, the Governor-General in council confidently 
anticipates the complete and speedy success of the expedition 
against the province of Cuttack, 

181. In our despatch of the 1st of August, the Governor- 
General in council apprized your honourable Committee of the 
expected death of his Highness the Nizam. 

182, The event took place on the 6th of August; his Highness’s 
eldest son Mirza Secunder Jah was immediately proclaimed 
successor to the Soobahdary of the Deccan; on the 7th of 
August, Mirza Secunder Jah formally took his seat on the 
musnud, to which he was conducted by the Resident at Hyder- 
abad, and by Rajah Ragotim Rao, the deputy of his late 
Highness’s prime minister Azim ul Omra, and reccived the 
congratulatory presents of all the principal officers of his govern- 
ment at Hyderabad. 

183. On that occasion, the Resident at Hyderabad was re- 
ceived by his Highness with the most distinguished honours as 
the representative of the British Government in India, and his 
Highness publicly delivered to the Resident an instrument under 
his Highness’s seal, acknowledging the obligation of the treatics 
subsisting between the British Government, and the state of 
Hyderabad. 

184, The Governor-General had previously directed the Resi- 
dent to require from Sccunder Jah the delivery of an instrument 
to that effect, as the first act of that Prince’s Government, and 
his Highness assented to that requisition with the utmost 
readiness. 

185. Rajah Ragotim Rao on that occasion, suggested the 
demand of a corresponding engagement on the part of the 
British Government, which suggestion the Resident properly 
rejected. The Governor-General in council however, being of 
opinion that a voluntary act of recognition on our part, would 
tend to conciliate the confidence of Sccunder Jah, and would 
produce an impression on the minds of his subjects, and of the 
several princes and chieftains of India, and particularly on the 


MUTUAL CONFIRMATION OF TREATIES WITH NIZAM, 371 


mind of his Highness the Peishwa, highly favourable to the 
credit of our justice, moderation, and public faith, deemed it 
expedient to execute an engagement in terms corresponding 
with the instrument delivered by Secunder Jah, and an instru- 
ment to that effect was accordingly executed by the Governor- 
General in council under the seal of the honourable Company, 
and transmitted to the Resident, with directions to deliver it to his 
Highness the Soobahdar in the most public and formal manner. 

186, The Governor-General in council has great satisfaction 
in stating to your honourable Committee, that the event of his 
Highness the Nizam’s death has not occasioned any interruption 
of the public tranquillity, and that the accession of Mirza Se- 
cunder Jah has been generally and cheerfully acknowledged by 
the younger sons of his late Highness, and by all the officers and 
subjects of his Highness’s Government. 

187. The preservation of tranquillity at this crisis must be 
ascribed principally to the position of our armies, under the 
command of Major-General Wellesley and Colonel Stevenson, 
and of a considerable detachment from the army, under the 
personal command of his Excellency Lieut.-General Stuart, 
which his Excellency, under the orders of the Governor-General 
despatched towards the southern frontier of the Nizam’s do- 
minions, for the purpose of eventually proceeding to Hyderabad, 
if the situation of affairs should render such a movement expe- 
dient or necessary for the preservation of tranquillity, or for 
securing the regular order of succession on the death of the 
Nizam. 

188, Adverting to the known designs and proceedings of the 
confederated chieftains with relation to the British Government, 
to the intrigues which they had long carried on at the Court of 
Hydcrabad, with a view to dissolve the connection subsisting 
between the British Government and the state of Hyderabad, 
and to the position of their united armies on the frontier of the 
Nizam’s dominions, it can scarcely be doubted that unless the 
movements of their armics had been checked by the position of 
the British troops, those chicftains would have taken advantage 
of the event of the Nizam’s decease, to excite comniotions in the 
state of Hyderabad, and to disturb the regular order of succes- 
sion by affording the aid of their troops in support of the known 
pretensions of Ferreedoon Jah, (the younger brother of Secunder 
Jah) to the musnud of Hyderabad. 

189, The expected event of his Highness the Nizam’s decease, 

Bba 


372 EXCHANGE OF TERRITORIES WITH THE PEISHWA, 


and the opportunity which that event might afford to the con- 
federated chieftains in the actual position of their armics to 
prosecute their injurious designs, furnished an additional reason 
for requiring those chieftains to withdraw their armies from the 
menacing position which they occupied on the frontier of the 
Nizam’s dominions. 

190. The Governor-General in council deems it proper to 
transmit to your honourable Committee, an extract from a 
despatch from the Resident at Poonah, detailing propositions 
on the part of his Highness the Peishwa, for the transfer to the 
honourable Company of a part of his Highness’s possessions in 
the Province of Bundlecund, yielding an estimated annual 
revenue of thirty-six lacs of rupees, in lieu of the territory ceded 
by his Highness in the southern quarter of his dominions, and of 
a part of the cessions in the vicinity of Surat, and other proposed 
modifications of the treaty of Bassein. 

191, The Governor-General in council considering those pro- 
posed modifications of the treaty of Bassein to be a considerable 
improvement of the terms of that treaty, with reference to the 
interests of the British Government, has assented to the Peishwa’s 
propositions. 

192. Your honourable Committee will observe with satisfac- 
tion, that these propositions from the Peishwa afforded an un- 
equivocal proof of the sincerity of his Highness’s disposition 
to adhere to the principles and spirit of the alliance happily 
concluded between his Highness, and the British Government. 

193. In conformity to the plan of operations and political 
arrangements contained in the Governor-General’s instructions to 
his Excellency the Commander-in-Chief, of the 27th of July, (of 
which a copy accompanied our despatch of the 1st of August,) a 
considerable detachment of British troops was assembled ncar 
Allahabad, for the purpose of co-operating with the force under 
the command of Himmut Bahadur (one of his Highness the 
Peishwa’s principal officers in Bundlecund) in the occupation of 
that province, agreeably to the proposals which that officer some 
time since transmitted to the British Government, as noted in 
the 59th paragraph of this despatch ; and the Governor-General 
has received information that the detachment has crossed the 
river Jumna, and entered the province of Bundlecund. 

194. The Governor-General in council has every reason to 
expect the pacific introduction of the Company's authority into 
the province of Bundlecund, and the late cession of a part of the 


ZI ANTICIPATE SPEEDY AND SECURE PEACE. 373 


Peishwa’s possessions in Bundlecund may be expected greatly 
to facilitate the accomplishment of that object. 

195. Adverting to the brilliant success and rapid progress of 
the British arms in the present contest with the confederated 
Mahratta chieftains, to the accumulated and seasonable pressure 
of an active and skilful system of military operations on all the 
most vulnerable points of their resources and dominions, and to 
the probable issue of the various political arrangements adopted 
on this occasion for the purpose of securing the co-operation, or 
neutrality of the several states and chieftains, whose power and 
resources might be employed in support of the enemy’s cause, 
the Governor-General entertains a confident expectation of the 
early conclusion of peace with those chieftains on terms, which 
shall deprive them of the means of disturbing the tranquillity of 
our possessions, and of impairing the efficiency and stability of 
our alliances, 

196, Under the prosperous issue of such a general pacification, 
we expect that with a considerable augmentation of the lustre 
and glory of the British arms in India, we shall witness the 
accomplishment of a comprehensive system of alliances and 
political connection in Hindostan and the Deccan, calculated to 
promote the general tranquillity of India, and to secure on the 
most permanent foundations the interests and dominions of the 
honourable Company, against the hostile attempts of any native 
or European power, and especially to protect the north-western 
frontier of Oude, and to destroy the last remnant of French 
influence in India. 

We have the honour to be, 
Honourable Sirs, 
with the greatest respect, 
Your most obedient and faithful servants, 
WELLESLEY, 
G. H. BARLOW, 
G. UpNy, 


50. The Governor-General in Council to the Honourable the 
Secret Committee of the Honourable the Court of Directors. 


Progress of the War. First attempts at negotiation. 


October 31, 1803. 
Ilonourable Sirs, 
The unavoidable delay in the despatch of the Packet over- 
land, enables the Governor-General in council to communicate 


374 PROPOSED TREATMENT OF EMPEKOR AND HIS FAMILY. 


to your honourable Committee, by the present opportunity, the 
accounts which we have received of the progress of our arms, 
since our last address to your honourable Committee. 

On the 12th of September, the army, under the personal 
direction of his Excellency the Commander-in-Chief, com- 
menced crossing the river Jumna. In consequence of the total 
defeat of the army under the command of M. Louis Bourquain 
on the 11th of September, the whole of the French and Mah- 
ratta force dispersed, leaving to the British troops the undisputed 
passage of the Jumna. 

Conformably to the permission granted to General Perron, 
that officer attended by his secretary, Mr. Beckett, and by 
Mr. Fleury, passed into the Company’s territories, and has 
since arrived at Lucknow, whence he will shortly proceed to 
the Presidency. General Perron was attended by his body- 
guard consisting of near 400 horse. On the 14th M. Louis 
Bourquain, and four of his officers, surrendered themselves 
prisoners of war to the Commander-in-Chief at Delhi. 

On the 16th, his Excellency the Commander-in-Chief at- 
tended by the principal officers of the British army waited on 
the unfortunate Emperor Shah Allum, at the royal palace, in 
the Fort of Delhi. ; 

On that occasion his Majesty’s eldest son, Mirza Akber Shah, 
proceeded to the British camp, and conducted his Excellency 
the Commander-in-Chief to the presence of his Majesty, who 
received his Excellency seated on his throne. 

His Majesty and the whole of his court testified the utmost 
joy at the events which have placed his Majesty and the royal 
family, under the protection of the British Government. 

The attention of the Governor-General is now directed to the 
formation of a permanent arrangement for the future main- 
tenance of the dignity and comfort of his Majesty and the royal 
family, on principles calculated to provide for the exigency with 
the least practicable inconvenience to the honourable Company, 
and with the greatest advantage to the reputation of British 
justice, and liberality, and to secure the important benefits to be 
derived from the connection which will now be renewed between 
his Majesty, and the British power in India. 

( The Governor-General having received from his Excellency 
the Commander-in-Chief, returns of the ordnance captured in 
the Fort of Alygur on the 4th of September, and of the artillery 
taken on the field of battle near Delhi, on the 11th of September, 


ENEMY RETAIN NO IMPORTANT FRENCH OFFICERS, 375 


which completed the official statement of the military operations 
conducted under the personal command of his Excellency the 
Commander-in-Chief, from the 29th of August, to the 18th of 
September, the Governor-General in council issued general 
orders, under date the 1st of October, expressing the sentiments 
of applause and admiration with which the British Government 
has contemplated the rapid and brilliant success of the British 
arms, under the distinguished conduct of his Excellency the 
Commanider-in-Chief, and the extraordinary valour and exer- 
tions of the officers and troops by which that success was 
atchieved. 

On the 24th of September, his Excellency the Commander- 
in-Chief marched from Delhi with the army under his command 
in the direction of Muttra and Agra, leaving Lieutenant-Colonel 
Ochterlony to attend the person of the Emperor Shah Allum; 
and for the protection of Delhi one complete battalion and five 
companies of infantry, together with a corps of Mahrattas, then 
raising under the superintendance of two officers, British sub- 
jects, who quitted the service of Scindiah at the commencement 
of the war.) 

On the goth of September, M. Dodernique, a French officer 
in the service of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, commanding a brigade 
of Scindiah’s troops, surrendered himself to Colonel Vandeleur, 
who had arrived at Muttra with a detachment of British troops 
from Futtygur. M. Dodernique was accompanied by a British 
subject, and by a French officer in Scindiah’s service, His 
Excellency the Commander-in-Chief received notice on the 1st 
of October, of the intention of Mr. Brownrig, and of three more 
officers, British subjects belonging to the corps under the com- 
mand of Mr, Brownrig, to surrender themselves at the carlicst 


opportunity. 

( The Governor-General in council has the satisfaction to in- 
orm your honourable Committee, that no French officers of any 
consideration now yemain in the service of the confederated 
Mahratta chieftains: 

On the 2d of October, the army under the command of his 
Excellency General Lake arrived at Muttra. The Governor- 
General in council deems it to be a testimony due to the 
exemplary discipline and good conduct of the British troops, 
to insert in this place an extract from his Excellency the Com- 
mander-in-Chief’s letter to the Governor-General, of the 2d 
of October, describing the impression produced on the minds 


376 POPULAR CONTENT. TREATY WITH BHURTPOOR RAJAH. 


of the inhabitants of the country between Delhi and Muttra, 
by the order and regularity of the troops during their march 
through that territory. 

“It is with a mixed sentiment of pride and pleasure that I 
inform your Lordship, that all the inhabitants of this place, who 
Jor a time fled, returned to their habitations last night, on per- 
ceiving that no ravages had been committed by the troops, which 
Ll attribute to the particular attention payed by Colonel Vandeleur 
to this circumstance.” 

“7 am informed from all quarters that the inhabitants behold 
with astonishment, this proof of the discipline and good conduct 
of the army. All declare that hitherto it has been unknown in 
Hindostan that a victorious army should pass through a country 
without destroying by fire, and committing every excess the most 
injurious to the inhabitants ; but on the contrary from the regu- 
larity observed by us, our approach is a blessing, instead of bring- 
ing with it as they at first feared all the horrors of war attended 
by rapine and murder; that thety cattle remain in their fields 
without being molested, and the inhabitants in their houses receive 
every protection.” 

“T cannot find words to express to your Lordship the pleasure 
I have received from this account. The favourable opinion the 
inhabitants have formed of us from these circumstances cannot 
fail of producing the most beneficial consequences.” 

On the 9th of October his Excellency the Commander-in- 
Chief concluded a treaty of general defence and guarantee with 
the Rajah of Bhurtpoor, one of the principal chieftains of the 
tribe of Jauts whose country is situated in the vicinity of Muttra 
and Agra. 

The Governor-General in council having entirely approved 
the terms of that treaty, has ratified it; a copy is enclosed for 

' your honourable Committee’s information. 
In consequence of the conclusion of this engagement the 
Rajah of Bhurtpoor has despatched to’ the British camp, a de- 
tachment of 1,200 cavalry to co-operate with the British army. 
‘The character and influence of that chieftain in the north- 
‘ western quarter of Hindostan, render his alliance an object 

of considerable importance to the interests of the British 
* Government. 

The Governor-General in council entertains a confident ex- 
pectation, that the Rajpoot and other chieftains in that quarter 
will shortly be induced to connect their interests with those of 


AGRA, AND SCINDIAH’S TERRITORY ON ¥UMNA, REDUCED. 377 


the British Government, and if necessary to co-operate with the 
British troops against the enemy. 

On the 4th of October the army under the command of his 
Excellency General Lake, arrived before Agra; a summons was 
immediately sent demanding the surrender of the fort to which 
no answer was returned. The Mahratta officers in the fort had 
confined all the Europeans stationed there, and the greatest 
confusion was said to prevail within the fort. A body of the 
enemy’s troops consisting of seven battalions being encamped 
under the walls of the fort, it became necessary to dislodge that 
force before the operations of the siege could be cgmmenced. 
The Commander-in-Chief accordingly appointed a detachment 
of British troops under the command of Brigadier General Clarke 
for that duty, and on the 1oth of October, the British detach- 
ment attacked and completely defeated the force of the enemy. 

By this success, the British troops obtained possession of the 
town of Agra, and were enabled to commence operations for the 
siege of the fort. 

On the 12th of October the battalions of the enemy which 
were opposed to the British troops on the 1oth of that month 
surrendered to the Commander-in-Chief; their number amounted 
to about 2,500. 

On the following day, the Governor of the Fort of Agra 
solicited a cessation of hostilitics for the purpose of negotiating 
the terms of capitulation, and despatched an Europcan officer 
to the British camp, with a Icttcr signed by the principal officers 
in the fort, stating the conditions on which they were disposed 
to surrender it; his Excellency the Commander-in-Chief imme- 
diately despatched a British officer into the fort for the purpose 
of finally adjusting the terms of the capitulation, but while that 
officer was actually engaged in the negotiation the firing from 
the fort recommenced, and the British officer returned to camp, 

On the 17th the breaching batterics opened against the fort 
with great effect, and on the evening of the same day the gar- 
rison capitulated and surrendered the celebrated Fort of Agra 
to the British troops. 

The acquisition of the important fortress of Agra, added to 
our possession of Delhi and Muttra, has completed the reduction 
of the territory of Scindiah situated on both banks of the 
Jumna. 

The encmy being entirely repulsed on the north-western fron- 
tier of Oude, no event has occurred to disturb the tranquillity 


378 NATIVE ADMIRATION OF OUR VALOUR AND HUMANITY, 


of our possessions since the incursion of the detachment under 
the command of Mr. Fleury, of which the details were com- 
municated in our despatch to your honourable Committee of 
the 25th of September. Some internal disturbance has arisen 
in consequence of outrages committed by the Zemeendar of 
Tutteea,.who has for some time been in a state of rebellion 
against the British Government; these disturbances however 
were entirely quelled, and several of the rebels were in custody 
for trial by the civil power on the 21st of October. 

Gholaum Mahomed Khan the Rohilla chief, who, at the 
invitation gf Scindiah and of M. Perron, had advanced with a 
body of troops to Coonjpoorah, a town situated on the river 
Jumna to the northward of Delhi, with the intention of crossing 
that river and of proceeding towards Rampore, on receiving 
intelligence of the battle of Delhi, and the total defeat of the 
army under the command of M. Louis Bourquain, immediately 
retreated with the utmost expedition, and was deserted by a 
considerable part of the troops which he had collected. 

The Governor-General in council deems it proper in this place 
to insert an extract from a letter from Mr. A. Seton, the political 
agent of the Governor-General in the ceded provinces, dated-the 
18th of September, describing the impression produced on the 
minds of the inhabitants of our north-western provinces by the 
brilliant victory obtained by the army under the command of 
his Excellency General Lake, over the troops conducted by 
M. Louis Bourquain on the 11th of September in the vicinity 
of Delhi. 

“It ts impossible to express the astonishment which has been 
vaised amongst all ranks of natives by the brilliant success of his 
Excellency the Commander-in-Chief on the 11th instant; at first 
the intelligence was not believed, and when confirmed was only 
believed to be admired. The beneficial effects of so glorious and so 
complete a victory gained under circumstances of such difficulty, 
must be almost beyond calculation. The language of the natives is 
that their admiration is divided between two objects, and that 
they know not which to extoll most,—British valour, or British 
humanity.” 

The Governor-General in council now proceeds to commu- 
nicate to your honourable Committee, the progress of operations 
in the province of Cuttack, which we have the satisfaction to 
inform your honourable Committee have terminated by the 
capture of the town and fort of Cuttack, and the consequent 


PROGRESS OF THE OCCUPATION OF CUTTACK. 379 


subjection of the whole of that valuable province to the British 
authority. 

Our despatch of the 25th of September, contains the commu- 
nication of the progress of the British army under the command 
of Lieutenant-Colonel Harcourt from Ganjam to Juggernaut, 
and of the occupation of that place by the British troops. 

The inundated state of the country prevented the march of 
the army under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Harcourt 
from Juggernaut, until the 24th of September. During the 
first day’s march, the advanced corps of the army were several 
times engaged with parties of the enemy’s troops who were 
repulsed with loss. 

An action subsequently took place between an advanced 
detachment of the British troops and a party of the enemy near 
Muckundpore, in which the latter was defeated with considerable 
loss. i 

No further resistance was opposed to the progress of the 
British army until its arrival at Cuttack on the 1oth of October, 
but the inundated state of the country and the rise of the rivers 
greatly retarded the march of the troops. 

The town of Cuttack was immediately occupied by the British 
troops without opposition. 

Our despatch of the 25th of September, also contains the 
information of the occupation of Balasore by a detachment of 
troops which proceeded from Fort William by sea, under the 
command of Captain Morgan. 

On the 30th of September, Captain Morgan detached two 
companics under the command of Licutenant Slye, towards 
Soorong twenty miles south of Balasore, for the purpose of dis- 
lodging a party of the encmy stationed near that place, and of 
opening the communication in the direction of Cuttack. 

On the 1st of October the detachment under the command of 
Lieutenant Slye, attacked and defeated the enemy which was 
posted at a village a short distance north of Soorong, and the 
troops of the enemy stationed at Soorong, subsequently re- 
treated to the southward. The detachment under Licutenant 
Slye having been reinforced by another company from Balasore, 
occupied Soorong on the 3d of October without further opposition, 

In our despatch of the 25th of September, the Governor- 
General in council has communicated to your honourable Com- 
mittce, the formation and destination of a detachment under the 
command of Lieut.-Colonel Fergusson, at Balasore. 


380 IMPORTANCE OF THIS CONQUEST. BAROACH TAKEN, 


On the 4th of October the whole of the detachment under the 
command of Lieut.-Colonel Fergusson arrived at Balasore with- 
out any opposition. 

On the roth of October the detachment under the command 
of Lieut.-Colonel Fergusson marched from Balasore in con- 
sequence of orders from the Governor-General, directing that 
officer to proceed for the purpose of forming a junction with the 
army under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Harcourt at Cut- 
tack; and on the 15th of October that detachment arrived near 
Budruck, a village situated near half-way between Balasore and 
Cuttack. 

The inhabitants of the province of Cuttack afforded every: 
assistance to the British troops on their march, and expressed 
the utmost satisfaction at the prospect of being speedily relieved 
from the oppressions to which they had uniformly been subjected 
by the Mahratta Government, and of being placed under the 
protection of the British power. 

On the 19th of October the Governor-General received the 
satisfactory intelligence of the capture of the strong fort of Bar- 
rabutty, or Cuttack, on the 14th, by assault. 

The Governor-General in council contemplates with sentiments 
of the highest approbation the distinguished zeal and ability of 
the British officers, and indefatigable perseverance and alacrity 
of the British troops in surmounting the extraordinary difficulties 
which the nature of the country of Cuttack, and the inclemency 
of the season opposed to the progress and operations of an 
invading army. 

The Governor-General in council desires to offer to your 
honourable Committee his congratulations on the success of the 
British arms in the province of Cuttack, by which the whole of 
that valuable and highly productive province has been annexed 
to the honourable Company’s dominions, the frontier of Bengal 
materially strengthened, and the continuity of your possessions 
between the presidencies of Bengal and Fort St. George, ulti- 
mately secured, 

On the 3rd of October the Governor.General in council had 
the satisfaction to receive despatches from Bombay, notifying 
the assault and capture of the important seaport of Baroach, on 
the 29th of August, by a detachment under the command of 
Lieut.-Colonel Woodington. 

By the capture of this important seaport, its dependant terri- 
tory estimated to yield an annual revenue of more than eleven 


BATTLE OF ASSYE. LAKE’S GREAT DESERTS. 381 


lacks of rupees, has been subjected to the authority of the British 
Government. 

The Governor-General has had the satisfaction to receive ad- 
vices from the honourable Major-General Wellesley, containing 
the important intelligence that on the 23rd of Sept. an action 
took place near the Adjuntee Pass, in the Deccan, between the 
forces under the command of the honourable Major-General 
Wellesley, and the main body of the combined army of the con- 
federated chieftains. After a most severe engagement the enemy 
was completely defeated, and ninety-eight pieces of canon were 
taken on the field of battle by the British troops at the point 
of the bayonet ; our loss in this signal and splendid victory has 
been great. 

The Governor-General in council solicits the particular notice 
of your honourable Committee, and of the honourable Court 
of Directors, to the distinguished merits of the honourable 
Major-General Wellesley, and of the officers and troops under 
his command in that extraordinary exertion of British discipline, 
valour, and skill. 

The satisfaction with which the Governor-General in council 
contemplates the late rapid and glorious success of the British 
arms in every direction in which they have been opposed to the 
enemy’s forces, is augmented by the reflection, that under the 
pressure of accumulated defcat, with aggravated loss of resources, 
power, reputation, military strength, and dominion in every 
quarter of India, the confcdcrate chieftains must speedily be 
compelled to accede to such reasonable terms of pacification as 
shall sufficiently provide for the safety of our allics, for the 
future security of the honourable Company’s possessions, and 
for the permanent establishment of tranquillity in Hindostan 
and the Deccan, 

The Governor-Gencral in council cannot close this despatch 
without expressing to your honourable Committce in the strong- 
est terms the sentiments of high respect, admiration, and grati- 
tude, with which he contemplates the energy and perseverance, 
the military skill, judgment, and invincible intrepidity manifested 
by his Excellency General Lake, commandcer-in-chief, under 
extraordinary difficulties, in preparing the army of Bengal for 
the field, in conducting it by a rapid succession of glorious 
victories to the complete defeat of a powerful enemy, and in 
maintaining the honour of the British name in India by a 
humane attention towards the inhabitants of the conquered 


3 82 SERVICES OF MAJOR-GENERAL WELLESLEY, 


provinces, and by a due respect and reverence towards the un- 
fortunate representative of the house of Timur, and towards 
his Majesty’s royal family. 

The glory of this uninterrupted success is not surpassed by 
any recorded triumph of the British arms in India, and has been 
attended by every circumstance calculated to elevate the fame of 
British valour, to illustrate the character of British humanity, 
and to secure the stability of the British empire in the east. 
The Governor-General in council therefore earnestly recom- 
mends the conduct of General Lake to the most distinguished 
approbation and applause of the East India Company, and 
to the gracious favour of his Majesty; nor has any officer in 
. the most brilliant periods of our history in India displayed the 
high, qualifications requisite for the arduous station of com- 
mander-in-chief, with more honour to the military reputation, of 
with more advantage to the political interests of the British 
nation in the east. 

The public duty of the Governor-General in council also de- 
mands a testimony of justice to the conduct of the honourable 
Major-General Wellesley. The attention of your honourable 
Committee has already been solicited to the merits of Major- 
General-Wellesley in conducting the British troops from the 
frontier of Mysore to Poonah, in establishing his Highness the 
Peishwa upon the musnud, and in the reduction of the important 
fortress of Ahmednuggur. The conduct of Major-General Wel- 
lesley in the exercise of the extensive political and military 
powers, vested in him by the Governor-General in council, also 
deserves the highest approbation of your honourable Committee, 
and of the honourable the Court of Directors. 

At the close of a campaign of the most brilliant success, 
and glory, in every quarter of India, the transcendent victory 
obtained at Assye in the Deccan, on the 23d of September, 
appeared to the Governor-General in council to demand a testi- 
mony of public honour, equal to any which the justice of the 
British Government in India has ever conferred on the conduct 
of our officers and troops in the most distinguished period of 
our military history. 

The Governor-General in council highly approved the skilful 
plan formed by Major-General Wellesley on the 21st of Sep- 
tember, for precluding the escape of the enemy, and for reducing 
their combined army to the necessity of hazarding a general 
action. 


UNIFORMITY OF SUCCESS, AND OF GOOD CONDUCT. 383 


’ His Excellency in council also signified his most cordial ap- 
probation of the magnanimity, promptitude, and judgment with 
which Major-General Wellesley determined upon the instanta- 
neous attack on the enemy on the 23d of September. 

During the severe action which ensued, the conduct of Major- 
General Wellesley united a degree of ability, of prudence, and of 
dauntless spirit, seldom equalled and never surpassed. 

The important benefits resulting from the triumph of our arms 
in the battle of Assye, are not inferior to the splendour of the 
action. The immediate consequences derived from the exertions 
of that day have been the complete defeat of the combined army 
of the confederate chieftains ; an irreparable blow to the strength 
and efficiency of their military resources, especially of their artil- 
lery, in the Deccan; the expulsion of a predatory and hostile 
army from the territory of our ally the Soubahdar of the Deccan; 
and a seasonable and effectual check to the ambition, pride and 
rapacity of the enemy. 

Under these circumstances the Governor-General in council is 
induced to recommend the conduct of the honourable Major- 
General Wellesley to the particular approbation of the honourable 
Court of Directors, and to the gracious notice of his Majesty. 

In the course of an extensive and complicated system of mili- 
tary operations, the glorious success of our arms since the com- 
mencement of this war has been uniform in every part of India. 
The able and gallant officers and troops of his Majesty’s service, 
and of the several establishments of the three Presidencies have 
been actuated by equal sentiment’ of public spirit and honour, 
and have co-operated with equal ardour and success, in an united 
effort to accomplish the just objects of the allics. The Governor- 
General in council confides in the justice of our cause, in the 
unanimous zeal of the three Presidcncies, and in the continued 
co-operation of their respective resources and power, that the 
views of the confederate chieftains willbe speedily frustrated by 
the complete restoration of peace and tranquillity to the provinces 
of Hindostan and the Deccan, which have been disturbed by the 
ambition and violence of the enemy, 

We have the honour to be, &c. 
WELLESLEY. 
G. H. BaRLow. 
G, Upny. 

P.S, The Governor-General has received on this day, a de- 
spatch from the honourable Major-General Wellesley, under 


384 PRELIMINARY AND FUTILE ATTEMPTS AT PEACE, 


date the 6th of October, containing intelligence that on the 
5th of October Major-General Wellesley had received a letter 
from the enemy’s camp signed by Ballajee Koonjur, request- 
ing that Major-General Wellesley would despatch a British 
officer, together with an officer of the Soubahdar of the Deccan 
to the enemy’s camp, for the purpose of negotiating terms 
of peace between the allies and the confederated Mahratta 
chieftains. 

Ballajee Koonjur was originally despatched by his Highness 
the Peishwa from Bassein, to Dowlut Rao Scindiah, for the pur- 
pose of explaining to that chieftain the nature of the engagements 
concluded between the Peishwa and the British Government ; 
but with the accustomed versatility and treachery of a Mahratta 
politician Ballajee Koonjur has subsequently attached himself to 
the service of Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 

Major-General Wellesley judged it to be expedient to decline 
a compliance with this request for the despatch of a British 
officer, and of an officer of the Soubahdar of the Deccan to the 
camp of the confederates; first, because in the application of 
Ballajee Koonjur no reference is made to the authority, either of 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah or the Rajah of Berar, and consequently it 
is not certain that the application proceeds from either of those 
chieftains, either or both of whom might hereafter disavow the 
act of Ballajee Koonjur; and secondly, because the presence of a 
British officer in the enemy’s camp at that moment, would have 
tended to raise the spirits of the enemy’s troops, and to prevent 
their dispersion, and would have been represented by the enemy 
as an attempt on our part to sue for peace. 

The Governor-General in council entirely approves the judg- 
ment and prudence manifested by Major-General Wellesley in 
refusing to comply with the request of the enemy, and is satisfied 
that the duplicity and debased art of the Mahratta councils 
would have perverted the acquiescence of Major-General Welles- 
Icy in this insidious proposition, to the purpose of impairing the 
reputation of our arms and power. 

The Governor-General in council however, is inclined to believe 
that the ambition, pride, and rapacity of the confederate chicf- 
tains have received such a check, as must compel them to abstain 
from the prosecution of their inordinate designs ; and we thcre- 
fore expect to receive early intelligence of the disposition of the 
confederate chieftains to despatch directly from their respective 
authorities, to the British camp, an embassy, duly authorized to 


- GENERAL WELLESLEY’S MOVEMENTS AFTER ASSYE, 385 
negotiate the terms of peace conformably to Major-General 
Wellesley’s proposition. 

WELLESLEY. 

G. H. BARLow. 

G. Upny. 


51. The Governor-General in Council to the Honourable the 
Secret Committee of the Court of Directors, 


Progress of the War, and of negotiation. 


Fort William, December 28, 1803. 
Honourable Sirs, 


On the 31st of October, the Governor-General in council had 
the honour to communicate to your honourable Committee the 
progress of transactions connected with the operations of the war 
in which the British Government is engaged with the Rajah of 
Berar and Dowlut Rao Scindiah, to the latest date of our 
advices, 

The Governor-General in council has now the honour to 
continue the narrative of the transactions and operations of 
the war. 

After the glorious victory obtained at Assye on the 23d of 
September, under the command of the honourable Major- 
General Wellesley, over the forces of the Rajah of Berar and 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah, the confederates having collected the 
remains of their broken armics, moved to the westward along 
the bank of the Taptce, with a view to procced to the south- 
ward by the Cascrbary Ghaut, and to prevent Gencral Wellesley 
proceeding northward against Scindiah’s city of Boorhanpoor, ! 
and the strong and important fortress of Asseerghur. 

This movement induced General Wellesley to remain to the 
southward with the division of the British army under his 
immcdiate command, in order to check the operations of the 
confederates in that direction. General Wellesley however deter- 
mined to prosecute his original plan of operations against the 
fortress of Assecrghur, and accordingly directed Colonel Steven- 
son, who on the 25th of September had descended the Adjuntce 
Ghaut in pursuit of the enemy, to continue his march to the 
northward, and to attack Boorhanpoor and Asscerghur. 

As soon as the confederates found that although Gencral 
Wellesley remained with the division of the army under his 
immediate command to the southward of the Adjuntee Pass, 

ce 


386 BOORHANPORE AND ASSEERGHUR TAKEN. 


he had detached a sufficient force for the reduction of Scindiah’s 
important possessions to the northward of that pass, they altered 
their plan of operations. They separated their armies, the 
Rajah of Berar proceeded towards Chandore and Scindiah made 
a movement to the northward, for the purpose of interrupting 
Colonel Stevenson’s operations against Asseerghur. General 
Wellesley therefore on the 16th of October marched again to the 
northward, and on the 19th descended the Adjuntee Ghaut. 
Scindiah halted as soon as he heard of General Wellesley’s 
movement to the northward, and afterwards moved in an easterly 
direction towards Berar by Mulkapoor, and through the valley 
formed by the Taptee and Poorna rivers. 

In the meanwhile General Wellesley received authentic ac- 
counts that the Rajah of Berar had passed through the hills 
which form the boundaries of Candeish, and had moved towards 
the river Godavery. General Wellesley therefore ascended the 
Adjuntee Ghaut on the 25th of October, and continued his march 
‘to the southward on the 26th, and passed Aurungabad on the 
29th of that month. 

Colonel Stevenson with the subsidiary force, serving with the 
Soubadar of the Deccan, marched to Boorhanpore, a city belong- 
ing to Scindiah, and the capital of the district of Candecish. 
That city was evacuated on Colonel Stevenson’s approach, and 
was occupied by the British troops on the 15th of October. On 
the 17th Colonel Stevenson advanced to Asseerghur, and on 
the 18th attacked and gained possession of the Pettah. On the 
19th preparations were made for the siege of the fortress of 
Asseerghur belonging to Scindiah, the key of the Deccan, A 
flag of truce with a summons to surrender the fort had been 
previously sent to the officer in command, who returned an 
equivocal reply. The operations against the fort were therefore 
continued, and on the 2oth the batteries were opened; in the 
course of an hour a signal was made from the fort indicating 
the Commandant’s acceptance of the terms which Colonel 
Stevenson had offered to the garrison. Those terms were that 
the garrison should be permitted to march out with their private 
property, and that their arrears should be discharged to the 
amount of 20,000 rupees. On these terms the Fort of Asseer- 
ghur was surrendered to the British arms on the 21st of October. 
The number of killed and wounded of the troops under the 
command of Colonel Stevenson during the operations against 
Asseerghur was inconsiderable. 


ARRIVAL OF PROFESSED ENVOYS FROM SCINDIAH. 387 


Previously to the occupation of Boorhanpore nine officers and 
four serjeants, subjects of France and other European states 
surrendered themselves to Colonel Stevenson, under the proclama- 
tion of the Governor-General in council of the 29th of August. 

Subsequently to the capture of Asseerghut Colonel Stevenson 
proceeded with the subsidiary force, and the contingent of his 
Highness the Soubadar of the Deccan to the eastward in pursuit 
of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, and Colonel Stevenson was directed 
by the Honourable Major-General Wellesley to prosecute his 
march as far as the fortress of Gavilghur the principal fortress 
in the possession of the Rajah of Berar, and to lay siege to that 
place. 

In the despatch of the 31st of October, the Governor-General 
in council informed your honourable Committee that on the 6th 
of October, the Honourable Major-General Wellesley received a 
letter from the enemy’s camp, requesting that Major-General 
Wellesley would despatch a British officer, together with an 
officer of the Soubadar of the Deccan to the enemy’s camp, 
for the purpose of negotiating the terms of pcace between the 
allies and the confedcrated Mahratta chieftains; the motives 
which had induced Major-General Wellesley to refuse com- 
pliance with that request, were also stated to your honourable 
Committee on the 31st of October. The Governor-General in 
council at the same time expresscd his expectation of the early 
receipt of intelligence of the disposition of the confederate 
chicftains to despatch to the British camp an embassy duly 
authorized to negotiate the terms of peace. 

Subsequently to the despatch of Major-General Welleslcy’s 
reply to the letter from the camp of the enemy, Major-General 
Wellesley reccived various Icttcrs and messages on the subject of 
a pacification through different channels. All these communica- 
tions however procecded from persons unauthorized by official 
situation undcr the government of Dowlut Rao Scindiah to open 
negotiations on the part of that chicftain. Inthe first weck of the 
month of November, a person of considerable rank named Jes- 
wunt Rao Goorparah and another person of inferior rank named 
Naroo Punt Nana arrived from Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s camp, in 
the camp of Major-General Wellesley, declaring themselves to be 
authorized by Scindiah to negotiate the terms of peace. 

At the first conference which Major-Gencral Wellesley held 
with Jeswunt Rao Goorparah and Naroo Punt Nana on the loth 
of November, those persons could not produce powers from 

cca 


388 HE DISAVOWS, AND THEN ACCREDITS THEM, 


Scindiah to prosecute the negotiation. Major-General Wellesley 
therefore referred Jeswunt Rao Goorparah and Naroo Punt Nana 
to Scindiah for full powers, in the meanwhile permitting those’ 
persons to remain in the British camp. 

Subsequently to the date of Major-General Wellesley’s con- 
ference with those persons, Major-Gencral Wellesley received a 
letter from Dowlut Rao Scindiah by which it appeared that 
Scindiah intended to appoint a person named Mahomed Meer 
Khaun to negotiate the peace, and that Scindiah disavowed 
Jeswunt Rao Goorparah and Naroo Punt Nana. On the receipt 
of that letter Major-General Wellesley sent for Jeswunt Rao 
Goorparah and his colleague, and held a conference with them 
on the 20th of November. The result of this conference con- 
firmed Major-General Wellesley in the opinion which he had 
previously entertained, that notwithstanding the letter of Scin- 
diah disavowing Jeswunt Rao Goorparah and Naroo Punt Nana, 
those persons had actually been sent to the British camp, by the 
authority of Scindiah. Major-General Wellesley deemed it to be 
probable that full powers would be transmitted to Jeswunt Rao 
Goorparah as soon as Scindiah should have been apprized of the 
amicable reception of that agent in Major-General Wellesley’s 
camp. 

Major-General Wellesley therefore considered it to be advis- 
able to state to that agent, and to his colleague, the dangers to 
which they were exposed by the defect of the necessary creden- 
tials, and the moderation and favour which had been manifested 
towards them by permitting them to remain with impunity in the 
British camp, rather than to dismiss them with disgrace. 

They accordingly retired from the conference of the 20th of 
November highly satisfied with the treatment which they had 
received from Major-General Wellesley; and greatly disgusted. 
with the evasive and equivocal conduct of their employer. On 
the same day, in the course of two hours, Naroo Punt Nana 
returned to Major-General Wellesley with a letter from Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah, which was written by that chieftain in consequence 
of the reference made to him after the conference of the toth of 
November, conveying powers to Jeswunt Rao Goorparah and 
Naroo Punt Nana, to negotiate with Major-General Wellesley, 

The Governor-General in council will hereafter communicate 
to your honourable Committee the detail of the intrigues which 
appear to have prevailed in the camp of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, 
with a view to direct the negotiations for peace through various 


ARMISTICE GRANTED TO SCINDIAH ONLY. 389 


channels. These intrigues suggested doubts of the authenticity 
of the mission of Jeswunt Rao Goorparah and Naroo Punt Nana. 

It is manifest that various persons at the Durbar of Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah have respectively endeavoured to become the 
channel of negotiation; and Major-General Wellesley is of 
opinion that Jeswunt Rao Goorparah has succeeded by exag- 
gerated reports of the solicitude of Major-General Wellesley 
for the conclusion of peace, and by encouraging an expecta- 
tion that Major-General Wellesley would be induced to despatch 
a British officer for that purpose to the camp of Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah. 

The course of the negotiations for peace, and the general plan 
of pacification in Hindostan and the Deccan, will form the 
subject of a separate despatch to your honourable Committee by 
an early opportunity, when the further progress of the confer- 
ences and negotiations now pending shall have enabled the 
Governor-General in council to submit to your consideration a 
full view of his proceedings in the conduct of those important 
affairs. At present, it appears to be sufficient to inform your 
honourable Committee that, at the conference held with Jeswunt 
Rao Goorparah’ and Naroo Punt Nana, on the 20th November, 
after the verification of their gencral powers from Scindiah, it 
appeared that those powers were still defective in the essential 
point of enabling the ambassadors to conclude any of the several 
territorial compensations to the Company and the allics, which 
must form the basis of the peace with Scindiah. Major-General 
Wellesley, therefore, with great judgment, referred the ambas- 
sadors again to their chicf for distinct powers to negotiate those 
compensations. At this conference, Scindiah’s ambassadors 
carnestly solicited Major-Gencral Wellesley’s consent to a sus- 
pension of hostilities with Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar, which 
that officer granted to Scindiah exclusively. 

Your honourable Committce will observe, that by the terms of 
the armistice, the Rajah of Berar was expressly excluded from 
the benefit of it; it being obviously prudent not to allow either 
of the confederates to treat for the other, and the Rajah of Berar 
not having yet despatched any ambassador to the British camp, 
or manifested any inclination to conclude peace. 

The Governor-General in council entirely approved the conduct 
of Major-General Wellesley in refusing the proposed armistice to 
the Rajah of Berar, and in granting it to Scindiah. 

These transactions justificd an expectation of the dissolution 


390 BATTLE OF ARGAUM. CHAMPANEER REDUCED. 


of the confederacy between Dowlut Rao Scindiah and the Rajah 
of Berar, and of the conclusion of a separate peace with the 
former of those chieftains. A despatch, however, was received 
on the 23rd December, from the Hon. Major-General Wellesley, 
under date the 30th Nov., communicating the intelligence that, 
on the 29th of November, an action had taken place between 
the combined armies of the confederated chieftains and those of 
Major-General Wellesley and Colonel Stevenson, which had 
terminated in the total defeat of the enemy, with the loss of all 
their artillery, amounting to thirty-eight pieces of ordnance, with 
ammunition, baggage, &c. with the slaughter of great numbers of 
their troops. 

The annexed copy of Major-General Wellesley’s despatch of 
the 30th November, contains the detail of this signal victory, 
and of the insidious artifices by which Dowlut Rao Scindiah had 
evaded the first conditions of the armistice, and had united the 
remnant of his forces with those of the Rajah of Berar in a posi- 
tion close to Major-General Wellesley’s army; in consequence of 
which act of treachery, General Wellesley had given notice to 
Scindiah’s ambassadors, previously to the day of the action, that 
the armistice was inadmissible, and that the British army would 
act against both of the confederates without delay. 

The Governor-General in council is happy to find that this 
decisive success has been obtained with inconsiderable loss on 
our side. 

The Governor-General in council confidently trusts that the 
ultimate objects of the war will be more speedily and completely 
obtained, in consequence of this signal defeat of the combined 
armies of the confederates, than could have been expected even 
by the conclusion of a separate treaty of peace with Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah. 

In the despatch of the 31st October, the Governor-General in 
council communicated to your honourable Committee the intelli- 
gence of the occupation of the seaport of Baroach, and of its 
dependent territory, by the British troops under the command of 
Lieutenant-Colonel Woodington, on the 29th of August. After 
the capture of that place, Lieutenant-Colonel Woodington pro- 
ceeded to reduce the district of Champanccer, which was the only 
territory remaining to Scindiah in Guzzerat ; and subsequently 
attacked the fort of Powanghur, a strongly-fortificd hill, with the 
town of Champaneer attached, situated about twenty-five miles 
east of Brodera, on the western confines of the province of © 


CANDEISH REDUCED, DUDERNEG’S VIEWS ON DELHI, 391° 


Malwa. The town of Champaneer was attacked and carried by 
assault, with little loss on the part of the British troops; and the 
fort was summoned to surrender. The Killedar having refused 
to comply with the summons, preparations were immediately 
made for the attack of the fort, which was to have been stormed 
on the 17th of September, when the fort capitulated, and was 
immediately occupied by the British troops. This success was 
followed by the reduction of the district of Godra, a territory 
belonging to Scindiah, in the province of Malwa, and contiguous 
to the district of Champaneer. Colonel Murray, who commands 
the British forces stationed in Guzzerat, has since been employed 
in settling the revenues of the district of Godra. 

The capture of Boorhanpoor and Asseer-ghur was followed by 
the subjection of Scindiah’s territory in Candeish, of which Boor- 
hanpore is the capital; and that territory has for the present 
been delivered into the hands of the officers of his Highness the 
Soubahdar of the Deccan. 

These successes have completed the conquest of the whole of 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s territorial possessions situated in Guz- 
zerat and south of the Nerbudda. 

The Governor-General in council has now the honour to com- 
municate to your honourable Committee the progress of the 
military operations and political arrangements in Hindostan, 
under the direction of his Excellency the Commandecr-in-Chief, 
subsequently to the reduction of Agra on the 17th of October, 
of which event information was transmitted to your honourable 
Committee in the despatch of the Governor-General in council 
of the 31st of October. 

The British army marched from Agra on the 27th of October 
in pursuit of a force of the enemy, composed of fiftcen of Monsieur 
Perron’s regular battalions (which had been detached by Scin- 
diah from the Deccan, in the early part of the campaign, under 
the command of Monsicur Duderncg), and of two battalions 
which had effected their escape from Delhi after the battle of 
the 11th of September. During the siege of Agra, this force 
occupied a position about thirty miles in the rear of the British 
army, but made no attempt to interrupt the siege of that im- 
portant fortress. It appears that these battalions of the enemy 
were destined to proceed towards Delhi for the purpose of at- 
tempting the recovery of that important post; and the existence 
of so considerable a force of the enemy in Hindostan alarmed 
those native chicftains who were disposed to unite with the 


392 FORCED MARCH, AND BATTLE OF LASWAREE. 


British government, and encouraged all those who might be 
adverse to our interests. The destruction of this force, therefore, 
became an object of the utmost importance. 

On the 31st of October, the British” army made a march of 
twenty miles, and arrived and encamped at a short distance 
from the ground which the enemy had quitted the same morn- 
ing. Possessed of this intelligence, the Commander-in-Chief 
determined to make an effort to overtake the enemy with all the 
cavalry of the army, intending to delay the enemy by a light 
engagement until the British infantry should be able to effect a 
junction with the cavalry in advance, and if any confusion should 
be occasioned by this attack, to seize the enemy’s guns and 
baggage. With this view, the Commander-in-Chief, with the 
whole of the cavalry, marched at twelve o’clock, on the night of 
the 31st of October, and after a march of twenty-five miles, came 
up with the enemy at day-break, on the morning of the rst of 
November, notwithstanding the difficulties which are opposed by 
the climate of India to the rapid movements of European troops. 
The distance marched by the army under Gencral Lake, in the 
mornings of the 30th and 3ist of October, exceeded forty miles, 
making a total distance marched by the army in forty-cight 
hours upwards of sixty-five miles. Previously to the march of 
the British cavalry, orders were given for the infantry to march 
at three o'clock in the morning. . 

On the 1st of November, in the morning, when General Lake 
with the British cavalry overtook the enemy, the encmy appear- 
ing to be on his retreat, and in great confusion, the Commandcer- 
in-Chief was induced to try the effect of an attack with the 
cavalry alone, without awaiting the arrival of the infantry. The 
cavalry succeeded in breaking the enemy’s line, and in taking 
possession of some of the enemy’s guns; but the fire of the 
enemy’s numerous and well-served artillery rendered it necessary 
to withdraw the cavalry out of the reach of the guns until the 
British infantry could approach. The British cavalry accordingly 
retired in perfect order, retaining possession of part of the 
enemy’s artillery. 

On the arrival of the infantry, a general attack was made on 
the enemy, who, after a long and vigorous resistance, were 
completely defeated, with the loss of all their bazars, camp 
equipage and baggage, a considcrable number of clephants, 
camels and bullocks, seventy-two pieces of cannon, five thousand 
stand of arms thrown down on the field of battle, forty-four stands 


SUMMARY OF RESULTS OF THE CAMPAIGN, 393 


of colours, sixty-four tumbrils, completely laden with ammuni- 
tion, together with three tumbrils of money, fifty-seven carts 
laden with matchlocks, muskets, and stores, : Two thousand 
prisoners were taken and‘numbers slain. 

The resistance opposed by the enemy on this memorable 
occasion was more determined than any which the army under 
General Lake had experienced since the commencement of the 
campaign. 

The victory must principally be attributed to the admirable 
skill, judgment, heroic courage, and matchless activity of the 
Commander-in-Chief, whose magnanimous example, together 
with the recollection of his achievements at Coel, Alligurh, Delhi, 
and Agra, inspired general confidence and emulation. 

In the morning, General Lake led the charge of the cavalry, 
and in the afternoon conducted in person, at the head of his 
Majesty’s 76th regiment, all the different attacks of the encmy’s 
line. 

The Commander-in-Chief displayed not only the most reso- 
lute fortitude and ardent valour, but the utmost degree of 
professional ability and knowledge, availing himsclf with ad- 
mirable promptitude of every advantage presented by the 
enemy, and frustrating every effort of the enemy’s obstinacy 
and boldness. 

The Governor-General in council desires to offer to your 
honourable Committee his congratulations on this most splendid 
and important victory, which has completed the subversion of 
Scindiah’s hostile power and formidable resources in Hindostan. 

Your honourable Committce will contemplate, with sentiments 
of the highest admiration, the uncxampled rapidity and success 
of the British arms in every part of India since the commence- 
ment of hostilitics. 

From the 8th of August, the day on which hostilities com- 
menced, to the 29th of November, the date of the battle of 
Argaum in the Deccan, the British army has conquered all the 
possessions of Scindiah in Guzerat, the city of Boorhaunpoor in 
Candeish, together with all the territorial possessions of that 
chicftain situated to the southward of the Nerbuddah, the pro- 
vince of Cuttack in Orissa, the Mahratta dominions between 
the Jumna and the Ganges, the city of Delhi and the right bank 
of the Jumna, the city of Agra and the adjoining territory; has 
reduced by storm the fortificd town of Ahmednuggur, the forts 
of Allyghur, Baroach, and Cuttack, and by capitulation, after 


394 A SECURE PACIFICATION IN PROGRESS. 


having opened the batteries, the forts of Ahmednuggur, of Pow- 
anghur and Champaneer, the forts of Asseergurh and Agra, and 
has defeated the enemy in four general engagements—at Delhi, 
on the 11th of September ; at Assye, on the 23rd of September ; 
at Laswaree, on the ist of November; and on the plains of 
Argaum, on the 29th of November. 

The defeat of the formidable force of the enemy assembled at 
Laswaree, has tended in a considerable degree to promote the 
succéss of his Excellency the Commander-in-Chief’s negotiations 
with the chiefs and states of Hindostan. 

The Commander-in-Chief has accordingly made considerable 
progress in the various political arrangements connected with the 
exclusion of the Mahratta power from the Company’s frontier in 
Hindostan. 

The Commissioners appointed for the affairs of Cuttack have 
proceeded successfully in the settlement of that province, and 
have already realized a proportion of its revenucs. 

The progress of our military operations and political arrange- 
ments, down to the date of this despatch, connected with the war 
in which the British government is engaged, has been uniformly 
prosperous and successful in cvery quarter of India, and the 
speedy termination of hostilities may be expected to place the 
interests and security of the British empire in India on a basis of 
improved strength and power. 

We have the honour to be, &c. 
WELLESLEY, 
G. H. BARLOw. 
G, UDNY. 


52. Lieut.-General Lake to the Marquess Wellesley. 
Batile of Dethi. 


Head Quarters, Camp opposite Delhi, 
half-past Seven p.m. Sept. 11, 1803. 
[Received at Fort William, Sept. 23, 1803-] 
My Lord, 

I have the satisfaction to inform your Lordship, that after a 
march of eighteen miles this morning, I learnt that the enemy in 
great force under Mr. Louis, had crossed the Jumna from Delhi, 
with the‘intention of attacking us. 

When we had encamped, we found our outposts were attacked 
by a body of the enemy. On reconnoitring to our front, I found 


pos 
a 


=4 


Route of te OS 
Brituh Eaxolry 
an ported of te 
fingetes 


os 


— 


ol the Batlle of 


DELAY, 
Fought on the I September IS03, 
by the brantAreny aniler the command ef his £ 
GENERAL GERAUD LAKE 
enka devotion of Monsieur Perrens Troops 
Under the Command of, 
Mensieur Lows Rerguein.. 


Lf 2g 


HOT FIRE OF ENEMY’S GUNS. COOLNESS OF OUR MEN.° 395 


that the enemy’s whole army were drawn up in order of battle, I 
immediately ordered out the whole line, and advanced to attack 
them in front. 

The enemy opposed to us a tremendous fire from a numerous 
artillery, which was uncommonly well served, and caused us con- 
siderable loss in officers and men, but I have the satisfaction to 
add, that our advance under a most heavy cannonade, and actual 
charge of the enemy, at about one hundred paces distant, caused 
a most precipitate retreat, and left in our possession the whole of 
their artillery. 

The cavalry pursued the fugitives to the Jumna, making great 
havock, and numbers were drowned in attempting to cross. 

In short, I have only to express my entire approbation of the 
gallantry of the troops under my command during the whole of 
this most brilliant action, and shall have the honour to detail 
it more particularly to-morrow, which the lateness of the hour 
prevents me doing at present. 

The whole army was under arms from three this morning till 


this moment. 
I have the honour to be, my Lord, 


‘ Your Lordship’s 
Most faithful humble servant, 
G. LAKE. 


53, Lieut.-General Lake to the Marquess Wellesley. 
Battla of Dethi. Reasons for advance thither. 


My Lord, September rath, 1803. 
It is with the most heartfelt satisfaction that I now congra- 
tulate you upon the attainment of your wishes. The action of 
yesterday was so decisive and proved our superiority so com- 
pletely, that I have not a doubt all the chicftains will come in 
to our standard. Louis having plundered Delhi with the few 
troops he had left, and taken himself and all his vagabonds off 
this morning, will I trust, destroy all confidence in Frenchmen. 
Where he is gone I know not, but I rather belicve towards Agra. 
I imagine that the few men he has with him will go to their own 
homes. I really do think the business was one of the most 
gallant actions possible; such a fire of cannon has seldom been 
secn if ever, against which our men marched up within one 
hundred yards without taking a firclock from off their shoulders, 
when they gave one volley, charged instantly and drove the 


’ 


396 IMPORTANCE OF MARCHING AT ONCE ON DELHI. ‘ 


enemy; then they opened ranks and let the cavalry through, 
who did their duty in the most gallant and judicious manner 
possible; indeed their conduct was remarkable throughout the 
day. From having detached so large a body of troops to the 
ceded provinces, we were yesterday most considerably out- 
numbered, but his Majesty's 76th regiment did set such an 
example that could not fail of inspiring every creature with zeal, 
energy, and spirit. I do not think there could have been a 
more glorious day, but as I may be thought partial, I will say 
no more, but leave it to others to relate the fact, exaggerate 
I think they cannot. 

Now my dear Lord, I hope you will agree with me that the 
destruction of Perron’s troops and power was the first object. 
Added to which, allow me to state my reasons for coming on to 
Delhi, which were as follow—I had certain information that 
Louis was making all the use possible of the King’s name, and 
of his royal prerogative, and I thought it most probable that 
many persons with the concealed design of taking advantage of 
the present times, but absolutely in obedience to the King’s 
mandate, might either join Louis or spread over the Company’s 
provinces for the sake of plunder. Another reason for coming 
to Delhi, was considering the character of Mr. Louis more active, 
and perhaps more zealous than Mr, Perron, and considering also 
his personal connection with the Seiks, I was decidedly of 
opinion, that the crushing of these political intrigues, and the 
subversion of his French connection were primary objects, and 
that nothing would be so likely to accomplish the above objects 
as the sudden appearance of the army at the capital of Delhi, 
and I am happy to say, that my conjectures were not ill-founded, 
as is clearly proved by the flight of Mr. Louis, the departure of 
the Seiks, and the strong desire of his Majesty for our troops to 
march into Delhi that he may be placed undcr our protection. 
The army will pass the moment the boats come from the other 
side. Another consideration was, that if the enemy were active, 
vigorous, and enterprising, our provinces are much at his mercy; 
-the movement of my army to Agra might save the lower part of 
the Doab, but the upper part, together with Rohilcund, would 
have been exposed to the depredations of Louis’s detachment, 
and as he possessed Saharunpore, and probably expected co- 
operation from the Rohillas, he would probably have overrun 
Rohilcund with greater facility than Perron could carry his 
depredations to any considerable extent. 


POPULAR VENGEANCE ON DEFEATED FRENCH CORPS. 397 


It so happens that from all I can learn, and by a letter just 
received from Mr, Leycester, I do not believe at this moment 
any commotion is likcly to take place, particularly after the 
event of yesterday. I shall most undoubtedly see the King of 
Delhi this night or to-morrow morning, when I understand he 
intends going through the form of delivering the country over 
to the British Government. Your Lordship may depend upon 
my attending to your instructions respecting his Majesty. Mr. 
Mercer is not yet arrived, but I imagine soon will, as by a letter 
this day received from him, his negotiation seems in a most 
forward state. 

I have this moment learnt, that the remaining part of Louis's 
army have dispersed in different directions, and that the coun- 
try people are so enraged at their plundering them, that they 
have retaliated by plundering them since they have separated, 
and killed a great many of them. 

I cannot, my dear Lord, avoid saying in the most confidential 
way that, in the event of a foreign foe coming into this country, 
without a very great addition of force in Europeans, the con- 
sequences will be fatal, as there ought always to be one Euro- 
pean battalion to four native ones, this at least I think necessary. 
I have scen a great deal of these people lately, and am quite 
convinced without King’s troops very little is to be expected, 
in short the infantry of this army as well as cavalry should be 
new modelled, as I will convince your Lordship when I am so 
fortunate as to conduct you to Delhi, which I sincerely hope 
will be very shortly. Iam not clear which way I shall move 
next, but rather think it may be toward Agra, which place must 
fall upon our approach, I apprehend the Sciks if assured of our 
not interfering with their government, will enter into a treaty of 
amity with us, and would ensure the capture of the fort called 
Hansi, late George Thomas’s, provided we would promise to 
destroy it, which in my opinion would be a good thing; I 
believe at present there are a great many of Perron’s guns in it, 
which might be got by this means, and which I shall endeavour 
to do without trouble or difficulty. 

I trust all your endeavours will be crowned with success, and 
remain, 

My dear Lord, 


Your faithful and attached servant, 
G. LAKE, 


398 STATISTICS OF THE BATTLE OF DELHI. 


54, Lieut.-General Lake to the Marquess Wellesley. 
Statistics of the Battle of Dethi. 


Head Quarters, Camp, near Delhy Ghaut, Sept. 13th, 1803. 
[Received at Fort William, Sept. 25th, 1803.] 
My Lord, 

For your Lordship’s information, I have the honour to enclose 
a list of the killed and wounded, officers and men, of the army 
under my command, in the action of the 11th instant. 

Your Lordship will perceive that our loss has been very great; 
but when I consider that we moved on against an immense 
artillery, of nearly one hundred pieces of cannon, and many of 
a very large calibre, under as heavy a fire as I have ever been 
witness to; and that this fire was directed against a line, con- 
sisting, on the most correct calculation, of not more than four 
thousand five hundred men, including cavalry, artillery and 
infantry; and that we were opposed by upwards of four times 
that number; it is no longer a matter of surprize. 

It is necessary to remark, that we had only one brigade of 
cavalry, consisting of the 27th light dragoons, and the ad and 
3d regiments of native cavalry; the other brigades being de- 
tached for the protection of our own provinces. 

The more I reflect on the glorious affair of the 11th, the 
more forcibly I feel the bravery and intrepidity displayed by 
every individual composing my army. I cannot find words to 
express my feelings on this occasion, nor can I sufficiently 
lament the loss of many brave fellows who have fallen. 

I have the honour to be, my Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most faithful humble servant, 
G,. LAKE, 


55. Lieut.-General Lake to the Marquess Wellesley. 


Military réquirements in the conquest territory, 
Delhi, Sept. 17th, 1803. 
My Lord, 

Yesterday was passed according to the usual forms in waiting 
upon the King, making and receiving presents from his Majesty, 
when every thing was properly conducted on both sides. 

The crossing our troops is a most tedious operation from the 
scarcity of boats, and will prevent my moving towards Agra 


A LARGE FORCE REQUIRED TO SECURE CONQUESTS. 399 


before the 22d instant, on which day, or the day after, I shall 
hope to begin my march, and when that fort is taken I shall 
have little to do but to settle the country, at present of course 
we must adjust some little disorders in different parts; how- 
ever, they are so trifling that they are easily checked. 

The want of rain must make the collections very uncertain, 
and if we have not some, the consequences will be fatal, as a 
famine is to be apprehended. 

I have engaged some irregular force this day under some 
Sirdars lately in the service of Perron; two of them are of 
high character in that line, and I believe to be depended upon, 
at least as much if not more than any we can get. The state 
of the case my dear Lord is, the immense tract of territory we 
have gained requires a great, I may say, a very great force to 
kcep, and at this time it must be supposed thcre are numbers of 
people that will avail themsclves of the unsettled state of the 
country to sow dissensions, and endcavour either to throw the 
country into confusion, or take possession of land and property 
of others, besides various reasons they may have for committing 
depredations, such as a dislike to any change of government, or 
old jealousies and animosities towards their neighbours. All 
these considerations render a very large force necessary, and 
as from my little army it is impossible for me to detach any 
more into the interior of the now acquired part of the Doab, it 
becomes necessary to arrange matters for the protection and 
tranquillity of it, and I see at present no substitute for supplying 
the place of our troops, but having that description of pcople 
which are most likely to keep the people in order. You may 
depend upon it I will not have one man more than is necessary. 

The rapidity of our march and loss in action, will with 
wounded and sick have weakened my army very considcrably, 
many of which cannot be replaced, and those men that are to 
be got in this country, Scpoys I mean, will require time to be 
made soldicrs. I really think when peace is restored, and we 
have nothing to think of but internal arrangements that our 
army is not by any means equal to the number of posts that 
ought to be occupicd to prevent depredations, which we are 
always liable to and which must be guarded against, 

After this is done, there ought always to be a disposable 
force, and I would have that respectable and not very small ; 
if your Lordship comes to see your new territories, which 
I sincerely hope you will, I am convinced you will see the 


400 REGULAR TROOPS ONLY ADEQUATE TO THE SERVICR. 


necessity of always keeping a very large army upon this frontier. 
I entreat your Lordship if possible, to come up this season ‘if all. 
is quiet enough to allow you to leave Calcutta. I perceive by 
the letter from the Court of Directors, that they still incline to 
reduce two regiments of native cavalry, when in my opinion 
they ought to raise several more, they also talk of one regiment 
of European cavalry for Bengal, in my opinion, two az the least 
is necessary, and my firm opinion is, that five regiments of 
English infantry is necessary in the Bengal army, and those 
kept complete; I have seen the good effects of the King’s 
troops, and am most thoroughly convinced that without a large 
proportion of them in this army, our possessions in this country 
cannot be secure. 

When I have a little leisure, I will if your Lordship chooses 
it, write an official letter upon the subject, though perhaps it 
may be better to delay it till I can exactly ascertain the number 
of points we ought to have posts at. 

I think we can have but little dependance in the Sebundy 
corps; here and there from the exertion of a particular man 
commanding them they will exert themselves, but in general I 
fear they imagine themselves stationary, get into habits of their 
own, and get connected too much with the inhabitants; but 
although I have said thus much, I should be sorry if any 
alteration took place respecting these corps till I can have some 
private conversation with your Lordship. I think it is possible 
the new plan of your Lordship in forming provincial battalions 
may prove much more useful from being under martial Taw, 
but the same objection still exists in the men becoming too 
intimately connected with the natives of that country in which 
they are raised. 

I suspect nothing but regular battalions will answer the 
purpose of keeping the country in order, and they, as I told 
you in a former letter, require much alteration in their system 
which is radically bad. 

T imagine Agra will cause us but little trouble, and if I dared 
to divide my army, it would not be necessary for me to go 
there, but I have so many reasons which I shall not commit to 
paper, but keep them for your private ear, for being with them 
that I am determined not to separate them. 

The army, I am happy to say, are in high spirits, and I flatter 
myself ready to do anything Task of them. Their good humour, 
patience, arid readiness to obey any orders of mince is delightful 


af 


GENERAL WELLESLEY ATTACKS WITHOUT STEVENSON. 401 


and most satisfactory, and gives me the greatest confidence in 
‘ them. 

I hear Monson is going on well, he is a most excellent man 
and incomparable officer. I cannot express how much I admire 
his conduct at Alighur. 

If we could get hold of those brigands from the Deccan, not 
‘a Frenchman would be left in the country. 

Believe me, my dear Lord, 
? With real attachment most truly yours, 
G. LAKE. 

I forgot to say, that I looked upon the strong fort at Hansi to: 
be ours, as there are very few persons in it, and the person who 
commands has sent to say, he will give it up to me if I can send 
troops, which will be difficult, he therefore will keep it, as the 
people he has in it are entirely his, 


56. The Hon. Major-General Wellesley to the Marquess 
Wellesley. 
F Battle of Assye. 
Camp at Assye, Sept. 24, 1803. 
[Received Oct. 30, 1803.] 
My Lord, e 

I was joined by Major Hill with the last of the convoys 
expected from the river Kistna on the 18th, and on the 20th 
was enabled to move forward towards the enemy, who had been 
joined in the course of the last seven or eight days by the 
infantry under Coloncl Pohlman, by that belonging to Begum 
Sumroo, and by another brigade of infantry, the name of whose 
commandcr I have not ascertained. The enemy’s army was col, 
lected about Bokerdun, and between that place and Jafficrabad. 

I was near Colonel Stevenson’s corps on the 21st, and had a 
conference with that officer, in which we concerted a plan to 
attack the cnemy’s army with the divisions under our command 
on the 24th in the morning, and we marched on the 22nd, 
Colonel Stevenson by the western route, and I by the eastern 
route round the hills between Budnapoor and Jalna. 

On the 23rd I arrived at Naulniah, and there received a 
report that Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar had moved off in 
the morning with their cavalry, and that the infantry were about 
to follow, but were still in camp at the distance of about six 
miles from the ground on which I had intended to encamp, 


dd 


402 DESCRIPTION OF THE RATTLE. 


It was obvious that the attack was no longer to be delayed ; and 
having provided for the security of my baggage and stores at 
Naulniah, I marched on to attack the enemy. 

I found the whole combined army of Scindiah and the Rajah 
of Berar encamped on the bank of the Kaitna river, nearly on 
the ground which I had been informed that they occupied. 
Their right, which consisted entirely of cavalry, was about 
Bokerdun, and extended to their corps of infantry, which were 
encamped in the neighbourhood of Assye. Although I came 
first in front of their right, I determined to attack their left; 
as the defeat of their corps of infantry was most likely to be 
effectual; accordingly I marched round to their left flank, 
covering the march of the column of infantry by the British 
cavalry in the rear, and by the Mahratta and Mysore cavalry 
on the right flank. 

We passed the river Kaitna at a ford beyond the enemy’s 
left flank, and I formed the infantry immediately in two lines, 
with the British cavalry as a reserve in a third, in an open space 
between that river and a nullah running parallel to it. The 
Mahratta and Mysore cavalry occupied the ground beyond the 
Kaitna on our left flank, and kept in check a large body of the 
enemy’s cavalry which had followed our march from the right of 
their own position. 

The enemy had altered the position of their infantry previous 
to our attack ; it was no longer, as at first, along the Kaitna ; 
but extended from that river across to the village of Assye upon 
the nullah, which was upon our right. We attacked them 
immediately, and the troops advanced under a very hot fire 
from cannon, the execution of which was terrible. The picqucts 
of the infantry, and the 74th regiment, which were on the right 
of the first and second lines, suffered particularly from the fire 
of the guns on the left of the enemy’s position near Assye. 
The enemy’s cavalry also made an attempt to charge the 74th 
regiment at the moment when they were most exposed to this 
fire, but they were cut up by the British cavalry, which moved 
on at that moment. At length the enemy’s line gave way in all 
directions, and the British cavalry cut in among their broken 
infantry; but some of their corps went off in good order, and a 
fire was kept up on our troops from many of the guns from 
which the enemy had been first driven, by individuals who had 
been passed by the line under the supposition that they were 
dead. 


COMPLETE BUT DEARLY BOUGHT VICTORY. 403 


Lieut.-Colonel Maxwell, with the British cavalry, charged one 
large body of infantry, which had retired, and was formed again, 
in which operation he was killed ; and some time elapsed before 
we could put an end to the straggling fire, which was kept up 
by individuals from the guns from which the enemy were driven. 
The enemy’s cavalry also, which had been hovering round us 
throughout the action, was still near us. At length, when the 
last formed body of infantry gave way, the whole went off, and 
left in our hands ninety pieces of cannon. 

This victory, which was certainly complete, has, however, cost 
us dear. Your Excellency will perceive by the inclosed return, 
that our loss in officers and men has been very great; and in 
that of Lieut.-Colonel Maxwell and other officers, whose names 
are therein included, greatly to be regretted. 

I cannot write in too strong terms of the conduct of the 
troops; they advanced in the best order, and with the greatest 
steadiness, under a most destructive fire, against a body of 
infantry far supcrior in numbers, who appeared determined to 
contend with them to the last, and who were driven from their 
guns only by the bayonet; and notwithstanding the numbers 
of the enemy’s cavalry, and the repeated demonstrations they 
made of an intention to charge, they were kept at a distance by 
our infantry. 

I am particularly indebted to Lieut~Colonel Harness, and 
Lieut.-Colonel Wallace, for the manner in which they conducted 
their brigades; and to all the officers of the staff for the 
assistance I received from them. The officers commanding 
brigades, nearly all those of the staff, and the mounted officers 
of the infantry had their horses shot under them. 

I have also to draw your Excellency’s notice to the conduct 
of the cavalry commanded by Lieut.-Colonel Maxwell, par- 
ticularly that of the 19th dragoons. 

The cnemy are gone off towards the Adjuntee Ghaut, and 
I propose to follow them as soon as I can place my captured 
guns and the wounded in security. 

I have the honour to be, my Lord, 
with the greatest respect, 
your Excellency’s most obedient, 
and faithful humble servant, 
ARTHUR WELLESLEY. 

Colonel Stevenson arrived this morning at Bokerdun, and 

I imagine that he will be here this evening. 
bd 2 


404 LAKE ATTACKS, WITH THE CAVALRY ONLY. 


57. Lieut.-General Lake to the Marquess Wellesley. 
Battle of Lasswary. 


Head Quarters, Camp near Lasswary, Nov. 2, 1803. 
[Received Nov. 15, 1803.] 
My Lord, 

In my despatch of yesterday’s date, I did myself the honour 
to state for your Lordship’s information, some particulars of the 
march of the army from Agra to the camp it now occupies, 
together with the general result of the action which took place 
yesterday. JI now have the honour to send your Excellency a 
more detailed account of that affair. 

After a forced march of twenty-five miles, which was performed 
by the cavalry in a little more than six hours, I came up with 
the enemy, who appeared to be upon their retreat, and in such 
confusion, that I was tempted to try the effect of an attack upon 
him with the cavalry alone. By cutting the embankment of a 
large reservoir of water, the enemy had rendered the road very 
difficult to pass, which caused a considerable delay in the ad- 
vance of the cavalry; of this the enemy had availed himsclf to 
take an advantageous post, having his right upon a rivulet, 
which we had to cross, and his left upon the village of Lasswary ; 
the whole of his front was amply provided with artillery. I was 
prevented from discovering this change in the situation of the 
enemy by the quantity of dust which, when once clear of the 
water, totally obscured him from our sight; I therefore pro- 
ceeded in the execution of my design, by which I hoped to pre- 
vent his retreat into the hills, and secure his guns; directing the 
advanced guard and first brigade commanded by Colonel Van- 
deleur, upon the point where I had observed the enemy in motion, 
but which proved to be the left of his new position; the re- 
mainder of the gavalry I ordered to attack in succession, as soon 
as they could form after passing the rivulet. 

The charge of the advanced guard under Major Griffiths, and 
that of the first brigade led by Colonel Vandcleur, was made 
with much gallantry; the enemy’s line was forced, and the 
cavalry penetrated into the village ; they still, however, continued 
to be exposed to a most galling fire of cannon and musketry, 
which, as it was impossible under such circumstances to form 
the squadrons for a fresh attack, determined me to withdraw 
them. The guns which had fallen into our hands could not be 
brought away from the want of bullocks. In this charge Colonel 


INFANTRY COME UP, AND BATTLE RENEWED. 405 


Vandeleur fell, mortally wounded ; in him the service has lost a 
most valuable officer. 

The attacks of the other brigades were conducted with the 
same spirit, but after taking several of the enemy’s guns, being 
still fired upon without being able to discover the enemy, they 
retired in good order, retaining possession of a part of the ar- 
tillery. In the performance of this service, the third brigade, 
consisting of his Majesty’s 29th regiment, and the 4th regiment 
of native cavalry, under the command of that meritorious officer, 
Colonel Macan, met my entire approbation. 

The infantry having marched at three A.M. arrived upon the 
banks of the rivulct about eleven o’clock. After so long a march 
it was absolutely necessary to allow some time for the men to 
refresh themselves, during which time the enemy scnt in to say 
that if certain terms were allowed them, they were willing to 
surrender their guns. Anxious to prevent the further effusion of 
blood, I dirccted a letter to be written, acquiescing in their pro- 
posals, and allowing them an hour to decide; in the mean time 
the several columns for the attack were formed. The infantry 
formed in two columns upon the Ieft; the first, composed of the 
right wing under the command of Major-General Ware, was 
destined to gain the enemy’s right flank, which he had thrown 
back since the morning, Icaving a considcrable space between it 
and the rivulct, and to assault the village of Lasswary; the 
second, composed of the left wing, under Major-General St. John, 
was to support the first column. The third brigade of cavalry 
under Colonel Macan was to support the infantry; the second 
brigade under Licut.-Colonel Vandcleur was detached to the 
right, to be ready to take advantage of any confusion in the 
encmy’s line, and to attack him upon his retreat; the brigade 
under Colonel Gordon composed the reserve, and was formed 
between the second and third brigades. As many of the ficld 
pieccs as could be brought up, with the gallopers attached to the 
cavalry, formed four different batterics, 

At the expiration of the time which I had allowed the enemy 
to decide, I ordered the infantry to advance: as soon as they 
became exposed to the cnemy’s guns, the four batteries com- 
menccd their fire, and continued to advance, though opposed by 
a great superiority, both in number and weight of metal. 

When the 76th regiment, which headed the attack, had arrived 
at the point from which I intended to make the charge, they 
were so much exposed to the enemy’s fire, and losing men so 


406 STUBBORN CONTEST, AND GREAT SLAUGHTER. 


fast, that I judged it preferable to proceed to the attack with 
that regiment, and as many of the native infantry as had closed 
to the front, to losing time in waiting until the remainder of the 
column should be able to form, the march of which had been 
retarded by impediments in the advance. 

As soon as this handful of heroes were arrived within reach of 
the enemy’s canister shot, a most tremendous fire was opened 
upon them. The loss they sustained was very severe, and suffi- 
cient alone to prevent a regular advance; at this moment the 
enemy’s cavalry attempted to charge, but were repulsed by the 
fire of this gallant body; they, however, rallied at a short 
distance, and assumed so menacing a posture, that I thought it 
advisable to order them to be attacked by the cavalry; this 
service fell to the share of his Majesty’s 29th regiment, com- 
manded by Captain Wade, (Major Griffiths having at that instant 
been unfortunately killed by a cannon shot,) and was performed 
with the greatest gallantry, and in a manner which entitles 
Captain Wade, and every officer and soldier in the regiment 
to my warmest acknowledgments. The remainder of the first 
column of infantry arrived just in time to join in the attack of the 
enemy’s reserve, which was formed in the rear of his line, with 
its left upon the village of Lasswary, and its right thrown back. 

About this time Major-General Ware fell dead, his head being 
carried off by a cannon shot. He was a gallant officer, and one 
whose loss I deeply lament. On his death the command of this 
column devolved upon Colonel Macdonald, who, though wounded, 
continued to acquit himself in this important command very 
much to my satisfaction. 

The enemy opposed a vigorous resistance to the last, and it 
was not until he had lost his guns that he abandoned his post. 
Even then his left wing did not fly, but attempted to retreat in 
good order; in this, however, they were frustrated by his Majesty’s 
27th regiment, and the 6th regiment of native cavalry, under the 
command of Lieut.-Colonel Vandeleur, who broke in upon the 
column, cut several to pieces, and drove the rest in prisoners, with 
the whole of the baggage. 

Severe as the loss has been which we have sustained in the 
achievement of this complete victory, that of the encmy has been 
far greater. With the exception of upwards of 2,000, who have 
been taken prisoners, (of which number I have only detained the 
principal officers, amounting to forty-eight), I have reason to 
believe that very few escaped the general slaughter. 


ALL SCINDIAH’S FRENCH CORPS DESTROYED. 407 


It would be a violation of my feelings were I to close my 
despatch without bearing testimony to the gallant conduct of 
Major Macleod, and Captain Robertson, of his Majesty's 76th 
regiment, and of every officer and soldier of that inestimable 
corps, in the attack of the village of Lasswary. Major Gregory, 
too, at the head of the second battalion of the 1ath regiment of 
native infantry, in the same service, displayed a conduct highly 
meritorious. 

In the list of those officers who particularly distinguished 
themselves, I cannot omit the namcs of Lieut. Wallace, of his 
Majesty’s 27th regiment, who was entrusted with the com- 
mand of a battery of gallopers, nor that of Lieut. Dixon, of 
the 6th regiment of native cavalry, who was employed in the 
same service. 

The whole of my staff upon this, as upon every former 
occasion, are entitled to a large share of praise, and to my 
warmest gratitude. The zeal which they displayed upon this 
memorable day is too plainly proved by the enclosed returns 
of the killed and wounded. I have sustained a great loss by 
the death of Major William Campbell, the deputy quarter- 
Master-general, and by that of my aid-de-camp, Lieut. Duval, 
of his Majesty’s 19th Light Dragoons, who was a young man of 
great promise. 

Herewith I have the honour to enclose returns of the ordnance 
and colours which were captured upon this occasion. 

I have the honour to be, my Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most faithful, 
and humble servant, 
G. LAKE. 


PS. In the hurry which I wrote my despatch of yesterday's 
date, I fear I did not explain to your Lordship, that the encmy’s 
corps which we have defcated, comprised the whole of the fifteen 
regular battalions which had been sent from the Deccan under 
the command of Monsicur Duderncg, and two battalions of the 
same description which had escaped from Delhi. I therefore 
have the satisfaction of congratulating your Excellency upon the 
annihilation of the whole of the regular force in Scindiah’s service, 
commanded by French officers, GL 


408 GENERAL WELLESLEY A MAN OF BUSINESS. 


58. The Hon. Major-General Wellesley to the Marquess 
Wellesley. 


Battle of Argaum. 


Camp at Parterly, Nov. 30th, 1803. 
[Received Dec. 25th, 1803.] 
My Lord, 

Having found that the Rajah of Berar was moving towards 
his own territories, that the body of troops he had with him was 
but small, and decreasing in numbers daily, and not likely to do 
much mischief to the territories of the Soubah of the Deccan, I 
descended the Ghauts by Rajoora on the Sindpauna in order to 
support and cover Colonel Stevenson's operations against Gawil- 
ghur in Berar, 

Colonel Stevenson had equipped his corps at Asseer-Ghur for 
the siege of that fort, and had marched to Ballapore, where he 
was joined on the 24th by the Brinjarries, and other supplies 
which had been saved from the enemy by Captain Baynes’s affair 
at Amber; and he marched forward on the 26th. 

Your Excellency has been informed, that on the 23d I had 
consented to a suspension of hostilities with the troops of Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah, in this quarter and Guzerat. The condition on 
which this agreement depended, viz. that Scindiah should occupy 
a position twenty coss to the east of Elichpour had not been 
carried into execution ; and Scindiah was encamped at Sersooly,’ 
about four miles from the camp of Munnoo Bappoo, which was at 
this place. The army of the former consisted only of cavalry; that 
of the latter was cavalry, a great part, if not the whole of Ragojee 
Bhooslah’s regular infantry, and a large proportion of artillery. 

In the course of the 28th, the vakeels from Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah urgently pressed me not to attack these troops ; but 
I informed them repeatedly, that there was no suspension of 
arms with Ragojee Bhooslah; and none with Scindiah till he 
should comply with the terms of his agreement: and that I 
should certainly attack the enemies of the Company whcrever 
TI should find them. 

Colonel Stevenson’s division and mine both marched to this 
place yesterday; the Colonel having with great prudence and 
propriety halted on the 28th at Hattee Andorah, to enable me 
to co-operate in the attack of the enemy. We found on our 
arrival that the armies of both chiefs had decamped ; and I could 
perceive, from a tower in Parterly, a confused mass, about two 


face Page 409 


To 


> 


© 


ate 8 ¥% . Ee Y 
MAVOUY £0 ETL Te 20 TT 
. aa ; 


The Arrows mark the retreal ef the Enemy 


SPEEDY ROUT, AND VIGOROUS PURSUIT. 409 


miles beyond Sersooly and Scindiah’s old camp, which I con- 
cluded to be their armies in march. 

The troops had marched a great distance on a very hot day, 
and therefore I did not think it proper to pursue them, but 
- shortly after our arrival here, bodies of horse appeared in our 
front, with which the Mysore horse skirmished during a part of 
the day ; and when I went out to push forward the picquets of 
the infantry, to support the Mysore cavalry, and to take up the 
ground of our encampment, I could perceive distinctly a long 
line of infantry, cavalry, and artillery, regularly drawn up on 
the plains of Argaum, immediately in front of that village, and 
about six milcs from this place, at which I intended to encamp. 

Although late in the day, I immediately determined to attack 
this army. Accordingly I marched on in one column, the British 
cavalry leading, in a direction nearly parallel to that of the 
enemy’s line; covering the rcar and left by the Mogul and 
Mysore cavalry. 

The enemy’s infantry and guns were in the Icft of their centre, 
with a body of cavalry on their Icft. Scindiah’s army, consisting 
of one very heavy body of cavalry, was in the right, having upon 
its right a body of Pindaries and other light troops. Their line 
extended above five miles, having in their rear the village and 
extensive gardens and enclosurcs of Argaum, and in their front 
a plain, which however was much cut by water-courses, &c. &c. 

I formed the army in two lincs: the infantry in the first, the 
cavalry in the sccond, and supporting the right ; and the Mogul 
and Mysore cavalry the left, ncarly parallel to that of the enemy; 
with the right rather advanced to press upon the encmy’s left. 
Somce little time elapsed before the lines could be formed, owing 
to a part of the infantry of my division which led the column 
having got into some confusion, When formed, the whole 
advanced in the greatest order; the 74th and 78th regiments 
were attacked by a large body (supposed to be Pathéns) and 
all these were destroyed. Scindiah’s cavalry charged the ist 
battalion 6th regiment, which was on the Ieft of our line, and 
were repulsed ; and the whole line retired in disorder before our 
troops, Icaving in our hands thirty-eight pieces of cannon and all 
their ammunition. 

The British cavalry then pursued them for several miles, and 
destroyed great numbers, and took many elephants and camels, 
and much baggage. The Mogul and Mysore cavalry also 
pursued the fugitives, and did them great mischicf. Some of 


oe 


410 NIZAMS AND MYSORE CAVALRY BEHAVE WELL, 


the latter are still following them; and I have sent out this 
morning all of the Mysore, Mogul, and Mahratta cavalry, in 
order to secure as many advantages from this victory as can be 
gained, and complete the enemy’s confusion. 

For the reasons stated in the commencement of this letter, the 
action did not begin till late in the day, and, unfortunately, 
sufficient day-light did not remain to do all that I could have 
wished ; but the cavalry continued their pursuit by moon-light, 
and all the troops were under arms till a late hour in the night. 

T have the honour to enclose a return of our loss in this action. 
The troops conducted themselves with their usual bravery. The 
74th and 78th regiments had a particular opportunity of dis- 
tinguishing themselves, and have deserved and received my 
thanks. I am also much indebted to Colonel Stevenson, for 
the advice and assistance I received from him; tothe honourable 
Lieut.-Colonel St. Leger for the manner in which he led on the 
British cavalry; and to Lieut.-Coloncls Wallace, Adams (who 
commanded Lieut.-Colonel Harncss’s brigade, the latter being 
absent on account of severe indisposition), Haliburton, Macleane, 
Pogson, and Major Huddlestone, who commanded brigades of 
cavalry and infantry’; to Major Campbell commanding the 94th 
regiment ; to Captain Beauman commanding the artillery with 
the division under my immediate command ; to Captain Burke 
commanding the artillery with the subsidiary force ; and to the 
officers of the staff with my division, and belonging to the 
subsidiary force. 

I have also to inform your Excellency, that the Mogul cavalry 
under Salabut Khan, and the Mysore cavalry under Bistnapah 
Pundit, distinguished themselves, The former took a standard 
from Scindiah’s troops. 

The Mahratta cavalry were not engaged, as the person who 
went to them with orders, missed-his road. Amrut Rao was not 
in the action, as he had encamped some distance in my rear on 
the 28th, and he could not march the whole distance to Parterly 
yesterday morning ; but he sent for orders as soon as he heard 
that I intended to attack the enemy. 

I propose to march to-morrow towards Gawil-ghur, and I shall 
lose no time in attacking that place. 

T have the honour to be, my Lord, 
your Excellency’s most obedient 
and faithful humble servant, 
ARTHUR WELLESLEY. 


~ 


HOW THE WAR ORIGINATED, ft 


4. PACIFICATION AND RESULTS OF THE WAR. 


59. The Marquess Wellesley to the Honourable 
Major-General Wellesley. 


Occasion and results of the war, and consequent character of the 


pacification. 
Extract. 
(Secret and Official.) Fort William, Dec. 11, 1803. 


Sir, 

14. The just, necessary, and attainable conditions of peace will 
be clearly ascertained by examining the causes, objects, and 
result of the war, together with the situation of the enemy at 
the present time. 

15.The immediate cause of the war was the refusal of the 
confedcrates to separate and withdraw to their usual stations 
within their respective territories the armics which they had 
assembled and united on the frontier of our ally the Soubadar 
of the Deccan, after having declared that the intention of that 
junction was to decide, whether there should be peace or war 
with the British Government and its allies,) 

16. Under these circumstances the continuance of the con- 
federate army in the position which the chieftains appeared 
determined to maintain, was a manifest indication of a design to 
frustrate by hostilities, or by the terror of their arms, the opera- 
tion of the alliance concluded between the British Government 
and the Peishwa, and to disturb the tranquillity of the dominions 
of the Nizam, and ultimatcly of the Company. The union of 
the confederate forces and their commanding and menacing 
position, afforded every advantage to the chicftains in prosc- 
cuting the hostile design which they had manifested, and enabled 
the confederated chieftains to hold the issue of peace and war 
in their hands, and to arbitrate the fate of the Deccan according 
to their interests or caprice. 

17. At the same time the position and state of Scindiah’s 
forces, under the command of his French officers in Hindostan, 
and the machinations of M. Perron with the adjoining states and 
with the subjects of the Company, and of the Vizicr, manifested 
additional proofs of the hostile designs of the confederates, and 
furnished those chicftains with additional means of prosecuting 
such designs. - 

18, The primary object of the war originating in these causes, _ 
was to deprive the confederates of the means which they possessed 


412 MANIFOLD DANGER TO US OF SCINDIAH’S POWER. 


of prosecuting their unwarrantable designs, and the general plan 
of military operations, connected with a corresponding system 
of political arrangement, was calculated to preclude the con- 
federates from reviving the sources of that military and political 
power, which they had employed to disturb the security of our 
alliances, dependencies and dominions. 

19. The power of Dowlut Rao Scindiah considered with 
relation to his means of affecting the security of the British 
empire in India, may be described to have consisted at the com- 
mencement of the war in the following branches of military and 
political resource : 

First. The efficient state of Scindiah’s military establishment, 
under the direction of European officers, and particularly the 
formidable condition of his regular infantry and artillery under 
the command of those officers. 

Secondly. The possession of an extensive and rich territory 
and of various strong forts, magazines, founderies and arsenals, 
with considerable supplies of ammunition and military stores, 
deposited in convenient stations upon our frontier, contiguous to 
the most vulnerable part of the British dominions in Hindostan, 

Thirdly. The establishment of a large and well disciplined 
body of troops, with a formidable train of artillery, under the 
command of French officers within that territory in Hindostan. 

Fourthly. The actual assignment of that territory in Hin- 
dostan to the French officer holding the chicf command of those 
troops, 

Fifthly. The possession of the person of his Majesty Shah 
Aulum, under the immediate power of the forces commanded by 
French officers in the service of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, and the 
exercise of the nominal authority of the Moghul through those 
French officers. 

Sixthly. The ascendancy established by the agency of the 
French officer in command of Scindiah’s troops in the north- 
west of Hindostan over the Rajpoot chicftains of Jynagur and 
Jodepoor, and other states and chieftains in the northern and 
western provinces of Hindostan, and over many of the Scik 
chiefs and others, occupying the territory from the Jumna to the 
banks of the Indus, and the facility afforded by the advanced 
posts of M. Perron’s army towards the Indus of aiding the inva- 
sion of the British dominions through that quarter. 

Seventhly. The facility which the possession of the sca-port of 
Baroach afforded to Scindiah of improving his military establish- 


ESPECIALLY IN COMBINATION WITH THE FRENCH. 413 


ment, by the accession of French or other European officers, of 
military supplies and stores, &c. and even of a body of French or 
other European troops. 

« Eighthly. The power of disturbing the tranquillity of the 
possessions of the Guickowar, and of the Company in the pro- 
vince of Guzerat, by means of Scindiah’s intermixed territories 
and fortresses in that province, and by his claims and influence 
in that quarter. 

Ninthly. The power of disturbing the tranquillity of the state 
of Poonah, and the stability of our alliance with the Peishwa by 
Scindiah’s intermixed territories and fortresses in the vicinity of 
Poonah, and to the southward of the river Taptee, especially 
the fortress and territory of Ahmednuggur, and by Scindiah’s 
various ¢laims upon the state of Poonah, and by his influence at 
that court. 

Tenthly. Scindiah’s intermixed and bordering fortresses and 
possessions which enabled him to menace and disturb the 
dominions of the Soubadar of the Deccan, and to impair the 
efficiency of the British alliance with that prince, and Scindiah’s 
various claims upon the Soubadar of the Deccan, and consc- 

“quent influence at Hyderabad. 

Eleventhly. The general magnitude, wealth and strength of 
Scindiah’s dominions and army, and the reputation of his military 
power from which he derived a general influence and ascendancy 
at Poonah and over all the Mahratta states, and even at Hyder- 
abad, which influence and ascendancy had been uniformly directed 
to injure the British powcr. 

20. Under this view of the condition of Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s 
power at the commencement of this war, it was dangerous to the 
British empire : 

First. By the facilitics which it afforded to the French of 

injuring the British interests in India, cither in co-operation with 
Scindiah, or through the independent aid of his French and other 
European officers. ; 
’ Secondly. By maintaining against the British Government a 
rival and hostile influence throughout every native state in India, 
and especially amongst our most important dependents and allies 
on the western side of India. 

21, The danger arising from the condition of the Rajah of 
Berar’s power with reference to the same considerations, appeared 
to be at the commencement of the war : 

First. A military force greatly inferior to Scindiah’s, in point 


. 


414 RAJAH OF BERAR WAS DANGEROUS TO US. 


of discipline, numbers, and artillery, but furnishing a considerable 
accession to the general strength of the confederacy against the 
British Government. 

Secondly. The possession of an extensive territory and several 
strong forts, commanding the dominions of the Company and the 
Soubadar of the Deccan, in several vulnerable points. 

Thirdly. The possession of the province of Cuttack by which 
the Rajah of Berar was enabled to interrupt the communication 
between our northern and southern possessions, to facilitate the 
invasion of Bengal and of the northern Circars, and to obtain the 
aid of French, and other European officers, or troops, to be landed 
in the province of Cuttack. 

Fourthly. The intermixture of the Rajah of Berar’s posses- 
sions with those of the Soubadar of the Deccan, and his vexatious 
claims upon the Court of Hyderabad, and his consequent in- 
fluence at that court. 

Fifthly. The Rajah of Berar’s pretensions to the Government 
of Poonah, and the ascendancy and influence which he derives 
from his descent, connected with the general magnitude of his 
dominions and resources, with his supposed wealth, and with 
the hostile spirit which has been manifested by the state of Berar 
for many years in counteracting the interests of the British 
empire in India. 

22. It is not necessary to advert to the state of Holkar's 
power, as he has not hitherto been considered to be a party in 
the war. ‘ 

23. It would also be superfluous to enumcrate the special 
objects of the war, as they have been sufficiently described in the 
view which the preceding paragraphs contain of the condition of 
the enemy’s power at the commencement of the war. 

24. The progress of the war and the glorious success of our 
arms in Hindostan and the Deccan, in Guzerat, and Orissa, have 
actually accomplished every requisite object with respect to the 
reduction of Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s military and political power, 
have materially affected the Rajah of Berar, and have placed in 
our hands the means of establishing the security of the British 
interests against Dowlut Rao Scindiah, and the Rajah of Berar, 
on foundations, which appear to promise considerable duration. 

25. At the date of your last despatch, you could not have 
been apprized of the extent of Scindiah’s loss, and of our success 
against his power in every quarter in which it has been attacked. 
These considerations however must form the basis of the con- 


THESE DANGERS REMOVED BY THE WAR. 415 


ditions which we are empowered to require from Scindiah at the 
conclusion of peace. \ 
26. The French force under the immediate command of M7 
Perron in Hindostan has becn completely destroyed, nearly the 
whole force of Scindiah’s regular battalions in Hindostan, and 
the Deccan, has been destroyed or dispersed by the victories 
obtained under the personal command of his Excellency General 
Lake at Delhi on the 11th of September, and at Laswaree on 
the 1st of November, and under your personal command at 
Assye on the 23d of September, and nearly the whole of 
Scindiah’s artillery has been taken or destroyed. The greater 
part of Scindiah’s European officers is now placed under the 
protection of the British power. The territory formerly pos- 
sessed by Dowlut Rao Scindiah, in the Doab of the Jumna 
and Ganges, and assigned to M. Perron for the payment 
of the French force in Scindiah’s service has been subjected to 
our authority, Scindiah has lost the Forts of Delhi, Muttra and 
Agra, with the adjoining territory on the right bank of the 
Jumna, and a considerable sum of money (twenty-four lacs of 
rupees) taken in the Fort of Agra, and five lacs of rupees at 
Delhi, with further sums of money taken at Allyghur, and in 
other places, and immediately divided by the troops after the 
several actions. The person of his Majesty Shah Aulum and 
the royal family have been placed under the protection of the 
British power. Scindiah has been deprived of the mcans of 
availing himself of the connexion with the Sciks, with the 
Rajpoots and with all the chicfs and states in the north of 
Hindostan, and the alliance of several of those chieftains has 
been transferred to the British Government. Begum Sumroo 
has placed herself under the protection of the British Govern- 
ment, and has recalled her battalions in the Deccan from 
Scindiah’s service. From the state of the negotiation with 
Rajah Ambajce, at the date of our latest advices from his 
Excellency the Commander-in-Chief, it may be expected that 
Scindiah is now deprived of that portion of his territorial 
possessions in Hindostan, which was placed under the authority 
of Ambajce, and that Scindiah has altogether lost the support 
of Ambajee’s power. The sca-port of Baroach and its depen- 
dent territory, the Forts of Champancer and Powanghur, with 
the whole of Scindiah’s territory in the province of Guzerat, 
situated to the northward of Baroach, have been subjected to 
our authority. The district of Godra has been occupied by our 


416 WE MUST NOT ARUSE THE RIGHT OF CONQUEST. 


troops. The fort and territory of Ahmednuggur, with the city 
of Boorhanpore, and the Fort of Asseerghur, have also been 
subjected to the authority of the British Government, and the 
fort and district of Jalnapore, with other districts in the Deccan, 
have been occupied by the combined armies of the British 
Government, and the Soubadar of the Deccan. 

27. The loss sustained by the Rajah of Berar, must be 
considered separately in any negotiation with that chief. It 
is proper however to state that loss in this place, because it 
has diminished the power of Scindiah as a confederate against 
the British Government and our allies, in the further prosecution 
of the war. 

28. From the Rajah of Berar all the intermixed Mahratta 
territories within the frontier of the Company on the side of 
Midnapore, have been taken and annexed to the British dominions, 
and the valuable province of Cuttack has also been subdued, and 
nearly settled. The loss of Juggernaut must deeply affect the 
consideration of the Rajah of Berar in the cyes of all the native 
powers. It is also reasonable to suppose that the military force 
of the Rajah of Berar must have suffered considerably at the 
battle of Assye, and during his subsequent unsuccessful operations, 
until the period of his disgraceful retreat to his own territories, 

29. Under these circumstances the powcr and dominion of 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah must be considered to have suffered a 
degree of reduction nearly amounting to total ruin; and the 
Rajah of Berar with such reduction as he has suffered in his 
separate resources, appears to be at the mercy of the British 
Government for the remainder of his possessions, without any 
further hope (in the event of a continuance of the war) than 
that which he may found on the existing remnant of Scindiah’s 
power. 

* * * * # * # # % 

40. The restoration to Dowlut Rao Scindiah of any part of 
the territories conquered from that chieftain is therefore to be 
viewed as an act of mere concession, and liberal clemency on 
the part of the British Government, proceeding from those 
principles of moderation and prudence, which constitute the 
foundations of our policy in India. ; 

41. It would neither be just, humane, nor honourable to insist 
upon the reduction of Scindiah’s power to any extent unnecessary 
to secure the just objects of the war, together with the safety of 
the British power and its allies. The British Government will 


SECURITY, NOT VENGEANCE, OUR OBJECT. 417 


never deem any course of policy to be consistent with its wisdom 
and true interests, which is repugnant to the genuine dictates of 
justice, humanity and honour. 

42. My duty requires me to employ every effort to reduce the 
power of the enemy within the bounds prescribed by the security 
of the interests committed to my charge, but it would be equally 
injurious to the glory and power of this government to prosecute 
war for the purposes of vengeance, and to urge the fall of 
a conqucred enemy beyond the limits of our own safety and 
self-defence. 


60. Treaty of Deogaum. 


Treaty of Peace between the Honourable English East India 
Company and their Allies, on the one part, and Senah Saheb 
Soubah Ragojee Bhooslah, on the other, settled by Major- 
General Wellesley, on the part of the Honourable Company 
and their allies, and by Feswunt Rao Ramchunder, on the 
part of Senah Saheb Soubah Ragojce Bhooslah; who have 
each communicated to the other their full powers. 


ART. 1. There shall be perpetual peace and _ friendship 
between the honourable Company and their allies on the one 
part, and Senah Saheb Soubah Ragojee Bhooslah, on the other. 

ArT. 2. Senah Saheb Soubah Ragojee Bhooslah cedes to the 
honourable Company and their allics, in perpetual sovereignty, the 
province of Cuttack, including the port and district of Balasore. ” 

ART. 3. He likewise cedes to the honourable Company and 
their allics, in perpetual sovercignty, all the territories, of which 
he has collected the revenues, in participation with the Soubah- 
dar of the Deccan, and those of which he may have possession, 
which are to the westward of the river Wurdah. 

ArT. 4. It is agreed, that the frontier of Senah Saheb Soubah, 
towards the territorics of his Highness the Soubahdar of the 
Deccan, shall be formed, to the west, by the river Wurdah, from 
its issue from the Injardy hills, to its junction with the Goda- 
very. The hills on which are the forts of Nernallah and 
Gawulghur, are to be in the possession of Senah Saheb Soubah, 
and every thing south of thosc hills, and to the west of the river 
Wurdah is to belong to the British Government and their 
allies, 

ART. 5. Districts amounting to four lacs of rupees per annum, 

Ee 


418 TREATY OF PEACE WITH RAFAH OF BERAR, 


contiguous to, and to the south of the forts of: Nernallah and 
Gawulghur, are to be given over to Senah Saheb Soubah. 
Those districts are to be fixed upon by Major-General Wel- 
lesley, and delivered over to Senah Saheb Soubah at the same 
time with the forts. 

ART. 6. Senah Saheb Soubah, for himself, his heirs and 
successors, entirely renounces all claims of every description 
on the territories of the British Government and their allies, 
ceded by the 2d, 3d, and 4th Articles, and on all the territories 
of his Highness the Soubahdar of the Deccan. 

ART. 7. The honourable Company engage, that they will 
mediate and arbitrate according to the principles of justice, any 
disputes or differences that may now exist, or may hercafter 
arise, between the honourable Company's allies, Secunder Jah 
Bahaudur, his heirs and successors, and Rao Pundit Purdhaun, 
his heirs and successors respectively, and Senah Saheb Soubah. 

ArT. 8. Senah Saheb Soubah engages never to take or retain in 
his service, any Frenchman, or the subject of any other European 
or American power, the government of which may be at war 

ith the British Government; or any British subject, whether 

uropean or Indian, without the consent of the British Govern- 

ent. The honourable Company engage on their part, that they 
will not give aid or countenance to any discontented relations, 
Rajahs, Zemindars, or other subjects of Senah Sahcb Soubah, 
who may fly from, or rebel against, his authority. 

ART. 9. In order to secure and improve the relations of amity 
and. peace hereby established between the governments, it is 
agreed, ¢hat accredited ministers from cach shall reside at the 
court of the other, 

ART. 10, Certain treaties have been made by the British 
Government with feudatories of Senah Saheb Soubah. These 
treaties are to be confirmed. Lists of the persons with whom 
such treaties have been made, will be given to Senah Saheb 
Soubah, when this treaty will be ratified by his I:xcellency, the 
Governor-General in council. 

ArT. 11. Senah Saheb Soubah hereby renounces, for himself, 
his heirs and successors, all adherence to the confederacy formed 
by him and Dowlut Rao Scindiah, and other Mahratta chiefs, to 
attack the honourable Company and their allies. He engages 
not to assist those chiefs if the war with them should still 
continue. 

ART. 12, This treaty of peace is to be ratified by Senah Saheb 


TREATY OF PEACE WITH SCINDIAH. 419 


Soubah within eight days from this time, and the ratification is 
to be delivered to Major-General Wellesley; at which time the 
orders for the cession of the ceded territories are to be delivered 
and the troops are to withdraw. Major-General Wellesley 
engages that the treaty shall be ratified by his Excellency the 
most noble the Governor-General in Council, and that the rati- 
fication shall be delivered in two months from this date. 
ARTHUR WELLESLEY, Major-General. 
JESWUNT RAO RAMCHUNDER, on the part of 
SENAH SAHEB SOUBAH. 
Done in Camp at Deogaum, this 17th December 1803, answer- 
ing to the 2d Ramzaun 1213 Fusslce. 


61. Treaty of Surje Anjengaum. 


Treaty of Peace between the Honourable English East India 
Company and their Allies on the one part, and the Maharajah 
Ali Fah Dowlut Rao Scindiah on the other ; settled ty Major- 
General Wellesley on the part of the Honourable Company and 
their Allies, and by Ectul Mahadeo, Moonshee Kavel Nyn, 
Feswunt Rao Goorparah Ameer-ool-Omrah, and Naroo Hurry, 
on the part of the Maharajah Dowlut Rao Scindtah, who have 
each communicated to the other their full powers. 


ArT. 1. There shall be perpetual peace and friendship be- 
tween the honourable Company and their allies, on the one part, 
and the Maharajah Ali Jah Dowlut Rao Scindiah on the other, ~ 

ArT. 2, The Maharajah cedes to the honourable Company 
and their allies in perpctual sovercignty, all his forts, territories, 
and rights in the Doab or country situated between the Jumna 
and Ganges ; and all his forts, territories, rights and interests _ 
in the countries which are to the northward of those of the 
Rajahs of Jeypoor and Joudpoor and of the Ranah of Gohud ; 
of which territories, &c. a detailed list is given in the accompany- 
ing schedule. Such countries formerly in the possession of the 
Maharajah situated between Jeypoor and Joudpoor, and to the 
southward of the former, arc to belong to the Maharajah. 

ArT, 3. The Maharajah likewise cedes to the honourable 
Company and their allics in perpetual sovereignty, the fort of 
Baroach and territory depending thereon, and the fort of Ahmed- 
nuggur and territory depending thereon ; excepting those lands 
which it is agreed by Article 8th of this treaty, that the Maha- 
rajah is to retain. : 

Ec2 


420 SCINDIAH S CESSIONS. EXCEPTED DISTRICTS. 


ART. 4. The Maharajah likewise cedes to the honourable 
Company and their allies, all the territories which belonged to 
him previous to the breaking out of the war, which are situated 
to the southward of the hills, called the Adjuntce hills, including 
the fort and district of Jalnapore, the town and district of Ganda- 
pore, and all other districts between that range of hills and the 
river Godavery. 

ART. 5. The Maharajah Ali Jah Dowlut Rao Scindiah, for 
himself, his heirs and successors, hereby renounces all the claim 
to the forts, territories, rights and intcrests, ceded by the 2d, 3d, 
and 4th articles; and all claims of every description upon the 
British Government, and their allies the Soubahdar of the Deccan, 
the Peishwa, and Anund Rao Guikwar. 

ArT. 6. The fort of Asseerghur, the city of Boorhanpore, the 
forts of Powanghur and Dohud, and the territories in Candcish, 
and Guzerat, depending on these forts, shall be restored to the 
Maharajah Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 

Art. 7. Whereas the Maharajah Dowlut Rao Scindiah has 
represented that his family have long held in Enaum as a gift 
from the kings of Hindostan, the districts of Dhoolpoor-Baree, 
and Rajah-Kerrah, which are situated to the northward of the 
countries of the Rajahs of Jeypoor and Joudpoor, and of the 
Ranah of Gohud, and that lands in Hindostan, ceded by the ad 
Article of this treaty to the honourable Company and _ their 
allies, are held in Jaghire by persons of the family of the late 
Madhajee Scindiah, and others by principal Sirdars in his service, 
all of whom would suffer distress, if deprived of the advantages 
they enjoy in those countries: it is agreed, that the Maharajah 
shall continue to hold and enjoy in Enaum the lands of Dhool- 
poor-Baree, and Rajah-Kerrah; and that Bala Baye Sahib, and 
Munsoor Sahib, Moonshec Kavel Nyn, Boogajec Jamdah, 
Amrajee Jadhoo, and Wirdah Charice, shall continue to hold 
their lands in Jaghire, under the protection of the honourable 
Company : and further, in order that no individual may incur 
loss or suffer distress in consequence of this arrangement, it is 
agreed, that the honourable Company shall cither pay pensions, 
or grant lands in Jaghire, according to the option of the British 
Government, to certain other Sirdars and others to be named by 
the Maharajah, provided that the total amount of the sums paid, 
or Jaghires granted or held, does not excecd seventeen lacs of 
rupees per annum, including the annual value of the lands, 
which it is agreed by this Article that Bala Baye Sahib, Munsoor 


OUR TREATIES WITH HIS CHIEFS TO BE RATIFIED. 421. 


Sahib, Moonshee Kavel Nyn, Boogajce Jamdah, Amrajce Jadhoo, 
and Wirdah Charie, are to continue to hold; and provided that 
no troops in the service of the Maharajah are to be introduced \ 
into Dhoolpoor-Baree and Rajah-Kerrah, or the other lands held | 
in Jaghire, under the pretence of collecting the revenue, or any 
other pretence whatever. 

ArT. 8, Whereas the Maharajah Dowlut Rao Scindiah has 
represented that his family have long held in Enaum certain 
lands, villages, &c. in the territories of Rao Pundit Purdhaun, 
viz. Chomargoondee Pergunna, Jamgaum, Ranjingaum, half of 
Seo Gaum Pergunna, six villages in Umber Pergunna, five 
villages in Pytun Pergunna, five villages in Niwaz Pergunna, five 
villages in Kurla Pergunna, six villages in Poonah Pergunna, 
two villages in Wahy Pergunna, six villages in Patutood Per- 
gunna, five villages in Pandipeergaum Pergunna, five villages in 
Pagood Pergunna, two villages in Parnyra Pergunna, which have 
lately been taken possession of by the British Government and f 
their allics; it is agreed, that those lands and villages shall be { 
restored to him, provided that no troops shall ever be introduced 
into those lands and villages, under pretence of collecting the 
revenues, or any other pretence whatever. 

Art, g. Certain treatics have been made by the British 
Government with Rajahs and others heretofore feudatories of the 
Maharajah Ali Jah Dowlut Rao Scindiah. These treaties are to 
be confirmed, and the Maharajah hereby renounccs all claims ii 
upon the persons with whom such treaties have been made, and 
declares them to be independent of his government and authority, 
provided that none of the territories belonging to the Maharajah, 
situated to the southward of those of the Rajahs of Jeypoor and 
Joudpogr, and the Ranah of Gohud, of which the revenues have 
been collected by him or his Aumildars, or have been applicable 
as Surinjamcc to the payment of his troops, are granted away 
by such treaties, Lists of the persons with whom such treatics 
have been made will be given to the Maharajah Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah, when this treaty will be ratified by his Excellency the 
Governor-General. 

ART. 10. No person whatever is hereafter to be molested on 
account of the part which he may have taken in the present war. \ 
ART. 11, It is agreed that the rights of his Highness the 
Pcishwa to certain lands in Malwa, and elsewhere, shall be 
established as heretofore, and in case any difference should. 
arise respecting those rights, it is agreed that the honourable 


422 CLAUSES AS TO EMPEROR, FRENCH, AND ALLIANCE, 


Company shall mediate, arbitrate, and decide according to the 
principles of justice between his Highness and the Maharajah, 
and whatever shall be thus decided, will be agreed to by both 
parties, and will be carricd into execution. 

ArT. 12. The Maharajah Dowlut Rao Scindiah hereby re- 
nounces all claims upon his Majesty Shah Alum, and engages 
on his part to interfere no further in the affairs of his Majesty. 

ART. 13. The Maharajah Ali Jah Dowlut Rao Scindiah 
engages never to take or retain in his service any Frenchman, 
or the subject of any other European or American power, the 
Government of which may be at war with the British Govern- 
ment; or any British subject, whether European or native of 
India, without the consent of the British Government. 

ART. 14. In order to secure and improve the relations of 
amity and peace hereby established between the Governments, 
it is agreed, that accredited ministers from each shall reside at 
the court of the other. 

ArT. 15. The honourable Company being bound by treaties 
of gencral defensive alliance with his Highness the Soubahdar 
of the Deccan, and his Highness Rao Pundit Purdhaun, to 
which the Maharajah Ali Jah Dowlut Rao Scindiah is desirous 
of acceding, he is to be admitted to the benefits thereof; and 
the honourable Company, with a view to the future security of 
the Maharajah’s territories, engage in the event of his agreeing 
to the treaty above-mentioned, in two months to furnish him 
with a force consisting of six battalions of infantry, with their 
complement of ordnance and artillery, and usual equipments 
of Military stores, &c. and the expense of this force is to be 
defrayed out of the revenucs of the lands ceded by the 2d, 3d, 
and 4th Articles. But it is agreed, that in casc it should suit 
the interests of the Maharajah’s Government to decline to enter 
into the treaty above-mentioned, such refusal shall not affect 
any of the stipulations of this treaty of peace, which are in every 
respect to be binding on the contracting partics, their heirs and 
successors. 

ART. 16. This treaty is to be ratified by the Maharajah 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah in eight days from this time, and the 
ratification is to be delivered to Major-Gencral Wellesley. 

Major-Gencral Wellesley engages that it shall be ratified by 
his Excellency the most noble the Governor-General in Council, 
and the ratifications shall be delivered to the Maharajah in three 
months, or sooner, if possible. 


QUESTIONS ARISING AS TO PARTITION OF CONQUESTS. 423 


The orders for the cession of the territories shall be delivered 
to Major-Gencral Wellesley at the same time with the ratifica- 
tion of the treaty of peace; but the forts of Asscerghur, Pow- 
anghur, and Dohud, are not to be delivered up, till accounts 
will have been received that the territories ceded, have been 
evacuated by the Maharajah’s officers and troops. 

ARTHUR WELLESLEY, 
° EETUL MAHADEO, 
KAVEL Nyn, 
JESWUNT RAo GOORPARAH, 
NaAroo HurRRY. 
Done in Camp at Surje Anjengaum, this 30th of December 
_1803, answering to the 15th Ramzaun 1213 Fusslee. 


o 


62. The Marquess Wellesley to the Honourable the Secret 
Committee of the Honourable the Court of Directors. 


Partition of Mahratta Conquests. 


Fort William, June 10, 1804. 


Honourable Sirs, 
At the earlicst practicable period of time, after the conclusion 


of peace with the confedcrated Mahratta chieftains, the attention 
of the Governor-General in Council was directed to the impor- 
tant object of establishing the general principle which should 
regulate the partition of our late acquisitions (under the treaties 
of peace with Dowlut Rao Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar,) 
between the British Government and its allics, and of applying 
that principle to the circumstances of those states which were 
to be considered as allics in the war, and the Governor-General 
in Council now deems it his duty to communicate to your 
honourable Committee the sentiments and resolutions of the 
Governor-General in Council on that important subject. 

With a view to determine and to apply the principle of 
partition of conquests, it was necessary to decide, istly, what 
states of India should be considered as the allies of the British 
Government in the late war; 2dly, what states possessed a 
positive right to participate in our conquests; and 3dly, whether 
it was expedient to admit the participation of any of the allies, 
who might not be considered to possess a positive right to 
participate in our conquests, and to what extent the admission 
of such participation might be decmed politic and just. 


424 PEISHWA AND NIZAM, OUR ONLY PROPER ALLIES. 


The Governor-General in Council was decidedly of opinion 
that the only states which could properly be considered as allies 
of the British Government in the late war were those of the 
Peishwa, and the Soubahdar of the Deccan. The nature of the 
relations and the engagements subsisting between the British 
Government and the states of Mysore and of the Guickwar (the 
troops of which, particularly of the former, were employed in 
the prosecution of the war) is not such as to place them in the 
condition of the allies designated by the treaty of peace with 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar, nor was it pro- 
bable that the governments of either of those states entertained 
any expectation of benefiting by the result of the war in any 
other manner than by acquiring an additional degrce of security 
in the peaccable enjoyment of their respective rights and 
possessions, ‘ 

The Governor-General in Council, however, was decidedly 
of opinion that noné of the states of India claiming to be 
allies of the British Government, could justly found a right 
to participate in the conquests of the war, merely on the 
declaration contained in the treaties of peace, that the cessions 
were made generally in favour of the British Government and 
its allies. 

This declaration was introduccd into the treatics of peace 
with reference, first, to the engagements actually subsisting 
between the British Government and the Soubahdar of the 
Deccan, by which that Prince is entitled, under certain con- 
siderations, to participate equally with the British Government 
in the conquests of joint war. 2dly. To the declared intention 
of the Governor-General to admit the Pcishwa also to a par- 
ticipation in the conquests of the late war, in such a proportion 
and in such a manner as should appear to be expedient on 
the conclusion of a general peace. That declaration was not 
intended to convey to any of the allics any right of participation 
which they did not possess on other grounds. 

If a contrary principle were admitted, a right of equal par- 
ticipation on the part of the allies could not justly be denicd, 
and that right must have been recognized independently of the 
conduct of the allies during the war, and with respect to the 
Soubahdar of the Deccan, independently of his fulfilment of 
those conditions, on which alone his right of equal participation 
is stipulated by positive treaty to depend. This could not 
be supposed to have been in the contemplation of cither 


NIZAM’S RIGHT TO SHARE CONQUESTS CONDITIONAL. 425 


of the contracting parties at the conclusion of the treaties of 
peace. 

The states of Hyderabad and Poonah, therefore, being the 
only states which could be considered as allies of the British 
Government in the late war, it became necessary to determine 
whether either or both of those states possessed a right to par- 
ticipate in our conquests; and under the defect of right, whether 
either or both those states should be admitted, on principles 
of expediency and policy, to a participation. 

By the 3d of the secret and separate articles of the treaty 
of Hyderabad concluded in October 1800, his Highness the 
Soubahdar of the Deccan is entitled to participate equally with 
the British Government in the conquests of joint war on certain 
conditions. With a view, therefore, to determine whether his 
Highness possessed a right to participate in the conquests of 
the late war, it was necessary to examine in what degree his 
Highness had fulfilled the conditions on which that right was 
stipulated to depend. 

It is declared in the 3d of the separate and secret articles of 
that treaty, that ‘in the event of war, his Highness shall be 
entitled to participate equally with the other contracting partics 
in the division of any territory which may be acquired by the 
successful exertions of their united arms, provided his Highness 
the Nawaub Asaph Jah shall have faithfully fulfilled all the 
stipulations of the preceding treaty, especially those contained 
in the 12th and 13th articles thereof,’ 

The obligation imposed upon his Highness the Soubahdar 
of the Deccan by the 12th and 13th articles is, that in the event 
of war, his Ilighness shall furnish a force of 6,000 infantry and 
9,000 cavalry, to act with the subsidiary force; that his High- 
ness shall also employ every further effort in his power for the 
purpose of bringing into the ficld, as specdily as possible, the 
whole force which he may be able to supply from his dominions, 
and that his Highness shall collect as many Bunjarrahs as 
possible, and shall store as much grain as may be practicable in 
his frontier garrisons. In other words, his ITighness is required 
to unite cordially with the British Government in the prose- 
cution of the supposed war, and to combine with the exertions 
of the British power, all the force and resources of his own state, 
as the condition of his being entitled to participate equally with 
the British Government in the territorics which may be acquired 
by the war. 


426 HE DID NOT FULFIL THE REQUIRED CONDITIONS. 


Although the conduct of the state of Hyderabad, during the 
late war with the confederated Mahratta chieftains, is described 
in the course of the narrative of transactions contained in our 
despatch to your honourable Committee of the 12th of April, 
the Governor-General in Council deems it proper with a view to 
trace distinctly the grounds of his decision on the question of 
his Highness’s right of participation to repeat on this occasion 
the leading facts of the case. 

After long and urgent solicitation on the part of the Resident 
at Hyderabad, a body of his Highness’s troops, amounting 
nearly to the number stipulated by treaty, joined the subsidiary 
force, and the general conduct of those troops was consistent 
with the obligations of the treaty. In other respects, however, 
the state of Hyderabad altogether failed in the discharge of the 
duties of an ally, and the conduct of his Highness’s officers was 
of a nature actually hostile to the British Government. 

At an early period of the war Major-General Wellcsley was 
invested by his late Highness the Nizam with a general power 
of control over the officers of his Highness’s government on 
the western fronticr of his dominions, That power of control, 
however, proved entirely nugatory. The orders of Major- 
General Wellesley were utterly disregarded ; every exertion on 
the part of his Highness’s officers in facilitating the movement 
and supply of the British troops, and in opposing those of the 
enemy, was insidiously withheld or directly refused, and his 
Highness’s officers not only neglected to store grain in the 
frontier garrisons for the service of the combined troops in con- 
formity to an express stipulation in the treaty of Hydcrabad, 
but refused to furnish any supplies, and even to permit the 
purchase of grain in his Highness’s territory for the use of the 
British army. 

His Highness’s officer commanding the fort of Dowlutabad 
refused admission to the sick and wounded of the British troops 
engaged in the battle of Assye. The Killadar of Dharore 
refused to give protection under the guns of his fort to a convoy 
proceeding with supplies to the army, without orders for that 
purpose from the Court of Hyderabad, and the Killadar of 
Budnapore actually fired upon a detachment of British troops 
on its march to join Major-Gencral Welleslcy. 

Although the conduct of his Highness’s officers may be 
ascribed in a great measure to the weakness of his government, 
yet the sentiments which his Highness Secunder Jah himsclf is 


WHETHER FROM ILL-WILL, OR INABILITY. 427 


stated to have declared upon that occasion, justify a suspicion 
that their hostile conduct was encouraged by his Highness. 
The Governor-Gencral in Council here refers to a declaration of 
his Highness to Azim Ool Omrah, reported by that minister to 
the Resident of Hyderabad, and communicated in a despatch 
from the Resident of the 13th October 1803, that it was not 
necessary for him to attend to all the remonstrances of the 
British Government on the subject of the conduct of his officers ; 
that ‘no apprchension should for instance be entertained on the 
representations that had lately been made to him regarding the 
Killadar of Dharore and others, for that it was not stipulated 
in any part of his engagements that British officers and their 
troops should positively be admitted within the forts of his 
government, and that it was a matter of equal indifference 
whether the Killadars did or did not admit them.’ 

These unwarrantable sentiments, and those which his High- 
ness is stated by the Resident to entertain generally with regard 
to the alliance subsisting between the British Government and 
the state of Hyderabad, accompanied by the several acts enume- 
rated in the preceding paragraph, are manifestly inconsistent 
with a due attention to the obligations of the alliance. 

In addition to these facts, it was manifest that his Highness 
did not, agreeably to the spirit of his engagements, combine 
with the exertions of the British powcr all the force and 
resources of his own state for the prosecution of the war, and 
consequently did not fulfil the conditions on which he would 
be entitled to participate equally in the conquests which have 
resulted from the war. 

The conclusion of any engagements between states necessarily 
supposes the ability, as well as the disposition of both partics, 
to fulfil the obligations of them. Admitting therefore that the 
conduct of his Highness’s officers originated in causcs wholly 
independent of his Highness’s control, and that his Highness 
was precluded by the inherent vices and defects of his Govern- 
ment, from applying the resources of the state to the promotion 
of the common cause, his Highness could not consistently with 
the acknowledged principles of reciprocity, be permitted to 
claim the benefit of this argument, and to found a right to an 
equal participation of conquests on his iriability to fulfil the 
conditions on which alone that right was admitted to exist. 

Independently of these considcrations, however, his High- 
ness’s claim to an equal participation is precluded by the tenor 


428 THE TREATY PRECLUDES HIS SHARING EQUALLY. 


of the 15th article of the treaty of peace with Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah, combined with the actual conclusion of defensive and 
subsidiary engagements between the British Government and 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah on the basis of that article. 

It is stated in that article that if Dowlut Rao Scindiah shall 
consent to the conclusion of a subsidiary treaty, the charges of 
the subsidiary force consisting of six battalions of infantry, with 
their complement of ordnance and artillery, and usual equipment 
of military stores, &c., shall be defrayed out of the revenues of 
the lands ceded by the 2d, 3d, and 4th articles of the treaty of 
peace; his Highness therefore could not justly claim an cqual 
share in the lands on which are charged the expense of the 
subsidiary force to be furnished by the British Government to 
Scindiah, and the Governor-General in Council is decidedly of 
opinion, that under a just construction of the 15th article of the 
treaty of Serji Anjengaum, combined with the provisions of 
the subsidiary engagement lately concluded with Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah, his Highness the Soubahdar could not claim any 
portion of the territory ceded by the 2d, 3d, and 4th articles of 
the treaty of Serji Anjengaum, because the British Government 
being pledged by the subsidiary and defensive engagements 
concluded with Dowlut Rao Scindiah, eventually to employ the 
whole power and resources of the state for the defence of that 
chieftain’s rights and possessions, the lands on which are charged 
the expense of the subsidiary force, may be justly considered to 
be assigned for all the actual and contingent charges of fulfilling 
that obligation of our defensive engagements, It was also 
evident that those territories are subject to other charges 
connected with the general principles of the pacification, and 
that from the revenues arising out of those territorics must be 
defrayed the expense of providing for Scindiah’s principal 
officers and chiefs, and certain branches of his family, as well as 
for the charges incidental to our engagements with several chicfs 
and statcs in Hindostan, and for the maintenance of the king 
and the family. 

It follows from this statement, that if his Highness the 
Soubahdar of the Deccan had maintained a claim to an cqual 
participation of conquests, hc must also be subjected to an 
equal share of the charges incidental to the security of those 
conquests, and resulting from the gencral principles of the 
pacification. If, therefore, the estimated value of all the ccs- 
sions made to the allics by the peace were opposed to the 


HIS SERVICES ENTITLE HIM TO NO SHARE. 429 


necessary charges of the whole arrangement, there can be no 
doubt that his Highness the Soubahdar’s share of the profits 
of the war would be greatly inferior to that which has actually 
been assigned to him, added to the positive gain which his 
Highness has acquired by the total abrogation of the claims of 
the Rajah of Berar and Dowlut Rao Scindiah on his Highness’s 
government under the distinct provisions of an article in the 
treaties of peace with each of those chieftains, 

Although his Highness the Soubahdar of the Deccan cannot 
be considered to possess on any ground a right to an equal par- 
ticipation in the territories acquired by the late war, a question 
may be supposed to exist, whether his Highness was not entitled 
to a share of the conquests proportioned to the degree in which 
he contributed the aid of his troops in the prosecution of the war. 
On this subject it may be observed, ist, that the conditions on 
which his Highness’s right of participation depends are absolute, 
and that the engagement does not state any obligation on our 
part dependent on a partial execution of those conditions on the 
part of his Highness, and 2dly, that no definite principle of 
comparison can be established between the benefit which our 
cause may have derived from the co-operation of his Highncss’s 
troops, and any precise proportion of territory to be assigned as 
an equivalent to his Highness. 

Under the circumstances above stated, the only points con- 
nected with the intcrests of the Soubahdar of the Deccan which 
remained to be decided were— 

ist. Whether his Highness the Soubahdar of the Deccan 
should be admitted to any share of the conquered territory? and 
if this question were decided in the affirmative : 

adly. Whether without reference to the conduct of his 
Highness's government during the war, such territory should 
be assigned to his Highness on the ground of his Highness’s 
right to participate in the conquests of the war, or simply as a 
gratuitous cession on the part of the British Government, on 
grounds distinct from any question of a right to participation of 
conquests ? 

3dly. What territory should be assigned to his Highness if 
he should be permitted to retain any part of the conquered 
countrics ? 

With regard to the first point the Governor-General in Council 
was of opinion that, adverting to considerations of a political 
nature, and to the local position of a considerable part of the 


430 BUT HE IS TO RECEIVE A GRATUITOUS CESSION. 


conquered territory, it was expedient to assign a certain portion 
of it to his Highness the Soubahdar. 

On the 2d question, as the Soubahdar possessed no positive 
right to any precise portion of our conquests, it appeared to be 
just and expedient that the territory to be assigned to the 
Soubahdar of the Deccan should be considered as a gratuitous 
cession to his Highness on the part of the British Government, 
and not surrendered to his Highness on the ground of his right 
to participation in the conquests effected during the war. 

The territories which it was expedient to cede to his Highness 
the Soubahdar of the Deccan, were obviously those which were 
intermixed with his Highness’s present possessions, or were con- 
tiguous to them. 

Those territories are, 1st, the districts, of which the Rajah of 
Berar collected the revenues in participation with the Soubahdar 
of the Deccan, and generally all the territory formerly in the 
possession of the Rajah of Berar, sifuated to the southward of 
the hills, on which are the forts of Narnulla and Gawilghur, and 
to the westward of the river Wurdah, ceded by the 3d and 4th 
articles of the treaty of Deogaum, excepting only such districts 
asare stipulated by the 5th article of that treaty to remain in the 
possession of the Rajah of Berar. 

adly. The districts ceded by the 4th article of the treaty of 
peace with Dowlut Rao Scindiah, viz. those which are situated 
to the southward of the Adjuntce hills, including the fort and 
district of Jalnapoor, the town and district of Gondapore, and 
all other districts formerly belonging to Dowlut Rao Scindiah, 
situated between that range of hills and the river Godavery. 

These territories had already been placed under the charge of 
his Highness’s officers by the honourable Major-General Wel- 
lesley, under an express declaration on the part of that officer 
that his Highness’s permanent appropriation of those territories 
must be subject to the future resolution of the Governor-General 
in Council. 

Upon the grounds detailed in the preceding part of this letter, 
the Governor-General in Council resolved to annex those terri- 
tories permanently to the dominions of the Soubahdar of the 
Deccan. 

The Governor-General in Council now proceeds to state to 
your honourable Committee his sentiments with regard to the 
question of a right to participate in the acquisitions of the late 
war, as applicable to our ally the Peishwa, and the arrangements 


THE PEISUWA NOT ENTITLED TO SHARE CONQUESTS. 431 


which the Governor-General in Council finally adopted in favour 
of his Highness under the acquisitions resulting from the successes 
of the war. 

The treaty of Basscin is framed on the basis of the treaties 
concluded with the Nizam in October, 1800, It stipulates for the 
aid of a certain portion of the Peishwa’s troops in the event of 
a war, but does not provide for his Highness’s participation in 
any conquests which may be achicved by the war. 

Admitting, therefore, that the Peishwa had furnished the 
stipulated number of troops for the prosecution of the late war, 
he would have acquired no right to participate in the conquests 
which have resulted from it. It was unnecessary, therefore, to 
enter into any discussion on the question of his Highness’s right 
of participation, founded on the consideration of his having con- 
tributed to the support of the common cause in the degree in 
which the weakness and confusion of his Highness’s government 
admitted of his co-operatidn. The peculiar circumstances of his 
Highness’s situation rendered such a pretension in the highest 
degree exorbitant and unreasonable. 

The war originated in the measures adopted by the’ British 
Government for the restoration of his Highness from a state of 
exile and of personal danger to his legitimate dominions, and to 
a condition of comparative dignity and permanent security. 

The utmost limit of the Peishwa’s just and reasonable expec- 
tations was attained in the preservation of his dominion, by the 
result of the war, from the violence and ambition of external and 
domestic enemies. His Excellency in Council, therefore, could 
discern no ground of claim on the part of the Peishwa, to a 
participation of conquests cffected in the defence of his Highness’s 
rights and possessions by the excrtions of the British arms and 
the wisdom of British councils, not only unaided by any efforts on 
the part of his Highness, but in some points impeded by the 
unaccommodating and vindictive spirit of his Highness’s policy, 

The Pcishwa could not in the judgment of the Governor-General 
in Council establish any pretension to participate in the terri- 
torics acquired by those arduous exertions of the British arms, 
to which his Highness was exclusively indebted for the existence 
of his power. 

The restoration of the Pcishwa’s legitimate authority, together 
with the recovery of the dominions which he possessed previously 
to his expulsion from Poonah, and with the provisions established 
for securing his Highness in his state and actual possessions, 


432 BUT POLICY DICTATES A CESSION TO HIM ALSO. 


appeared to the Governor-General in Council to constitute an 
ample participation in the success of the war, and in the benefits 
of the peace. 

Considerations of policy, however, suggested the expedience of 
admitting the Peishwa to a participation in our late conquests. 

The jealousy with which the Peishwa contemplated an intimate 
connexion with the British Government prevented his acceptance 
of our proposals for the conclusion of a defensive alliance until 
the successful rebellion of Jeswunt Rao Holkar had subverted his 
government, and had compelled him to abandon his capital. 

The Peishwa has experienced the benefits of that alliance by 
his restoration to the exercise of his legitimate authority, under 
the protection of the British arms and of the British power. 

The Governor-General in Council, however, was of opinion 
that the characteristic jealousy of the Pecishwa could not be 
completely cradicated until he should be satisfied by a further 
experience of the moderation and liberality of our proccedings 
under the alliance, that it is our object rather to augment than 
to impair the power and resources of his government. The 
assignment of a portion of our recent conquests to’ the Pcishwa, 
under the total defect of his Highness’s right to participate in 
them, founded cither on the obligations of treaty or on the aid 
which his Highness contributed in the prosecution of the war, 
was calculated in the judgment of the Governor-General in 
Council to impress upon his Highness’s mind the most favourable 
opinion of the equity and liberality of the British Government, 
to encourage his confidence in its public faith and honour, and to 
fix his attachment to the alliance, as well as to elevate the 
fame and character of the British Government in the judgment 
of every state in India. 

For these reasons his Excellency in Council decmed it advis- 
able to assign to the Peishwa as large a portion of our late 
territorial acquisitions as could be conveniently annexed to his 
dominions, consistently with the security of our own rights and 
possessions, and with the arrangements which the Governor- 
General in Council had resolved to accomplish in favour of our 
ally the Soubahdar of the Deccan. 

His Excellency in Council accordingly resolved that the city 
and province of Ahmcdnuggur, excepting such portion of the 
latter as was restored to Dowlut Rao Scindiah by the terms of 
the treaty of pcace, should be annexed to the Peishwa’s 
dominions. 


CESSIONS TO FOLLOW SIGNING OF PEACE BY ALLIES. 433 


Upon the basis of the observations and resolutions stated in 
the preceding part of this despatch, instructions were transmitted 
to the Residents at the courts of Hyderabad and Poonah, under 
the date the 30th of March, 1804, directing those officers to com- 
municate to their Highnesses the Soubahdar of the Deccan and 
the Peishwa respectively, the territorial arrangements which the 
Governor-General in Council had resolved to adopt in favour of 
their Highnesses, and to be preparcd to oppose any assumption 
on the part of their Highnesses of a right to participate in the 
conquests of the war. The Resident at Poonah was especially 
directed to endeavour to impress upon the mind of the Peishwa 
a just sense of the liberality of the British Government in assign- 
ing to his Highness so valuable a portion of our recent conquests, 
under the total defect of his Highness’s right to participate in them, 
founded either on the stipulations of the treaty, or on the aid 
afforded by his Highness in the promotion of the common cause. 

The draft of a treaty of partition framed in conformity to the 
resolutions above described, was at the same time transmitted to 
the Residents at Hyderabad and Poonah respectively, with 
directions to obtain the seals and signatures of their Highnesses 
the Soubahdar of the Deccan and the Peishwa to separate 
treatics to be prepared in conformity to that draft. 

The Governor-General in Council deeming the period of 
adjusting the participation of conquests to be the fittest oppor- 
tunity for obtaining their Highnesses the Soubahdar’s and the 
Peishwa’s ratification of the treaties of peace concluded with 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah and’ the Rajah of Berar, transmitted with 
his instructions to the Residents onthe subject of a partition of 
conquests, copies of those treaties directing the Residents to 
present to their Highnesses the Soubahdar of the Deccan and 
the Peishwa respectively, copies of those treaties, in order that 
their Highnesses might affix their seals to each of those treaties 
in testimony of their recognition of the terms of the pacification, 
and the Residents were further instructed to return those treaties 
so attested for the purpose of being deposited among the records 
of Government. It was at the same time signified to the Resi- 
dents that the Ratification of the treatics of peace must precede 
the executior of the treaties of partition. 

On the 28th of April the Resident at Hyderabad waited upon 
his Highness the Soubahdar of the Deccan for the express 

“purpose of obtaining his Highness’s ratification of the treaties of 
Peace, and his execution of the treaty of partition. 
Ff 


434 THE NIZAM ACCEPTS THE OFFERS READILY. 


His Highness, after an attentive perusal of the treaties of 
peace, affixed his seal and signature to those documents, The 
Resident then delivered to his Highness the proposed treaty of 
partition, which, after being attentively perused, was executed by 
his Highness without the slightest hesitation. The Resident 
at the same time delivered a counterpart of that treaty to his 
Highness the Soubahdar. Immediately after the exchange of 
those instruments, the minister, Azim Ool Omrah, in the pre- 
sence of his Highness, expressed to the Resident his Highness’s 
entire satisfaction at the amicable and liberal spirit of the terri- 
torial arrangements for which the treaty of partition provided. 

In the course of the conversation, the Resident took occasion 
to intimate to the minister that the assignment of territory to 
his Highness, prescribed by the treaty of partition, must be con- 
sidered as gratuitous on the part of the British Government, and 
not as surrendered on the ground of his Highness the Soubahdar’s 
right to participation in the conquests of the war. But no pre- 
tensions having been advanced by his Highness to an equal share 
of conquests, the Resident judged it unneccssary to press the 
discussion of that question upon the court of Hyderabad. 

The treaty of partition, executed by his Highness the Sou- 
bahdar of the Deccan, was reccived at Fort William on the 13th 
of May, and was ratified by the Governor-General in Council on 
the following day. 

Adverting to the extent and value of the cessions to the Sou- 
bahdar of the Deccan under the treaty of partition, and to the 
benefits which his Highness derives’from the renunciation on 
the part of the Rajah of Berar and of Dowlut Rao Scindiah of 
all claims of every description on the state of Hyderabad, 
the Governor-General in Council is decidedly of opinion that 
under the treaty of partition the Soubahdar of the Deccan has 
acquired a share in the conquests and advantages of the war 
greatly exceeding the proportion in which his Highness con- 
tributed to its success, and not inferior to that which his Highness 
must have received under an admission of his right to an equal 
participation of conquests. 

The court of Poonah on this occasion manifested a spirit of 
cavil and of inordinate pretension, wholly unbecoming the rela- 
tive situation of his Highness the Peishwa, and unsuitable to the 
nature of the obligations imposed upon his Highness by the 
arduous exertions of the British Government for the re-cstablish- * 
ment of his authority, and by the liberality of its conduct in 


PEISHWA, AFTER REFUSAL, AND REPEATED DEMUR. 435 


resolving to assign to his Highness a portion of the conquered 
territory under the total defect of his Highness’s claim to such 
a participation. 

When the Resident submitted to his Highness the Peishwa 
copies of the treaties of peace for ratification, apprizing him that 
when his Highness should have ratified those documents, the 
Resident would communicate to his Highness an arrangement 
for the cession of the fort and territory of Ahmednuggur to the 
state of Poonah, his Highness refused to ratify those treaties 
with his seal and signature, justifying his refusal by claims and 
pretensions of a most extravagant and unreasonable nature. 

The instructions of the Governor-General in Council, however, 
enabled the Resident to oppose with success the exorbitant 
demands and expcctations of the Peishwa, who finally consented 
to recognize the provisions of the treaties of peace by affixing 
his seal to the copies of those treaties presented to him for that 
purpose by the Resident. 

The Resident then proceeded to submit the treaty of partition 
to his Highness’s acceptance. Upon this occasion the Peishwa 
renewed his unreasonable claims, and even advanced pretensions 
to participate equally with the British Government in the 
conquests of the war. The Resident found no difficulty, how- 
ever, in demonstrating to his Highness and his ministers the 
absurdity of these pretensions, and after some further discussion 
his Highness consented to withdraw his unreasonable claims and 
to affix his seal and signature to the treaty of partition. 

Accordingly on the 14th of May the Resident at Poonah 
waited on his Highness the Pcishwa, who on that occasion 
affixed his seal to the treaties of peace concluded with Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar, and duly executed the 
proposed treaty of partition. 

The treaty of partition, as concluded with his Highness the 
Peishwa, has also been ratified by the Governor-General in 
Council. 

Copics of the treaty of partition, as concluded with their 
Highnesses the Soubahdar of the Deccan and the Peishwa, are 
also annexcd to this despatch for your honourable Committee’s 
information. 

We have the honour to be, honourable Sirs, 
your most faithful humble Servants, 
WELLESLEY. 
G. UDNY. 


Ff2 G. H. BARLow, 


436 ENEMIES CONQUERED. OUR TERRITORY EXTENDED. 


63. The Governor-General in Council to the Secret Committee 
of the Honourable the Court of Directors. 
Advantages resulting from the War. 

(Extract.) 

Fort William, 13th July, 1804. 
Honourable Sirs, 

139. The Governor-General in Council deems it proper to close 
this despatch by a general recapitulation of the benefits which 
the British Government in India has derived from the opera- 
tions of the war, and the combined arrangements of the pacifica- 
tion, including the treaties of peace, of partition,and of defensive 
alliance and subsidy. Those benefits may be enumerated under 
the following heads :— 

The reduction of the military power and territorial resources 
of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, and the Rajah of Berar, within the 
limits indispensably necessary for the security of the British 
Government in India and of its allies. 

The destruction of the French territorial power established 
by M. Perron, on the most vulnerable part of the frontier of the 
British possessions in India, under circumstances of internal 
strength, military resource, and political influence, which menaced 
the British Government with great and extensive dangers. 

The barriers opposed by the stipulations of treaty, to the re- 
vival of the French power and influence in any quarter of India. 

The annexation to the British possessions of the territory 
formerly occupied by the French force under M. Perron. Under 
this accession of territory, our north-western frontier has been 
strengthened by being advanced to the banks of the Jumna, and 
by the occupation of the several important posts and fortresses, 
which command that river, and from the source of former danger 
we now derive additional security to the British possessions in 
India. 

The augmented sources of revenue and commerce acquired by 
the annexation to the British territorics of the fertile countries 
situated in the Doab of the rivers Jumna and Ganges (in which 
the authority of M. Perron had been established) combined with 
the complete command over the navigation of the Jumna. 

The deliverance of the Emperor Shah Allum from the control 


. of the French power, established in the north-western quarter of 


Hindostan; by which the government of France has been 
deprived of a powerful instrument in the eventual prosccution of 


GUARANTEES OF FUTURE SECURITY ACQUIRED, 437 


its hostile designs against the British Empire in India, and the 
British Government has obtained a favourable opportunity of 
conciliating the confidence, and securing the applause of sur- 
rounding states, by providing a safe and tranquil asylum for the 
declining age of that venerable and unfortunate monarch, and, a 
suitable maintenance for his numerous and distressed family. 

The establishment of the British influence in the north-western 
division of Hindostan, and the additional security acquired by 
the conclusion of treaties of defensive alliance with the Rajpoot 
state of Jyenagur, and the petty states in the vicinity of our 
possessions in that quarter Those states under the operation of 
the alliances concluded with them, constitute a barrier between 
the British territories and the Mahratta states ; which(arrange- 
ment, with other stipulations of the pacification, secures the per- 
manent exclusion of the influence and control of the Mahrattas 
from the north-western quarter of Hindostan. 

The commanding position which the British Government has 
secured by the possession of the strong fortress of Gwalior, and 
by the establishment of a subsidiary force within the territory of 
the Ranah of Gohud, under the conditions described in the 48th 
paragraph of this despatch. This branch of the general arrange- 
ments of the peace contributes in a particular degree to maintain 
the tranquillity of Hindostan, and to consolidate the barrier 
established for the exclusion of the Mahratta power and influence 
from that quarter of India. The same arrangements also connect 
our possessions in Bundlecund with those to the northward of 
the province of Gohud, and provide additional security to the 
navigation of the Jumna, and additional protection to our 
valuable possessions in the Doab, from the hostile attempts of 
any regular state, or from the predatory incursions of any enter- 
prizing adventurer. ) 

The additional means of defence acquired by the established 
system of our external rclations in the north-western quarter 
of Hindostan, against any attempt on the part of the northern” 
powers of Asia, or of the French Republic, through the aid of 
those powers, to disturb the security of the British posscssions in 
India. 

The augmented security which the British Empire derives 
from the annexation of the valuable province of Cuttack, in- 
cluding the sea-port of Balasore, and all the dependencies of that 
province to the British dominion. By establishing between the 
province of Midnapore, and the northern Circars, a continuation 


438 OUR INFLUENCE, AND COMMERCIAL AREA EXTENDED, 


of the British dominion and authority, and thereby completing 
the line of connexion between the territories under the imme- 
diate government of Bengal, and those under the authority of 
Fort St.George. By depriving the government of France of the 
facilities which the province of Cuttack while in the possession 
of a foreign power, afforded for the prosecution of intrigues, 
injurious to the British interests, and for the invasion of the 
British territories, either singly, or in co-operation with a native 
power. By the advantages which our possession of the province 
of Cuttack would afford to us in the event of a contest with the 
state of Berar; and by the augmented sources of revenue and 
commerce opened to the British Government by that fertile and 
valuable province, and by the influence and reputation to be ac- 
quired throughout India, from the possession of the great temple 
of Jaggernaut, and from the just and benevolent administration 
of the affairs of that temple with relation to the innumerable 
pilgrims, who frequent it from every part of India. 

The acquisition of the port and territory of Baroach, and of 
the sea-ports belonging to Scindiah on the western side of 
India, which afforded to Scindiah, and to the French officers 
in his service, the means of intercourse with the government of 
France, and to the French an casy access to the Mahratta states, 
in a quarter where our military powcr was less formidable, and 
our political influence less firmly established than in other parts 
of India. 

The degree of security afforded by the possession of the sca- 
port and territory of Baroach against any attempt on the part 
of France, to supply by that channel any native state with arms 
and military stores, or with officers for the purpose of disciplining 
their armies, and against the prosecution of any intrigues be- 
tween the government of France and any native state, by means 
of the facility of communication which the sea-port and territory 
- of Baroach might afford while in the hands of a Mahratta power, 
to the indefatigable zeal of French emissaries. 

The additional security which our possessions and interests in 
Guzerat must derive from the possession of.the port and territory 
of Baroach, and from Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s renunciation of all 
claims on our ally the Guikwar. 

The augmented sources of revenue and commerce, acquired by 
the possession of the port of Baroach and its district. 

The improved state of our alliances with the Soubahdar of the 
Deccan and the Peishwa, under the provisions of the treaties of 


OUR FAME, AND COMMAND OVER ALLIES CONFIRMED, 439 


peace and of partition. By the combined operation of those 
treaties the power, territory, and resources of the Peishwa and 
the Soubahdar of the Deccan have been encreased and consoli- 
dated, and their means of discharging the duties of alliance have 
been consequently augmented. The confidence of those allies in 
the power, justice, and moderation of the British Government 
has been confirmed and encreased by their experience of the 
advantages of the alliance in the prosecution of the war, and in 
the ultimate arrangements of the peace. 

The stipulations of the treaties of peace have in a considerable 
degree removed the causes of dissension, and the means of poli- 
tical intrigue between our allies and the Mahratta states, by 
precluding the future intermixture of their territories, and the 
consequent collision of their authorities; by requiring from 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar, the renunciation 
of their claims on the Soubahdar of the Deccan and the Peishwa, 
and by vesting in the British Government a right of arbitration 
in all cases of difference which may arise between those powers 
respectively, Thus the influence and ascendancy of the British 
Government in the councils of Hyderabad and Poonah have 
been encreased and permanently established, not by limiting 
the authority, controlling the independence, or reducing the 
power of those states, but by the operation of arrangements 
which have confirmed and corroborated their respective rights, 
authorities and independence, extended their dominion, consoli- 
dated their power, and augmented their resources ; secured them 
from the vexatious claims, and litigious and violent interference 
of other powers, and established the sources of permanent 
tranquillity and prosperity within the limits of their respective 
dominions. 

Our influence and ascendancy in the councils of those allies 
are now founded on the solid basis of their entire confidence in 
the equity and modcration of our views, and in their just reliance 
on our protecting power. 

The elevation of ¢he fame and glory of the British nation in 
India, by the sled achicvements of the war, and by the 
clemency, moderation, and public faith, which distinguished the 
British counscls in the conclusion of the peace. 

The conclusion of a defensive and subsidiary alliance between 
the British Government and Dowlut Rao Scindiah, by which the 
British influence has been completely established at the court 
of that chieftain on the foundation of Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s 


440 MILITARY EFFICIENCY COMBINED WITH ECONOMY. 


deliberate view of the real interests of his government, and by 
which the most formidable enemy of the British power in the 
late contest with the confederated Mahratta chieftains, has been 
rendered an efficient ally of the honourable Company. 

The power acquired by the British Government under the 
general arrangements of the peace and the treaties of partition 
and subsidiary alliance, of controlling the causes of dissension 
and contest among the several Mahratta states, and of preclud- 
ing the restoration of any of those states to a formidable degree 
of power, their combination for purposes injurious to the British 
Government or its allies, their communication and co-operation 
with an hostile European force, and their means of prosecuting 
dangerous intrigues with allies or subjects of the British Go- 
vernment. 

The security afforded to the territories of our allies the Sou- 
bahdar of the Deccan, the Guikwar, the Rajah of Mysore, and 
the honourable Company, from the dangers to which they were 
exposed by the anarchy and confusion existing in the Mahratta 
empire, and by the character and habits of the contending 
Mabhratta chieftains. 

140. The general arrangements of the pacification combined 
with the treaties of partition, with the defensive and subsidiary 
alliance now concluded with Dowlut Rao Scindiah, with the 
general condition of our external relations, and with the internal 
prosperity of the British empire, have finally placed the British 
power in India in that commanding position with regard to 
other states, which affords the only possible sccurity for the 
permanent tranquillity and prosperity of these valuable and 
important possessions. 

141. By the establishment of our subsidiary forces at Hyder- 
abad, and Poonah, with the Guikwar, Dowlut Rao Scindiah and 
the Ranah of Gohud, an efficient army of 22,000 men is stationed 
within the territorics, or on the fronticr of forcign states, and is 
paid by foreign subsidics. That army is constantly maintained in 
a state of perfect equipment, and is prepared for active service in 
any direction at the shortest notice. This force may be directed 
against any of the principal states of India, without the hazard 
of disturbing the tranquillity of the Company’s possessions, and 
without requiring any considerable encreasc to the permanent 
military expences of the governments of India. 

142. The position, extent, and equipment of this military 
force, combined with the privilege which the British Govern- 


IDEA OF DEFENSIVE ALLIANCE SYSTEM REALISED, 441 


ment possesses of arbitrating differences and dissensions between 
the several states with which it is connected by the obligations 
of alliance, enables the British power to control the causes of 
that internal warfare, which during so long a term of years has 
desolated many of the most fertile provinces of India, has occa- 
sioned a constant and hazardous fluctuation of power among 
the native states, has encouraged a predatory and military spirit 
among the inhabitants, and formed an inexhaustible source for 
the supply of military adventurers, prepared to join the standard 
of any turbulent chieftain for the purposes of ambition, plunder, 
or rebellion. 

143. A general bond of connection is now established between 
the British Government, and the principal states of India, on 
principles which render it the interest of every state to maintain 
its alliance with the British Government, which preclude the 
inordinate aggrandizement of any one of those states by an usur- 
pation of the rights and possessions of others, and which secure 
to every state the unmolested exercise of its separate authority 
within the limits of its established dominion, under the general 
protection of the British power. 

We have the honour to be, 
Honourable Sirs, 
Your most faithful humble servants, 
WELLESLEY. 
G. H. BaRLow. 
G. UDNY. 


64. Governor-General’s reply to an address from the 
British inhabitants of Calcutta. 


Fustification of the War, and of the Terms of Peace. 


Gentlemen, 

The regularity, order, and dcliberation with which the pro-_ 
ceedings of your public meeting have becn conducted, are con- 
formable to the respectable character of this great settlement, 
and to the magnitude and importance of this happy occasion. 
The sentiments expressed in your address, are derived from 
an attentive observation of the events Phich preceded the 
commencing of hostilitics on the continent of India, and from 
a correct knowledge of the principles which constitute the basis 
of the general pacification. You have considered the glory of 
our victories, and the genuine lustre of our ultimate triumph to 


442 FOU HAVE JUDGED RIGHTEOUS }UDGMENT. 


be inseparably blended with the original justice of our cause, 
and with the moderation and clemency exercised in the hour 
of conquest. Satisfied that the public safety, and the national 
honour required an appeal to the sword, you have manifested 
a due sense of the national advantages obtained by the brilliant 
success of the war, and confirmed by the equitable conditions of 
the peace. 

In this course of proceeding, I recognize with satisfaction and 
pride, the public spirit of British subjects. To commence or to 
continue war for purposes of aggrandizement, for the extension 
of dominion or power, for the gratification of pride, vanity, 
hatred, or irregular passion, is a species of policy, which no 
success can sanction, and which every British subject must 
abhor. Your birth, your education, your attachment to the 
laws and constitution of our country preclude your admiration 
of any system of public measures, however adorned by success, 
which is not founded in the sacred maxims of justice, humanity 
and honour. I therefore deem it to be a circumstance highly 
creditable to the character of this settlement, and of my 
administration, that I should have reccived from you this unso- 
licited, deliberate, and public testimony of your sincere and 
zealous concurrence in the principles of British policy, which 
have regulated my conduct from the origin to the close of the 
late memorable war. In the moment of alarm and danger, my 
duty required me to repel the menaces, insults, and power of 
the encmy by the most active use of our military force. In the 
full carcer of victory, and with the most splendid prospects 
of unlimited success, the same duty forbad me to prosccute 
hostilitics to the extremity of vengeance, or to urge the fall of a 
vanquished enemy beyond the just limits of national sccurity, 
and public faith. With these sentiments I accept this address, 
not only as a valuable mark of your personal regard, and 
-an unequivocal proof of your honourable attachment to the 
interests of the public servicc, but as a solemn pledge of your 
unanimous determination to maintain in this distinguished 
settlement, that ardent and active zeal for the glory of our 
country in which consists the vital principle of the British 
empire, the source fnd support of our national fame and power, 
the origin of our triumphs abroad, the strength of our security 
at home, and the main bulwark of our defence in every quarter 
of the globe. 


During the crisis which preceded the war I should have 


e 


OBJECTS, MAGNITUDE, AND SUCCESS OF THE WAR. 443 


vicwed the situation of these possessions with anxiety, if I had 
not been supported by a firm confidence, that the spirit which 
you have displayed on this occasion, animated the counsels 
of this government and those of the governments of Fort St. 
George and Bombay; and that an equal zeal prevailed amongst 
the generals, officers and troops charged with fhe execution of 
my orders. 

With united counsels, with an unrivalled army, with flourish- 
ing resources, with powerful alliances, and with a just cause, 
I was enabled to encounter and to surmount the difficulties 
which surrounded me, and to witness the rapid and complete 
effect of our military operations on every point of the enemy’s 
strength. The vast extent, complicated system, and matchless 
success of the campaigns in Hindostan and the Deccan, cannot 
be contemplated without emotions of gratitude and admiration. 
The execution of the plans, which it was my duty to form, 
corresponded with the renown of an army, accustomed to 
victory, inured to fatigue and danger, attached to the just 
principles of discipline and order, animated by the memory of 
former triumphs, and commanded by generals who possess every 
qualification requisite to inspire confidence, to excite enterprize, 
and to ensure success, 

Peace is the fairest fruit of victory, the brightest ornament of 
military triumph, and the highest reward of successful valour. 
The peace, which has been concluded, comprchends every object 
of the war, with every practicable security for the continuance 
of tranquillity. The object of the war was not to accomplish 
inordinate projects of extravagant conquest; not to subvert 
ancient and revered authorities; not to desolate flourishing 
provinces; not to plunder private property; nor to disturb the 
civil and religious institutions of contiguous states ; nor to raise 
commotion in the bosom of established governments; nor to 
excite discord among powers connected by the relations of 
amity and peace. The object of the war was, to vindicate and 
to secure the just and legitimate rights, interests, and honour 
of the British government and of its allics against usurpation, 
violence, and rapine, The restoration of the legitimate authority 
of our ally the Pcishwa at Poonah, the establishment of our 
ally the Soubahdar of the Deccan in his hereditary rights and 
dominions at Hyderabad, and the deliverance of the unfor- 
tunate and vencrable emperor Shah Aulum from the hands of 
the Mahrattas and French at Delhi, were the earliest effects of 


444 CHARACTER AND BENEFITS OF THE PACIFICATION. 


the success of our military operations. During the progress of 
our arms, every endeavour was employed to mitigate the horrors 
of war, even in the midst of hostilities, and to extend security 
and protection to the utmost limits compatible with the safety 
of our armies in the field. 

In the termination of hostilities, my solicitude has been 
directed to the important purpose of effecting a general 
pacification of India on principles of reciprocal justice and 
moderation. The power, reputation and dignity of the British 
empire in India, will derive additional security and lustre from 
the establishment of peace and good order among the native 
states. In the decline of intrinsic strength, inferior states may 
perhaps have gained a temporary safety by fomenting the 
discord of contiguous powers. In any extremity such a policy 
is unwarrantable and disgraceful; nor can permanent repose 
be secured upon such precarious foundations. In the actual 
condition of this empire, I am happy to declare, that the concord 
of the established native states, the independence of their sepa- 
rate authoritics, the internal peace of their respective dominions, 
and the tranquillity and happiness of their respective subjects 
will tend to confirm and to fortify the power and resources of 
the British government, and must constitute the most desirable 
objects of British policy in India. 

In pursuance of these principles, the treatics of peace provide 
the means, not only of enlarging and consolidating the resources 
and powcr of our allics, but of guarding the less powerful neutral 
states from oppression ; of placing the illustrious house of Timur 
in a condition of competent affluence, dignity, and honourable 
repose, and even of admitting our vanquished encmics to the 
benefits of a gencral defensive alliance, calculated to secure them 
in the independent exercise of their actual rights, and in the 
uncontrolled government of their present dominions; to exclude 
usurpation, and to limit the scveral powers of Hindostan and 
the Deccan to the undisturbed cultivation of their separate 
resources, within the boundaries of their respective possessions. 
I trust that the result of this system will prove equally advan- 
tageous to our interests and to our honour. 

The foundations of our empire in Asia are now laid in the 
tranquillity of surrounding nations, and in the happiness and 
welfare of the pcople of India. In addition to the augmentation 
of our territories and resources, the peace has manifested 
exemplary faith and equity towards our allies, moderation and 


MR, PITT RESERVES HIS $UDGMENT. 445 


Jenity towards our enemies, and a sincere desire to promote the 
general prosperity of this quarter of the globe. The position 
in which we are now placed is suited to the character of the 
British nation, to the principles of our laws, to the spirit of our 
constitution, and to the liberal and comprehensive policy, which 
becomes the dignity of a great and powerful empire. 

My public duty is discharged to the satisfaction of my con- 
science by the prosperous establishment of a system of policy, 
which promises to improve the general condition of the people 
of India, and to unite the principal native states in the bond of 
peace, under the protection of the British power. 

WELLESLEY. 


65. Lord Castlereagh to the Marquess Wellesley. 
Doubtful policy of Annexations at the close of the War. 


London, 21st May, 1804. 
[Received x4th October, 1804.] 
My dear Lord, 

With respect to the great question to which your Lordship’s 
last despatches principally relate, the pressure of other business 
has prevented Mr. Pitt from going into the subject in that detail, 
which he deems to be necessary previous to his forming a con- 
clusive judgment upon it: he feels, however, all the importance 
of it, and has promised me to apply himself as early as possible 
to its examination. Until his Majesty's ministers have gone 
through the various despatches, and come to a decision upon 
them, and more particularly till I have had an opportunity of 
conferring dcliberatcly with Mr. Pitt and Lord Melville, I 
should wish to postpone troubling your Lordship with any very 
detailed remarks upon this subject, in the new and enlarged 
shape in which it is now presented to our consideration, Hitherto 
T have been led to examine it as a question of alliance merely, 
upon the presumption, that the Mahratta empire was to continue 
to subsist in the same shape, or ncarly so, as it has hitherto done, 
and in this point of view I own reflection has only served more 
strongly to impress upon my mind a conviction, that the prin- 
ciples of connection as laid down in the despatch from the 
secret Committee of February last, is upon the whole the 
best adapted to states so circumstanced as those composing 
the Mahratta confederacy, and that -which I apprehend would 


446 UNPRECEDENTED MAGNITUDE OF THE QUESTION. 


be the most likely sincercly to dispose them towards a con- 
nection with us. 

Your Lordship’s instructions to the Gencrals Lake and 
Wellesley of the 27th June and 27th July, take up the ques- 
tion upon a much wider range, and suggest a comprchen- 
sive scheme for the partition and new distribution of the 
greater portion of the Mahratta territory. The splendid and 
unexampled success of our arms may probably have brought 
the execution of such a measure within the reach of your 
Lordship’s power, and I am by no means at present prepared 
to convey to your Lordship a conclusive opinion upon the 
comprehensive scheme of policy laid down in those instructions; 
I wish only at present to draw your Lordship’s attention to the 
marked distinction between the two questions, When latcly 
reasoning upon the treaty of Bassein, we were considering how 
we could best connect ourselves with the state of Poonah, and 
what plan of alliance was upon the whole the most likely to 
conciliate, and include some of the other leading statcs in that 
connection. Now we arc to examine the effects upon our Indian 
system, not only of that state being occupied by a British force, 
but of the other leading states materially reduced in territory 
being almost entirely encompassed cither by the posscssions, 
which it is intended should be acquired in dircct sovereignty by 
the Company, or by the Rajpoot states, with whom it is proposed 
to entcr into close alliance. The arrangement in question carries 
the Company’s frontier far to the north and west of Delhi; it 
adds to their dominions in direct possession, exclusive of intro- 
ducing their authority over the whole of the Mahratta empire, a 
territory considerably excecding in extent the entire of Oude, 
and brings them in contact with Sikhs and other northern tribes, 
with whom it is proposed to establish connections throughout 
the Panjab as far as the Indus. 

Such I take to be the question, which may have been pre- 
sented by the result of the war to your Lordship’s decision, and 
it is impossible not to feel that it is the largest in its bearings, 
and the most important in its effects upon our Indian system 
that has ever come into discussion. As an Indian question 
merely, it involves considerations of the highest moment, two of 
which I shall only at present slightly glance at. 1st. Whether 
assuming the whole to be the result of legitimate conquest, it 
does not in the great extcnt of direct acquisition, or indirect 
control thus to be acquired, contravene too strongly the system 


PERILOUS EXTENSION OF MILITARY OBLIGATIONS, 447 


of policy, upon which the legislature has professed to act, by 
pushing our dominion beyond what the necessity of the case 
may fairly appear to warrant. 2nd. Whether it does not swell 
so largely and so suddenly not only our immediate possessions, 
but our dependencies necessarily included within the dominion 
of our army, as to run some risk of rendering the frame of our 
government complicated and unwieldy in such a degree as to 
hazard its becoming enfecbled and embarrassed in ordinary hands, 

/ and in weighing the latter consideration we should deceive our- 
selves if we expected to find a successor to replace your Lord- 
ship, capable of giving and continuing to the machine of Govern- 
ment that impulse which every department of the state so visibly 
receives from the mind that now directs it. 

It is fair on the other hand to weigh the encreased security 
resulting from there being no longer any native power capable of 
contending with us in the field; an advantage, however, which I 
apprehend will not relieve us (if we may judge from past experi- 
ence) from the necessity of carrying forward our military estab- 
lishments, nearly in the proportion in’ which the sphere of our 
dominions is extended. 

The question is not less serious as applied to the empire at 
home, not so much from any claims which it may furnish the 
encmy with, to limit our pretensions at a peace, to preserve in 
our hands in other parts of the world points of importance to our 
general security, but as founding our Indian system upon a basis 
so broad, as to create a doubt, whether such an empire can be 
fed with its due proportion of European troops from hence. 

When I recollect that the number of Europeans civil and military 
governing fifty millions of subjects, do not excced thirty thou- 
sand, I cannot but look with anxicty to the extension of our 
Native population and dependencics, whilst Iam unable to see 
my way through the mcans of carrying forward, as our empire 
advances, even this apparently inadequate proportion of the 
governing principle. At this moment, I regret to observe, that 
our European is not to our native army more than in the propor- 
tion of one to seven; I have always been taught to consider this 
as too low a proportion, and it has been an anxious, though a 
fruitless object of my solicitude, since I have been in office, to 
obtain for India a larger proportion of King’s troops. Having 
hitherto failed of completing an establishment of 24,000 men, 
which is deficient at this moment ncarly six thousand of its 
complement, I am the Iess disposed to be sanguine in my 


| 


448 DESTRUCTION OF SCINDIAH’S CORPS—A GREAT GAIN, 


expectations that an establishment of 31,000 men can be pre- 
served complete, which is the force specified in your Lordship’s 
second plan, which I take to be that which you conceive to be 
required for India, should the proposed arrangements in the 
Mahratta empire be carried into effect. I shall have occasion 
to address your Lordship more in detail on this subject by 
another conveyance; in the meantime I must fairly apprize your 
Lordship, that as it would require above 10,000 men to bring 
your establishment to the proposed standard, from my past 
experience of the difficulties which occur at home in raising 
the amount of force requisite for the public service at large, 
I wholly despair of such an army being in the first instance 
supplied, or subsequently kept complete for the service of India. 

My object in calling your Lordship’s attention to these con- 
siderations at the present moment, is not for the purpose of 
conveying to you by anticipation a decision upon the main 
question itself, but from a desire that you should be aware of 
the doubts that are to be well weighed, before it shall be finally 
decided on. 

I cannot close this letter either in justice to your Lordship, or 
to myself, without acknowledging an crror into which the result 
has proved, I had fallen from defect of information in my former 
reasonings upon Mahratta affairs. Indeed I believe others who 
had better means of intelligence were inadequately impressed, as 
well as myself, with respect to the extent of the regular force in 
Scindiah’s service. It certainly has proved much more for- 
midable than even Mr. Henry Wellesley, from whom I have on 
all subjects connected with India obtained the most satisfactory 
and accurate intelligence, conceived it to be; and although it 
would be doing injustice to the grounds of the war, to state the 
destruction of this force as being in itself any part of the cause 
upon which it was undertaken, distinct from the intended hostile 
application of that force, against the British power; yet I must 
reckon its dissolution and annihilation as amongst the most 
valuable services which your Lordship could have rendered ; 
and I look upon the war as carrying with it in this collateral 
effect, the most solid advantages to our empire in the cast. I 
will only add one remark on this subject, that it will still remain 
a question, supposing a close connection could have been formed 


of the latter from Poonah, whether the dissolution of this corps, 


\ere Scindiah as well as the Peishwa, subsequent to the expulsion 


\of the leading officers of which, I have understood Scindiah had 


REINFORCEMENTS FOR INDIA ON THEIR WAY, 449 


latterly become excecdingly jealous, might not have been accom- 
plished by more amicable measures. 
Believe me, my dear Lord, 
with great regard, 
yours most faithfully, 
CASTLEREAGH. 


P.S. Reserving the discussion of the military establishment in 
a larger sense for a future occasion, it may be satisfactory to 
your Lordship to be apprized, that in addition to 12 or 1500 
recruits, which have already been despatched in the ships of the 
present season to join their regiments in India, having been 
completely disciplined and formed previous to their departure ; 
the 17th foot completed to 1000 rank and file is now under 
orders, and will proceed in the next fleet appointed to sail in the 
end of June. 

Your Lordship will have also learned before this reaches you, 
that a complete regiment of infantry, I think the 66th, was em- 
barked for Ceylon in March last; exclusive, therefore, of this 
reinforcement sent to Ceylon, the army on the continent will 
have received in the course of the present season an addition of 
2,500 men, which added to the 12,211 the effective force in 
December, 1803, will raise the King’s infantry, exclusive of 
Ceylon, to about 14,000 rank and file. 

C. 


5. WAR WITH HOLKAR. 


66. The Governor-General in Council to the Honourable the 
Secret Committee of the Court of Directors. 


Origin of the War with Holkar. General narrative of 
its carlicr operations}, 
15th June, 1804. 
Honourable Sirs, ° 
The position of a body of troops under the command of 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar, and the conduct and language of that 


1 The Governor-General’s account of the circumstances under which 
the war with Holkar was begun is rather complicated. It is hoped that 
the paragraphs here printed will sufficiently explain the facts, and Lord 
Wellesley’s view, and line of action in relation to them. A postscript, at 
the end of the Despatch, not relating to Holkar, has also been omittel. 


Gg 


450 HOLKAR’S HOSTILE DISPOSITION. 


freebooter rendered it necessary for the security of the British 
interests, and those of our allies, to retain the army under the 
personal command of his Excellency the Commander-in-Chief in 
the field for a considerable period of time after the conclusion of 
peace with Dowlut Rao Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar. The 
most important considerations of policy, and especially of 
economy, required that the earliest means should be employed 
for establishing the British army at the stations which might be 
fixed for its permanent position in consequence of the peace. 
And it was therefore necessary to bring Jeswunt Rao Holkar to 
some definite explanation of his designs, the uncertainty of which 
might have involved considerable expense by occasioning the 
protracted detention of the army in the field. 

2. The result of these negotiations has finally compelled 
the Governor-Gencral in Council to adopt the most decisive 
measures for reducing the power and resources of Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar. 

5. Towards the conclusion of the war, Jeswunt Rao Holkar 
advanced towards the frontier of our ally the Rajah of Jyenagur, 


. in prosecution of his habits of predatory warfare, and occupied 


a position with the main body of his forces, which indicated an 
intention to violate the territorics of the Rajah of Jyenagur. 
Many other indications of an hostile nature were also manifested 
by Jeswunt Rao Holkar. 

6. In the month of December, 1803, Jeswunt Rao Holkar 
addressed letters to his Excellency the Commander-in-Chief, 
which, though expressed in the spirit of arrogance, which 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar assumed upon all occasions, contained 
assurances of his disposition to cultivate the friendship of the 
British Government. ! 

7. The conduct of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, however, at this period 
of time, was wholly inconsistent with thcse amicable professions. 
A letter was delivered to the Commander-in-Chief by the Rajah 
of Macherry,eaddressed to the Rajah by Jeswunt Rao Tolkar, 
the object of which was to detach that chieftain from his alliance 
with the British Government. ' Further correspondence of a 
nature hostile to the British Government was discovered between _ 
Holkar and persons owing allegiance to the British Government. > 
Authentic information was also received that Holkar had bar- 
barously murdered three British subjects in his service on a 


_charge of a correspondence between one of those officers and 


the Commander-in-Chief. 


GOVERNOR-GENERAL’S INSTRUCTIONS THEREON, 451 


8. The replies of the Commander-in-Chief to the letters which 
his Excellency had received from Jeswunt Rao Holkar expressed 
the wish of the British Government to abstain from the prosecu- 
tion of hostilities against him, declaring at the same time our 
determination to resist any attempt on the part of any chief or 
power to molest the allies, or to invade the rights of the British 
Government, The tenor of these answers was entirely approved 
by the Governor-General, who deemed it proper at this time to 
furnish the Commander-in-Chief with a statement of his views 
and intentions with respect to Jeswunt Rao Holkar, and with 
instructions for the guidance of the Commander-in-Chief’s con- 
duct with respect to that chieftain. 

9. It appeared to the Governor-General to be indispensably 
necessary either to adopt measures for the reduction of Jeswunt 
Rao Holkar’s predatory force, or to frame some arrangement 
with him which, without compromising the dignity of the British 
Government, and without violating the general principles of 
justice, or the acknowledged rights of other chicftains, might 
render it‘the interest of Jeswunt Rao Holkar to abandon his 
predatory habits, and preclude the necessity of an expensive 
permanent arrangement for the defence of our territories, and 
those of our allics against the incursions of that frecbooter,) 

11, * * * The Governor-General in Council therefore 
ultimately determined to authorize the Commander-in-Chief to 
conclude an agreement with Jeswunt Rao Holkar, engaging on the 
part of the British Government to leave Jeswunt Rao Iolkar in the 
unmolested exercise of his authority, Provided only that Jeswunt 
Rao Holkar should engage on his part to abstain from any acts 
of aggression and hostility against the British Government, and 
from any invasion of the rights of our allics. For the accomplish- 
ment of this arrangement the Commander-in-Chief was instructed 
to signify to Jeswunt Rao Holkar, either by letter or through the 
channel of the vakecls whom he might be invited to despatch, that 
the British Government entertained the most amicable disposition 
towards him, and harboured no intention of prosecuting hostilities 
against him, unless compelled to that extremity by acts of 
aggression on his part against the British Government, or any 
of its allics.) That the British Government was pledged by the 
obligation of its engagements with various chicfs and states in 
Hindostan to guarantce them against all exactions and demands 
unfounded in justice ; {hat we did not admit his claim to tribute 
of any denomination upon those chiefs or states founded upon 

Gg 2 


452 HOLKAR’S UNREASONABLE DEMANDS. 


the pretensions of the Holkar family, and that we should there- 
fore be compelled to resist any such demands on the part of 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar.) That with the consent of his Highness the 
Peishwa, the British Government would be disposed to arbitrate 
the differences subsisting between Jeswunt Rao Holkar and 
Cashee Rao Holkar, and to adjust the claims of the several 
branches of the family on the principles of equity and justice. 
That we were desirous of preserving peace with Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar, and that we would abstain from any unsolicited inter- 
ference in his concerns beyond ¢he limits required for the pro- 
tection and security of the rights and territories of our allies, and 
that we merely required that he should manifest a similar 
conduct by abstaining from all measures and operations of a 
contrary tendency, by \withdrawing his troops from any position 
which they might at that time occupy menacing to the British 
Government or to our allies, and by withholding all demands on 
the states or chicftains with which the British Government was 
in alliance ; adding, that if Jeswunt Rao Holkar should advance 
any claims on those states in his individual capacity/the British 
Government would be disposed to arbitrate all such claims on 
principles of equity and justice. 
12. The Commander-in-Chicf was desircd to exercise his dis- 
cretion with regard to the degree of sccurity which we might 
possess under Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s acquicscence in the terms 
) of the proposed arrangement ; and the Commandcr-in-Chicf was 
also authorized to employ the British forces against Jeswunt Rao 
_ Holkar, if the views of that chieftain should appear to be 
evidently hostile. 

20, On the 16th of March two vakecls from Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar arrived in the British camp, and on the 18th of that 
month held a conference with his Excellency the Commander-in- 
Chief. It appeared that the vakcels posscssed no powers to 
conclude any arrangement, but were simply instructed to state 
the propositions of Jeswunt Rao Iolkar, and to acquaint him 
with the terms which might be offered by the Commander-in- 
Chief. The demands which the vakeels brought forward in the 
name of Jeswunt Rao Holkar at this conference were, 

-ist. ‘That he should be permitted to collect the chout agrec- 
ably to the custom of his ancestors, 

ad. ‘That the ancient possessions formerly held by the family, 
such as Etawa, &c., twelve Pergunnahs in the Doab, and a Per- 
gunnah in Bundelcund should be granted to him. 


THE COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF’S REPLY. 453 


3d. ‘That the country of Hurriana, which was formerly in the 
possession of the family, should be given to him. 

4th. ‘That the country then in his possession should be 
guaranteed to him, and a treaty should be concluded with him 
on the same terms as that with Scindiah.’ 

21., These demands were of a nature so extravagant, and in every 
point of view so entirely inadmissible, that they were positively 
rejected by the Commander-in-Chief, who expressed his surprise 
at the conduct of Holkar in proposing terms utterly incom- 
patible with the propositions of the Commander-in-Chief and 
inconsistent with the tenor and apparent spirit of his late com- 
munications. 

22. The Commander-in-Chief referred the vakeels to the 
former letters of Holkar, containing the terms on which his 
Excellency was authorized to conclude an arrangement with 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar, and required as a preliminary to any 
negotiation, Holkar’s immediate return within his own territories. 

(The Commander-in-Chief directed the attention of the vakeels 
to the promise expressed in Holkar’s Ictter to the Commander- 
in-Chief, that he would withdraw his troops from their actual 
position, and asked the vakcels if he might depend on the 
performance of the promise.) They, replicd in explicit terms, 
that Holkar would not consider that promise to be binding, 
unless the demands now brought forward by the vakeels should 
be complied with The whole of the conversation on the part of 

_ the vakecls during this conference was distinguished by the most 
offensive spirit of arrogance and haughtiness.) They appeared to 
entertain an( expectation of inducing the Commander-in-Chicf 
to accede to their demands by an exaggerated description of 
Holkar’s military power and resources, and by insinuating that 
Holkar while soliciting the Commander-in-Chicf’s compliance 
with his demands possessed ample means of enforcing them: 

23. After the conference was concluded, the vakcels conveyed 
an intimation to the Commander-in-Chief, that although the 
demands which they had brought forward were conformable 
to their instructions, they were authorized to recede from those 
demands and to accept on the part of Holkar any provision in 
lands or moncy which the British Government should think, 
proper to assign to him. The Commander-in-Chief replied to 
this proposal by referring to his former proposition,and by again 
requiring as an indispensable preliminary to any negotiation, the 
immediate return of Holkar within his own possessions. 


454  HOLKAR TRIES TO TERRIFY GENERAL WELLESLEY. 


24. Shortly after this conference, the vakeels quitted the 
British camp on their return to that of Jeswunt Rao Holkar. 

27. While the negotiation with Jeswunt Rao Holkar was 
depending, the Governor-General in Council received a copy of 
a letter, addressed to the honourable Major-General Wellesley 
by Jeswunt Rao Holkar, apparently written at the commencement 
of the month of February, 1804, in which Jeswunt Rao Holkar 
distinctly demands the cession of certain provinces in the Deccan, 
stated by him to be the original property of the family of Holkar, 
as the condition of peace ; adding, in terms of insulting menace, 
jthat in the event of war, although unable to oppose the British 
artillery in the field, ‘countries of many hundred coss should 
'be overrun and plundered and burnt. That he (meaning the 
Commander-in-Chief) should not have leisure to breathe for a 
moment, and that calamities would fall on lacs of human beings 
in continued war by the attacks of his (Holkar’s) army, which 
overwhelms like the waves of the sca.’ 

28. The insolent and hostile declarations contained in that 
Ictter, combined with the equivocal conduct of Holkar in his 
negotiation with the Commander-in-Chicf, and his detected 
attempts to create rebcllion within the Company’s provinces, 
appeared to require the immediate adoption of measures of 
extremity against that chicftain} 

36. Holkar levied considerable contributions in Ajmere, and 
attempted, though without success, to obtain possession of the 
fort. A considerable part of his force, however, remained on the 
fronticr of Jyenagur, after having committed depredations on the 
territory of the Rajah. This circumstance, combined with the 
tenor of the Ictters of Jeswunt Rao Holkar and Bhowanny 
Shunker, with the renewal of those extravagant and inadmissible 
demands which had already been positively rejected by the 
Commandcer-in-Chief, and the evasive and deccitful conduct of 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar, throughout his negotiation with the Com- 
mander-in-Chief, precluded all expectation of effecting any 
pacific arrangement with Jeswunt Rao Holkar, on terms com- 
patible with the sccurity of the British interests and those of our 
allies, or with the honour and dignity of the British name. 

47. On the 5th of February a vakcel despatched by Holkar 
had arrived in the camp of Dowlut Rao Scindiah. The minister 
‘of Scindiah intimated to the Acting Resident that the principal 
object of the mission of Holkar’s vakcel was, to engage Scindiah 
to accommodate his differences with Jeswunt Rao Ifolkar, and 


INTRIGUES AGAINST US WITH SCINDIAH AND BONSLAY. 455 


unite in an attack on the British possessions. The minister 
stated that Scindiah had signified his refusal to engage in the 
proposed measure in the most positive terms, adding, that even 
if he were inclined to violate his faith with the British Govern- 
ment, the character of Holkar and the experience which Scin- 
diah had acquired of his utter disregard of the most solemn 
engagements, would effectually prevent him from forming any 
connection with that chicftain. The minister added, that Scin- 
diah had declared to Holkar’s vakeel that he had no inclination 
to attack Holkar, provided he would retire within his own terri- 
tory, and abstain from committing acts of hostility against 
Scindiah and his dependants. 

48, Adverting to the enmity subsisting between Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah and Jeswunt Rao Holkar, and to the solicitude of 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah to induce the British Government to 
adopt measures of extremity against Jeswunt Rao Holkar, the 
assertions of the Durbar of Scindiah with respect to the proceed- 
ings of Holkar, must be reccived with distrust. ©The Governor- 
Gencral in Council, however, entertains no doubt of the truth of 
those assertions, the conduct of (Holkar being entirely consistent 
with such a project of combined hostility against the British 
Government. } 

54. The ministers of Dowlut Rao Scindiah accompanied this 
report to Major Malcolm of the negotiations of Scindiah’s vakeel 
at the camp of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, with the communication of a 
paper which they stated to have been received from the vakeel 
of Scindiah at Nagpore, containing the concurrent report of mes- 
sengers despatched for intelligence to the camp of Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar, with respect to the declared intention of that chieftain 
to carry on a predatory war against the British possessions. 

56. These combined facts demonstrate that such of the pos- 
scssions of the Company and_of our allies, as might be accessible 
to the troops of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, were the immediate 
objects of his predatory designs. But even the amicable dis- 
position of Holkar would not have afforded to the British 
Government or to its allics any security against the predatory 
incursions of that chicftain’s forces. The charges of Holkar’s 
numcrous troops greatly exceeded the precarious resources of 
his usurped dominion, and had hitherto been defrayed by the 
profits of indiscriminate plunder; and the continuance of the 
same system of predatory warfare directed against such terri~ 
torics as were most accessible and had not yet been desolated, 


456 HOLKAR AN INEVITABLE OBSTACLE TO PEACE, 


afforded to his tumultuous followers the only prospect of relief 
from the distress to which they were exposed by the inability 
of Holkar to provide for their subsistence. 

57. By the extension of the system of political alliances which 
had been adopted by the British Government during the war, 
most of those petty states from whose territories! Holkar and 
other freebooters had been accustomed to derive their plunder, 
were now connected by alliance with the British Government, 
which was bound to protect them against all aggressions, ) 

58. The scarcity occasioned by the unusual deficiency of rain 
during the last rainy season, the operations of the contending 
Mahratta armies, antecedent to the conclusion of the treaty of 
Bassein, and the subsequent depredations of the troops of 
Holkar had spread desolation over the greater part of the 
Deccan and of the southern provinces of Hindostan. Holkar’s 
predatory force, therefore, must shortly have been compelled for 
subsistence to violate the territorics of the British Government 
or of states, for whose defence the British Government was 
bound to provide. 

59. The plunder of the opulent city of Jyenagur, which would 
probably have been the first object of his depredations, would 
have afforded to Holkar a great accession of pecuniary resource, 
would have enabled him to retain a formidable force, and would 
consequently have augmented his means of plunder and 
devastation ; and the employment of our military force for the 
suppression of Holkar’s predatory operations, would ultimately 
have become indispensably necessary under circumstances of 
augmented inconvenience, difficulty and expense. 

60. The recent peace with Dowlut Rao Scindiah and the 
Rajah of Berar has deprived of employment numerous bands 
of irregular troops, Persons of that description would cither 
have been encouraged by the hope of plunder, or impelled by 
the necessity of obtaining subsistence to unite with Holkar in 
the plunder of the countries towards which he might direct his 
force. Under these circumstances, it would have been indis- 
pensably necessary cithcr to maintain our army in a state of 
inactivity in the ficld upon a scale of expense not inferior to 
that which would attend the most active operations of war, or 
to have exposed the territories of the British Government and 
those of our allies, to the certain ravages of Holkar’s troops, 
until the army could again be placed at a still more burthen- 
some expense in a condition to repel their incursions. 


4 


TO SUBDUE HIM NECESSARY, AND BEST ECONOMY. 457 


61. The facts and considerations above stated sufficiently 
demonstrate that the existence of the horde of freebooters 
which Holkar conducted was hazardous to the tranquillity of 
our possessions and those of our allies, and that our continued 
forbearance was calculated to encourage his predatory designs, 
to augment his means of carrying them into effect within the 
limits of our own possessions, and to involve the British 
Government in great additional expense. (The reduction of that 
predatory power therefore was manifestly a measure not only 
of just policy and necessary security, but of ultimate economy 
with reference to the finances of the honourable Company. 

62. The Governor-General therefore on the receipt of the 
despatch from the Commander-in-Chief to which the 34th 
preceding paragraph of this despatch refers, issued orders to the 
Commander-in-Chicf, and to Major-General Wellesley, under 
date the 16th of April, for the immediate commencement of 
hostile operations against Holkar in Hindostan and the Deccan. 
The Governor-General at the same time notificd this determi- 
nation to Major Malcolm, and directed that officer to apprize 
Scindiah of his Excellency’s resolutions. The Governor-General 
in Council has the honour to enclose for the information of 
your honourable Committee copies of the instructions to 
the Commander-in-Chief, Major-General Wellesley, and Major 
Malcolm, to which this paragraph refers. 

63. The Governor-General in Council now proceeds to 
submit to your honourable Committce a review of the military 
operations which have been directed to the object of reducing 
the power and resources of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, and of the 
success with which they have been attended down to the date 
of the latest advices which have been received by the Governor- 
Gencral in Council. 

64. On the receipt by Major-General Wellesley of the Ictter 
addressed by Holkar to that officer, referred to in the 27th 
paragraph of this despatch, Major-General Wellesley, judging 
from the tenor of that letter, and from the advices which he 
had received of the proceedings of Jeswunt Rao Holkar in 
Hindostan, that the Governor-General in Council would deem 
it necessary to direct the immediate prosecution of hostilities 
against that frecbootcr, thought it advisable to adopt without 
dclay such measures as should enable him to afford the most 
effectual support to the operations which might be commenced 
under the orders of the Governor-General in Council by the 


mK 


458 MA}OR-GENERAL WELLESLEY’S PREPARATIONS. 


Commander-in-Chief from Hindostan. The principal posses- 
sions now occupied by the partisans of Jeswunt Rao Holkar 
under that usurper’s authority in the Deccan are, the fort and 
territory of Chandore. Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s partisans also 
possessed some territory in Candeish, and a few districts inter- 
mixed with the territories of his Highness the Nizam. The 
capture of the fort of Chandore would deprive Holkar of all 
those possessions. The siege of that fort therefore was the 
primary object to which the operations of the British army in 
the Deccan was to be directed. The state of the country how- 
ever between Poonah and Chandore, which was suffering under 
the calamity of a severe scarcity, presented scrious obstacles to 
the advance of an army in that direction, and Major-Gencral 
Wellesley was apprehensive that unless the commencement of 
hostilities was postponed until the rainy season, he might not be 
able to conduct active operations against Holkar’s possessions 
in the Deccan. Major-General Wellesley however proceeded 
to place the troops under his immediate command in a state of 
equipment for active service. 

65. Major-General Wellesley was of opinion that considcrable 
effect might be produced by the advance of the British troops 
in Guzerat against the possessions of Holkar in Malwa; and 
Major-General Wellesley accordingly adopted immediate mea- 
sures for reinforcing the troops in that quarter with three 
battalions of native infantry. The probability that it might be 
the determination of the Governor-Gencral in Council to station 
in Guzerat the force to be subsidized by Dowlut Rao Scindiah 
according to the stipulations of the defensive alliance, operated as 
a farther inducement to Gencral Welleslcy to reinforce the troops 
in Guzerat, which after the addition above stated, amounted to 
two regiments of European infantry and six battalions of native 
infantry, one battalion of which was 1,600 strong. 

66, These arrangements, together with the sentiments of the 
honourable Major-General Wellesley on the subject of a general 
plan of operations against Jeswunt Rao Holkar, were stated by 
that officer to his Excellency the Commander-in-Chief in a 
letter dated 23rd April, of which a copy is annexed to this 
despatch for the information of your honourable Committee. 

67. On the receipt of the instructions of the Governor-General, 
under date the 16th April, Major-Gencral Wellesley issued 
immediate instructions to Colonel Murray, commanding the 
British troops in Guzerat, for the guidance of his conduct in the 


SCINDIAH AGREES TO CO-OPERATE AGAINST HOLKAR. 459 


operations which General Wellesley directed Colonel Murray to 
adopt without delay against Holkar’s possessions in Malwa. 

68. Major-General Wellesley, at the same time, directed the 
Resident at the court of Dowlut Rao Scindiah to require 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah to employ his arms without delay in the 
reduction of such parts of the possessions of Holkar as might 
be accessible to Scindiah’s troops. The Resident was also 
directed to desire that Scindiah would despatch an officer on 
his part to join the army under the command of Colonel Murray 
for the purpose of procuring supplies for the use of the army 
under the command of Colonel Murray, and of taking charge 
of any districts captured from Holkar, which Colonel Murray 
might think proper to deliver to his charge. The Resident, with 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah, was also apprized of General Wellcsley’s 
opinion that a detachment of British troops should join Scin- 
diah’s army, and was desired to call on Scindiah to provide 
battering guns for the eventual use of Colonel Murray’s army. 

69. Dowlut Rao Scindiah had received the notification of the 
Governor-General’s resolution to reduce Jeswunt Rao Holkar, 
and of his Excellency’s intention with respect to the future 
division of the territory under the usurped authority of Holkar, 
as stated in the instructions to the acting resident with Scindiah 
under date the 16th April, a copy of which is annexed to this 
despatch. With every demonstration of satisfaction Scindiah 
promised to employ every exertion to co-operate effectually 
with the British troops against Holkar, and after some discussion 
with the Resident, consented to adopt the measures recom- 
mended by Major-General Wellesley. 

70, The Governor-General in Council has the honour to 
annex to this despatch a copy of the instructions issued by 
Major-General Wellesley to Colonel Murray. That document, 
together with the letter from Major-General Welleslcy to the 
Commander-in-Chicf to which the 66th paragraph of this 
despatch refers, will afford to your honourable Committee 
complete information with respect to the plan of operations 
against ITolkar to be undertaken from the Deccan and Guzerat. 

91, The Governor-General in Council now resumes the nar- 
rative of the proceedings of his Excellency the Commander- 
in-Chief in Hindostan under the Govctnor-Gencral in Council’s 
instructions of the 15th of April. 

72. During the negotiation with Jeswunt Rao Holkar the 
Commander-in-Chicf had continued to advance slowly towards 


460 HOLKAR FORCED TO RETREAT FROM }¥ENAGUR. 


the territories of the Rajah of Jyenagur for the combined 
purpose of accelerating the progress of the negotiation with 
Holkar, of protecting the country of Jyenagur from any hostile 
attempt on the part of Holkar, and of more effectually pro- 
tecting the dominions of the British Government, and of our 
allies, against the predatory incursions of any bodies of troops 
in the direction of the Jumna. 

73. A detachment of considerable strength, under the com- 
mand of Lieut.-Colonel Ball, occupied a position near Canoon, 
a town situated about eighty miles south-west of Delhi, which 
was calculated effectually to oppose the attempts of any body 
of troops to penetrate in that direction into the recently acquired 
possessions of the British Government. 

74. Previously to the receipt of the Governor-General’s 
instructions of the 16th of April, the Commander-in-Chicf had 
judged it to be expedient to adopt some arrangement calculated 
to arrest the progress of the depredations which Holkar, 
returning from Adjmcer, had actually commenced within the 
territorics of the Rajah of Jyenagut, where he occupicd a 
position which menaced the sccurity of the capital of that 
province. Holkar had previously despatched his guns towards 
Malwa, but remained at the head of a considerable body of 
horse. With a view to protect the city of Jyenagur, and to 
give confidence to the government and troops of the Rajah, the 
Commander-in-Chicf formed a detachment of three battalions 
of native infantry, under the command of the Honourable 
Licut.-Coloncl Monson, of his Majesty’s 76th regiment, which 
marched towards Jyepore on the i8th of April. The march of 
the detachment was regulated in such a manner as to enable 
the Commander-in-Chicf eventually to join it in one forced 
march with the whole army. On the 21st of April, the detach- 
ment under the command of Licut.-Colonecl Monson arrived 
in the vicinity of Jyenagur. The detachment was accompanied 
by an officer despatched by the Commander-in-Chief, with 
instructions to confer personally with the Rajah of Jycnagur on 
the means of opposing the designs of IHolkar, and to persuade 
the Rajah to adopt the most vigorous and decisive measures 
towards the accomplishment of that object. The march of 
the detachment to Jyenagur immediately compelled Holkar to 
retreat. On the morning of the 23rd of April that chieftain 
suddenly retired from his position within the territory of 
Jyenagur, and commenced his march with great precipitation 


HIS RAPID FLIGHT, AND RENEWED OVERTURES. 461 


to the southward. Holkar was followed in his retreat by parties 
of Hindostanee horse, under the command of European officers, 
who had been detached by the Commander-in-Chief for the 
purpose of observing Holkar’s motions, and harassing his troops 
on their march. 

75. A short halt made by Holkar of two days having induced 
the Commander-in-Chief to suspect that Holkar’s retreat might 
be intended as a feint, his Excellency thought it proper to 
advance with his army, directing the detachment under the 
command of Lieut.-Colonel Monson to precede the main army 
with the utmost expedition. On the approach of the British 
troops, however, Holkar resumed his flight with the utmost 
precipitation, and with every appearance of apprehension and 
alarm. 

76. Holkar continued his retreat with the utmost celerity 
until he arrived in the vicinity of Kotah, at which place he 
halted, the rapidity of his flight having placed him at so great 
a distance from the British troops as to relicve him from the 
apprchension of any immediate attack. The parties of Hin- 
dostanee horse which had been detached by the Commander- 
in-Chief continued to accompany his retreat, and had oppor- 
tunitics of engaging parties of his troops. Regular information 
was received by the Commandcer-in-Chief from the officers com- 
manding the Hindostanee horse employed in the pursuit of 
Holkar, which described the situation of that chieftain during 
his flight to be in the utmost degree wretched and distressed. 
The countries through which he passed had been nearly deso- 
lated by his former outrages, and afforded a scanty subsistence 
for his troops, of whom great numbers deserted. 

97. After Holkar’s flight the Commandcr-in-Chief received a 
Ietter from that chieftain, recommencing protestations of friend- 
ship, and proposing to despatch a vakecl to the Commander-in- 
Chicf. The Commander-in-Chief replied to this overture by 
referring to the propositions which he had originally offered to 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s acceptance. Copics of those documents 
are annexed to this despatch. 

78, The Commander-in-Chicf continued the march for some 
days in the direction of Holkar’s flight, the detachment under 
Licut.-Colonel Monson still continuing in advance. His Ex- 
cellency proposed to attack the fort of Rampoorah, belonging 
to Holkar, the occupation of which by the British troops would 
deprive that chicftain of his possessions in that quarter of India, 


462 RAMPOORAH STORMED, DEFENSIVE PRECAUTIONS. 


For this service his Excellency detached a force consisting of 
three battalions of native infantry, one regiment of native 
cavalry, and a proportion of heavy ordnance and field artillery, 
under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Don. The detachment 
arrived before Rampoorah on the . That fort 
was assaulted by a party of the troops under Lieut.-Colonel Don 
on the 16th of May, and carried with the greatest gallantry and 
rapidity. The despatch from the Commander-in-Chief, of which 
a copy is annexed to this despatch, contains an account of the 
assault and capture of Rampoorah, which reflects the highest 
honour on the officers and troops who were engaged on that 
service. 

79. The rapid flight of Holkar, and his distance from the 
Commander-in-Chicf, and from the detachment under Licut.- 
Colonel Monson, rendered it highly improbable that any force 
acting from Hindostan would be able to bring Iolkar to action. 
The improbability of Holkar’s return to the upper parts of 
Hindostan, combined with the advices which the Commander- 
in-Chief had received of the forward state of preparations in 
Guzerat, and the conviction that the operations of the British 
troops in that quarter, in concert with those of Scindiah, afforded 
during the present scason the only prospect of making an 
effectual impression on the territories of Ilolkar, appcared to 
render it expedient to withdraw the main body of the British 
army from the advanced position which it occupied, and to 
confine the plan of operations on the side of Hindostan to the 
adoption of measures for the effectual exclusion of Holkar from 
that quarter. : 

80, With this view, his Excellency the Commander-in-Chief 
directed Lieut-Colonel Monson to form such a disposition of 
his force as should completely obstruct the rcturn of Molkar in 
that direction, The force under Licut.-Coloncl Monson was 
fully equal to any which it was probable that Iolkar would be 
able to oppose to it before the scason for more active operations 
should arrive. The possession of Rampoorah, and of the terri- 
tories of Holkar which depended on that fort, also contributed 
to oppose any attempt of that chicftain to return towards the 
position from which he had fled. 

81. A large body of Scindiah’s troops, which had advanced 
from Ougein to co-operate with the Commander-in-Chicf, was 
instructed to press upon Holkar, and to harass him on his 
march. 


DETAIL AND ECONOMY OF SUBSIDIARY FORCES. 463 


82. The Governor-General entirely approved the arrangement 
which the Commander-in-Chief had resolved to adopt. 

83. In the actual state of affairs, it appeared to the Governor- 
General in Council to be impracticable to carry on active 
operations against Jeswunt Rao Holkar until the close of the 
rainy season, when it might be expected that those countries 
which had been desolated by the ravages of the predatory 
troops of the Mahratta chieftains, in the contests which preceded 
the conclusion of the treaty of Bassein, and by the deficiency 
of rain during the last season, would afford subsistence to the 
British troops which might be employed against the territories 
and resources of Jeswunt Rao Holkar in the Deccan. The 
Governor-General in Council deemed this to be a favourable 
moment for withdrawing the British troops in every quarter of 
India to their usual stations, with the exception of the subsidiary 
forces which the British Government is bound to furnish to the 
Peishwa and the Guikwar, to Dowlut Rao Scindiah and the 
Ranah of Gohud. With this vicw, the Governor-General, on 
the 25th of May, issued the notes of instructions of which a 
copy is transmitted for the information of your honourable 
Committee. 

84. The completion of the arrangements prescribed in the 
notes of instructions will enable the British: Government, at the 
close of the rainy season, to reduce the power of Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar within due bounds, without entailing any further expense 
than that to which the British Government is exposed by the 
_establishment of the subsidiary forces at Poona and with the 
Guikwar, Dowlut Rao Scindiah and the Ranah of Gohud; for 
which, however, the most ample resources have been provided 
by our subsidiary engagements with those states respectively. 
Your honourable Committee will remark with satisfaction, that 
the whole of the subsidiary troops in the Deccan, forming a 
force of upwards of 22,000 men’, may be employed against 


1 Al Hyderabad—t regiment Europeans, 6 battalions Sepoys, 2 regi- 
ments Native Cavalry, 2 companies Artillery, 1 company Pioneers, 4/ 
Poona—6 battalions Sepoys, 2 companies Artillery, 1 regiment Native 
Cavalry. With Dowlut Rao Scindiah—6 battalions Sepoys, 2 companies 
Artillery, 1 regiment Native Cavalry. Wh the Gurkwar—a battalions 
Sepoys, 1 company Artillery. Zo/a/—1 regiment Europeans, 3 regi- 
ments Native Cavalry, 20 battalions Native Infantry, 7 companies 
Artillery, 1 company Pioneers. 


464 LAKE GOES INTO CANTONMENTS FOR THE RAINS. 


Jeswunt Rao Holkar, or any other disturber of the public 
tranquillity, without incurring any scrious demands on the 
permanent establishments of your respective presidencies, or 
without making any considerable addition to the military 
charges in India. Your honourable Committee will not fail to 
appreciate the advantages of an arrangement by which the 
charges of so considerable a proportion of the established mili- 
tary force of India is defrayed by forcign subsidics. Adverting 
to the constant state of preparation and cquipment in which 
the subsidiary forces must be maintained, your honourable 
Committee will not fail to estimate the influence and security 
which the British Government must derive from the establish- 
ment in the heart of the Deccan of so formidable a force, in 
positions calculated at once to repel external aggression and to 
secure the maintenance of tranquillity within your flourishing 
and extensive possessions in the peninsula of India. 

85. On the of May last, the Commandcr-in-Chicf com- 
menccd his march on his return towards the British posscssions, 
for the purpose of cantoning the troops at their usual stations, 
with such changes of position as the state of our newly-acquired 
possessions may demand, 

86. It has been stated in the 74th paragraph of this despatch, 
that the Commander-in-Chief had detached a body of Hin- 
dostanee cavalry to accompany the movements of Holkar’s 
troops. That body of cavalry consisted of two partics; one 
commanded by Captain Gardiner, an officer in the service of 
the Rajah of Jyenagur, and the other by Licutenant Lucan, of 
his Majesty’s 74th regiment. 

87. On the morning of the 29th of May, Captain Gardiner, 
with the detachment under his command, arrived at a placc 
called Balloo-Khery, where he received intelligence that a 
native chieftain, in the interest of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, named 
Tantia, was encamped with 3 battalions of infantry, 11 guns, 
200 Mewattees, and 3,000 horse, at the distance of about 5 miles 
from Captain Gardincr’s position. Captain Gardiner imme- 
diatcly addressed a letter to Licutenant Lucan, who occupied 
a position about two miles in the rear, apprizing him of the 
circumstance, and requesting Lieutenant Lucan’s assistance in 
attacking Tantia’s party. Licutenant Lucan soon joined Cap- 
tain Gardiner’s party, and the two divisions lost no time in 
advancing towards the cnemy. 

88. Tantia having before been apprized of the approach of 


TANTIA’S BATTALIONS SURRENDER ON TERMS. 465 


the force under Captain Gardiner and Lieutenant Lucan, was 
retreating with his battalions to a strong position, which they 
reached about nine o’clock on the 29th of May. In this situation 
they were attacked by the united detachments of Captain 
Gardincr and Licutenant Lucan, which had been divided into 
four parties for the purpose of pressing the battalions on every 
side and of preventing their escape. At five o’clock P.M. the 
guns attached to Lieutenant Lucan’s division arrived after a 
march of thirty-five miles, when the native chieftain command- 
ing Tantia’s battalions demanded a parley, and agreed to 
surrender his party on condition of being escorted in safety to 
the camp of Bappoo Scindiah, the officer commanding the 
advanced army of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, and of never serving 
against the British Government. These terms having been 
acceded to by Captain Gardiner, the battalions (surrounded by 
partics of Captain Gardiner and Licutenant Lucan’s cavalry) 
immediately commenced their march to Balloo-Khery. The 
force of the battalions, including 200 Mewattces, amounts to 
2099 effective men. Tantia himself retreated with his cavalry, 
on the first appearance of the divisions under Captain Gardiner 
and Licutenant Lucan. 

89. On the 2d of June the Governor-General in Council 
received information that a body of predatory horse had made 
an incursion into the province of Bundlecund. 

go. Licutenant-Coloncl Fawcett, who, by the illness of Colonel 
Powell, and the death of Licutenant-Colonel Polhill, had acci- 
dentally succeeded to the command of the British troops serving 
in the province of Bundlccund, consisting of 450 Iuropean 
infantry, four battalions of sepoys, and two squadrons of native 
cavalry, had scent a detachment of seven companies of scpoys, 
a troop of native cavalry, and the park of artillery, under the 
command of Captain Smith, to attack a fort at the distance of 
about five miles from Licutenant-Coloncl Fawccett’s position at 
Kooch. 

gi. On the morning of the 22d of May, the party of predatory 
horse succecded in cutting off a part of Captain Smith’s detach- 
ment, which was posted in the Pettah of the fort. This party 
consisted of Captain Feade, and Lieutenant Morris of the 
artillery, with two serjeants, two corporals, four gunners, and 
forty-one matrosscs, and a proportion of Lascars, Mr. Hooper, 
assistant-surgeon, and two companics of scpoys from the ist 
battalion 18th regiment, under Licutcnant Gillespie. The whole 

Wh 


466 LIEUT.-COLONEL FAWCETT’S DISASTER. 


of the party was cut off with the exception of 130 wounded 
natives, who returned to Lieutenant-Colonel Fawcett’s camp on 
the 24th of May, two howitzers, two 12-pounders, one 6-pounder, 
and all the tumbrils belonging to the parks were also captured 
by the party of predatory horse. Captain Smith, with the 
fetiaining five companies of sepoys, retreated (with the loss of 
one man only) to Lieut.-Coloncl Fawcctt’s camp. The party 
of predatory horse made several attempts to cut off Captain 
Smith’s retreat but without success. 

92. The detail of this disaster will be found stated in the 

annexed copy of a despatch from Lieut.-Colonel Fawcett, under 
date the 22d of May. 
_ 93. The party of predatory horse was originally stated to be 
fifteen or twenty thousand in number, and to be commanded by 
Ameer Khaun, formerly a partizan of Jeswunt Rao Holkar. 
From information, however, subsequently reccived, there is cvery 
reason to believe that this party of predatory horse did not 
exceed five thousand, that they did not belong to Amcer Khaun, 
and that the predatory incursion had no connection with the 
movements of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, but was a mere incursion 
of vagrant banditti for the purpose of obtaining subsistence by 
plunder. 

94. The same party of predatory horse afterwards attacked 
the town of Calpee, and attempted to cross the Jumna, but was 
repulsed by two companies of sepoys under the command of 
Captain Jones ; and was afterwards defeated near Kooch on the 
goth of May by Colonel Sheppard, commanding a small party of 
troops lately in the service of Ambajec Inglia. Since that period 
of time, the predatory horse have entirely evacuated the province 
of Bundlecund. 

95- Their progress, however, from Eritch to Calpec, and from 
Calpee to Kooch, the greatest part of which tract of country 
belongs to the Nana of Calpcee, was marked by plunder, cruclty, 
and devastation. 

96. Lieut.-Colonel Fawcett subsequently moved with his de- 
tachment in various directions from Kooch to the river Betwah, 
thence to the Jumna, and ultimately marched to Calpec. 

97. In the course of the various marches of the detachment, 
the troops experienced the utmost degree of distress from the 
intense heat of the weather, and from the deficiency of forage 
and provisions, and the lives of several valuable officers and 
men were lost by the mere effects of excessive heat and fatigue. 


CAPTAIN BAILLIE KEEPS BUNDLECUND QUIET. 467 


g8. The conduct of Lieut.-Colonel Fawcett on this occasion 
appearing to the Governor-General to be in the highest degree 
censurable, contrary to the positive orders of the Commander- 
in-Chief, and utterly inconsistent with the duty of Lieut.-Colonel 
Fawcett, and unworthy of the character of a British officer, the 
Governor-General directed that Lieut.-Colonel Fawcett should 
be placed under arrest, and that a judicial investigation into his 
conduct should be instituted. The Commander-in-Chief, imme- 
diately on the receipt of the intelligence of the destruction of the 
party detached from the force under the command of Captain 
Smith, had issued orders to Lieut.-Colonel Fawcett, directing 
that officer to deliver over his command to the officer next in 
rank with the design of instituting a judicial enquiry into Lieut.- 
Colonel Fawcett’s conduct. The Commander-in-Chief has also 
placed Captain Smith in arrest, with a view of instituting an 
enquiry into his conduct, which appears also to have been 
blameable. | ‘ 

99. At this period of time, Captain John Baillie who con- 
ducted on the part of his Excellency the Commander-in-Chief 
all political and civil duties in Bundlccund, resided at Banda, a 
place situated to the southward of the river Betwa, and nearly 
in the centre of that part of the province of Bundlccund, in 
which the British authority had been established. The force 
with Captain Baillie consisted only of a small force of cavalry 
belonging to Shumshere Bahauder, about 200 cavalry belonging 
to Rajah Himmut Bahauder, and 1000 sepoys, under the com- 
mand of an European officer in the service of the latter chicftain. 
Notwithstanding the consternation which had spread throughout 
the province of Bundlecund on the incursion of the predatory 
horse, whose numbers had been greatly exaggerated, Captain 
Baillie deemed it to be his duty to maintain his situation at all 
hazards, and the Governor-General in Council is satisfied that 
the preservation of tranquillity in the districts in our possession 
south of the Betwa is to be ascribed entirely to the confidence 
inspired, and to the subordination maintained throughout those 
districts, by the firmness, manly prudence, and fortitude mani- 
fested by Captain Baillie on that occasion. 

100, On the day after the receipt of the intelligence of the 
destruction of the party detached from the force under the 
command of Captain Smith, the Commander-in-Chief marched 
from the position which he then occupicd with the whole of 
the cavalry with the intention of crossing the Jumna, and 

wha 


468 | HOPEFUL PROSPECTS, FALSIFIED RY THE EVENT. 


of proceeding through the Doab to the south-cast, for the 
protection of that territory from the eventual incursion of 
the predatory horse. 

1o1. In consequence of the late occurrences in Bundlecund, 
the Governor-General deemed it necessary to adopt an arrange- 
ment for the complete establishment of the British authority 
throughout the districts of Bundlecund, ceded to the honourable 
Company by his Highness the Peishwa, and for the consolida- 
tion of the civil and military authorities in that province, 
and for its future security against any irruption of predatory 
horse. 

102. By the latest accounts, Jeswunt Rao Holkar had retreated 
to within a short distance of Ougein, still followed by the 
irregular cavalry, under the command of Captain Gardiner, and 
whilst the detachment under Lieut.-Coloncl Monson occupied a 
position calculated to preclude the possibility of Holkar’s return 
into Hindostan. : 

103. It may be reasonably expected that during the course of 
the rainy season now commencing the situation of Jcswunt Rao 
Holkar will be arranged in such a manner as to secure the peace 
of India. In the meanwhile the Company’s provinces enjoy a 
state of perfect tranquillity, and the Governor-Gencral in Council 
expects to be able to complete all the arrangements connccted 
with the late treatics of peace and subsidy previously to the 
conclusion of the rains. With a view to acccleratc these desirable 
objects, the Governor-Gencral proposes to procced by watcr to the 
upper provinces in the course of a few days, and hopes to be able 
to meet the Commandcer-in-Chicf in the course of the month of 
August; after which event, the Governor-Gencral will have the 
honour to submit to your honourable Committee a more detailed 
state of the arrangements connected with the late treatics of 
peace and subsidy, 

We have the honour to be, &c. 
WELLESLEY. 
G. H. BARLow. 
G. UDNY. 


NECESSITY OF OFFENSIVE MEASURES AGAINST HOLKAR. 469 


67. Marquess Wellesley’s Notes on the War with Holkar. 


Necessity of re-inforcing Licut-Colonel Monson with 
European troops. 


(Extract.) 
Fort William, July 28, 1804. 


2. This state of circumstances presents a favourable oppor- 
tunity for striking a decisive blow against Holkar’s power and 
resources. No expectation can be entertained of any accommo- 
dation with Holkar as long as he shall remain in any degree of 
force. In the actual situation of affairs, a defensive war on our 
part would be attended with the most scrious consequences to 
our reputation and interests. It docs not appear that either of 
the corps under the command of Colonel Murray, and of Lieut.- 
Colonel Monson, are sufficiently strong to encounter singly 
Holkar’s force in the ficld. We must not depend on Scindiah 
for assistance, and whether his recent conduct proceeds from 
treachery, or from inability to put his troops into motion, it is 
evident that no aid will be derived from his co-operation in the 
prosecution of hostilitics against Holkar, It is also evident that 
as long as Holkar shall be enabled to maintain a superiority in 
the ficld, it will be impossible for the detachments under Colonel 
Murray and Licut.-Coloncl Monson, to effect a junction of their 
forces, and a protracted and expensive war may be expected to 
be the consequence of this system of opcrations. 

3. Under these circumstances it appears to be highly expe- 
dicnt to adopt immcdiate measures for the attack of Jeswunt 
Rao Holkar. The first step with a view to this desirable object 
is to reinforce cither of the detachments under Colonel Murray 
or Licut.-Colone! Monson, to the extent which may be neces-~ 
sary to cnable cithcr of those detachments to encounter singly 
the army of Ifolkar. The two detachments may then effect 
a junction, or adopt any other system of operations which may 
be dcemed morc advisable. 

4. From the distance of Coloncl Murray’s detachment from 
the troops in the Deccan, it will be impossible to reinforce him 
from that quarter; and the force stationed in Guzcrat will be 
required for the protection of that province against predatory 
incursions. It appears, therefore, to be necessary to reinforce 
the detachment under Licut,-Colonel Monson, with a regiment 


470 MONSON TO BE REINFORCED BY EUROPEAN TROOPS. 


of European cavalry, and “wo, or if possible ¢hrec, regiments 
of native cavalry, and with such a proportion of native infantry 
and European artillery, as shall enable Licut.-Coloncl Monson 
to advance against Holkar, and to leave a sufficient corps to 
defend the Mucundra Pass, and to prevent any incursion in that 
direction into Hindostan. It would be very desirable, if pos- 
sible, to afford to Lieut.-Colonel Monson a reinforcement of 
European infantry. The Commander-in-chicf knows how far he 
can rely on our native infantry for the attack of Tolkar's 
artillery, supposing Holkar’s artillery to be as formidable as it 
has been lately described. 

5. If the native troops should be deemed uncqual to the 
attack, what arrangement can be immediately adopted for the . 
attainment of that important object? How can an European 
force be supplicd to Licutenant-Colonel Monson for the attack 
of Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s artillery? 


68. The Governor-General in Council to the Honourable the 
Secret Committee of the Honourable the Court of Directors.’ 


Progress of the War. Operations against Bhurtpore. Critical 
relations with Scindiah. 


Fort William, March 24, 180%. 
Honourable Sirs, 

In our despatch of the 15th of Junc, 1804, the Governor- 
General in Council had the honour to submit to your honourable 
Committee a statement of the circumstances and considerations 
which had compelled the British Government to adopt measures 
for the reduction of the powcr of Jeswunt Rao Ifolkar, within 
such limits as might be consistent with the security of the rights 
and interests of the British Government and its allics, and of the 
successful commencement of hostile operations against the troops 
of that chieftain. 


* A great part of this voluminous despatch does not relate, directly, to 
the war with Holkar. It has been therefore omitted. But it was thought 
desirable to insert the passages describing the crisis at Scindiah’s Court, 
which threatened the renewal of hostilities between that Chief and the 
British Government. Nor was it thought necessary to reproduce the 
arrangements preliminary to operations in the Deccan, or the tedious and 
uninstructive detail of detached actions during the latter part of the war 
with Holkar, in Cuttack, Rohilkund, and Bundlecund. 


THE TOILS SEEMED CLOSING ROUND HOLKAR. 471 


In that despatch the Governor-General in Council communi- 
cated to your honourable Committee the general plan of opera 
tions originally intended to be pursued for the reduction of 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s power. Your honourable Committee 
will have observed that the basis of that plan was a combination 
of the movements and operations of the British troops and 
those of Dowlut Rao Scindiah and the Guickwar, acting against 
the forces and territories of Holkar from Guzerat, Malwa, and the 
Deccan, while the main army under the personal direction of 
his Excellency the Commander-in-Chief pursued the enemy from 
Hindostan. 

It was not expected that the whole of this plan of operations 
could be immediately carried into effect, and we apprized your 
honourable Committee in our despatch of the 15th of June, of 
the insurmountable obstacles opposed to the immediate advance 
of the army of the Deccan which was destined to occupy the 
forts and territory of Holkar, south of the Nerbudda, by the 
desolated state of the country through which that army would 
have occasion to pass. Until those obstacles, however, should 
have bcen removed by the return of the rainy season, we had 
reason to expect that the operations of the British troops on the 
side of Hindostan, combined with those of the allied forces from 
Malwah and Guzcrat, would either effect the destruction of 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s force, or would circumscribe the move- 
ments of the encmy in such a manner as tp occasion the 
dispersion of his forces, or at least to prevent his return to 
Hindostan after the army of his Excellency the Commander-in- 
Chief should have compelled him to retire from the position 
which he occupied within the territory of the Rajah of Jyenagur. 

Your honourable Committec has becn apprized by our despatch 
of the 15th of June, that the detachment under the command of 
Colonel Monson had compelled the enemy to retire from that 
position. The Governor-General in Council further apprized 
your honourable Committee of the circumstances, which in the 
judgment of his Excellency the Commander-in-Chief rendered 
it expedicnt to withdraw the main body of the British army 
from the advanced position which it occupicd, and to confine 
the plan of operations on the side of Hindostan, to the adap- 
tion of measures for the effectual exclusion of Holkar from 
that quarter, until the return of a season more favourable for 
active operations. 

Your honourable Committce will have observed that his 


472 GROUNDS OF CONFIDENCE IN HIS PROMPT REDUCTION. 


Excellency the Commander-in-Chief judged the strength of the 
detachment under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Monson to be 
sufficient for that purpose, and accordingly directed Licut.- 
Colonel Monson to form such a disposition of his force as should 
completely obstruct the return of Holkar into Hindostan. 

This arrangement was founded on the following suppositions. 
1st. That the army and resources of Jeswunt Rao Holkar had 
been greatly reduced and were daily diminishing, and that 
his military reputation had suffered from his precipitate flight. 
andly. That the British force in Guzcrat would be enabled to 
act offensively against the force of Jeswunt Rao Holkar accord- 
ing to the original plan of operations. 3rdly. That the forces of 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah were prepared to co-operate with the 
British troops on the side of Malwah and Guzecrat. 

The information which had been communicated to his Exccl- 
Iency the Commander-in-Chief, relative to the reduced condition 
of Jeswunt Rag Holkar’s power and resources, was entitled to 
every degree of credit. The expectation, however, which his 
Excellency the Commander-in-Chicf entertained that the British 
force in Guzcrat would be enabled to carry on offensive opera- 
tions against Holkar, was not consistent with the information 
which the Governor-General had reccived relative to the obstacles 
opposed to the advance of that force by the gencral distress of 
the country in which it would be required to act. Although the 
Governor-Gencral was not disposed to place any implicit confi- 
dence in the aid of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, his Excellency had no 
reason to doubt cither the disposition or the ability of that chieftain 
to prosecute with energy and effect offensive operations against 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar. 

In our despatch of the 15th of June, the Governor-General in 
Council apprized your honourable Committee that this state of 
circumstances appeared to the Governor-General to afford a 
favourable opportunity for withdrawing the British troops in 
every quarter of India to their usual stations, with the exception 
of the subsidiary forces which the British Government was bound 
to furnish to the Peishwa and the Guickwar, to Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah and the Rana of Gohud, and for framing a disposition 
of those subsidiary forces which would enable the British Govern- 
ment at-the close of the rainy scason to reduce the powcr of 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar within due dounds, without incurring any 
considerable expence. 

Your honourable Committee has already been furnished with 


COL. FAWCETT’S DISASTER DISTURBED CUR PLANS. 473 


a copy of the Governor-General’s notes of the 25th of May, 
prescribing the detail of these proposed arrangements, and 
your honourable Committee will not fail to observe that those 
arrangements were not limited to the object of providing for the 
supposed situation of affairs, but were calculated to meet the 
exigency of any probable occurrence, or future state of circum- 
stances. Those arrangements were framed on principles calcu- 
lated to provide not only for the contingency of an erroncous 
estimate of the reduced power and resources of Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar, and of Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s inactivity, but even for 
the possible event of a combination of Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s 
forces with those of Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar. 

No doubt whatever can be entertained that the completion 
of the proposed arrangements would have secured the accom- 
plishment of the expectation announced to your honourable 
Committee in our despatch of the 15th of June, of effecting the 
reduction of Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s power at the close of the 
rains, without any considerable expence, since the stipulated 
strength of cach of the subsidiary forces, combined with their 
assigned positions, was such as to render them irresistible by the 
troops of any native power, and to afford the certain means of 
pressing with success upon the encmy to whatever point he 
might direct his forces. 

The reports which the Governor-General in Council originally 
reccived of the nature and extcnt of the incursion into the 
province of Bundlccund, of which the substance is stated in our 
despatch to your honourable Committee of the 15th of June, 
rendered it neccessary in the Governor-Gencral'’s judgment to 
direct the suspension of the arrangements prescribed by the 
notes of the 25th of May, and the vigorous prosccution of 
hostilitics against Jeswunt Rao Holkar, and accordingly the 
Governor-General in an official Ictter, addressed to his Excel- 
lency the Commander-in-Chicf, under date the 8th of June, 1804, 
stating the sentiments of the Governor-General rclative to the 
possible consequences of the irruption into Bundlecund, and to 
the conduct of Licut.-Colonel Fawcett, who commanded the 
troops stationed in that province, authorized the Commander-in- 
Chicf to postpone the prescribed arrangements, and to employ 
every effort to reduce Jeswunt Rao Holkar and the predatory 
chicfs connected with him or acting upon our fronticrs, or within 
the territorics of our allics, in the pursuit of separate schemes of 
plunder, 


474 ABOVE GROUNDS OF CONFIDENCE FALLACIOUS. 


Although it appeared by subsequent information that the 
reports which the Governor-General had originally received with 
regard to the extent of the force, which had invaded Bundlecund, 
were greatly exaggerated, that the number of the predatory 
horse which had entered Bundlecund did not exceed 5000, and 
that the invaders had abandoned the province, the Governor- 
General did not think proper to revoke his orders for the 
prosecution of active measures against Jeswunt Rao Holkar and 
his adherents, because the success of that predatory force in 
destroying a detachment of British troops, and in accomplishing 
its objects of plunder and devastation, and especially the retreat 
of the British troops, under the command of Lieut.-Colonel 
Fawcett, might encourage similar attempts on a more cxtended 
scale on the part of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, or of other predatory 
chiefs, and because in the actual positions of the several branches 
of our military force, the operation of the orders for the prosecu- 
tion of active measures against Jeswunt Rao Holkar, and other 
predatory chiefs to a certain extent, was not calculated to prevent 
or even to retard the. ultimate accomplishment of the arrange- 
ments prescribed by the notes of the 25th of May, if circum- 
stances should render the immediate prosecution of active 
measures of hostility unnecessary or inexpedicnt. 

The causes which have protracted the existing disturbances 
beyond the expected period of time, will be traced in the ensuing 
Narrative of transactions and occurrences. 

Your honourable Committce was informed by our despatch 
of the 15th of June, 1804, that his Excellency the Commander- 
in-Chief, with the army undcr his personal command, had 
commenced his march on his return from the vicinity of Jyenagur 
to the British possessions for the purpose of cantoning the troops 
at their usual stations, and in the 101st paragraph of that despatch 
it is stated, that on the day after his Excellency’s reccipt of the 
intelligence of the incursion of a body of predatory horse into 
the province of Bundlecund, the Commander-in-Chicf marched 
from the position which he then occupicd with the whole of the 
cavalry, with the intention of crossing the Jumna, and of pro- 
ceeding through the Doab to the south-cast for the protection 
of that territory from the eventual incursions of the predatory 
horse. 

The repulse and retreat of the banditti, however, which had 
entered Bundlecund, rendered unnccessary the adoption of any 
extraordinary measures for the protection of the Doab, and his 


MONSON ADVANCES ON HINGLAISGURH. 475 


Excellency the Commander-in-Chief pursued his march to 
Cawnpore, where the whole of the European cavalry and infantry 
had arrived before the middle of the month of June. On his 
march, the Commander-in-Chief cantoned the native troops in 
different positions on the right bank of the Jumna, and at such 
stations within the territory of the Doab, as appeared to be best 
calculated to provide for the security and tranquillity of our 
possessions in that quarter. 

Our despatch of the 15th of June, contained a narrative of the 
operations of the detachment commanded by the honourable 
Licut.-Colonel Monson from the period of its formation until the 
close of the month of May, the date of the latest advices which 
had been reccived at Fort William, relative to the operations of 
that detachment. 

After the capture of the Fort of Rampoora by a detachment 
under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Don on the 16th of May, 
as stated in the 78th paragraph of the same despatch, Licut.- 
Colonel Don leaving in that fort a sufficient garrison, joined the 
detachment under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Monson, with 
the remainder of his force. 

With this re-inforcement Licut.-Coloncl Monson moved to the 
southward in the direction of Kotah, near which place he arrived 
early in the month of June. Coloncl Monson was joined at 
Kotah by a body of troops in the service of the Rajah of Kotah, 
who had on many occasions, expressed a decided inclination to 
obtain the friendship of the British Government, and whose 
overtures to the Commandecr-in-Chief for the establishment of a 
more intimate connection with the British Government were 
stated to your Honourable Committee in our despatch of the 
12th of April, together with the reasons which induced the 
Governor-General to suspend the negotiation. 

Colonel Monson having advanced from Kotah, arrived at the 
strong pass of Mokundra, situated about 30 miles to the south- 
ward of Kotah, and having halted a few days at the pass for the 
purpose of collecting supplics, he resumed his march on the 28th 
of June, and on the 1st of July, arrived in the vicinity of the 
fortress of Ilinglaisgurh ; this fort, which is represented to be a 
place of considerable strength, is an ancient possession of the 
Holkar family, and was at this time, occupied by a garrison in 
the interest of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, consisting of 800 foot and 
joo horse. Jeswunt Rao Holkar, who is said to have attached 
considcrable importance to the possession of Hinglaisgurh, was at 


476 REASONS OF HIS RETREAT TU MOKUNDRA PASS: 


this time, encamped about forty-four miles from that fort with his 
whole force. Lieut.-Colonel Monson states, that these considera- 
tions induced him to attack the fort without delay : accordingly 
on the evening of the ist of July, Licut.-Colonel Monson detached 
a party of the troops under his command against the fort. The 
party (which was placed under the command of Major Sinclair) 
consisted of 9 companics of the 2d battalion 2d regiment of 
native infantry, with 6 six-pounders, and a party of Iindos- 
tance cavalry commanded by Licutenant Lucan. 

On the 2d of July, Major Sinclair, with the force under his 
command, arrived within a short distance of the fort, which was 
assaulted on the evening of that day, and carried by the British 

. troops with the greatest gallantry and rapidity, and with incon- 
sidcrable loss on our part. 

After the capture of Hinglaisgurh, Licut.-Colonel Monson 
advanced his position about fifty miles from the Mokundra pass, 
in which position he was informed that he would be able to 
procure supplics. Licut.-Colonel Monson also expected to be 
able to communicate with Colonel Murray, at that time, on his 
march, with a considerable detachment of troops, from Guzcrat, 
towards Ougcin. 

The corps under the command of Licut.-Colone] Monson at 
this period, consisted of five battalions of sepoys, with a propor- 
tion of artillery, and of two bodies of irregular horse, under the 
command of Licutenant Lucan, and of Bapojce Scindiah, amount- 
ing to about 3000 men. 

On the 7th of July 1804, Licut.-Colonel Monson received intelli- 
gence, that Jeswunt Rao Holkar, (who, since his retreat before 
the army of the Commandcer-in-Chicf, had occupied a position 
in Malwa, having the Chumbul river between him and Licut.- 
Colonel Monson’s corps) had crossed the Chumbul river with 
the whole of his army and guns. Licut.-Coloncl Monson was 
desirous of attacking Jeswunt Rao Holkar, and moved towards 
the place at which it was stated that Jeswunt Rao Wolkar had 
crossed the Chumbul river. It appears, however, that Licut.- 
Colonel Monson found, that he had only two days’ grain in his 
camp; part of his corps had been detached to bring up grain ; 
one battalion of his force was on its march to join him from 
Hinglaisgurh, and he expected to be joined by an escort, with 
treasure for the use of his detachment. Licut.-Colonel Monson 
had also reccived accounts from Colonel Murray, of that officer’s 
intention to fall back on the Myhic river. This movement, and 


WHICH HE REACHES, LOSING HIS REAR-GUARD. = 477 


the causes stated to justify it, are subsequently described in this 
despatch. 

Lieut.-Colonel Monson also received information, that the 
extent of Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s force was such as to render 
it imprudent to hazard a general engagement. Under these 
circumstances, Licut.-Colonel Monson determined to retire to 
the Mokundra pass. Accordingly, the whole of the baggage 
and stores, belonging to Lieut.-Colonel Monson’s detachment, 
was sent off at four A.M. on the morning of the 8th of July 
1804, to Soonarah, and Lieut.-Colonel Monson remained on the 
ground of encampment, with his detachment formed in order of 
battle, until half-past nine. At that hour Lieut.-Colonel Monson 
commenced his retreat, leaving Lieutenant Lucan and Bappojee 
Scindiah with the irregular cavalry on the ground, with orders 
to follow in half an hour, and to send to Lieut.-Colonel Monson 
the carliest intclligence of Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s motions. 

The detachment had marched nearly twelve miles, when 
Licut.-Colonel Monson received intelligence, that Lieutenant 
Lucan’s party had been attacked, at a considerable distance, 
in the rear of Licut.-Coloncl Monson’s division, by the whole 
of Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s cavalry. On the reccipt of this 
intelligence, Licut.-Colonel Monson formed his troops in order 
of battle, and was proceeding to the support of Lieutenant 
Lucan's detachment, when Bappojce Scindiah joined Lieut.- 
Colonel Monson’s division, bringing intclligence, that the rcar 
guard had been defcated, that many chicfs had been either killed 
or wounded, and that Licutenant Lucan, with several chiefs, 
were taken prisoners. In consequence of this information, 
Licut.-Colone! Monson resumed his march in the direction of 
the Mokundra Pass, where he arrived at noon on the gth of 
July, without having been molested by the enemy. 

The intelligence of the commencement of Licut.-Colonel 
Monson’s retreat reached the Commander-in-Chicf at Cawnpore 
on the 18th of July. His Excellency immediately adopted 
measures for re-inforcing Licut.~Coloncl Monson’s detachment, 
and for supplying it with grain, in the hope of enabling that 
detachment to maintain its ground against the enemy. His 
Excellency also made such arrangements as appcarcd to be 
best calculated for the security of the British territorics against 
any incursion which the continued retreat or defeat of Licut.- 
Colonel Monson’s detachment might eventually encourage and 
enable the enemy to attempt. 


478 HOLKAR’S REVIVED STRENGTH UNEXPLAINED. 


Our despatch to your honourable Committee of the 15th of 
June 1804, represented the condition of Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s 
force, according to the information then before us, to be in the 
utmost degree wretched and distressed, and his troops to be 
deserting in great numbers. Upon the ground of this informa- 
tion were partly founded instructions to the Resident with 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah, under date the 30th June 1804, on the 
subject of effecting an accommodation with Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar, through the agency of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, the sub« 
stance of which will be found stated in that part of this despatch 
which relates to the transactions at the Court of that chieftain. 
Before the close of the month of July, however, the Governor- 
General in Council received information, that in the early part 
of that month, Jeswunt Rao Holkar had found means, probably 
from the remains of Scindiah’s disbanded forces, to collect a 
large body of cavalry and infantry, with a large train of artillery, 
and was posted with the whole of his force in the vicinity of 
the Mokundra Pass. 

The Governor-General in Council is not yet sufficiently 
informed with regard to the detail of transactions and events in 
the southern and western provinces of Hindostan, which imme- 
diately followed the retreat of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, to be able 
to explain, with accuracy and precision, the mcans by which 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar was enabled so considerably to augment 
the number, and to revive the spirit of his troops, notwithstand- 
ing the precipitation of his flight, the real distress of his army, 
and the apparently desperate condition of his affairs. The 
investigation of the conduct and movements of the British 
detachments employed against the army of Jcswunt Rao Holkar 
may be expected to elucidate this subject, and to afford the 
means of explaining in a satisfactory manner the causes of that 
change in the situation of affairs which produced the necessity 
of adopting a system of measures and arrangements entirely 
different from those by which the Governor-General in Council 
confidently hoped to accomplish the effectual reduction of the 
power of Jeswunt Rao Holkar. 

The Governor-Gencral in Council deems it proper in this 
place to state to your honourable Committee, the substance of 
the instructions which the Governor-General issued to his 
Excellency the Commander-in-Chief, on a consideration of this 
change in the situation of affairs, and the sentiments on which 
those instructions were founded. 


‘SCINDIAH FAILED TO CO-OPERATE AGAINST HOLKAR, 479 


It did not appear probable that Holkar would again separate 
the extensive force which he had been enabled to assemble, 
unless the necessity of his affairs should compel him to adopt 
that measure. A division of his force would evidently expose 
some part of it to the hazard of being destroyed by either of the 
detachments under Colonel Murray, or Licut.-Colonel Monson, 
or by the troops of Scindiah, or of some other of the native 
chiefs. 

This state of circumstances therefore, appeared to the 
Governor-General to present a favourable opportunity of effect= 
ing a decisive blow against Holkar’s army. 

No expectation could be entertained of effecting an accom- 
modation with Holkar, consistent with the honour and interests 
of the British Government, while he should remain in force, and 
our perseverance in a system of defensive arrangements, under 
actual circumstances, was manifestly calculated to injure the 
reputation of the British power, and to encourage the hopes of 
the.enemy. 

Neither of the corps under Colonel Murray, or Lieut.-Colonel 
Monson acting separatcly, appeared to be of sufficient strength 
to contend with success against the whole of Holkar’s force; nor 
while Holkar maintained a superiority in the field, could those 
two detachments effect a junction. No aid could be expected 
from Dowlut Rao Scindiah, who had entirely failed in per- 
forming the obligation of the alliance, (as stated in a subsequent 
part of this despatch.) 

The immediate attack of Jeswunt Rao Holkar appeared, 
under these circumstances, to be obviously the most expedient 
course of policy. It appcared to the Governor-General that this 
object might be accomplished with most expedition and facility, 
by re-inforcing the detachment under the command of Colonel 
Murray, or of Licut.-Colonel Monson, to such an extent as to 
enable it to contend singly against Holkar’s whole force. It 
was obvious that when this object should have been effected, the 
two detachments would be able to effect a junction, or to under- 
take any other operation which might appear to be advisable, 

The distance of Colonel Murray's corps from the station of 
the British troops in the Deccan, and the necessity of retaining 
in Guzerat the force stationed in that province, precluded the 
practicability of strengthening the detachment under the com- 
mand of Colonel Murray in any material degree. The attention 
of the Commander-in-Chicf was thercfore directed to the means 


480 GOVERNOR-GENERAL’S MODIFIED PLANS AND ORDERS. 


of re-inforcing Colonel Monson’s detachment with a sufficient 
body of European and native cavalry, infantry, and artillery. 
The Commander-in-Chief was directed to exercise his discretion 
with regard to the expediency of placing this force under the 
orders of an officer of supcrior rank to either of those who 
commanded the separate detachments, and of investing the 
officer so appointed with powers to conclude, under favour- 
able circumstances, a pacific arrangement with Holkar. The 
Governor-General in Council was still of opinion that great 
advantage would be derived from an accommodation with 
Holkar on the terms proposed in the instructions to the 
Resident with Scindiah of the 3oth of June, but the Commander- 
in-Chief was directed to consider an early and vigorous attack 
on Holkar’s force, and if necessary, the reduction of his power 
and resources, to be the main object of his attention. 

The instructions of which the substance is stated in the pre- 
ceding paragraphs were prepared before the Governor-Gencral 
had received information of Licutenant-Colonel Monson’s retycat 
before the army of Jeswunt Rao Holkar. Previously however 
to the actual despatch of those instructions, the Governor- 
Gencral received the intelligence of that event. 

Although the retreat of Licutcnant-Colonel Monson’s detach- 
ment rendered it probable that a necessity might arise for more 
extended preparations against Holkar than those prescribed by 
the Governor-General’s instructions to the Commander-in-Chief, 
the Governor-General did not deem it necessary at that moment 
to issue further orders founded on the tenor of that intelligence. 
The Governor-General was satisficd that every exertion would 
be employed by his Excellency the Commandecr-in-Chicf for the 
relief of Lieutenant-Coloncl Monson’s detachment; and that 
every necessary precaution would be adopted by his Excellency 
to provide against the effects of Licutenant-Coloncl Monson’s 
retreat until his Excellency should receive the Governor- 
General’s instructions, founded on the further information which 
might speedily be expected with regard to the operations of 
Colonel Monson’s detachment. 

The Governor-Gencral in Council now resumes the narrative 
of the proceedings of Licutenant-Colonel Monson’s detachment. 

On the morning of the 10th July, a large body of the enemy’s 
cavalry, under the personal command of Jeswunt Rao Ilolkar, 
approached the position of Licut.-Colonel Monson’s detachment, 
and continued to increase in number until noon of the next day, 


MONSON RETREATS BEFORE HOLKAR ON KOTAH. 481 


when Jeswunt Rao Holkar dispatched a letter to Lieut.-Colonel 

Monson, demanding the surrender of the guns and small arms 

of the British detachment. This demand being rejected with 

becoming spirit, Jeswunt Rao Holkar divided his force into three 

bodies, which at the same point of time attacked the frent and 

flanks of Lieut.-Colonel Monson’s corps. The judicious position 

occupied by Lieut.-Colonel Monson, and the valour and dis- 

cipline displayed by the troops under his command, enabled the 

detachment to repel this attack; and after various unsuccessful 

attempts which continued until evening, Jeswunt Rao Holkar 
drew off his troops to a position about four miles distant from | 
Lieut.-Colonel Monson’s corps, where he was joined by his 
infantry and guns, and where he encamped with the supposed 
intention of attacking Lieut.-Colonel Monson’s detachment the 
following morning. The loss sustained by the British troops 
on this occasion was very inconsiderable. 

Lieut.-Colonel Monson in his narrative of the proceedings of 
the detachment, states that in the position which his detachment 
occupied at this period of time, he apprchendcd that the enemy 
might pass his rear, and cut off his communication with the 
Mokundra Pass, and with the town of Kotah, which was the 
only place from which he could expect to derive supplies. 
Adverting also to the circumscribed nature of his own position, 
to the reputed strength of Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s force, and to 
the supposed weight and number of Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s guns, 
Lieut.-Coloncl Monson did not ‘consider his post at Mokundra 
to be tenable, and accordingly resolved to retire to Kotah, which 
place the detachment reached on the 12th July in the morning, 
after experiencing extreme fatigue from the inclemency of the 
scason, and the inundated state of the country. The conduct of 
all the troops both in the contest with the force of Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar and under the pressure of the difficulties which impeded 
their retreat, is stated by Licut.-Colone! Monson to have been 
distinguished by an invincible spirit of gallantry and firmness, 

The Rajah of Kotah, alarmed at the near approach of Holkar’s 
force, and fearful of the consequences of affording succour to 
the English detachment, was unwilling to admit Licut.-Colonel 
Monson into the town, and declared his inability to supply 
the detachment with provisions. Lieut.-Colonel Monson was 
therefore compelled to continue his march the same day in the 
direction of a ford on the river Chumbul, distant about seven 
miles from Kotah ; such however was the severity of the weather 

li 


482 REACHES, AND IS DETAINED AT, CHUMBULEE STREAM. 


and the state of the road, that this short march could not be 
accomplished until the following day. 

On the 14th July the detachment halted for the purpose of 
endeavouring to procure supplies. 

On the 15th the detachment attempted to proceed, but the 
progress of the guns being prevented by the severity of the rain, 
it became necessary to halt. 

On the morning of the 16th July, the guns had sunk so deep 
into the mud, that it was impracticable with every degree of 
exertion to extricate them. All the supplies of the detachment 
being expended, and the neighbouring villages being exhausted, 
Lieut.-Colonel Monson was induced to spike his guns, and to 
order the ammunition to be destroyed: at the same time, he 
wrote to the Rajah of Boondce, desiring him to dispatch people 
to extricate the guns and to deposit them in a place of security. 
Lieut.-Colonel Monson then prosecuted his march, and with the 
utmost difficulty reached the Chumbulce rivulet on the 17th of 
July. The rivulet was not fordable on the 17th, but on the 
18th July the European artillery-men crossed the rivulet on 
elephants, and proceeded to Rampoorah. 

On the 19th of July the rivulet began to rise; at this time the 
troops were absolutely destitute of provisions, but their imme- 
diate distress was relieved by a supply of grain, sufficient for the 
consumption of the detachment for two days, which was obtained 
from a village at a short distance by a party detached for that 
purpose, That party was attacked on its return to camp by a 
body of the enemy's horse, which was however repulsed with 
inconsiderable loss on our side. 

In the evening of the 21st July, Lieut.-Colonel Monson 
detached a body of troops, under the command of Captain 
O'Donnell, to attack a body of the enemy's cavalry encamped at 
some distance. In this attempt the British detachment was com- 
pletely successful ; having destroyed the enemy’s camp, captured 
several camels and 200 horscs, and killed a great number of the 
enemy’s troops. 

By means of rafts, which Lieut.-Colone! Monson procured, two 
of the battalions crossed the rivulet in the course of the 23d and 
the 24th of July, and Lieut.-Colonel Don, with one battalion, was 
detached to a ford, a few miles lower down the rivulct, with a view 
to expedite the passage of the detachment. During the 24th of 
July, a large body of the enemy’s cavalry having approached, 
Lieut.-Colonel Monson drew up the remainder of his detach- 


THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL ISSUES NEW ORDERS, 483 


ment, amounting to about seven hundred men, and maintained a 
contest with the enemy until sun-set, when the enemy retired 
with the loss of several men and horses. Of the British troops, 
about twenty men were killed and wounded. 

On the 25th of July, Lieut.-Colonel Monson detached another 
battalion to join the detachment under Lieut.-Colonel Don; and 
the rivulet having on that day become fordable, Licut.-Colonel 
Monson crossed the remainder of his force, which at this time 
was totally destitute of provisions, Lieut.-Colonel Monson 
therefore proceeded with the division which had crossed the 
rivulet to the fort of Rampoorah, where he arrived on the 27th of 
July. Lieut.-Colonel Monson immediately adopted measures 
for supplying the two remaining corps under Lieut.-Colonel 
Don with provisions, and Lieut.-Colonel Don joined him at 
Rampoorah on the 29th of July. 

At the period of time when the Governor-General in Council 
reccived the intelligence of the continued retreat of Colonel 
Monson’s detachment, under circumstances of the utmost dis- 
tress, and with the loss of guns, camp equipage, and baggage— 
the Governor-General in Council had also received information 
with regard to the state of Colonel Murray’s detachment at 
Ougein, and to the conduct of the officers of Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah’s government in Malwa (the details of which will be 
stated in a subsequent part of this despatch) which precluded 
the hope of deriving any immediate benefit from the services of 
Licut.-Colonel Murray’s detachment. In this state of affairs, 
the Governor-General dcemed it necessary to consider, without 
delay, the most effectual means of resisting the force of Holkar, 
and of preventing the evils which might be expected to flow 
from the retreat of the detachment under Lieut.-Colonel Monson. 
The Governor-General accordingly prepared and transmitted to 
his Excellency the Commander-in-chief, on the 17th of August, 
a paper of notes, containing his sentiments and instructions on 
the course of measurcs to be adopted in the actual crisis of affairs, 
and comprising a gencral view of the objects to be pursued, and 
the means of attaining them with the greatest practicable degree 
of certainty and dispatch. 

The judgment of the Governor-General was decided, that 
those objects could not be attaincd by any system of operations 
which should be limited to the measure of opposing the force of 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar by small detachments, neither possessing 
the component parts of an army, nor the power of moving with 

1i2 


484 SMALL DETACHMENTS CANNOT CHECK HOLKAR, 


celerity. It was obvious, that detachments of this description, 
unless strongly posted and secure of an ample and constant 
supply of provisions, would be exposed to the hazard of being 
compelled to retire before an army of such strength as that - 
which was then commanded by Jeswunt Rao Holkar, and that 
any partial success on the part of Jeswunt Rao Holkar would 
increase his reputation, and by the numbers which that success 
would induce to join his cause, considerably augment his strength, 
whilst a continuation of the enemy’s success might be expected 
to depress the spirits of our own troops. 

The first point stated in the Governor-General’s notes of 
instructions was the immediate preparation of an army in Hin- 
dostan, equipped for light movements and of sufficient strength 
to defeat the main body of Holkar’s force, to be commanded by 
the Commander-in-chief in person, and to be joincd by a party 
of irregular horse, to be furnished by our native allies. The 
Governor-General suggested that the operations of this army 
should be directed immediately against the army under the 
personal command of Holkar, and should pursue Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar to the last extremity, if it should not be possible to 
compel him to risk an action; a necessity which it might be 
expected that he would endeavour by every means in his power 
to avoid. 

It appeared to the Governor-General to be proper that a 
detachment should be stationed in the neighbourhood of the 
Passes into the British territorics in Hindostan, at some position 
between Agra and Delhi, for the purposes of defending those 
passes ; and that the detachment should be of sufficient strength, 
both to preserve tranquillity in those territorics, and to defcat 
any part of Holkar’s force which might pass in the rear of the 
Commander-in-chief. The Governor-General observed, that a 
detachment thus formed and posted, might act as a body of 
reserve to the army of the Commander-in-chicf, and might be 
strengthened from the garrisons of Agra, Delhi, Muttra, and 
other places. ; 

The defence of Delhi against an attack from the cnemy was 
stated to the Commander-in-chicf to be an object of the greatest 
importance. 

The position of an efficient detachment in Bundlecund was 
considered and stated by the Governor-Gencral to form an 
important branch of the general plan of operations. 

The Governor-General observed, that the situation of affairs in 


COMPREHENSIVE PLAN OF OFFENSIVE WARFARE, 48 5 


Malwa and Guzerat appeared to render it desirable that the 
corps under the command of Colonel Murray should retire from 
Ougein towards the frontier of Guzerat, where it might occupy 
a position for the protection of that province, and co-operate 
with the main army acting against Holkar, if his march should 
be directed to that quarter, provided a force could be fur- 
nished to supply the place of Colonel Murray’s detachment 
at Ougcin. 

For this purpose, it appeared to be desirable that the subsi- 
diary force for Dowlut’ Rao Scindiah should be prepared in 
Hindostan, and should form a part of the army of the Com- 
mander-in-chicf ; and on his Excellency’s advance into Malwa, 
should march to Ougein to remain in that position prepared to 
act as the events of the campaign might render advisable. 
According to this plan, Holkar would have been placed between 
five separate British armies, ; 

ist. The army under the personal command of the Com-. 
mander-in-chicf. 

2d. The detachment to be posted between Delhi and Agra, 
near the passcs, 

3d. The detachment in Bundlecund, 

4th. The subsidiary force to be stationed at Ougein. 

5th, The corps under the command of Colonel Murray to be 
posted on the fronticr of Guzerat. 

It appeared to be highly improbable that Holkar should be 
able to evade the attack of all these detachments; and it was the 
Governor-Gencral’s decided opinion, that the proposed plan of 
operations was preferable to any system merely defensive. 

The specdy conclusion of the war appeared to be of the highest 
importance in every view of the question, and a vigorous and 
early attack on the enemy’s main force offered the fairest pros- 
pect of such a result. 

The Governor-General also communicated to the Commander- 
in-chicf some suggestions respecting the mode of supplying his 
army, under the eventual necessity of pursuing Holkar into 
Malwa, and of drawing the British army to a distance from the 
countrics from whence it was to derive its supplies, 

A copy of these instructions, which, with a view to despatch, 
were prepared in the form of notes, is annexed for your honour- 
able Committce’s information. 

The Governor-Gencral in Council now resumes the narrative 
of the proceedings of Licut.-Colonel Monson’s detachment, which 


486 MONSON REINFORCED; REACHES THE BANNAS. 


has becn interrupted for the purpose of stating in the regular 
order of transactions, the substance of the instructions issued by 
‘the Governor-General to the Commander-in-chief, under the 
information possessed by the Governor-General at the date 
of those instructions with regard to the situation of affairs in 
Hindostan. 

On his arrival at Rampoorah, Lieut.-Colonel Monson was 
joined by two battalions of sepoys, with four 6-pounders, and 
two howitzers, and a body of Hindoostanee cavalry, under the 
command of Major Frith, together with a supply of grain, which 
had been despatched from Agra by the orders of the Com- 
mander-in-chief, after his Excellency reccived the intelligence of 
Lieut.-Colonel Monson’s situation at the Mokundra Pass. 

Every practicable exertion was, at the same time, employed 
by Lieut.-Colonel Monson to obtain additional supplies, but the 
state of the country, and the vicinity of Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s 
force, precluded all hope of collecting supplies to the extent 
necessary to enable the detachment to continue at Rampoorah. 
Lieut.-Colonel Monson therefore determined to prosecute his 
retreat to Khooshaul Ghur, where he expected to be joined by 
six battalions and twenty-one guns, under the command of a 
native commander, named Suddasheo Bhow Bukshee, in the 
service of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, and where he also hoped to 
obtain a sufficient supply of provisions, to enable him to kecp 
the field against Jeswunt Rao Holkar. Before his departure 
from Rampoorah, Licut.-Colonel Monson made the necessary 
arrangements for its sccurity. A garrison was left in the fort of 
Rampoorah, under the command of Captain Hutchinson, of the 
Bengal artillery, consisting of the 2d battalion 8th regiment, and 
four companies of the 21st regiment, with four 6-pounders, and 
a considerable stock of ptovisions. 

On the 22d of August, the remainder of Licut.-Coloncl 
Monson’s detachment, consisting of five battalions and six com- 
panies of sepoys, with two howitzers, marched from Rampoorah, 
and on the morning of the 23d August 1804, reached the Bannas 
river, That river had risen in consequence of a heavy fall of 
rain, and was so deep as to be scarcely fordable for the largest 
elephants. 

Three boats were found at the Bannas river, and Licut.- 
Colonel Monson perceiving that the river did not fall so rapidly 
as might be expected, ordered Captain Nicholl, with the six 
companies of the ad battalion 21st regiment to cross the river, 


SEVERE CONTEST THERE, GUNS AND BAGGAGE LOST, 487 


and to proceed to Khooshaul Ghur, in charge of the treasure of 
the detachment. 

Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s cavalry appeared in large bodies in 
front of Lieut.~Colonel Monson’s detachment on the morning of 
the 23d of August 1804, and encamped at the distance of about 
four miles from the British detachment. 

On the morning of the 24th of August, the river having been 
found fordable, Lieut.-Colonel Monson began to cross the bag- 
gage, and one of the battalions. At the same time the enemy 
took possession of a large village on the right of Lieut.-Colonel 
Monson’s position; but Lieut.-Colonel Monson attacked this 
post, and carried it with the loss of a few men. The river having 
become fordable in many places, the enemy’s cavalry began to 
cross in great numbers, at different places to the right and left 
of Lieut.-Colonel Monson’s position. The greater part of Lieut.- 
Colonel Monson’s baggage had crossed, and Lieut.-Colonel 
Monson despatched three more battalions and one howitzer for 
its protection, intending to follow with the remainder of the 
detachment, when the whole of the baggage and camp followers 
should have crossed the river. 

At four P.M. however, the enemy’s infantry and guns arrived, 
and opened a heavy cannonade on the 2d battalion 2d regiment, 
and the picquets posted on the south side of the Bannas river. 
Licut-Colonel Monson immediately charged the enemy with 
this small body of men, and succecded in carrying some guns, 
The troops of the enemy, however, encouraged by their superiority 
of numbers, rallied; and advancing with great celerity in dif- 
ferent directions, the picquets and the 2d battalion ad regiment 
were overpowered, and compelled to retire, and to abandon the 
remaining howitzer. Our troops suffered severcly in this opera- 
tion, and with difficulty effected a retreat under cover of the Ist 
battalion 14th regiment, which advanced to the bank of the river 
for their support. 

The enemy prosecuted the advantage which he had obtained, 
and Licut.-Colonel Monson was compelled to abandon his bag- - 
gage, and to continue his retreat to Khooshaul Ghur, which he 
reached on the night of the 25th of August. 

During the march to Khooshaul Ghur, the enemy’s cavalry, 
supported by guns, made scveral attacks on Lieut.-Colonel 
Monson’s detachment, but without success; Captain Nicholl, 
with the treasure placed under his charge, had arrived at that 
Place on the preceding day. 


488 TWO COMPANIES DESERT. HINDOWN OCCUPIED. 


It has been already stated that on his arrival at Khooshaul 
Ghur, Lieut.-Colonel Monson expected to be joined by a con- 
siderable force under the command of Suddasheo Bhow Bukshee, 
in the service of Dowlut Rao Scindiah. Immediately after the 
arrival of Captain Nicholl however at Khooshaul Ghur, Sudda- 
sheo Bhow Bukshee, with the force under his command, attacked 
Captain Nicholl’s.detachment, but was repulsed with consider- 
able loss. 

On the morning of the 26th of August, the whole of the 
enemy’s cavalry encamped in separate bodies, surrounding Lieut.- 
General Monson’s detachment. A correspondence was at this 
period detected between some of the native officers of Licut.- 
Colonel Monson’s corps and Jeswunt Rao Holkar, the object of 
which was to encourage among our troops a spirit of desertion. 
The most vigorous measures were immediatcly adopted to 
render these attempts abortive, but notwithstanding every effort 
on the part of Lieut.-Colonel Monson, and of his officers, nearly 
two companies from the Ist battalion 14th regiment, and a large 
proportion of the Hindoostance cavalry deserted to the encmy. 

Disappointed in his expectation of receiving support from the 
troops of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, and of obtaining supplics at 
Khooshaul Ghur, and destitute of every specics of equipment 
necessary to enable the detachment to continue at Khooshaul 
Ghur, Lieut.-Colonel Monson was compelled to prosecute his 
retreat, and accordingly, on the 26th of August, at scven P.M. 
Licut.-Colonel Monson moved from the Fort of Khooshaul 
Ghur, and formed his detachment into an oblong square, having 
previously spiked the remaining howitzer. 

During the night of the 26th of August, and the greater part 
of the 27th, the enemy’s cavalry, supported as before by guns, 
attempted several times to penetrate the detachment, but could 
not make the least impression on this compact body of men. On 
the night of the 27th of August, Lieut.-Colonel Monson took 
possession of the ruined fort of Hindown, and at onc A.M. on the 
28th continued his retreat towards Agra. As soon as the de- 
tachment had cleared the ravines near IHindown, the cnemy’s 
cavalry charged the detachment with extreme violence in three 
separate bodics, but was reccived by the scpoys with determined 
coolness and bravery. The sepoys reserved their fire until the 
enemy’s cavalry had come almost within reach of the bayonet, 
and then gave their fire with such signal effect, as to compel the 
enemy to retire in every direction, 


RETREAT CONCLUDED. GOV.-GENERAL’S FORESIGHT. 489 


Licut.-Colonel Monson reached the Biana Pass about sunset 
on the 28th August. The troops were almost exhausted with 
fatigue and hunger, and Lieut.-Colonel Monson halted with an 
intention to remain during the night at the entrance of the Pass. 
The enemy however succeeded in bringing up some guns and 
opened a heavy fire, which compelled Lieut.-Colonel Monson to 
continue his retreat towards Agra. The detachment reached 
the town of Biana at. nine P.M. on the 28th of August. The 
night was dark, and the camp followers, with such baggage as 
remained with the detachment having mixed with the line, the 
troops were thrown into confusion. It was impossible to restore 
order, and the different corps retreated in great disorder to Agra, 
which they all reached by the 31st August. The enemy fol- 
lowed as far as Futtypoor, in straggling parties for the purpose 
of plundering, but made no united attack after the 28th. During 
the whole of this unfortunate retreat the officers and troops of 
the detachment displayed the greatest perseverance, fortitude 
and gallantry; and in the different engagements with the enemy 
they manifested a degree of courage and determined resolution 
which, under less adverse circumstances, would have ensured the 
most distinguished success. 

To the retreat of the detachment under the command of 
Lieut.-Colonel Monson, under circumstances of extreme difficulty 
and distress, occasioned partly by the state of the country and 
the unusual inclemency of the season, and partly by the failure 
of supplies, must be attributed both the necessity of suspending 
the establishment of the subsidiary forces prescribed by the 
Governor-Gencral’s notes of the 25th of May, and the means 
which Jeswunt Rao Holkar acquired of maintaining a contest 
with the British power. 

Your honourable Committee will observe from the tenor of 
those notcs, that the security of the detachment under the com- 
mand of Licut.-Colonel Monson was a peculiar object of the 
Governor-General’s_ solicitude; the Governor-General having 
suggested the necessity cither of withdrawing that detachment, 
or of adding to its strength by a corps of Europeans and a pro- 
portion of cavalry. The Governor-Gencral at the same time 
stated his opinion in favour of the former measure, because no 
hope could reasonably be entertained of employing that detach- 
ment in active operations against the force of Jcswunt. Rao 
Holkar until the close of the rainy season. 

The Governor-Gencral in Council is not yct enabled to state 


490 HOLKAR’S RETURN INVOLVES NEW PLANS. 


the precise causes which precluded the adoption of one or other 
of those measures. It is the intention however of the Com- 
mander-in-Chief to furnish the Governor-General with detailed 
information upon this point at the earliest practicable period of 
time. The Governor-General in Council is also unable at this 
time distinctly to explain the causes of the retreat of Lieut.- 
Colonel Monson’s detachment under circumstances of difficulty 
and distress. Those causes must be sought in the conduct and 
operations of the several detachments actively employed against 
the forces of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, which the Governor-General 
in Council is not yet enabled to state with accuracy and pre- 
cision ; the distance of the scene of action, and the necessity of 
accelerating the operations of the main body of the army, having 
precluded the possibility of completing any satisfactory investi- 
gation of the movements of those detachments. Every effort, 
however, will be employed to submit to your honourable Com- 
mittee with the least practicable delay, all the details contiected 
with such transactions as may now appear to be imperfectly 
related. 

If circumstances had admitted the reinforcement of the 
detachment under Lieut.-Colonel Monson, or its immediate 
recal in the manner suggested by the Governor-General on 
the 25th of May, either the return of Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s 
force to the north of Hindostan would have becn prevented, 
or his force would have returned under circumstances which 
would have facilitated the early reduction of his power. But 
the retreat of Lieut.-Colonel Monson’s detachment, and the 
disasters which attended it, cnabled Jeswunt Rao Holkar to 
return with the whole body of his forces to Hindostan under 
circumstances of advantage. 

Although no apprehension could reasonably be entertained 
of any incursion into the provinces of Benares, Bchar, Bengal, 
or Cuttack, the retreat of Colonel Monson’s detachment under 
such disastrous circumstances, and the approach of Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar’s army to the Jumna, rendered it expedient in the 
Governor-General’s judgment upon general principles of pru- 
dence, to provide by every practicable arrangement for the 
protection of the western frontier of those provinces, 

With this view, instructions were issucd on the 12th of Sep- 
tember 1804, to the magistrates of the several districts, extend- 
ing from Midnapore to Mirzapore, and to the officers command- 
ing at Midnapore, in Ramgurh, and at Benares, renewing the 


THE COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF TAKES THE FIELD. 491 


measures of precaution which were adopted during the late war 
with Dowlut Rao Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar, for the purpose 
of preventing the irruption of marauders into the Company’s 
possessions, as described in the 618th and following paragraphs 
of our despatch of the 12th of April 1804. The defence of the 
province of Cuttack was entrusted to Colonel Harcourt, the 
officer commanding the forces in that province, and instructions 
were issued to Colonel Harcourt, under date the 19th of Septem- 
ber 1804, directing him to regulate his conduct by the principles 
stated in the orders which were issued to the officers entrusted 
with the defence of the frontier during the late war, as far as 
those principles were applicable to the protection of the province 
of Cuttack. 

Jeswunt Rao Holkar continued to advance with the whole of 
his cavalry, and having halted some days at Biana, prosecuted 
his march toward the Jumna, and encamped with the whole of 
his force at a short distance from Muttra, his cavalry being 
posted in numerous divisions over the whole of the adjacent 
territory. 

The continued retreat of Colonel Monson’s detachment, and 
the advance of the main body of Holkar’s army towards the 
banks of the Jumna, necessarily occasioned a deviation from the 
plan of operations prescribed in the Governor-General's notes. 

Under the Governor-General’s instructions, his Excellency the 
Commander-in-Chief issued orders for assembling near Agra a 
large force of native infantry and cavalry, and for placing that 
force in a state of cquipment to take the field. His Excellency 
also made preparations at Cawnpore for enabling the European 
cavalry and infantry to move at the earliest practicable period 
of time. 

The march of these corps, however, was unavoidably retarded 
by the inclemency of the season, but no inconvenicnce was 
occasioned by this delay; the state of the Jumna precluding 
any attempt on the part of the enemy to molest our possessions 
in the Doab. His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief com- 
menced his march from Cawnpore, with the whole of the 
European cavalry and infantry on the 3d of September, and on 
the 22d of that month arrived at Agra. His Excellency imme- 
diatcly proceeded to Secundra, about six miles from Agra, where 
the troops which had been assembled at the latter place were 
encamped. The force assembled at Secundra consisted of three 
tegiments of European light dragoons, five regiments of native 


492 TRIES IN VAIN TO ENGAGE HOLKAR’S CAVALRY. 


cavalry, and the horse artillery, his Majesty’s 76th regiment of 
foot, the flank companies of his Majesty’s 22d regiment of foot, 
and ten battalions of native infantry, and the usual proportion of 
artillery, &c. 

The necessity of waiting for supplics prevented the Com- 
mander-in-Chief from marching from Secundra until the rst of 
October, on which day the army advanced towards the enemy 
who had remained in the vicinity of Muttra, and had at different 
periods appeared to entertain the opposite designs of hazarding 
an engagement in the field, and of retiring from the banks of the 
Jumna. 

On the approach of the British army, the enemy drew off to 
the north-west along the bank of the Jumna. His infantry and 
guns appeared to take the direction of Delhi, and his cavalry 
which remained in the rear, attempted to obstruct the march of 
the British troops and to cut off the baggage. They did not, 
however, succeed in effecting any object of importance. The 
Commander-in-Chief made three different attempts to engage 
the cavalry of the enemy, commanded by Holkar in person, on 
the 2d, 7th, and roth of October, but the dispersed position of 
the enemy’s cavalry, and the celerity of the enemy's retreat on 
the approach of the British troops, rendered ineffectual his 
Excellency’s utmost endeavours to compel the cnemy to main- 
tain an action. 

The manifest determination of the enemy’s cavalry to avoid an 
action with the British troops, induced the Commander-in-Chicf 
to suspend his operations against the enemy’s cavalry, until by 
the defeat of the infantry and guns, the cavalry should become 
the only object of pursuit, 

Previously to his march from Secundra, the Commander-in- 
Chief had detached a force under the command of Captain 
Worsley into the Doab, for the purpose of preserving tranquillity 
and of expelling a party of predatory horse which had crossed 
the Jumna at Muttra and plundered the neighbouring country. 
On the approach of our troops, the enemy re-crossed the 
river. Captain Worsley’s corps was afterwards stationed at 
Muttra, where that officer was employed in collecting and 
forwarding supplies, in maintaining the tranquillity of the 
neighbouring country, and in protecting the important post of 
Muttra and the passage of the Jumna against any attempt of 
the enemy. 

In the mean while the infantry and artillery of Holkar con- 


DELHI DEFENDED AGAINST HIS INFANTRY AND GUNS. 493 


tinued to advance to Delhi, before which city they arrived on 
the morning of the 8th of October. 

The city of Delhi is of great extent, and its defences consist 
merely of a high wall, in many placesina ruinous condition, The 
garrison consisted of only one battalion and four companies of 
regular sepoys, a battalion of irregulars, and a corps of match- 
lockmen. 

On the day of the enemy’s arrival at the city of Delhi, a 
heavy cannonade was opened upon the walls, but the distance of 
the batteries rendered it of no effect. On the 9th, the enemy 
having approached nearer to the walls, opened a battery with 
considerable effect. Lieut.-Colonel Burn, the officer command- 
ing the garrison, finding that the enemy’s fire would soon effect 
a practicable breach in the walls, resolved to interrupt the opera- 
tions of the besiegcrs by a sally from the garrison. Colonel 
Burn accordingly prepared a party, consisting of 200 men of 
the battalion under his command, and 150 men of the irregular 
troops, and placed the whole under the command of Lieutenant 
Rose. 

This party proceeded on the evening of the 10th to storm the 
enemy’s battery, and completely succeeded in obtaining posses- 
sion of it, and having spiked the guns, returned with little loss; 
the loss of the enemy is supposed to have been considerable. 
The enemy’s fire was renewed the next morning, but without 
much effect, being soon silenced by the fire from a battery which 
had been erected on one of the bastions of the city. The enemy 
subsequently changed the point of attack, and opened batteries 
on another part of the wall, in which, they specdily effected a 
breach. By the exertions of the garrison, however, the enemy 
was prevented from taking advantage of the breach. On the 
14th, in the morning, a general assault was made by the whole 
force of the enemy, but without success, the enemy being 
repulsed with heavy loss. 

On the following day, the enemy despairing of success in his 
attempts to carry the place, and intimidated by the approach of 
the Commander-in-Chief, who, on receiving intelligence of the 
design of the enemy to attack the city of Delhi, advanced with 
the utmost rapidity to the relief of the garrison, drew off the 
whole of his infantry and guns, and retired from the vicinity of 
Delhi. 

The Governor-Gencral in Council reflects with sentiments of 
the highest admiration and applause, on the skill, activity, 


494 LAKE DIVIDES HIS ARMY FOR DISTINCT SERVICES. 


judgment, and gallantry, which distinguished the conduct of the 
officers and men of the garrison of Delhi in defending that city 
under circumstances of such extreme disadvantage, difficulty, and 
danger, against the efforts of the enemy’s whole force of infantry 
and guns, continued with unremitted exertion during a period of 
seven days. 

On the 18th of October, the Commander-in-Chief, with the 
army under his personal command, arrived at Delhi. His 
Excellency entertained a confident expectation of being enabled 
to pursue the enemy without delay. An unexpected delay in the 
arrival of supplies, however, compelled the Commander-in-Chief 
to halt at Delhi for a few days; during this period, the infantry 
and artillery of Holkar continued their retreat from Delhi, and 
proceeded by a circuitous route through the hills towards Deig, 
a strong fort belonging to the Rajah of Bhurtpore, and situated 
about twenty-five miles in a westerly direction from Muttra. 

On the 31st of October, the Commandcr-in-Chief having 
received information that Jeswunt Rao Holkar, with the whole 
body of his cavalry had crossed the Jumna at a ford a short 
distance above Delhi, determined to divide his force, to detach 
the infantry and artillery of the army, with two regiments of 
native cavalry, under the command of Major-Gencral Frazer, 
the second in command, in the direction of the enemy’s infantry 
and guns, and to proceed in person with the whole of the 
European dragoons, and three regiments of native cavalry, the 
horse and artillery and the reserve of the army, consisting of two 
companies of European and thrce battalions of native infantry 
in pursuit of the enemy’s cavalry which had entered the Doab. 

The object of the Commander-in-Chief by this combined and 
judicious movement, was, to compel both Holkar’s infantry and 
cavalry to risk an action with the British troops, or to fly from 
Hindostan, under such circumstances of ignominy and distress 
as must be attended with the most fatal consequences to the 
cause of the enemy. 

In pursuance of this plan, his Excellency crossed the Jumna 
on the 1st of November, with the force above described, and 
followed the direction of the enemy’s cavalry. Holkar’s first 
object appeared to be, to cut off a battalion of native infantry, 
commanded by Colonel Burn, which had been detached into 
Sehaurunpore after the retreat of the enemy from Delhi, for the 
purpose of suppressing the disturbances which had bcen occa- 
sioned in that quarter of the Doab, partly by the insurrection 


ROUTS HOLKAR’S CAVALRY AT FUTTYGHUR. 495 


of refractory Zemindars, and partly by the incursions of several 
petty chieftains of the tribe of Seiks, instigated by the intrigues 
of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, and allured by the hopes of plunder. 
Holkar attacked the battalion, but was unable to make any 
‘impression on it, and was obliged to desist after having sustained 
considerable loss. 

Jeswunt Rao Holkar proceeded for a few days in a northerly 
direction, with the supposed intention of crossing the Ganges 
into Rohilcund, at a ford on that river not far distant from 
Hurdwar. But being closely pressed by the Commander-in- 
Chief, he suddenly changed his route and proceeded by rapid 
marches down the Doab. The Commander-in-Chief continued 
to pursue the enemy with a degree of unexampled rapidity and 
vigour which prevented the enemy from extending his ravages 
beyond the narrow limits of his immediate track. 

Holkar continued to fly down the Doab by rapid marches, 
until his arrival at Furruckabad on the 16th of November. On 
the same day, the Commander-in-Chief who had followed 
Holkar daily at the distance of one march, in his rear, arrived 
at Alligunge, distant from Futtyghur thirty-four miles, after a 
march of more than twenty miles. 

The Commander-in-Chief being apprized of Holkar’s march 
in the direction of Furruckabad, resolved to pursue him without 
delay in the hope of preventing the plunder of that city, and of 
the cantonments of Futtyghur, and of compelling the enemy to 
tisk an engagement. His Excellency therefore, after halting at 
Alligunge only a few hours to refresh his men and _ horses, 
resumed his ntarch at nine o’clock in the evening of the same 
day. The success of this most active, able, and enterprizing 
operation was complete and decisive. The British cavalry 
arrived in the vicinity of Holkar’s camp at day-break on the 
17th of November, after a march of fifty-eight miles performed 
within twenty-four hours, and completely surprized the enemy. 
After the discharge of a few rounds of grape from the horse 
artillery, the British cavalry charged the enemy’s troops in every 
direction, and routed them with great slaughter. The British 
cavalry pursued the enemy for many milcs, destroying great 
numbers, and compelling the survivors to disperse in all direc- 
tions, The whole of the enemy's cattle and supplies were 
Captured by the British troops. Holkar himself narrowly 
escaped by an early flight at the first approach of the British 
troops. Our loss was very small, and no officer was either 


496 BRITISH SUPERIOR TO MAHRATTA CAVALRY. 


killed or wounded. MHolkar with the remains of his cavalry 
fled with the utmost precipitation and apparent ‘consternation 
towards the Jumna, which he forded at Mahoba and proceeded 
towards Dieg. 

Including the pursuit of the enemy on the 17th of November, 
the British troops marched a distance of seventy miles from 
their movement on the morning of the 16th, until they took up 
their ground on the 17th, and had it not been for the accidental 
explosion of a tumbril, belonging to the British troops, within a 
few moments before the approach of the Commander-in-Chief 
to Holkar’s position, no doubt can be entertained that Holkar 
himself would either have been killed, or taken prisoner. 

_ The Commander-in-Chief having halted two days to refresh 
his men and horses, resumed his march in pursuit of the enemy 
on the 20th of November. Holkar, however enabled, escaped 
across the Jumna. 

The Governor-General in Council is convinced, that your 
honourable Committee will contemplate with satisfaction, this 
decisive proof of the progressive improvement of our cavalry, 
and of its great superiority to that of the encmy. The result 
of this extraordinary and successful pursuit has proved, that 
the most rapid movements, even of the Mahratta horse, cannot 
avail against the celerity and discipline of our cavalry undcr its 
present improved construction. The utmost degree of credit is 
due to the Commander-in-Chief for his unremitting attention to 
the improvement of the cavalry of Bengal, and his Excellency’s 
complete success in attaining this important object has been 
distinguished with splendour and honour on every occasion 
under his personal command, during the late operations against 
the Mahratta horse. 

While these events were passing in the Doab, Major-General 
Frazer having been joined at Delhi by the expected convoys of 
supplies, commenced his march from that city towards the main 
body of the enemy. On the 11th of November, he arrived at 
Goberdun, about fourteen miles from Deig, under the walls of 
which fort the whole of the enemy’s infantry and artillery were 
strongly posted. On the following day, Major-General Frazcr 
marched to within six miles of Deig. Having ascertained 
exactly in the course of the night, the nature of the cnemy’s 
position, Major-General Frazer with the greatest judgment and 
spirit, determined to attack the enemy’s force on the following 
day. 


BATTLE OF DEIG. DEATH OF GENERAL FRAZER. 497 


On the 13th in the morning, the British army advanced to the 
enemy’s position, which was of uncommon strength and defended 
by numcrous batteries of guns, which extended over a space of 
nearly two milcs almost to the walls of the fort. 

Led by Major-General Frazer, the British troops attacked 
the cnemy’s forces with the utmost gallantry, and after a most 
severe and arduous contest, completely defeated them, and 
drove them from their guns into the town of Deig with heavy 
loss ; eighty-seven picccs of cannon, and almost the whole of the 
ammunition belonging to the enemy, were taken or destroyed 
on the ficld of battle on this memorable day. This brilliant, 
glorious and important victory was not obtained without con- 
sidcrable loss both in officers and men on our part. 

The Governor-General in Council laments with the deepest 
concern the irreparable loss of that gallant and distinguished 
officer Major-Gencral Frazer, to whose eminent judgment and 
military skill, and exemplary valour, is principally to be ascribed 
the signal success of the British arms on this memorable 
occasion. Major-General Frazer reccived a severe wound in the 
leg while in the act of Icading his troops to the attack of the 
enemy’s batterics. Even after he had received the wound, 
Major-General Frazer continued by his voice and action to 
animate and encourage the exertions of the troops. Having 
suffered amputation, Major-General Frazer after languishing 
some days, expired at Muttra, on the 24th of November. 

The applause and gratitude of the British Government in 
India, and of the nation, must ever be connected with sentiments 
of the deepest regret for the loss of that heroic officer. The 
established reputation of Major-General Frazer for professional 
knowledge, gallantry, activity and public zeal, justificd the 
expectation which the Governor-General in Council confidently 
entertained of deriving from the talents and exertions of Major- 
General Frazer, the most essential advantages in the prosccution 
of the war; and-the Governor-General in Council deems it a 
subject of public sorrow, that the British Government in India 
should have been deprived of the services of that valuable officer 
at the commencement of his carcer of glory in Asia, and in the 
moment of victory, 

After Major-Gencral Frazer had becn wounded, the command 
of the army devolved on Licut.-Coloncl Monson, who displayed 
the utmost activity and courage during the whole of the 


engagement. 
Kk 


498 TREACHEROUS CONDUCT OF RAFAH OF BHURTPORE. 


The force of the enemy in this action is stated to have been 
twenty-four battalions of infantry, with 160 picces of cannon, 
and a large body of horse; and a party of the Rajah of Bhurt- 
pore’s horse, and three battalions of his infantry were engaged 
on the side of the enemy, and the British troops suffered greatly 
by the fire of the guns from the fort of Deig which opened on 
their approach. After the action, the British army cncamped 
near the field of battle. 

It is remarkable that in this glorious action most of the 
artillery lost by Lieut.-Colonel Monson’s detachment, were 
retaken at the point of the bayonet by the troops, of whom the 
command had devolved to Licut.-Colonel Monson. 

The Commander-in-Chicf having re-crossed the Jumna at 
Muttra, on the 28th of November, joined the British infantry 
which had retired to that place from Deig, a few days after the 
battle. The reasons assigned by Lieut.-Colonel Monson for 
this movement, are stated in the annexed despatch from his 
Excellency the Commander-in-Chief, to which the Governor- . 
General in Council has the honour to refer your honourable 
Committee. 

On the 4th of December, the Commander-in-Chief arrived at 
Kecrasamy, about four miles from Deig, and remained at this 
position until he was joined by the battcring train which his 
Excellency had ordered from Agra for the purpose of com- 
mencing the siege of Deig, at which fortress the remains of 
Holkar’s force continued to encamp. This fortress belongs to 
the Rajah of Bhurtpore, with whom a treaty of alliance had 
been concluded by the Commander-in-Chief, under the authority 
of the Governor-General, as is stated in our despatch to your 
honourable Committce, under date the 31st of October 1803. 

* * * * # # # 

The hostile conduct of the Rajah of Bhurtpore in the 
battle of Deig, when his guns opened upon our troops, and his 
cavalry acted with the enemy, had precluded the practicability 
of continuing on terms of amity with that chicf, and rendered 
indispensably necessary the vigorous prosccution of measures 
for the punishment of his gross and flagrant violation of every 
principle of public faith and honour, 

Independently however of these considcrations, the change 
of the condition of Jeswunt Rao Holkar produced by the com- 
plete identification of his interests with those of the Rajah of 
Bhurtporc, rendered the prosecution of hostile operations avainst 


HIS TERRITORIES TO BE REDUCED AND ANNEXED., 499 


the possessions of the Rajah, the most effectual means of extin- 
guishing the remnant of Holkar’s military power. 

The territorial resources of that chicftain were not at any 
period of the war applicable to the support of his army, and 
were at this time completcly reduced. Holkar never had ranked 
among the states of India; he had never risen above the 
character of an adventurer and frecbooter, whose success in 
some attacks upon detachments of the forces of Scindiah had 
gained a reputation of military enterprize. Holkar’s force was 
now however greatly reduced by the defeats which his troops 
had sustained at Furruckabad and Deig. His hopes of support 
from the native states of India declined with his declining 
fortune, and he was compelled to depend exclusively upon 
the Rajah of Bhurtpore for the supply of every branch of 
military resource. 

Under these circumstances, the Commander-in-Chief resolved 
on the immediate attack of the forts in the Rajah of Bhurtpore’s 
country, upon which the strength and resources of that chieftain 
principally depended. 

On the 20th of December, the Governor-General having 
reviewed the whole of the Commandcr-in-Chief’s communica- 
tions on the subject of the Rajah of Bhurtpore, and having 
taken into consideration the whole tenor of that chicftain’s con- 
duct, addressed a despatch to the Commandcer-in-Chief, approv- 
ing and confirming his Exccllency’s proceedings with respect to 
the Rajah, and containing the expression of the Governor- 
General's sentiments and instructions on the measures negessary 
to be pursued against that chicftain, and on other points con- 
nected with the prosccution of hostilitics against Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar and his confederates, 

The Commander-in-Chief was authorized and directed by 
those instructions to procced immediately to reduce the whole 
of the territorics of the Rajah of Bhurtporc, and to annex them 
to the British dominions, 

The Commander-in-Chicf was at the same time informed that 
the Governor-General still considered the destruction of the 
force attached to the person of Jeswunt Rao Holkar to be the 
main object of the war, and that the prosecution of operations 
against the territory of Bhurtpore was to be considered as 
subordinate to that important object. 

The Governor-Gencral also stated his opinion that the subju- 
gation of the territory and power of the Rajah of Bhurtpore was 

Kk 32 


500 HOW BAPOOFEE SCINDIAH, ETC,, ARE TO BE TREATED. 


essential to the reduction of Holkar’s hostile force, the entire 
subversion of which the Governor-General considered to be 
indispensably requisite for the tranquillity of India. 

The Commander-in-Chief was further directed to introduce 
into whatever part of the territory of Bhurtpore which might be 
conquered, a civil authority for the collection of the revenues, 
and the administration of civil and criminal justice. 

The proceedings to be adopted against the Rajah of Bhurtpore 
being calculated to serve as an example to all the other pctty 
chiefs and states in that quarter of India, the Governor-Gencral 
directed the Commander-in-Chief to address letters to all those 
chiefs, explaining the principles of his conduct towards the 
Rajah of Bhurtpore, and assuring them of the determination of 
the British Government to respect the independence of all 
contiguous states. 

The Commander-in-Chief was also directed to circulate a 
declaration, warning all persons of the consequences of assisting 
the enemies of the British Government. 

The Governor-Gencral took this occasion to furnish the 
Commander-in-Chief with instructions for the guidance of his 
conduct towards Bapoojce Scindiah, who commanded the army 
of Dowlut Rao Scindiah in Malwa, and on the retreat of Licut.- 
Colonel Monson’s detachment, deserted with his force to the 
enemy, as is related in a subscquent paragraph of this despatch. 
Bapoojee Scindiah being not only an officer of Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah’s government, scnt expressly to co-operate with the 
Commander-in-Chief against Jeswunt Rao Holkar under the 
stipulations of the defensive alliance, but also included in the list 
of chieftains entitled to jaggccrs or pensions from the British 
Government under the 7th article of the treaty of peace, could 
not be considered to possess any claim to the rights of war, 

The Governor-General thercfore desired the Commander-in- 
Chief to issue a proclamation, ordering Bapoojee Scindiah and 
his followers to repair to the British camp within a certain 
time, under the penalty of being considered and treated as 
rebels and traitors to the cause of the allics, and in the event 
of their neglecting to appear to bring such of them as might be 
seized to trial before a court martial, and to carry into effect 
such punishment as might be awarded by the Court. 

A similar course was directed to be pursued towards Sud- 
dasheo Bhow and his followers, whose defection is stated ina 
preceding paragraph of this despatch. 


STORM OF DeIG. THE FORT ABANDONED. 501 


On the 12th of December the Commandcr-in-Chief having 
been joined by his battering train from Agra, took up the 
position before Dcig, which he intended to occupy during the 
siege. On the 17th December batterics were opened against 
a strong out-work, which entirely commanded the town and the 
-works of the fort, and which was flanked by batterics in which 
was planted all the artillery of Holkar, that remained in his 
possession after the battle of the 13th November. 

On the 23d of December, a practicable breach having been 
effected in the wall of the out-work, the Commander-in-Chief 
determined to storm it on that night. This attack was combined 
with two separate attacks to be made on the enemy’s batteries 
to the right and left of the principal work. The conduct of these 
combined attacks was committcd to Licut.-Colonel Macrae, of 
his Majesty’s 76th regiment. At the appointed hour, the parties 
destined to these several attacks advanced, under a heavy fire 
from the whole of the cnemy’s batteries, and after a severe and 
arduous contest, cach party completely succceded in effecting the 
object of its attack. 

Our loss on this occasion was considerable, but not more 
than the strength of the works to be stormed, and the nature of 
the attack, rendered probable. The conduct of Licut.-Colonel 
Macrae, and of the officers to whose charge the conduct of, the 
attacks on the encmy’s battcrics were entrusted, and of every 
officer and soldicr engaged in this arduous enterprize, reflects on 
them the highest honour, and entitles them to the warmest 
admiration and applause. 

In consequence of the success of the attack on the out-works, 
the garrison abandoned the fort on the night of the 24th, and 
retired in the direction of Bhurtpore, another strong fortress, 
situated at the distance of about thirty miles ina southern direc 
tion from Deig. 

The number of guns captured from the enemy in the lines before 
Deig, and in the town and the fort, amounted to one hundred, 

The Governor-General in Council suspends the narrative of 
the proceedings of his Iexcellency the Commander-in-Chief for 
the purpose of communicating to your honourable Committee 
the operations against the powcr of Jeswunt Rao Iolkar, which 
have been conducted on the western side of India. 

* * ¥ # * * * 
Licut,-Coloncl Wallace marched from Poonah, as has been stated 
in a preceding paragraph of this despatch, on the 22d of August. 


502 SUCCESSFUL OPERATIONS IN THE DECCAN. 


Lieut.-Colonel Wallace crossed the Godavery with his in- 
fantry, at Peytun, about the 18th of September, and on the 
a7th was joined at Forkabad by Licut.-Colonel Haliburton, 
whose march as well as that of Colonel Wallace, had been 
impeded by the severity of the weather; and on the 3oth Licut.- 
Colonel Wallace was joined by his cavalry, which had procecded 
higher up the Godavery than Peytun in search of a ford. 

Lieut.-Colonel Wallace was joined by the Pcishwa’s con- 
tingent early in the month of October. 

On the 8th of October, Colonel Wallace detached a party for 
the purpose of taking possession of a small fort belonging to 
Holkar, called Lasselgong, about twelve miles from Chandore. 
The party which was despatched on this service, failed in an 
attempt to storm the fort, and was compelled to retire to the 
Pettah, or town, which had been previously occupied by the 
British troops, until a rc-inforcement arrived from Colonel 
Wallace, when the place was stormed with complete success. 
In accomplishing this service, forty-four men of the British 
detachment were killed and wounded, and two officers were 
also wounded. 

On the same day, Colonel Wallace arrived before the town 
aud fortress of Chandore, and took posscssion of the former 
without opposition. Preparations were immediately made for 
the siege of the fort, and a battery was nearly ready to open, 
when proposals of capitulation were received from the garrison, 
which were accepted by Licut.-Colonel Wallace, and the fort 
was immediately surrendered to the British troops on the 12th. 
The conditions on which the garrison surrendered were the 
safety of private property, and permission to the troops com- 
posing the garrison, to procced whither they pleased. Our loss 
during the siege was inconsidcrable. After the capture of 
Chandore, Liecut.-Colonel Wallace detached a party against 
another fort, situated in the same range of hills and occupied 
by a garrison in the interest of Holkar, called Dhoorb, which 
surrendered on the 14th of October, and several other small 
forts in the vicinity having been evacuated by the cnemy’s 
troops, and occupied by those of the Pcishwa, Licut.-Coloncl 
Wallace marched from Chandore on the 17th. 

On the 21st of October, he arrived before Galna, a strong fort 
belonging to Holkar, and took possession of the Pcttah without 
opposition. On the 23d two practicable breaches having been 
effected, the garrison surrendered on the conditions of being 


HOLKAR’S OWN POWER THCROUGULY BROKEN. 503 


allowed to march out with their arms and private property; 
which conditions being accepted by Licut.-Coloncl Wallace, the 
British troops took possession of the fort. 

The possession of these forts deprived Holkar of all his 
possessions to the southward of the Tapty. The conduct of the 
troops is represented by Colonel Wallace to have been highly 
meritorious, and the manncr in which these operations have 
been conducted by Colonel Wallace, entitles that officer to 
considerable praise. 

After having made the necessary arrangements for main- 
taining these fortresses, and for establishing the authority of his 
Highness the Pecishwa in the country which had been reduced 
by the success of our operations, Licut.-Coloncl Wallace pro- 
cecded to Borenaire, a position from whence he should be able 
to move in whatever direction the services of his detachment 
might be required ; and in the neighbourhood of which he pro- 
posed to remain until he should reccive further orders, or until 
circumstances should require the march of the detachment. 

The subsequent movements of this detachment being con- 
nected with transactions at the Court of Nagpore, will be stated 
in another part of this despatch. 

Destitute of any other resources than such as he derived from 
the habits of indiscriminate plunder and cxaction, the power of 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar has been preserved from entire destruc- 
tion, exclusively by the scasonable application of the military 
resources of the Rajah of Bhurtpore, with whom the British 
Government, previously to the conclusion of the late war with 
the confederated Mahratta chicftains, concluded an alliance, 
as has been reported to your honourable Committee in our 
despatch of the 31st of October 1803. 

Kvents have incontrovertibly demonstrated that the arrange- 
ments suggested for the speedy and successful termination of 
the war, which the British Government was compelled to under- 
take against Jeswunt Rao Holkar were more than adequate to 
the accomplishment of that object under any occurrences, or any 
situation of affairs which could reasonably be contemplated; 
since the British forces acting under circumstances much less 
favourable than those to which the prescribed arrangements 
refer, have succeeded in accomplishing the reduction of all the 
forts and territorics of Jeswunt Rao MIolkar, in completely 
defeating his whole assembled army of infantry and _ artillery, 
and his entire force of cavalry at the memorable battles of 


504 COLONEL MURRAY’S MARCH FROM GUZERAT. 


Deig and Furruckabad, and in capturing the whole of Holkar's 
numerous artillery. 

The complete success of our arms in every contest with the 
troops of Jeswunt Rao Holkar must have produced the entire 
destruction of his power, if the resources of the Rajah of Bhurt- 
pore’s territory, the aid of his forccs and the protection of his 
forts had not supported the cause of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, and 
compelled the British Government to direct its arms against 
the possessions of the Rajah of Bhurtpore. 

* * * * * x * 

With our despatch to your honourable Committee, under date 
the 15th of June, the Governor-General in Council had the 
honour to transmit a copy of instructions issued by the honour- 
able Major-Gencral Wellesley to Coloncl Murray, the officer 
commanding the British troops in the province of Guzerat, for 
the co-operation of a considcrable detachment under the com- 
mand of that officer, with the army under the immediate dircc- 
tion of his Excellency General Lake, against the forces of 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar. 

The Governor-General in Council now proceeds to state to 
your honourable Committee the proceedings of that detachment. 

After providing for the protection of Surat and Baroda, in 
the manner suggested by the honourable Major-Gencral Wellcs- 
ley, the force under the personal command of Coloncl Murray 
amounted to two regiments of European infantry, and five batta- 
lions of native infantry, with a duc proportion of artillery. 

Arrangements were also made for the co-operation of a body of 
troops in the service of the Guikwar; but those troops did not 
join the army of Colonel Murray until after its arrival at Ougcin. 

In the supposition that Jeswunt Rao Holkar (who was then 
at Ajmere) if pressed by the army of the Commandcr-in-Chief, 
might retire in a south-western direction, Coloncl Murray was 
directed by the instructions of the honourable Major-General 
Wellesley to place his detachment in such a position as would 
enable it to embarrass and impede Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s retreat. 

But, in the event (which was deemed more probable) of 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s proceeding towards Ougcein, Licut.- 
Colonel Murray was instructed to endeavour to effect an carly 
junction with Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s army; and under any cir- 
cumstances, to proceed with the utmost practicable expedition in 
the direction of Holkar’s force, and to take advantage of any 
opportunity of attacking it. 


REASONS FOR RETIRING BEHIND THE MYHEE. 505 


Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s troops having subsequently moved in 
the direction of Ougcin, Colonel Murray determined in confor- 
mity to the spirit of his instructions, as well as in compliance 
with the urgent solicitations of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, to proceed 
with the utmost practicable expedition for the protection of that 
capital. The advance of Coloncl Murray’s detachment however, 
from Baroda to the frontier of Guzerat, was considerably retarded 
by the difficulty of procuring conveyance in Guzerat; by the 
exhausted condition of the country, and the consequent difficulty 
of procuring forage, and by the necessity of previously securing 
ample supplics of provisions. About the middle of the month of 
June however, Colonel Murray arrived with the detachment 
under his command in the vicinity of Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s 
Fort of Dohud. 

At the suggestion of Major-Gencral Wellesley, the transmis- , 
sion of orders to the Commandant of that fortress for the reccep- 
tion of the hcavy ordnance and stores of the detachment under 
Colonel Murray’s command, had been a subject of repeated 
urgency on the part of the Resident at the court of Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah, with that chicftain and his ministers, who explained 
the delay which occurred in the transmission of those orders, by 
asscrting that the Commandant of that force was in the service 
of Ambajec, and “that orders addressed to him would be of no 
effect. This subject will be stated more in detail in that part of 
the present despatch, which rclates to the transactions at the 
court of Dowlut Rao Scindiah. It appears however, that ulti- 
matcly the Commandant not only consented that the heavy 
ordnance should be deposited in the fort, but proposed that a 
British guard should be stationed in it. 

On the goth of June, the detachment under the command of 
Colonel Murray, arrived at Budnawar on its route to Ougcin. 
At that station Coloncl Murray reccived intelligence which 
induced him to suspend his advance to Ougcin, and to retire to 
a position behind the river Myhce. 

The causcs which influenced Colonel Murray’s resolution to 
retire behind the Myhce, appeared to have been principally the 
information which he received from Licut.-Colonel Monson of 
the return of the army under the personal command of the 
Commander-in-Chicf into cantonments, and of the intention of 
Licut.-Coloncl Monson to halt with his detachment at the 
Mokundra pass, until he should reccive further orders from 
General Lake, combined with intelligence which Colonel Murray 


506 HE ADVANCES TO OUGEIN UNOPPOSED. 


received at the same time, of the intention of Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar to direct the whole of his force against the detachment 
advancing from Guzerat. 

Colonel Murray stated it to be his opinion, that the detach- 
ment under his command was uncqual to oppose the whole force 
of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, without the assistance of the cavalry, 
with which he expected to be furnished by the Guikwar, and by 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah, and that by advancing into Malwa, he 
might not only endanger the safety of his detachment, but afford 
to Jeswunt Rao Holkar a favourable opportunity for the invasion 
of Guzerat. In addition to these causes of retreat, Colonel 
Murray considered his position at Budnawar to be unfavourable 
to the operations of a body of infantry against a supcrior force, 
while the position to which Colonel Murray proposed to retire 
. in the rear of the Myhec, appearcd to that officer to possess 
advantages which would cnable his detachment to resist the 
attack of the whole of Holkar’s force. Coloncl Murray ac- 
cordingly on the 1st of July, commenced his retreat towards 
the Myhee. 

On the 5th of that month however, Colonel Murray reccived 
intelligence that Holkar had detached a considerable body of 
his troops towards Hinglaisghur, (the assault and capture of 
which place by the British troops has already been described,) 
and that the main body of Holkar’s force had marched in a 
direction north-east of Mundascre. These movements appear 
to have relicved Colonel Murray from the apprehensions which 
he entertained with respect to the safety of his detachment, and 
accordingly on the 5th of July, Colonel Murray resumed his 
march towards Ougein, at which city he arrived on the 8th of 
the same month without having encountered any opposition. 

At an carly period of time after the march of Colonel Murray 
from Guzcrat, that officer communicated to the Resident with 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah, his anxious desire to be furnished with a 
body of Scindiah’s cavalry, to co-operate with the detachment 
under his command. Before the arrival of Colonel Murray at 
Ougein, a vakecl on the part of Antajee Geerdur, the principal 
officer of Dowlut Rao Scindiah at that capital, had arrived in 
the camp of Colonel Murray, in consequence of orders issued by 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s ministers, in conformity to the urgent 
application of the Resident (as described in a subsequent part of 
this despatch). Colonel Murray transmitted through this vakcel 
also, repeated applications to Antajec Geerdur, urging his imme- 


GOV.-GENERAL FORBIDS EMPLUYMENT OF PINDARRIES, 5047 


diate advance with a body of Scindiah’s cavalry. But this re- 
inforcement though frequently promised, was never despatched, 
and even after Colonel Murray’s arrival at Ougein, every endca- 
vour to obtain the services of an efficient body of Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah’s forces proved unavailing. The expectation also of 
being joined by Scindiah’s forces under the command of Bapoo- 
jee Scindiah, having been disappointed by the defection of that 
chicftain, Colonel Murray submitted to the Resident with Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah, a plan for securing the services of a considerable 
body of Pindarrce horse, which had formerly been in the service 
of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, and was then in the ncighbourhood of 
Bopaul. Colonel Murray also proposed to raise a body of 
Sillchdar horse in Malwa, for the purpose of co-operating with 
his detachment. 

The Resident with Dowlut Rao Scindiah, in reply to Colonel 
Murray’s propositions, explained the various objections to the 
employment of Pindarrics in the service of the British Govern- 
ment, but submitted the decision of the question to the authority 
of the Governor-General in Council. 

The Governor-General in Council concurred entirely in the 
sentiments expressed by the Resident with Dowlut Rao Scin- 
diah, and significd to Colonel Murray, his Excellency in 
Council’s disapprobation of the employment of troops of that 
description. 

Coloncl Murray having submitted to the Governor-Gencral 
several questions relative to the extent to which he might be per- 
mitted to encourage desertion among the adherents of Jeswunt 
Rao Holkar, and to offer to them employment in the service 
of the allics, and to what extent he might make pecuniary 
advances to the servants of Dowlut Rao Scindiah for the pur- 
pose of enabling them to act with vigour and exertion, the 
Governor-General in Council deemed it to be advisable to 
furnish Colonel Murray with instructions on those several ques- 
tions. On the first point, the Governor-General in Council 
stated his opinion to be, that the advantages to be derived by 
the employment of a large number of deserters from the cause, 
of TTolkar would not be adequate to the cxpence and inconveni- 
ence attending that measure. On the question regarding the 
advance of moncy to the officers of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, 
Colonel Murray was referred entirely to the judgment of the 
Resident at that chicftain’s court. 7 

To the disordered condition of the whole frame of Dowlut 


508 INDORE TAKEN, GUICKWAR’S CONTINGENT :— 


Rao Scindiah’s government must be ascribed the conduct of his 
officers in Malwa, in failing to supply an efficient force for the 
purpose of co-operating with Colonel Murray’s detachment ; and 
to the same cause must be ascribed the difficulty which Colonel 
Murray experienced in obtaining supplics or necessaries for his 
troops, and in restoring his establishments of carriage-cattle and 
other equipments which had suffered by the severity of the 
Monsoon, and Colonel Murray was apprized at an carly period of 
time by the Resident with Dowlut Rao Scindiah, of the neces- 
sity of acting without reference to any expectation of useful 
assistance from the government of that chieftain in the opcera- 
tions of the war. 

During the continuance of Colonel Murray's detachment at 
Ougein, that officer took possession, without any resistance, of 
the whole of the territory in the occupation of Jeswunt Rao 
Holkar, situated in that quarter, and of Indore, the capital of 
the possessions of the family of Holkar. These places were 
immediately delivered over to the charge of the officers of 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 

It has been stated in a preceding paragraph of this despatch, 
that the troops which had been furnished by the Guickwar to 
co-operate with Colonel Murray’s detachment, did not form a 
junction with that detachment until after its arrival at Ougcin. 
The body of troops selected by the government of the Guickwar 
for this service, consisting of 3600 horse and 800 foot, was 
assembled at Ahmedabad in Guzcrat, soon after the Resident 
at Baroda notified the desire of the British Government, that 
such a force should be prepared in conformity to the plan 
of operations prescribed by the honourable Major-General 
Wellesley. 

The disordered state of the Guickwar’s finances, compelled the 
British Government to provide for the pay and subsistence of 
the troops composing the Guickwar’s contingent while in the 
ficld, and the Resident at Baroda accordingly, under the 
authority of the Governor in Council of Bombay, adopted an 
_arrangement for that purpose. A British officer was appointed 
to reside in the camp of the Guickwar’s contingent for the pur- 
pose of conducting communications between the commanders of 
the troops of the Guickwar and the Resident at Baroda and 
Colonel Murray, and of supcerintending the payment of those 
troops. Considerable delay occurred before the troops com- 
menced their march, occasioned by the extravagant demands of 


MURRAY'S TROUBLES WITH IT, AND ITS COMMANDER. 509 


the officers commanding the different bodics of men composing 
the contingent. These difficulties having been at length over- 
come, the contingent commenced its march, and on the 7th of 
July arrived at Godra, a possession of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, near 
the frontier of Guzcrat. At this station, the progress of the 
troops was delayed by the same cause which had retarded the 
commencement of their march. This obstruction was at length 
removed by an advance of money on account of the pay of the 
troops which was made by Captain Williams (the British officer, 
residing in the camp of the Guickwar’s contingent) under autho- 
rity which he had received for that purpose from the Resident 
at Baroda. The troops of the Guickwar then resumed their 
march, but their progress was extremely slow. The disorderly 
and turbulent habits of the troops and of the commanders of the 
different parties, were not less conspicuous on their march from 
Godra than they had been before. The repeated orders of 
Colonel Murray to the commander on the subject of expediting 
the march of the troops and on other points of duty connected 
with the public service, were entirely disregarded. 

Being of opinion that these troops might be usefully employed 
in the protection of a convoy, which was advancing from Guzerat, 
with a small detachment of British troops, Colonel Murray 
instructed Captain Williams to require the commander of the 
Guickwar’s troops to join the convoy for the purpose above 
stated, and in the event of his refusal, to leave the camp and to 
inform the commander that the services of his corps would not 
be required, The demand of Captain Williams being refused, 
he quitted the camp of the Guickwar. The progress of the 
convoy, however, being accidentally retarded, the Guickwar's 
contingent joined the convoy a few days after Captain Williams's 
departure, and advanced to Ougein, at which city the contingent 
arrived on the 16th of August. 

The causes which had unhappily produced a disagreement 
between Colonel Murray and the officer commanding the troops 
of the Guickwar, did not cease to operate after the junction of 
the contingent with the British detachment. With a view to 
remedy the evils occasioned by the disagreement existing 
between Colonel Murray and the commander of the Guickwar’s 
contingent, it was determined in concert with the Government 
of the Guickwar (which had, on all occasions, manifested a 
sincere disposition to promote the common cause) to supersede 
the commanding officcr of the contingent and the principal 


510 HOLKAR’S COUNTRY, WEST OF CHUMBUL, REDUCED, 


member of the Guickwar’s Government, prepared to assume the 
command in person. This arrangement, however, was subse- 
quently abandoned. 

In the mean time, the Guickwar’s contingent remained at 
Ougein, and was employed by Colonel Murray in the reduction 
or occupation of some of the possessions of Holkar, situated in 
that vicinity. No cordiality however appears to have been 
established between Colonel Murray and the commander of the 
Guickwar’s contingent, and Colonel Murray continued to transmit 
to the government of Bombay, and to the Resident at Baroda, 
complaints of the misconduct of that officer. 

On the 18th of October, Colonel Murray having completed 
the equipments of his troops, which had been nearly destroyed 
by the violence of the Monsoon, and having collected a sufficient 
number of cattle, advanced from Ougein, in compliance with the 
urgent and repeated orders of the Commander-in-Chief, who 
considered the carly advance of this detachment to be an object 
of the utmost importance in the prosecution of the war; espe- 
cially in the event of Holkar being compelled to retire towards 
Malwa on the approach of the army under his I:xcellency’s 
personal command. Colonel Murray was accompanied on his 
march by the Guickwar's contingent. 

On the 11th of November, Colonel Murray arrived at Munda- 
sere, having occupied the Pergunnahs of Burrowda and Jowrah, 
belonging to Holkar, through which he had directed his march, 
Advancing from Mundascre, Colonel Murray took possession of 
the forts of Narrayn-Gurh and Mulhar-Gurh, which were held by 
the adherents of Holkar. The next operation performed by the 
detachment under the command of Colonel Murray, was the 
attack of Rampoorah, a fortress of some strength, belonging to 
Holkar, and distinct from the fort of Rampoorah, the assault and 
capture of which, is stated in a preceding paragraph of our 
despatch of the 15th of June, and which is still occupied by a 
British garrison. 

This fort was occupied by a party of British troops on the rgth 
of November, after an able resistance on the part of the enemy. 
The possession of Rampoorah completed the conquest of the 
whole of Holkar’s terrifories on the west of the river Chumbul. 

* * * * * * * 

The Governor-Gencral in Council now proceeds to communi- 
cate the sequel of the Acting Resident’s negotiations at the 
Court of Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 


RESIDENCY, AT SCINDIAH’S COURT, PLUNDERED. = 511 


The conviction which the Acting Resident entertained of the 
infamous designs of Serjce Rao Ghautka was corroborated in the 
Acting Resident’s judgment by an occurrence in his*camp on 
the night of the 27th of December. On that night the guard 
stationed at the tent which contained the public baggage of the 
Residency ‘was attacked and overpowered by a large body of 
plundcrers, who murdered or wounded every person ncar the tent, 
and plundered moncy and other property to the value of about 
12,000 rupees, The most valuable part of the public property 
however was preserved by the activity of the Resident’s escort, 
which compelled the plunderers to retreat with precipitation. 
The Acting Resident was induced to suspect that this outrage 
was instigated by Serjce Rao Ghautka, but of this fact no 
evidence appears. Dowlut Rao Scindiah expressed the utmost 
degree of regret upon this occasion, and promised to afford the 
Resident cvery practicable satisfaction. The Acting Resident 
did not suspect that Dowlut Rao Scindiah had any concern in 
this outrage. That chieftain had previously expressed an carnest 
desire that the Acting Resident should encamp on the same 
ground with his army on account of the Pindarrics, whom his 
Highness acknowledged his inability to control. Although the 
suspicions of the Acting Resident with regard to the designs of 
Serjec Rao Ghautka were confirmed by this occurrence, the 
Acting Resident very properly determined not to render it an 
exclusive cause for quitting the court of Dowlut Rao Scindiah., 

Between the 7th and the gth of January the army of Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah invested the fort of Saugur for the purpose of realizing 
the amount of his demand ; in consequence of which, the Acting 
Resident despatched a message to his Highness, intimating that 
he had resolved to march the following morning, and desiring 
passports. To this message the Acting Resident reccived an 
answer purporting that Ramchunder Bhasker (the Agent before 
mentioned) should be despatched to the Acting Resident in the 
course of the morning, and that all points should be satisfactorily 
adjusted. 

The Acting Resident, however, having repeated his demand 
for passports, he received a message from Dowlut Rao Scindiah 
signifying that Ambajec Inglia was expected to arrive in the 
space of eight days, and that on his arrival, it would be deter- 
mined whether his Highness should proceed to Ougein, or the 
Acting Resident should reccive his dismission. 

This insulting message confirmed the Acting Resident in his 


512 AMBIGUOUS PROCEEDINGS OF SCINDIAH. 


resolution to march the succeeding morning unless Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah should consent to proceed immediatcly in the direction 
of Ougein. This resolution, however, the Acting Resident was 
subsequently induced to change, after having made preparations 
for marching by striking all the tents of the British camp and 
loading the baggage, on receiving from Dowlut Rao Scindiah, 
through the agency of Ramchunder Pundit, the most solemn 
assurances of his Highness’s determination to march in the 
direction of Ougein on the 16th of January, and to act in every 
respect according to the Acting Resident’s advice. The delay of 
six days was required in consequence of the deccasc of a female 
of distinction in the family of Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 

It is proper to observe in this place that the information 
which the Acting Resident received with regard to the object 
of Ambajce’s expected visit, was calculated to palliate the hostile 
and insulting tendency of the message which was conveyed to 
the Acting Resident upon that subject, as described in a pre- 
ceding paragraph. 

The Acting Resident was informed that repeated and carnest 
invitations had been transmitted to Ambajce, to proceed to the 
camp of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, in the hope and expectation that 
his influence would effect the expulsion of Ghautka. The Acting 
Resident also stated that in the gencral opinion Ambajce was 
decidedly adverse to the renewal of war with the British Govern- 
ment. The arrival of Ambajee therefore was calculated to main- 
tain peace and amity between the two states, although the 
expectation of it was announced to the Acting Resident in 
an apparent spirit of hostility and insult. 

On the evening of the 15th of January the Acting Resident 
received a message from Dowlut Rao Scindiah stating, that his 
Highness’s march on the following morning agrccably to his 
engagement would be attended with considerable inconvenicnce, 
and requesting that the Acting Resident would consent to a 
further delay of two days, promising in the most positive terms 
to prosecute his march at the expiration of that time, without a 
halt to Ougein. To this proposal the Acting Resident after 
some opposition assented, and on the 11th of January Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah actually commenced his march ; but only a small 
portion of the army accompanied his Highness, The battalions 
and guns, together with the greater portion of the army, con- 
tinued to occupy their position in the vicinity of Saugur, and the 
extent of his Highness’s march did not exceed three miles. The 


THE ACTING RESIDENT LEAVES SCINDIAH’S CAMP, 513 


Acting Resident was also informed that it was the intention of 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah to halt four days where he had pitched his 
tents. 

The Acting Resident having despatched a message remon- 
strating on his breach of promise, his Highness replied, that in 
compliance with the Acting Resident’s desire, his Highness had 
considered it to be incumbent upon him to march on the 18th. 
That his resolution of proceeding to Ougein remained unchanged, 
but that within the period of thirteen days after the decease of 
a member of his family, it was inconsistent with established 
custom to quit the spot where such an event had happened ; 
adding however, that he would positively proceed on the march 
to Ougein after the four days which the prescribed period of 
mourning compelicd. The Acting Resident considered the 
whole of this proceeding to be the result of collusion and deceit, 
but his solicitude to abstain from a measure which in his appre- 
hension would revive the war between the two states, induced him 
.to attend to the promiscs and professions of Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 

# # * # * * * 

The Acting Resident’s report of his proceedings at the court 
of Dowlut Rao Scindiah is interrupted by the miscarriage of a 
despatch to that officer under date the 22nd of January, It 
appears however, by a despatch from the Acting Resident of a 
subsequent date, that he had reccived an insulting message from 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s Durbar in answer to his demand for 
passports, and that the Acting Resident actually marched from 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s camp on the 23d of January to the distance 
of about fourteen miles. Previously to his departure, the Acting 
Resident received a visit from two of Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s 
officers, the object of which was to persuade the Acting Resident 
to remain, but those persons not being authorized to vouch for 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s march on that day, the Acting Resident 
resisted their entrcatics and commenced his journey towards the 
camp of the British forces. 

On receiving information of the Acting Resident’s departure, 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah despatched an officer of high rank together 
with Ramchunder Bhasker the agent before mentioned to the 
Acting Resident’s camp, for the purpose of persuading the 
Acting Resident to return. They arrived at his camp on the 
evening of the 23d, and on being reccived by the Acting 
Resident, solemnly pledged themselves that if he would return 
to Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s camp on the morning of the 24th, 

Ll 


514 RETURNS, LEAVES AGAIN, RETURNS ONCE MORE. 


Dowlut Rao Scindiah would commence his march towards his 
capital on the following day. The Acting Resident however 
- refused to accept this assurance, but being informed by those 
persons that they were authorized to pledge Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah’s name for the performance of any conditions which 
could induce the Acting Resident to return; the Acting Resident 
proposed the following :— 

1st. That on the day following the Acting Resident’s return 
to camp, Dowlut Rao Scindiah should commence his march to 
Ougein, to which place he should proceed without any further 
halt than the usual and necessary intervals. 

andly. That Scindiah should act in conformity to the Acting 
Resident’s advice respecting Ambajce without any further delay. 

gdly. That Scindiah should comply with the Acting Resident’s 
advice to disavow in a letter to the Governor-General, the 
conduct of Ambajec and of the vakecl at Hyderabad, and that 
letters of recall to the latter persons should be delivered to the 
Acting Resident in order that they might be transmitted through 
the Resident at that court. The messengers having agreed in 
the most solemn manner to these conditions, the Acting Resident 
consented to return to camp, and he accordingly returned on the 
24th of January. 

On the evening of that day the Acting Resident reccived 
information that Dowlut Rao Scindiah had resolved to halt the 
following day. This resolution being a direct violation of one of 
the conditions on which the Acting Resident had consented to 
return to camp, the Acting Resident recommenced his march, 
but after proceeding a short distance was informed that Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah had expressed a desire to receive a visit from the 
Acting Resident, who in consequence of this intimation directed 
that his baggage should remain at a grove in the vicinity of the 
encampment of Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s regular brigades, and 
proceeded with Lieutenant Stuart, the officer commanding the 
escort, to the tents of Dowlut Rao Scindiah. After some cn- 
deavour on the part of Dowlut Rao Scindiah to excuse his 
conduct, he signified his determination to comply that day with 
all the Acting Resident’s demands respecting Ambajece, and to 
commence his march towards Ougcin on the following morning. 

The Acting Resident refused to be satisfied unless the letters 
which he had demanded should be prepared and despatched in 
his presence. To this his Highness after much discussion con- 
sented, and the Acting Resident was requestcd to retire with 


ATTACK AND PLUNDER OF ACTING RESIDENT'S CAMP. 515 


some of Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s public officers to a separate tent, 
that the letters might there be prepared in the terms which the 
Acting Resident should prescribe. The Acting Resident accord-’ 
ingly retired with Lieutenant Stuart while Dowlut Rao Scindiah 
continucd to hold his court. The letters were in a state of pre- 
paration, when the Acting Resident was informed that Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah desired to retire for the purpose of performing his 
devotions, which had been interrupted by the Acting Resident’s 
visit, and the letters when completed should be carried to him, and 
if the terms of them should not entirely accord with the Acting 
Resident’s wishes, he might return to his Highness’s tents in the 
evening for the purpose of suggesting the necessary alterations. 

The Resident accordingly returned to take leave of Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah, and immediately despatched orders, recalling the 
baggage of the Residency. In the mcan time, however, the 
British camp was surrounded and overpowered by the whole 
body of Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s Pindarrics, who plundered the 
whole of the baggage. Licutenant Greene, who commanded the 
cscort, and Dr. Wise the surgcon of the Residency, were severely 
woundcd, and many of the Scpoys and other persons attached 
to the Residency were also wounded. 

Dowlut Rao Scindiah expressed the utmost horror and regret at 
this occurrence, and promiscd to restore the whole of the plundered 
property. In the mean time the gentlemen of the Residency 
being deprived by this atrocious violence of all the mcans of 
accommodation, were reduccd to a situation of extreme distress, 

With whatever degree of regret and indignation the Governor- 
General in Council contemplated this unparalleled outrage, 
justice requires the expression of our decided opinion, that it 
was perpetrated without the participation or knowledge of Dow- 
lut Rao Scindiah, The Governor-Gencral in Council even 
doubts whether that outrage was instigated or abetted by Serjce 
Rao Ghautka, and decms it most probable that the plunder of 
the baggage was the exclusive object of this act of violence on 
the part of some of Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s irregular horse and 
other licentious troops. This occurrence therefore produced no 
altcration in the sentiments of the Governor-General in Council 
with regard to the vicws and disposijions of Dowlut Rao Scindiah 
as described in preceding paragraphs. 

The Governor-Gencral, however, decmed it indispensably 
necessary to demand from Dowlut Rao Scindiah a full explana- 
tion of that extraordinary act of violence and ample reparation 

Lia 


516 FIRST ATTACK ON BHIURTPORE REPULSED. 


and atonement for it, and the Governor-General considered it to 
be proper to address a letter to that chieftain, stating in general 
terms the sentiments of the British Government with regard to 
the whole tenor of his conduct, adverting however in an especial 
manner to the outrage committed upon the British Representa- 
tive at his Highness’s court, and containing also a demand of 
reparation and atonement. A copy of that letter is annexed to 
this despatch for your honourable Committec’s information. 
¥ * * * * * * 

The Governor-General in Council now resumes the narrative 
of the proceedings of the army under the personal command of 
his Excellency the Commander-in-Chicf. 

The Commander-in-Chicf having completed the necessary 
arrangements at Deig and having left a proper garrison in the 
fort, proceeded against Bhurtpore, another strong fort belonging 
to Rajah Runjeet Sing and his usual place of residence. 

The Commander-in-Chief directed his march near Muttra for 
the purpose of favouring his junction with his Majesty’s 75th 
regiment and a large convoy of provisions. THis Majesty’s 75th 
regiment and the convoy having joined the main army on the 
29th of December, the Commandecr-in-Chicf pursued his march to- 
wards Bhurtpore, where the army arrived on the 3rd of January. 

The Commandcer-in-Chicf commenced operations against the 
town of Bhurtpore, and a battery of six 18-pounders was opened 
against the wall on the 7th of January. On the gth, the breach 
being reported practicable, preparations were made to storm it, 
and Lieut.-Colonel Maitland of his Majesty’s 75th regiment 
was appointed to the command of the storming party. 

Extraordinary and unexpected obstacles however opposed the 
progress of the storming party and occasioned its detention 
during a considerable period of time in a situation where it was 
exposed to a heavy fire from the walls of the town, and on 
reaching the breach, it was unfortunately found to be imprac- 
ticable. The party was therefore compelled to retire after 
repeated attempts to ascend the breach with the loss of many 
officers and men, and of Lieut.-Colonel Maitland whose courage 
and exertions were eminently conspicuous on this unfortunate 
occasion. A flanking party, however, which was directed against 
the enemy’s battery at the same time succecded in gaining the 
battery, spiked the guns which were found in it and killed a 
considerable number of the enemy. 

The party which endeavoured to storm, retreated in good 


FAILURE OF THE SECOND ATTACK. 517 


order to the batterics of the British army. Although this 
attempt to storm the breach terminated unsuccessfully, the 
British troops have on no occasion displayed a greater spirit 
of gallantry and firmness than in this attack. The failure 
of this attack must be exclusively ascribed to the insurmount- 
able nature of the obstacles which opposed the progress of the 
troops. 

On the following night a new battery was commenced for the 
purpose of breaching the wall in a different place and was opened 
on the 14th with great effect. 

On the 21st of January, the breach which had been effected by 
the fire from the battcrics which had been erected after the 
assault of the town on the 9th appearing to be practicable, the 
Commandcr-in-Chicf determined upon another attempt to carry 
the place by storm. On the evening of that day the storming 
party, which was commanded by Lieut.-Colonel Macrae of his 
Majesty’s 76th regiment, moved out of the trenches. The ditch 
however which surrounds the town was found to be so broad 
and deep that every attempt of the storming party to cross it 
proved unsuccessful, and the party was compclied to return to 
the trenches. The Commander-in-Chicf represents the conduct 
of the troops on this occasion to have been distinguished by their 
accustomed steadiness, activity, and valour. 

The Governor-General in Council is concerned to add that the 
heavy fire to which the troops were unavoidably exposed during 
a considerable time in endeavouring to effect their passage across 
the ditch and during their return to the batteries occasioned a 
severe loss, 

The failure of these attempts determined the Commander-in- 
Chicf to carry the approaches close to the surrounding ditch, by 
which means it was his Excellency’s expectation that the 
obstacles which had hitherto prevented our success would be 
effectually overcome, 

His Excellency accordingly stationed the army in a new 
position on the southern side of the town and recommenced the 
opcrations of the sicge. 

* * * * * * * 

On the 11th of February the main body of the army under the 
command of Major-General Jones, which had advanced from 
Guzcrat, formed a junction with the army of the Commander-in- 
Chief, and encamped in a position in the vicinity of the ground 
occupied by the army of Bengal, 


518 THE THIRD ATTACK UNSUCCESSFUL, 


The remainder of the force from Guzerat under the command 
of Licut..Colonel Holmes, was advancing with a convoy of 
treasure and stores by a different route, and at the period of the 
Jatest advices was arrived at Rampoorah. 

On the 2oth of February the advanced state of the operations 
against thetown of Bhurtpore appeared to the Commander-in- 
Chief to render it advisable to assault the place without further 
delay. On that day his Excellency made preparations for the 
attack. The party destined to storm the breach was formed of 
the greater part of the European infantry belonging to the 
Bengal army and three battalions of Sepoys under the command 
of Lieut.-Colonel Don. Another party consisting of 200 men, 
his Majesty’s 86th regiment, and one battalion of Bengal native 
infantry under the command of Captain Grant of the former 
corps, was ordered to attack the enemy’s trenches and guns on 
the outside of the town, while a third column composed of 300 
men from his Majesty’s 65th regiment and two battalions of 
Bombay native infantry was destined to attack onc of the gates 
of the place which was understood to be accessible. The attack 
conducted by Captain Grant entirely succeeded, and the British 
troops obtained possession of the ecnemy’s guns, which were 
brought into camp. The Governor-General is concerned to 
state that neither of the other attacks succeeded. The ditch 
was found to be so deep as to render the approach of the storm- 
ing party under the command of Licut.-Colonel Don to the 
breach impracticable. The troops then attempted to ascend one 
of the bastions of the town but without success, and after 
repeated endeavours to ascend, was finally compelled to desist, 
The column under the command of Licut.-Coloncl Taylor 
which was intended to attack the gate was detained a consider- 
able time on its march, and was carly exposed to a most heavy 
and destructive fire from the town, which destroyed the ladders 
and rendered every attempt to succeed by assaulting the gate 
impracticable. Licut.-Colonel Taylor, therefore, was compelled 
to withdraw his men until he reccived orders to return to camp. 
The Commander-in-Chief has expressed his opinion of the con- 
duct of Lieut.-Colonel Don and of Captain Grant and the troops 
under their command in terms of the greatest approbation. 

The failure of this attempt to carry the town by assault 
having been occasioned in a great degree by the occurrence of 
unexpected accidents and delays, and the Commander-in-Chicf 
having reason to suppose that a few hours more battering would 


THE FOURTH ATTACK UNSUCCESSFUL. 519 


render perfectly practicable the bastion which our troops had 
attempted to escalade, his Excellency determined to renew the 
attack on the following day. 

The storming party consisted of the whole of the European 
force and two battalions of Native infantry from the army of 
Bengal and the greater part of his Majesty’s 65th and 86th 
regiments, the Grenadicr battalion and the flank companies, and 
another battalion of Native infantry from the army of Bombay. 
The whole was commanded by the honourable Colonel Monson, 
and moved out to the attack at three o’clock in the afternoon of 
the arst of February. 

The troops engaged in the attack with the most determined 
zeal and bravery, but their utmost excrtions to gain the top of 
the breach were unsuccessful, and after succcssive attempts, 
which were continued with unabating ardour during two hours, 
were compcliled to retire with a severe loss of officers and men. 
It is with the deepest concern that the Governor-Gencral in 
Council announces to your honourable Committce this further 
failure in the attempt to carry Bhurtpore by assault, and his 
Excellency in Council extremely laments the loss of the many 
brave officers and men who have fallen on this occasion. 
Although the exertions of the troops have not been attended 
with success, they have not on any occasion displayed a greater 
degree of gallantry and stcadincss, and the Commander-in- 
Chicf has expressed the highest approbation of the conduct 
of Licut.-Coloncl Monson and of all the troops engaged in the 
assault, 

The causes of the repeated failures in the attempts upon 
Bhurtpore have not yet been fully stated to the Governor- 
Gencral in Council, and will require further investigation. 

On the 24th of February the Commandcer-in-Chicf took up a 
new position on the north-cast side of Bhurtpore, and his 
Excellency is prepared to re-commence operations against that 
place as soon as he shall have received supplies of storcs and 
ammunition which are advancing towards the army from the 
stations within the Company’s provinces at which they had 
been collected. The Commander-in-Chicf expresses a confident 
hope of obtaining possession of Bhurtpore before the conclusion 
of the scason for active military operations in that quarter of 
India. 

The Rajah of Bhurtpore however, aware that the exertions of 
the British forces must ultimately be successful and that the 


520 OUR POLICY SURE TO ANSWER ULTIMATELY. 


utter destruction of his power must be the consequence of our 
success, despatched on the 25th of February a Ictter to his 
Excellency the Commander-in-Chief, proposing an accommo- 
dation with the British Government. 

* * * * * * * 

On a consideration of all the transactions which have becn 
recorded in the preceding narrative, combined with the actual 
condition of our internal and external rclations, the Governor- 
General in Council has no reason to doubt the accomplishment 
of the expectations, which in our despatch of the 13th of July 
the Governor-General in Council has expressed with regard to 
the benefits to be derived from the general arrangements of the 
peace concluded with Dowlut Rao Scindiah and the Rajah of 
Berar. The fundamental principles of that policy which regu- 
lated the measures of the British Government in framing those 
arrangements which must constitute the basis of the power and 
security of the British Empire in India, cannot be considered to 
be affected by the circumstances of the existing contest with 
Holkar and his partizans, The immediate effect of that cx- 
tended system of political connection which is indisputably 
requisite for the permanent cstablishment of general peace and 
tranquillity throughout India, must necessarily be to deprive of 
employment that numcrous class of military adventurers, who 
have hitherto derived subsistence from the wars and contests of 
the various discordant and unconnected powers of India. To 
the operation of this cause must be ascribed the facility with 
which Holkar and his partizans have been enabled without any 
pecuniary or territorial resources to assemble and maintain a 
numerous horde of freebooters. But the gradual and certain 
operation of those principles on which is founded the existing 
system of our political relations, must ultimately tend to subdue 
the characteristic habits and dispositions of those rude and pre- 
datory classes, and to encourage the cultivation of the arts of 
peace, and industry throughout every state in India, 

The power of Jeswunt Rao Holkar is destitute of any solid 
foundation, and of every element of an established Government ; 
and although under actual circumstances the British Govern- 
ment is still under the necessity of maintaining our armics in the 
field during an unexpected pcriod of time, no conclusions can be 
deduced from the present situation of affairs, of a nature to 
justify a doubt of the ultimate establishment of that system of 
general peace and security throughout India, to which the 


TERMS OF PEACE’ WITH RAJAH OF BHURTPORE. 521 


views and measures of this government have been uniformly 


directed. 
We have the honour to be, 


Honourable Sirs, 
Your most faithful humble servants, 
WELLESLEY. 
G. H. BARLow. 
G. Upny. 


69. The Governor-General in Council to the Honourable the 
Secret Committee of the Honourable the Court of Directors. 


Terms of the Treaty with the Rajah of Bhurtpore. The Defensive 
Alliance System tested favourably by the War with Holkar. 
(Extract.) 

Honourable Sirs, Fort William, 31st May, 1808. 

The terms to which the Rajah of Bhurtpore has ultimatcly 
assented are, that the Rajah shall pay to the honourable Com- 
pany the sum of twenty lacks of rupces by instalments, the 
whole to be discharged within the space of four years. 

The last instalment howevef to be remitted, if the inter- 
mediate conduct of the Rajah shall be satisfactory to the British 
Government, : 

That the Rajah shall assist to the utmost of his power in 
repclling any attack upon the British possessions, and that the 
Rajah shall never hold any correspondence with the encmics of 
the British power, or be in any way connected with them. 

That the Rajah will never cntertain in his service any subject 
of Great Britain or France, or any European, without the 
sanction of the British Government. 

That as a sccurity for the performance of the articles of the 
treaty, one of the Rajah’s sons shall constantly remain with the 
officer commanding the British forces in the Soubahs of Delhi or 
Agra, and that the fortress of Deig shall continue in the occupa- 
tion of a British garrison, until the British Government shall be 
perfectly satisfied of the Rajah’s fidelity and attachment. 

On the other hand, the British Government engages per- 
manently to guarantce Rajah Runject Sing in the posscssion of 
his antient territory: the Rajah consenting, as the condition of 
his right eventually to claim the aid of the British power, to submit 
to the arbitration of the British Government any difference which 
may occur between him and any other state or chicftain, 


522 DEFENSIVE ALLIANCE SYSTEM HAS WORKED WELL, 


The terms of this treaty do not differ materially from those 
which were prescribed in the Governor-Gencral’s instructions of 
the 19th of March; and being considered by the Governor- 
General in Council to be in every respect advantageous and 
honourable to the British Government, the treaty was ratified 
by the Governor-General in Council on the 2d of May. 

Although the treaty with Rajah Runject Sing was not finally 
executed until the 17th of April, all the stipulations of it were 
adjusted on the 11th of that month; and on the evening of that 
day, the Rajah’s son arrived in the British camp as an hostage. 
On the same evening Jeswunt Rao Holkar was compelled by 
the Rajah to leave Bhurtpore. 

* + * * * * * 

In concluding this despatch, the Governor-Gencral in Council 
deems it expedient to submit to your honourable Committee 
the following observations respecting the effect of the war 
with Holkar upon the principles of the gencral system of our 
defensive alliances, in Hindostan and the Deccan. 

The different states of India included in the general system 
of defensive alliance arc, the Pcishwa; Soubahdar of the Dec- 
can; Rajah of Mysore; Guikwdr; Rajah of Jeypore; Rajah of 
Bhurtpore ; Rajah of Matcherry; Rana of Gohud; Scindiah. 

In the prosecution of hostilitics against Jeswunt Rao Holkar, 
we have derived considcrable assistance from the Pcishwa, the 
Soubahdar of the Deccan, the Rajah of Mysore and the Guikwar, 
under the operation of our engagements with those statcs. That 
assistance could not have been expected under any other state 
of circumstances. The troops of these states have actually 
joined our armies, while the resources of their respective terri- 
tories have been at our disposal, and have been applied with 
advantage to the usc of our troops in the ficld. 

At this moment the troops of the Pcishwa and of the 
Soubahdar of the Deccan form an uscful addition to the army 
in the Deccan. The troops of the Rajah of Mysore are already 
prepared for active operations. The troops of the Guikwar have 
rendered considerable scrvices with the army under the com- 
mand of Major-Gencral Jones, and have furnished convoy for 
the extensive supplies, which have been drawn as well from the 
Guikwar’s territories as from the Company’s resources for the 
use of the army. 

These advantages could not have been obtained without the 
operation of the system .of alliances established with those 


IT HAS STRENGTHENED US AGAINST HOLKAR. 523 


states respectively, and it may justly be apprchended that in a 
different state of circumstances, the resources by which our 
military operations have been so materially facilitated might 
have been applied against us. The causcs which have precluded 
the operation of the alliance with Dowlut Rao Scindiah have 
been fully detailed in the narrative of transactions and events 
at that chicftain’s court, and your honourable Committee will 
observe that those causes are wholly unconnected with any 
considerations affecting the general policy of the alliance. 

The Rajah of Jeypore has not fulfilled the dutics of the 
alliance against the common enemy. With regard to active 
excrtions, he has observed a strict neutrality. But this conduct 
on the part of the Rajah must be attributed to the internal state 
of the politics of that court. The Rajah of Jeypore however 
has been useful in a certain degrce, by assembling his troops 
and by publicly manifesting a design to co-operate with the 
British forces, Had the Rajah of Jeypore been unconnected 
with us, the difficultics of the war in HTindostan would have been 
increased by the necessity of adopting measures of precaution 
to guard against the possible cffect of intrigues at that court, 
which we should not then have had the means of controlling. 

The Rajah of Matcherry has performed all the dutics of 
defensive alliance with fidelity and zeal. 

The Rana of Gohud has been cqually faithful, and his troops 
have been actively employed against the enemy. 

With regard to the Rajah of Bhurtpore, it may be observed 
that a sufficicnt period of time had not clapsed to give full 
effect to the alliance, before the advance of Holkar compelled 
the British power to direct its immediate attention to the 
prosecution of hostilities against that chicftain. The retreat of 
Colonel Monson’s detachment, followed by the troops of Jeswunt 
Rao Ilolkar, favoured the success of Holkar’s intrigues at the 
durbar of the Rajah of Bhurtporc; and the characteristic 
treachery of the Asiatic durbars combined with an exaggerated 
impression of Holkar’s power, induced the Rajah of Bhurtpore 
to violate his engagements and to join the cause of the enemy. 
The experience of the difficulty, danger and distress which have 
attended his connection with Jeswunt Rao Holkar, has induced 
the Rajah of Bhurtpore to abandon the cause of that chieftain, 
and to seck the sources of security and prosperity in the renewal 
of his alliance with the British power, 

It is evident therefore that the war with Jeswunt Rao Holkar 


524, LAKE’S FIRST IMPRESSIONS ON MONSON’S RETREAT. 


has not only not affected the general system of our political 
relations, but has demonstrated the utility of those relations in 
their application to the increase of our resources and power 
against our enemies. Under every possible advantage derived 
from the exertions of intrigue, from the unsettled state of our 
conquests, from the internal commotion naturally occasioned 
by a state of active war on the frontier, from the exaggerated 
impression of Holkar’s power, resources, skill and reputation, 
the disturbances excited by Holkar have not shaken the great 
foundations of the alliances established in Hindostan and the 
Deccan, and it may be reasonably expected that the ultimate 
consequence of the war with Holkar will tend to confirm the 
stability of all our alliances, and to secure the tranquillity of all 
our dominions. 
We have the honour to be, 
Honourable Sirs, 
Your most faithful humble Servants, 

WELLESLEY. 

G. H. Bartow. 

G. Upny. 


470. Lieut.-General Lake to the Marquess Wellesley. 
Monson’s Retreat. 


My Lord, Head Quarters, Camp near Gunge, Sept. 8th, 1804. 

I have now the honour to forward for your Lordship’s informa- 
tion, the honourable Colonel Monson’s report of the operations 
of his detachment from the 23d to the 31st of August, the period 
of the arrival of the detachment at Agra. This with my former 
despatches will put your Lordship in possession of cvery infor- 
mation I have received respecting the movements of Colonel 
Monson’s corps since he retreated from Mochundie Ghaut. 

Although I cannot sufficiently lament the unfortunate turn 
affairs have taken with this detachment, or the circumstances 
which led to them, still I fecl it my duty to represent to your 
Lordship, that both officers and men of the detachment, on 
every occasion on which they were actually engaged with the 
enemy, maintained the superiority of British discipline, and 
showed the utmost steadiness and gallantry; and that should 
an opportunity occur of leading against the enemy those who 
remain, I shall place the fullest confidence in their attachment, 
and approved bravery and experience. 


MONSON PREPARES TO CROSS THE BANAS, 525 


I shall cause every possible enquiry to be made into the 
apparent disaffection, on the part of some of the corps, who 
formed the detachment, but I have the pleasure to assure your 
Lordship, that it does not appear to have been by any means 
extensive; numbers of the sepoys are daily coming in; and 
those that are still with the enemy and have been obliged to 
take service, have sent word to their officers that they will avail 
themselves of the first opportunity of escaping to return; those 
who refused to enter the enemy’s service, have been most cruelly 
treated and in gencral mutilated in the right hand. 

I have the honour to be, 
My Lord, &c. 
G, LAKE. 
rst Enclosure. 
Hon. Colonel Monson to Lieutenant-General Lake. 
Agra, Sept. and, 1804. 
Sir, 

I had the honour to inform you, in my Ictter under date the 
22nd instant, that I was cncampcd on the banks of the Banas 
river, which I was in hopes I should be able to cross the following 
day, but finding the river did not fall so rapidly as I had reason 
to expect, I ordered Captain Nicholl with six companies of the 
and battalion of the 21st regiment to cross in boats and proceed 
immediately to Khooshall Ghur, in charge of the treasure with 
my dctachment. On the evening of the 23rd the whole of 
Ifolkar’s cavalry came up, and pitched their camp about two 
coss from mic; on the morning of the 24th at day-light, finding 
the river fordable, I began to cross my baggage. At eight 
o’clock A.M. the cnemy took possession of a large village on my 
right, and commenced making embrasures for two guns, I there- 
fore ordered without delay two companics from the 12th regi- 
ment and the advanced picquet from the and battalion, and 
regiment, the whole under the command of Licutenant Parr of 
the latter corps, to storm it, which they did with the loss of few 
men killed and wounded. About twelve o’clock the whole of 
my baggage with the rath regiment, Ist battalion rqth, 2nd do. 
gth regiment had crossed and one howitzer, the above corps 
leaving their picquets standing, the and battalion, and regiment 
remaining to support them, finding any attempt to withdraw my 
picquets before dark must prove inevitable destruction to them, 
About four o’clock P.M. Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s infantry came up; 


526 THE CONTEST ON THE BANKS OF THE BANAS. 


in the morning nearly the whole of his cavalry had crossed at a 
ford three or four miles below me for the purpose of attacking 
my baggage, which had obliged me to cross my infantry as his 
cavalry crossed. When his infantry had surrounded my picqucts, 
they opened a heavy cannonade, which obliged the party I had 
posted in the village we had taken in the morning, to withdraw, 
and of which the enemy took possession directly, and planted 
two guns, but our right flank being protected by a high hill, they 
had no effect; they therefore soon withdrew them more to our 
left, and after having cannonaded us for nearly an hour, they 
came down to the attack making a hideous noise. Our troops 
received them with great coolness and charged ; the enemy fied, 
and we carried a line of guns, but were prevented making use 
of them, the whole of the ammunition being carried away. The 
enemy immediately opened a fire extremely heavy from a fresh 
line of guns, and surrounded us with bodies of infantry and 
cavalry; most of my troops were now cither killed or wounded, 
and further resistance being vain, I retreated to the Ghaut with 
the howitzer, the enemy pressing on me very fast; when we 
reached the river, the confusion was very great. The cnemy’s 
horse cut in, and every man that stood by the howitzer was cut 
down. Our troops now pressed fast into the river endeavouring 
to make thcir escape, but the enemy pushed after and many 
were either killed or drowned. At this instant, while the 
enemy were making a dreadful slaughter of our troops, Colonel 
M‘Culloch with the 1st battalion 14th regiment, came down to 
the river on the opposite side, upon which the enemy retired, 
and enabled a few of our troops to escape, which was scarcely 
done, when the enemy brought their guns to the Ghaut, and 
under the cover of their fire began to cross. I immediately 
formed my troops into an oblong square and commenced my 
march. 

The enemy’s cavalry pressing me hard, I found it impossible 
to save the whole of my baggage; therefore leaving my baggage 
to make the best of its way, I moved rapidly on, and I reached 
Khooshall Ghur on the evening of the 25th, the greater part 
of my baggage having fallen into the hands of the enemy. We 
had been greatly annoyed the whole of the day, the enemy’s 
horse hanging on the rear, and threatening to charge, which had 
obliged me to halt and open the howitzer on them, several 
times. I found Captain Nicholl’s detachment cncamped in the 
fort; they had been attacked by the battalions belonging to 


PROSECUTION OF THE RETREAT TO HINDOWN. 527 


Rao Mahdoo Sadishoo Buxy; for the particulars I refer your 
Excellency to Captain Nicholl’s letter which I have the honour 
to enclose. I was much surprized on my arrival at Khooshall 
Ghur, not to find five battalions and twenty pieces of cannon 
belonging to the Rajah of Jeypore, as I understood from that 
court that I was to be joined by that force on my arrival there, 
but they had left it some days previous to my arrival. On the 
morning of the 26th the whole of the enemy’s cavalry arrived, 
and in the evening they encamped in separate bodies all around 
me. It is with great pain I now inform your Excellency that 
I discovered during the day a correspondence going forward 
between some of the native commissioned officers of the 1st 
battalion 14th and 2nd battalion goth regiment, with Holkar, 
respecting those corps going over to the encmy: fortunately a 
letter from Holkar to a Soubahdar was brought to me, which 
put it into my power to take some steps towards preventing 
any thing scrious with regard to the safety of the detachment 
being endangered taking place; however, nearly two companics 
from the 1st battalion 14th regiment going off, and about 400 of 
Major Frith’s irregular cavalry deserting at the same time, and 
recciving two verbal summons from Holkar to surrender during 
the day, made my situation truly alarming, not knowing to what 
extent the treachery of my troops might exist. I must in 
justice notice that the exemplary conduct of the 12th regiment, 
and the six companies of the 2nd battalion 21st regiment during 
the whole of the campaign, shewed their attachment to the 
government and their reliance on their officers, and at this period 
in particular, their steady good conduct was very conspicuous. 
On the 26th at seven o'clock P.M. I moved out of the fort, and 
formed an oblong square: finding the howitzcr would prove a 
scrious delay to us, I ordered it to be spiked, and commenced 
my march. The enemy, as soon as they knew we had moved, 
followed us, and one body charged but were easily repulsed, 
the guns nearly at the same time belonging to Rao Mahdoo 
Sadishoo Buxy’s battalion opened on us but with no effect. It 
being so dark they could not distinguish our troops at the 
distance we were. The enemy’s cavalry followed us the whole 
of the night of the 26th, and during the day of the 27th, harassing 
our troops by attempting to charge and keeping up a constant 
fire from three gallopers, but which fortunately did little mischief, 
Tn the evening about six o’clock we reached Hindoun, the troops 
greatly exhausted, I tovk possession of an old ruined fort and 


528 RETREAT CONCLUDED. OFFICERS AND MEN PRAISED. 


remained until one o’clock A.M. on the 28th, when I commenced 
my march; at day-light the enemy’s horse were in sight, they 
keeping the high road whilst we marched among the ravines, 
the guide taking what he said was the best road. We had just 
cleared the ravines when the enemy’s cavalry made a desperate 
charge in three bodies, which was received by our troops with 
determined coolness and bravery, the 12th regiment reserving 
their fire until the enemy were within a few yards of their 
bayonets, which when delivered did great exccution, several 
Sirdars falling. The enemy finding they could make no im- 
pression, wheeled off and made no more attempts to charge 
during the day. 

We reached the Biana Pass about sunset, and finding the 
troops greatly fatigued, I halted, intending to remain for the night 
at the entrance of the pass. The enemy’s guns at this time 
came up, and finding I had halted, brought their guns around 
me and opened a furious cannonade, which obliged me to 
proceed. We got to the city of Biana about nine o’clock P.M. 
The night being extremely dark, the baggage had mixed with 
the linc, and thrown the troops into great confusion : however 
I got the corps together as well as possible and moved on, but 
they were soon separated again, owing to the darkness of the 
night and the great cultivation. Finding it impossible to collect 
the whole togcther again, each corps made the best of their way 
to Agra, keeping together as much as possible, where most of 
the troops arrived by the goth and the whole by the 31st at 
day-light. 

I beg leave now to assure your Excellency that the coolness 
and determined bravery shewn by the officers and men of the 
detachment during this arduous contest, merits my warmest 
praise; the firmness with which they received the repeated 
attacks of so superior and powerful an enemy and the patience 
with which they underwent the greatest hardships, claims my 
admiration and gratitude, and shewed themselves worthy of the 
name of British troops. To Licutenant-Colonels M‘Culloch and 
Ashe, Major Radcliffe, Captains Nicholl, Featherstone, and 
Fletcher I feel greatly indebted for their exertions. Licutenant- 
Colonel Don and Captain O'Donnel, both in a bad state of 
health, exerted themselves greatly and rendered me essential 
service. 

Your Excellency will perceive, by the enclosed return of killed 
and wounded, that our loss has becn very great. Though I 


CAPTAIN NICHOLL REACHES KHOOSHALGHUR, 529 


cannot but lament with the deepest regret the loss of so many 
noble fellows, yet I cannot but observe with some satisfaction, 
that even in the hour of death, each emulated the other to deeds 
of glory, and fell as became British soldiers and men. 
I have the honour to be, &c. 
W. Monson, 
Brig. Com. 


2d Enclosure. 


Captain Nicholl to the Hon. Brigadier General Monson. 
Agra, Aug. 31st, 1803. 
Sir, 

I take this, the earlicst opportunity of detailing the occurrences 
of the detachment you did me the honour to place under my 
command on the river Banas. 

After crossing the Banas in the evening of the 22nd, with six 
companics of the and battalion of the 21st regiment, (not ex- 
eecding 240 firelocks) I moved from its bank about ten o’clock 
on the following morning in charge of the treasure, tumbrils, &c., 
and proceeded according to your instructions on the road to 
Coossial Ghur. About seven in the evening I halted at a small 
village to refresh the people; and between three and four of the 
morning of the 24th, moved with the intention of waiting your 
arrival at the town of Bebonda agreeable to your directions, but 
being refused admittance, I hesitated not a moment in pushing 
for Coossial Ghur, under the supposition that my presence there 
might favourably operate upon the Mahratta chiefs, with whom I 
had understood negotiation was carrying on. My approach to 
the town was arrested by a body of Mahratta cavalry, which I 
(reluctantly) submitted to upon the principle of moderation, and 
as we came upon them rather unexpectedly, the military etiquette 
of stopping our approach to their camp to ascertain the cause of 
our mission, might not be decmed irregular or improper. After 
being informed that our arrival was for the express purpose of 
conciliation, we were permitted to proceed to the Fort, under the 
walls of which I encamped about 12 o'clock, forming a junction 
with a company of the 1ath regiment which had been there 
some days, Our arrival seemed to excite a good decal of com- 
motion among the Mahrattas, who immediately got under arms, 
and in an hour sounded a signal for march; I then advised them 
again that we had come on terms of friendship, and begged they 
would persuade themselves to remain where they were until your 

Mm 


530 HIS SPIRITED PROCEEDINGS THERE. 


arrival, which might be expected in all the next day; this, 
however, had no other effect than producing a declaration, on 
their part, that they had been deceived, and about 4 o’clock they 
marched off and encamped a coss distant on the opposite side of 
the town; at 9 o’clock at night all our picquets were attacked at 
the same moment by horsemen, &c. With our little linc under 
arms, I directed the picquets to stand their ground, which they 
did until the morning, when I recalled them and moved into the 
Fort of Coossial Ghur, having several gates and more openings. 
Between 7 and 8 o'clock on the 24th I was apprized of the 
Mahrattas’ intention of levying a maumlah upon the town, 
accompanied with a threat, that if in two hours a certain sum 
was not paid, they would open a cannonade upon it. Concciving 
that in alliance with the Jeypoor Rajah, it was my duty to 
defend his rights, I wrote to the Mahratta Chicfs, repeating the 
cause and intention of our arrival, adding that if they were 
determined to insist upon unjust exactions, I was equally de- 
termined under all the circumstances existing to oppose them, 
to which they replicd as enclosed (leaving me no doubts as to 
my own conduct) in haughty terms demanding all my elephants, 
treasure, arms, &c., and observing that if I would resign them 
I should be permitted to retire unmolested wherever I pleased. 
Not having great confidence in Mahratta faith, and feeling all 
the indignity annexed to the insolence of such a demand, I of 
course made no reply, and in an hour they opened a battery 
of 10 guns, 9 and 6 pounders, which they continued playing 
until 3 o'clock P.M., when finding they could make no impression, 
they moved round to the northward. Although their battery 
had been within musket shot, I treated them with silent con- 
tempt, which may have encouraged their attack upon the town 
in the evening, as about 5 o’clock they recommenced their can- 
nonade (all the towns-people quitting the fort), and their infantry, 
6 or 800, entering by the north gate with colours flying and 
drums beating, but by the brisk gallantry of Licutenant Harriott 
with his own company of the 2d battalion of the 1ath regiment, 
followed with equal spirit by about 100 men of the ad battalion 
of the 21st regiment, the enemy were beat back under disgrace, 
leaving several killed, and many must have been wounded. 
Observing the animated conduct of this spirited detachment, 
I regretted most seriously that I had not a few more sepoys to 
have enabled me to take advantage of an cxulting moment, but 
the responsibility of a charge so scrious in its nature as the 


HOW THE WAR WITH HOLKAR AROSE, 531 


treasure, made me pause, fearful of carrying even gallantry too 
far, though I had not the smallest doubt of success had I 
attempted their battery. After repulsing their attack upon the 
town I had however determined to storm this battery upon the 
close of day, and had given orders to that effect, but whether 
the enemy had been apprized of your approach or my determi- 
nation, they wisely moved off their guns to their camp, where 
altogether they possessed 24 or 25 pieces of cannon. The spirited 
conduct of our small body in this little affair does them great 
credit, and is, in my humble opinion, deserving of praise. The 
men of the 2d battalion of the 21st followed with animated 
courage the bright example of the company of the 12th regiment. 
Licutcnant Brownrigg, who upon this occasion acted as a volun- 
tcer, behaved with great spirit. 
I have the honour to be, &c. 
W, NICHOLL, 
Capt. commanding a Detachment. 
The Company of the 12th, one Drummer killed. - 
Do. do. aist, one Sepoy _— do, 


71, Lieut.-General Lake to the Marquess Wellesley. 
Monson’s Retreat. 


Head Quarters, Muttra, July 1st, 1809. 
My Lord, 

Soon after the conclusion of the late war with the Mahratta 
tonfedcratcs, the attention of Government was directed to 
Jeswunt Rao Holkar. The armics of that chief occupied a 
position highly dangcrous to our security, and he openly 
avowed an intention to invade our possessions. He was like- 
wise committing the most destructive depredations on the 
territories of our allics, and employing the most active means 
to excite revolt and insurrection in those provinces which had 
recently becn subjected to our dominion. 

A consideration of these circumstances induced your Lordship 
in Council to authorize me to center intd a negotiation with 
Jeswunt Rao ITolkar; and in conformity to the instructions with 
which I was furnished on this occasion, I employed such means 
as were deemed consistent with the dignity, honour and interests 
of government to avert the hostile designs of that chief, and to 
adjust his various insolent and groundless pretensions, 

During the progress of this negotiation, I judged it expedient 

Mm 2 


532 MONSON’S DETACHMENT FORMED TO PROTECT }Y¥EPOOR. 


to move forward with the army, which as your Lordship knows, 
had remained in the field since the conclusion of the former war. 
This movement was dictated by the desire of giving weight to 
the means employed for the purpose of accommodation ; by the 
necessity of protecting from the ravages of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, 
those states with whom we were in alliance, and by the ad- 
vantage of placing my army in a situation from whence it might 
act with effect and celerity in the event of failure in our pacific 
measures, 

In the course of my communications with Holkar, it gradually 
became manifest that the relations of peace and friendship could 
not be established with that chief. His language was arrogant 
and unconciliating, his demands were extravagant and inad- 
missible, and his conduct continued menacing and _ hostile. 
Under these circumstances I continued slowly to advance for- 
ward until your Lordship’s final decision should authorize what 
appeared no longer avoidable, the commencement of military 
operations. 

Holkar’s force had occupicd @ position in the country of 
Ajmeer, contiguous to the frontier of the Jyepoor possessions, 
from whence it had extended its depredations to all the sur- 
rounding countries. On my arrival at Doussa, I was informed 
that it had moved into the territories of Jyepoor and advanced 
so far as to threaten the capital of that state. It became of 
importance to avert a plan which would be destructive to our 
ally the Rajah of Jyepoor, and add in a great degree to the 
resources of a chicf whose hostile intentions in regard to the 
British Government were no longer doubtful. I therefore dcter- 
mined to advance a force for the protection of Jyepoor, which my 
vicinity to that place would have enabled me to support with the 
rest of my army if necessary. 

The force destined for this service marched from my camp at 
Doussa, on the 18th of April 1804, and consisted of three 
battalions of Native infantry, with suitable equipments of artil- 
lery, military stores, e“ It was commandcd by the honourable 
Lieut.-Colonel Monson of his Majesty’s 76th regiment, whom I 
instructed, unless compelled for the safcty of Jyepoor, to avoid 
engaging any part of the enemy’s force, and to remain within 
such a distance of my army as might enable me to give him what- 
ever degree of support circumstances might require. 

The advance of this detachment, and the situation of my army 
compelled Holkar to abandon his designs against Jyepoor. He 


HOLKAR RETREATS. TONK AND RAMPOORAH TAKEN, 533 


moved slowly off in a southerly direction, destroying the villages 
and laying waste the country in his neighbourhood. 

My proceedings in the course of the negotiation I carried on 
with Jeswunt Rao Holkar had been transmitted to your Lord- 
ship, and produced a conviction of the impossibility of avoiding 
hostilitics with that chief. Your Lordship in consequence was 
pleased to transmit me instructions to commence military opera- 
tions with every practicable degree of haste and vigour. The 
despatch on this occasion under date 16th of April 1804, was 
reccived whilst the army was encamped at Doussa, and I com- 
menced without delay to carry into effect the orders it contained. 

The enemy having halted in the Jyepoor territorics an oppor- 
tunity seemed to offer of bringing him to a general action, and I 
accordingly proceeded from Doussa with the greatest expedition 
towards the position he occupicd. My approach however induced 
him to retreat, and he pursued his course with such celerity in a 
southerly direction as left no probability that I could compel 
him to engage my army. 

The flight of Holkar, and the inexpediency of pursuing him 
on account of the advanccd period of the season and other causes, 
induced me to halt the army at Nuahce,.a position near the 
fronticr of the Jycpoor country, and at an inconsiderable dis- 
tance from Tonk and Rampoorah, places which with an extensive 
country connected to them belonged at this time to the enemy, 
and of which it was of importance that we should obtain pos- 
session. 

Tonk, which is a walled town of considcrable extent and 
population, was about this time very gallantly attacked and 
carricd by a body of irregular horse, which I had sent in advance 
under the command of Licutenant Lucan of his Majesty’s 74th 
regiment, for the purpose of giving every possible annoyance to 
the rear of the retreating encmy. 

Rampoorah is a fortress deemed by the natives of great 
strength, I therefore judged it necessary to detach a force from 
the army properly cquipped for taking possession of it. The 
party intended for this service accordingly consisted of two 
battalions of Native infantry, the necessary artillery, and a 
reginient of Native cavalry under the command of Licut.-Colonel 
Don of the honourable Company’s service. 

Licut.-Coloncl Don and his detachment executed this duty 
with the utmost spirit and success. Having in vain endea- 
voured to induce the enemy to surrender the place, Colonel Don 


534 WHY LAKES ARMY WENT INTO CANTONMENTS. 


concerted the necessary measures for attempting to carry it by 
assault on the 16th of May. This was contrived with so much 
wisdom, and executed with. such spirit and cnergy, that the 
attempt completely succeeded. The greatest part of the garrison 
was destroyed, whilst the loss on our part was extremely incon- 
siderable. 

These rapid and important successes, with the situation of my 
army, and the advancement of the detachment under the honour- 
able Lieut.-Colonel Monson, appeared to impress the enemy with 
a great degree of consternation. They fled rapidly across the 
Chumbul river, and returned towards Malwa, laying waste the 
country in their progress in that dircction. 

At this periéd I was informed from all quarters, that Holkar’s 
pecuniary resources were reduced to the lowest ebb, that his 
army was filled with terror and dismay, and that his troops 
who before had been mutinous and discontented were now 
deserting from him in great numbers. These representations 
were rendered more probable from the considcration that a 
successful war is necessary to retain together an army and to 
support the confidence of troops whose chief band of union is 
plunder. I therefore gave them considcrable credit, although I 
found it impossible to obtain accurate information, and was awarc 
of the exaggeration which the natives of this country give to all 
their relations. 

This reduced state of the encmy’s power and resources, and 
the great distance to which he had prosccuted his flight, appcar- 
ing to me in a great measure to have rcleased those states with 
which we were in alliance from all hazard of future depredation, 
and to have deprived Jeswunt Rao Holkar of all hopes of 
success in any future attempt to invade the British territories in 
Hindostan, I determined without further delay to withdraw the 
main army to their respective cantonments within the Company’s 
provinces. 

Other considerations at the same time concurred to render this 
measure highly expedient. No advantage could have resulted 
from remaining in the position I then occupied, and a further 
pursuit of the enemy was rendered impossible from the nature of 
those countries in advance, in regard to water and provisions. 
It was highly desirable too to place my Europcan troops under 
cover before the approach of the rainy scason, which could not 
fail to be destructive to them in the field. 

Before I commenced my march to cantonments, it was of 


CONSTITUTION OF LIEUT.-COL. MONSON’S DETACHMENT. 535 


importance to take every precaution in regard to our future 
security, and it appeared to me that this object would be com- 
pletely attained by securing the passes of Boondee and Lakery 
in that chain of mountains to the southward of Rampoorah. I 
accordingly directed Lieut.~-Colonel Monson with the force under 
his command, to occupy and maintain a position in their vicinity. 
Licut.-Colonel Don was at the same time instructed to place 
himself under the command of Colonel Monson, with the whole 
force that had captured Rampoorah, with the exception of a 
regiment of native cavalry which I ordered to rejoin my army. 

Having formed this arrangement, and furnished the honour- 
able Lieut.-Colonel Monson with such instructions as appeared 
necessary for the guidance of his future conduct, I commenced 
my march with the main army towards Agra on the 18th of 
May, and I arrived at that place on the 5th of June 1804. 

Though this march was in some degree hastened by unexpected 
occurrences, which at this time happened in the province of 
Bundclcund, yet my movements were adapted as much as 
possible to the extreme heat of the scason. Notwithstanding 
however every precaution that could be taken, I lost a number 
of Europeans, and my whole army suffered severely from the 
excessive heat. 

I stationed the principal part of my native force at Agra and 
at Muttra, as well for the purpose of securing tranquillity in the 
districts contiguous to these places, as with the view of ensuring 
the fidelity of the neighbouring petty statcs, and of being in 
readincss to proceed again to the southward, should circum- 
stances at a future period require their presence in that quarter. 

No cantonments for Ikuropean troops had been constructed on 
the banks of the Jumna, and I therefore proceeded towards 
Cawnpore with my European force, which consisted of his 
Majesty’s 8th, 27th, and 2gth regiments of light dragoons ; two 
companies of his Majesty’s 22d and the whole of the 76th 
regiment of foot, with two companics of the honourable Com- 
pany’s European regiment. These arrived at Cawnpore about 
the end of June, a few days previous to the commenccment of 
the rainy scason, 

The detachment which I had Icft under the command of the 
honourable Licut.-Coloncl Monson consisted of five complete 
battalions of native infantry, a suitable proportion of artillery, 
and about 4,000 irregular cavalry, who, under the command of 
Licutcnant Lucan, had been ordered to join Colonel Monson’s 


536 MONSON DID NOT OBEY HIS INSTRUCTIONS. 


detachment soon after its arrival at Jyepoor. These troops were 
in a high state of discipline and had been accustomed to victory, 
and their equipment and efficiency were rendered perfect by an 
ample supply of treasure and all kinds of military stores. 

The passes near which this detachment was stationed afford 
the only entrance through the mountains above mentioned from 
Malwa into Hindostan. Through these the enemy had retreated, 
and whilst they were defended by our troops, his return appeared 
to be rendered impossible. The situation of Colonel Monson’s 
corps therefore appeared to secure all the advantages which had 
been obtained, and to obviate every danger that could accrue to 
ourselves or to our allies, from the absence of the main army. 

It was my intention that the detachment should have remained 
in this position until the termination of the rainy scason, where 
either alone or strengthened by reinforcements from Hindostan 
as circumstances might have rendered necessary, it could have 
advanced into Malwa for the purpose of carrying on offensive 
operations against the enemy. Unfortunately my views were 
defeated by Colonel Monson’s departure from the plan which I 
intended him to pursue. 

The irregular cavalry belonging to Colonel Monson’s detach- 
ment were sent in advance to distress as much as possible the 
rear of the retreating enemy, and their exertions in this servicc 
were attended with considerable success. Several small partics 
of the enemy were cut off. On the 29th of May, Licutenant 
Lucan, assisted by Captain Gardiner, who likewise commanded 
a small body of irregular horse, surrounded three battalions and 
eleven guns belonging to Tantia, a partizan of Holkar, and after 
a short engagement, in which these officers displayed great activity 
and courage, compelled them to surrender. 

Unfortunately it appeared to Colonel Monson about this time, 
that advantage would likewise result from the advance of his 
main force. It appeared to him that the presence of his detach- 
ment would animate to resistance the chiefs of those countries 
in which Holkar was committing depredations. Such resistance 
in the present reduced and dismayed state of the enemy might 
be thought to be attended with important effects, and the 
promises of support and of supply held out to him by the Rajah 
of Kotah seemed to obviate every risk of an advanced movement. 

As soon as I understood that Colonel Monson had formed the 
resolution of advancing beyond the position I had assigned to 
him, I expressed in the strongest terms my disapprobation of 


I TRIED TO OBVIATE THE DANGER OF HIS ADVANCE. 537 


such a measure, and my apprchension of the mischiefs that might 
follow. Bcfore however, he could receive my communications 
on this subject, he had actually crossed the Chumbul near Kotah, 
and was proceeding towards Mokundra, (a pass in a more distant 
range of hills) which appeared to Colonel Monson as defensible 
and as well calculated to command the future operations of the 
enemy as those at which he had been originally stationed. 

Though the reasons which Colonel Monson assigned for this 
forward movement did not appear to me satisfactory, yet I was 
disposed to allow considerable latitude to the judgment of this 
officer, as well from his being best able to obtain a knowledge 
of such circumstances as immediately regarded his situation, 
as from the confidence in his zeal, courage and abilities with 
which his whole conduct during the former war had inspired me. 

Finding therefore that the detachment had occupied the 
advanced position at Mokundra, it appeared to me that the 
most desirable measure I could pursue, was to form such arrange- 
ments as were calculated to support it in that situation, and point 
out to Colonel Monson such precautions as were likely to obviate 
the evils to be apprehended. 

All my communications to Colonel Monson at this period had _ 
in view to impress him strongly with the danger of advancing ; 
with the importance of being in a situation where his supplics 
would be liable to no uncertainty; with the advantages to be 
derived from his conciliating the chicfs of those countries in his 
neighbourhood, and with the necessity of extreme vigilance in 
regard to whatever concerned the movements and designs of the 
enemy. 

I likewise directed Colonel Monson to correspond frequently 
with Colonel Murray, and to keep that officer regularly informed 
of the nature of his situation and intentions, and of his opinions 
on such objects as he thought ought to cngage their mutual 
attention and excrtions. 

Colonel Murray at the commencement of the war had been 
directed by Major-General Wellesley to move forward from 
Guzerat into Malwa. The force under his command was of 
sufficient strength to engage the main body of the enemy, and 
he had been instructed to use every exertion to accomplish that 
object. At the present period he was advancing to Oujcin, where 
his presence appeared necessary for the defence of that capital 
against an attack with which it was threatened by the enemy’s 
force. 


538 COLONEL MURRAY'S RETREAT INCREASED THE DANGER. 


My communications to Colonel Murray informed him of the 
situation of the detachment under the command of Colonel 
Monson, and instructed him to correspond and co-operate with 
that officer, in the fullest confidence that two bodies of troops of 
such strength and efficiency could not only have supported each 
other, but by availing themselves with judgment of such favour- 
able circumstances as offered, might have had it in their power 
to accomplish the total overthrow of the enemy. 

For reasons which have never been satisfactorily explained to 
me, Colonel Murray after he had advanced within a short 
distance of Oujein, formed the extraordinary resolution of 
retreating behind the Myhee river, and actually fell back for 
that purpose. This movement gave the enemy confidence ; 
relieved him from any apprehension of an attack on the side 
of Malwa, and left him at liberty to direct his whole attention 
to the honourable Colonel Monson’s detachment. Colonel 
Murray after several retrograde marches, again altered his inten- 
tions and advanced to Oujein. He was however, either too late 
to give the necessary support to Colonel Monson ; or he declined 
affording that degree of assistance and co-operation which seemed 
to me so much in his power, and which the situation of the 
latter so much required. 

Colonel Monson was at this time unfortunatcly induced to quit 
his secure situation at Mokundra. It had appeared to him that 
the Fort of Hinglaisghur, situated at some distance in advance 
of that Pass, might greatly tend to strengthen his position, and 
he resolved to make an effort to gain possession of it. With 
that view therefore he procecded forwards, and by an attack 
concerted with skill and executed with vigour, he carried it by 
assault on the 2d of July 1804. On this occasion the activity of 
Colonel Monson, and the gallantry and good conduct of his 
troops appeared to merit such an expression of my approbation 
as I had the honour of transmitting to your Lordship. 

After the capture of Hinglaisghur, the detachment remained 
encamped several days in its vicinity, at a place nearly fifty 
miles in advance of the Mokundra Pass ; and whilst they were in 
this situation, intelligence was received that the main body of the 
enemy’s force was advancing for the purpose of attacking them. 

Jeswunt Rao Holkar had occupied a position in Malwa and 
was now advanced to the vicinity of Rampoorah on the left 
bank of the Chumbul. During the short period that had 
elapsed since his retreat, he had been exerting himself to collect 


MONSON SHOULD HAVE ATTACKED AT THE CHUMBUL. 539 


his scattered forces; to renew their confidence and their attach- 
ment to his cause; and to equip himself in such a manner as 
would enable him to make a vigorous exertion against the 
British detachment. How he succeeded in so great a degree as 
to be enabled to make those exertions which afterwards marked 
his conduct, my deficiency of information prevents me from 
explaining. 

Colonel Monson’s farther progress wotld have deprived the 
encmy of his most valuable possessions; and been entirely destruc- 
tive of whatever confidence or spirit his followers yet retained. 
These considerations therefore, in the very exposed situation of 
the British detachment at the present period, formed a sufficient 
inducement to the enemy to hazard a decisive engagement. 

The Chumbul which at that season is a considerable river was 
interposed between our troops and Holkar’s army; and whilst 
the encmy were crossing it, with their numerous artillery, an 
opportunity offered to Colonel Monson of attacking him, which 
appeared to promise success. Success at this period would have 
secured to Colonel Monson his advanced position; procured him 
Supplics from the neighbouring country, and enabled him after- 
wards to prosccute whatever plan of operations circumstances 
might have required. Colonel Monson was aware of these 
circumstances, and wrote to me that he intended to attack the 
enemy. Unfortunately, however, he altered these intentions 
and permitted Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s force to cross the river 
unmolested and to advance upon his detachment. 

As another occasion equally favourable for an attack could 
not occur to Colonel Monson, perhaps the omission should 
have been repaired by an attack under the most favourable 
circumstances that could afterwards be obtained. His numbers 
were certainly inferior to those of the enemy, but he had on his 
side discipline, approved valour, and the choice of position. 
A bold effort was likewise evidently necessary to extricate him 
from his situation, and to avoid the disgrace and misfortunes 
inseparable from a rapid retreat. 

Instead of adopting this plan, Coloncl Monson formed the 
resolution of retreating to the Mokundrah Pass, with the inten- 
tion as he informed me of making a stand in that situation; and 
he accordingly moved from his position on the 8th of July, 
Icaving the whole of his irregular cavalry on the ground of his 
encampment, for the purpose of protecting the rear of the 
detachment in the event of an attack from the enemy. 


540 RETREAT WAS NECESSARILY PERILOUS AND DISASTROUS. 


Colonel Monson’s infantry effected their retreat without 
suffering any loss; but his cavalry having as he informed me, 
remained longer behind than he intended, were attacked, and, 
after an obstinate contest, nearly cut to pieces. The number of 
these had lately been increased by a body of horse belonging to 
Bapojee Scindiah, and in this affair amounted to four thousand. 
Lieutenant Lucan who commanded them signalized himself to 
an extraordinary degree, till being scverely wounded he was 
made prisoner. He afterwards fell a sacrifice to the inhuman 
treatment he met with from the enemy. 

After the detachment had arrived at the Mokundrah Pass, its 
out-posts were attacked by bodies of the enemy’s horse which 
had followed in its rear. These were repulsed with very severe 
loss, but the supposed approach of the enemy’s infantry, and the 
apprehensions entertained by Lieut.-Colonel Monson in regard 
to his future supplies, determined -him after a short halt to 
prosecute his retreat to Kotah. This he effected on the 12th of 
July with more precipitation than was necessary; having on his 
departure from Mokundrah left his camp standing in order to 
deceive the enemy in regard to his intentions. 

At Kotah Colonel Monson’s difficulties did not appear to him 
to be diminished. He stated that he was unable to obtain the 
necessary supply of provisions; and a misunderstanding with 
the Rajah having at the same time created some distrust in 
regard to the disposition and views of the latter, the Colonel 
determined to re-cross the Chumbul and retire on the fortress 
of Rampoorah. 

On its march from Kotah to Rampoorah, the detachment 
sustained considerable loss, and was exposed to great incon- 
venience from the severity of the rains and the want of pro- 
visions. Colonel Monson reported to me that the obstaclés 
produced by the very broken state of the roads and the swelling 
of the rivers, were surmounted with the utmost difficulty, and 
compelled him to leave behind the whole of his artillery and 
military stores. These in consequence fell into the hands of the 
enemy, where they remained until retaken by my army at Deig 
and Bhurtpore. 

Colonel Monson was detained a considerable time at the 
Chumbulee rivulet, which was much swelled by the rains; and at 
length found such difficulty in crossing it, that several of his men 
were drowned. He states, likewise, that he was attacked in this 
situation by a body of the enemy’s horse, which he repulsed 


THOUGH REINFORCED, HE LOST TIME AT RAMPOORAH. 541 


with some loss. The detachment arrived at Rampoorah about 
the 27th of July. 

As soon as I was apprized that Colonel Monson had com- 
menced his retreat, I urged him in the most pressing manner to 
occupy some position in which he could make a stand against 
the enemy; and I at the same time ordered two fresh battalions 
with ample supplies of ammunition, provisions and treasure to 
march from Agra with all possible expedition to his support. 
These battalions under Colonel M‘Culloch and a thousand 
irregular horse under Major Frith reached Rampoorah a few 
days after Colonel Monson’s arrival at that place. 

When I was informed that the detachment joined by this 
reinforcement was at Rampoorah, I transmitted instructions to - 
Colonel Monson to make a stand at that place, if such a measure 
appeared to him practicable; but if the enemy could not be 
opposed with considerable prospect of success, to throw a 
sufficient garrison with the necessary quantity of provisions and 
stores into the Fort of Rampoorah, and fall back in a slow and 
regular manner on the frontier of the British possessions, before 
the enemy were in a situation to press his retreat. 

The honourable Colonel deemed it most advisable to retreat ; 
and he accordingly marched from Rampoorah on the 2ist of 
August, after having garrisoned that place as I had directed. 
He had, however, waited till the enemy were close upon his 
rear, On the 22nd of August the detachment arrived at the 
Bannas river, which was so swelled in consequence of the late 
rains as to be impassable. This occasioned a halt until the river 
might subside, during which the whole force of the encmy had 
assembled in the neighbourhood of the detachment, 

The river having become fordable, the dctachment was 
ordered to cross it on the 24th of August, notwithstanding the 
presence of the encmy; and the precautions taken by Coloncl 
Monson on this occasion were not sufficicnt to prevent the 
enemy from availing himsclf successfully of the opportunity 
which was offered to him of attacking our troops. 

When four battalions of the detachment had crossed the river, 
the enemy commenced a sharp attack upon the pickets which 
had not yet been withdrawn. Colonel Monson immediately 
advanced to their support with a battalion of the second 
regiment of the native infantry, now the only corps remaining 
on that side of the river. This party was in consequence 
exposed to the whole force of the enemy’s attack, 


542 DISASTERS AT THE CLOSE DUE TO EXHAUSTION. 


The utmost steadiness and intrepidity was displayed in this 
unequal contest. The battalion above mentioned, not only. 
withstood the utmost efforts of the enemy, but charged and 
drove them from several of their guns. The great numbers 
however which had fallen, and the great loss of officers it had 
sustained, rendered it unable to maintain the advantages it had 
obtained: It was compelled after an arduous struggle to fall 
back upon the river; and the obstacles it there met with in 
crossing exposed it so much to the enemy’s attack, that great 
numbers were destroyed. 

Colonel Monson continued his retreat to Khooshalghur, where 
he arrived on the night of the 25th of August, and joined a 
- party consisting of six companies of sepoys, which he had sent 
forward under Captain Nicholl with the treasure of the detach- 
ment, the day preceding the action at the Bannas river. 

A body of troops belonging to Dowlut Rao Scindiah were at 
this time encamped in the neighbourhood of Khooshalghur, and 
had resolved to attack the town for the purpose of levying a 
contribution. The hopes of obtaining possession of the treasure 
induced them at the same time to commence an attack on 
Captain Nicholl’s party. They were however repulsed with 
some loss, and afterwards joined the enemy. 

A great part of the corps of irregular cavalry, commanded by 
Major Frith, deserted during the retreat from Rampoorah; and 
at Khooshalghur some sepoys of the 14th regiment went over 
with their arms to the enemy, The defection amongst the latter 
was however more the consequence of extreme fatigue than of 
disaffection, and never took place to any very alarming extent. 

On his route from Khooshalghur, Colonel Monson formed his 
detachment into an oblong square, which resisted with great 
steadiness repeated attacks of the enemy, who continued to 
harrass its march. On the 28th of August, in the neighbourhood 
of Hindown, the detachment repulsed with severe loss a very 
vigorous charge made upon it by the whole of the encmy’s 
cavalry, 

As the detachment approached our own territories, however, 
it lost in a considerable degree that regularity which it had 
hitherto preserved. In this situation several were destroyed ; 
and others, exhausted and dispirited by hunger and fatigue, 
allowed themselves to fall into the hands of the enemy. The 
remainder, greatly harrassed and nearly worn out, arrived in a 
scattered and irregular manner at Agra about the 31st of August. 


BARBAROUS TREATMENT OF PRISONERS BY HOLKAR. 543 


It is painful to me to reflect on these distressing particulars. 
It affords however some satisfaction to be assured of the 
steadiness and attachment of our native troops, even under 
circumstances of the severest misfortune. The same corps 
which constituted Colonel Monson’s detachment, have served 
under my immediate command during the whole of this cam- 
paign, and they have on every occasion displayed the utmost 
patience, activity, steadiness and discipline. 

The impression made on the public mind by the misfortunes 
of the honourable Lieut.-Colonel Monson’s detachment, was 
much increased by the ferocious cruelty exercised on those who 
fell into the hands of the enemy. Europeans of all descriptions 
were immediately put to death; and such natives as refused to 
engage in the service of the enemy, were mutilated in a most 
shocking and inhuman manner. Fortunately, a very small 
number of the former have suffered; and the latter, as a means 
of preservation, embraced a cause which they soon afterwards 
found an opportunity of deserting. 

The enemy’s cavalry followed close in the rear of the honour- 
able Licut.-Coloncl Monson's detachment; and his infantry and 
artillery arrived in a few days afterwards, and took up a position 
in the neighbourhood of Bhurtpore. This rendered ‘necessary 
the adoption of that system of measures which I shall have the 
honour of detailing to your Lordship in my next despatch. 

I have the honour to be, 
My Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most faithful humble servant, 
LAKE. 


72, Honourable Brigadier Monson to the Marquess 
Wellesloy. 


Battle of Deeg. 


My Lord, Camp near Deeg, Nov. 14, 1804. 

However proud and happy I may feel in communicating to 
your Excellency some particulars respecting the brilliant and 
decided victory, which through the favour of Providence we have 
obtained over the whole of the infantry and guns of Jeswunt 
Rao Holkar, commanded by his chief Sirdar, Hernaut Dada ; at 
the same time I cannot sufficiently lament the event which has 
made it fall to my lot, in consequence of Major-General Fraser 


544 MONSON’S DESPATCH ON THE BATTLE OF DEEG. 


having received a severe wound, which obliged him to quit the 
field. I attribute our decided and glorious victory over the 
enemy, entirely to the arrangements made for the attack by 
Major-General Fraser, and to the confidence and enthusiasm 
with which he inspired the whole army, heading his Majesty's 
76th regiment with the most undaunted gallantry. 

Your Excellency has already heard from Major-General Fraser’ 
the particulars respecting the commencement of the action. 

After we had carried the village, we descended the hill, and 
charged the enemy’s advanced party under a most tremendous 
discharge of round, grape, and chain, from their guns, which they 
abandoned as we came up to them, retiring to fresh batteries, 
the whole of which we carricd for upwards of two miles, they 
flying before us in every direction ; numbers of them perishing in 
the swamp which encompasses that angle of the fort at Deeg, 
and even in the ditch of the fort itself, being pursued by us close 
up to the very walls. After having carried the different ranges 
of guns, which extended from the village on their right flank to 
the south-east angle of the fort, we returned to attack a large 
body of the enemy drawn up to the eastward of the lower end ~ 
of the lake, and who kept annoying us with a most destructive 
fire from 18 and 12 pounders, which until now we had no oppor- 
tunity of dispersing; these however were kept in check by 
Major Hammond with the 1st battalion 2nd regiment, and three 
6-pounders, who maintained his position with the utmost stcadi- 
ness and gallantry. I ordered some more 6-pounders to be 
brought up, and, under cover of their fire, I moved round upon 
the cnemy’s left flank, who as we advanced made a precipitate re- 
treat into the lake, where numbers perished, amongst whom were 
Mohummud Shah Khan and Abdil Khan, two of the principal 
Sirdars of the Ally-Goles. After thf, the enemy made no further 
opposition, but entirely quitted the field, flying in all direc- 
tions. Lieut.-Colonel Browne, with the 2nd and grd regiments of 
native cavalry and gallopers, continued to watch the motions of 
a considerable body of horse during the action, and afterwards 
moved down to the field of engagement to protect the removal 
of the captured guns and our wounded, who were unavoidably 
left there. Lieut.-Colonel Ball at the same time moved down 
with the 3rd brigade to support the cavalry. 

I find it impossible to express my gratitude and obligation for 
the support I have received from every officer and soldier en- 
gaged. | Were I allowed to offer my individual thanks, to Licut.- 


PLAN 
of the 0, 
BAT TL F and SIEGE of ~ 


AS < Ds & SG, 5 &, 4 
“ Ses SAY de birmer Fonght on th °H November 
2 Bazar, and 4 


’ \ the latter — 
a oy \ amar ot a ea 


RESULTS. MONSON’S GUNS RETAKEN, 545 


Colonel Horsford, commanding the artillery, and to Lieut.-Colonel: 
G, S. Browne, commanding the and brigade infantry, they are 
particularly due. 

From Brigade Major Menzies, Captains Fraser and Macknight, 
the officers of Major-General Fraser’s staff, I received the most 
active assistance, for which I feel myself highly indebted. My 
Sincere thanks are also due to my Brigade Major Captain Carr, 
and to Ensign Bowyer, of the 12th regiment native infantry, who 
acted as my Aid-de-Camp on this occasion. 

I should not be doing justice to my feelings were I not to 
mention in the most pointed manner the undaunted bravery and 
steadiness of his Majesty’s 76th regiment, which was never more 
conspicuously displayed than on this day. 

I have equal satisfaction in mentioning the conduct of the 
ist European regiment, under the command of Lieut.-Colonel 
Burnet, who showed themselves in every way worthy of the 
name of British troops. 

From the most accurate accounts I can obtain, the enemy’s 
force consisted of twenty-four battalions, a considerable body of 
horse, and one hundred and sixty pieces of cannon, the greater 
part of which is already brought to camp. The enemy’s loss, as 
far as I can ascertain, has been very great, and it is supposed 
near two thousand have been killed and drowned in their efforts 
to escape. At the same time, glorious as has been the result of 
this day, I have to lament the death of many a gallant soldier. 

The remains of the enemy's army which took shelter in the 
Fort of Deeg are in the greatest consternation, and are deserting 
in vast numbers, 

T have the honour to enclose a general return of killed, wounded, 
and missing, of the corps engaged, and a return of ordnance, &c. 
‘captured and brought into camp; more guns are hourly dis- 
covered. I have the satisfaction to add, that among the cap- 
tured guns are eleven 6-poundcrs and two 12-pounders, lost by 
the detachment under my command. 

I have the honour to be, my Lord, 
your Lordship’s most obedient 
and most devoted Servant, 
W, MONSON. 


546 HOLKAR ROUTED AT FURRUCKABAD, 


73, Lieutenant-General Lake to the Marquess Wellesley. 
Surprise and rout of Holkar and his cavalry, 


Head Quarters, Furruckabad, Nov. 17, 1804. 
My Lord, 

I have the honour to inform your Lordship, that in pursuance 
of my intentions expressed in my despatch of yesterday’s date, 
I reached this place this morning with the cavalry before day- 
break, after a march of upwards of thirty-four miles. 

The enemy occupied a position close under the walls of Fur- 
ruckabad, and I completely succeeded in surprizing them, The 
consequence has been, that vast numbers of their men and horses 
have been destroyed, and the whole cattle and baggage taken 
which they possessed. 

Jeswunt Rao Holkar escaped by an early flight, but his troops 
in.the greatest confusion, were pursued and every where cut to 
pieces by my cavalry. I am happy to add, that we have sus- 
tained very little loss either in men or horses. 

I have not time at the present moment to express the satis- 
faction I have derived from the good conduct of all the corps 
engaged, but I shall have the honour of forwarding to your 
Lordship my sentiments on this subject as soon as possible. 

: I have the honour to be, my Lord, 

your Lordship’s most faithful humble Servant, 
G. LAKE. 


74. Lieutenant-General Lake to the Marquess Wellesley. 
First unsuccessful assault on Bhurtpore. 


Head Quarters, Camp before Bhurtpore, 
January roth, 1805, 


My Lord, 

I have the honour to inform your Lordship, that in consequence 
of the breach in the wall of the town being reported practicable, 
I determined on storming the place yesterday evening. I chose 
this time, in order to prevent the enemy from stockading the 
breach during the night, which had hitherto been the case. : 

I am sorry to add, that obstacles of an insurmountable nature 
were opposed to the storming party, on their arrival at the breach ; 
the*water in the ditch was éxceedingly deep; this difficulty how- 
evef was speedily surmounted, and the party gained the foot of 
‘the breach; but though every exertion was made by both officers 
and,men, the breach was so imperfect, that every effort to gain 


“6 Te tace Page 547. 


Paw of the 


SIEGE OF 
BUORTPOOR 


A 


Vritish (amp TP Posthon 


Grand Pick 
than All 6" Feb 


tish Cag 2"Posilion 
the 8 tilkthe 4 ot Feb = 
Village eceupi P 2 
dy cur Sepoys OWFe “0 
+ 


2s 


A, ° ' 
wy eterateSremys Horse TI 


ee 


FIRST AND SECOND ASSAULTS ON BHURTPORE FAIL, 547 


the top proved fruitless, and the column, after making several 
attempts with heavy loss, was obliged to retire, which they did 
in excellent order, to our battery. 

Among the many brave men who have fallen on this occasion, 
it is with sincere grief I report the death of Lieut.-Colonel Mait- 
land, of the 75th regiment, who commanded the storming party; 
his exertions are described by all to have been of a nature the 
most heroic, and his example animated the men to persevere in 
their attempts, which nothing but difficulties, of a nature the 
most unexpected, could have rendered unsuccessful, This gallant 
officer, though he had received several severe wounds, continued 
to exert himself until he received a shot in the head, which 
proved instantaneously mortal. 

Although we unfortunatcly failed in gaining possession of the 
place, we were not wholly unsuccessful. A flanking column on 
the right, under the orders of Major Hawkes, gained possession 
of the enemy’s battery, and succeeded in spiking and disabling 
their guns, and in destroying the greatest part of the enemy who 
were opposed to them. 

I beg to assure your Lordship, that the conduct of our officers 
and men employed last night, has been as exemplary as on every 
former occasion ; but circumstanccs, Of an unexpected and unfor- 
tunate nature, occurred, which their utmost efforts coild not 
surmount: but I hope, in a very few days, their excellent 
conduct will be rewarded by the possession of the place. 

I have the honour to be, 
My Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most faithful humble servant, 
G, LAKE. 


75. Lioutenant-General Lake to the Marquess Wellesley. 
Second unsuccessful assault on Bhurtpore. 
Hlead Quarters, Camp before Bhurtpore, 
Jam 21, 1805. 
My Lord, P 

T have the honour to inform your Lordship, that the breach 
appearing in a sufficient state of forwardness, I determined to 
attempt the place again this afternoon, 

The storming party moved out of the trenches, where they 
had becn lodged for the purpose, a little before three o'clock. 
I am sorry to add, that the ditch was found so broad and dcep, 
that every attempt to pass it proved unsuccessful, and the 

Nn2 


548 FAILURE OF THIRD ASSAULT ON BHURTPORE. 


party was obliged to return to the trenches, without effecting 
their object. 

The troops behaved with their usual steadiness, but I fear, 
from the heavy fire they were unavoidably exposed to, for a 
considerable time, that our loss has been severe. 

I shall have the honour to forward returns of the killed and 
wounded, as soon as possible. 

T have the honour to be, my Lord, 
your Lordship’s most faithful humble Servant, 
G, LAKE, 


76. Lieut.-General Lake to the Marquess Wellesley. 
Third unsuccessful assault on Bhurtpore. 


Head Quarters, Camp before Bhurtpore, 
February 21, 1805. 
My Lord, 

My despatch of the 20th will have informed your Lordship, 
of our failure on that day, in an attempt to carry Bhurtpore by 
assault. 

I have now the honour to detail for your Lordship’s informa- 
tion, the plans that were formed to ensure, if possible, the success 
of the attempt. 

The storming party under the orders of Licut.-Colonel Don, 
was formed of the greatest part of the European force belonging 
to the Bengal army, and three battalions of Sepoys. 

One column composed of 200 of his Majesty’s 86th regiment, 
from the Bombay division, and the Ist battalion 8th regiment 
Bengal native infantry, under Captain Grant, of the former corps, 
was ordered to attack the enemy’s trenches and guns outside the 
‘town, whilst a third column composed of 300 men of his Majesty’s 
65th regiment, and two battalions of Bombay Sepoys, marched 
to attack the Beem Narain Gate, which from every report I had 
received was easy of access for guns, &c. 

The signal for the storming party to move out was the com- 
mencement of Captain Grant’s attack on the enemy’s trenches, 
which took place a little before four o’clock in the afternoon. 

Captain Grant’s column was completely successful, and got 
immediate possession of the encmy’s guns, eleven in number, all 
of which have been brought into camp. The gallant conduct of 
Captain Grant and his party merits every praisé. 

T am sorry to say, that neither of the.other columns succeeded. 


FAILURE OF FOURTH ASSAULT ON BHURTPORE. 549 


Lieut.-Colonel Don’s was unfortunately delayed by some un- 
expected circumstances, and on its arrival at the ditch, it was 
found to contain such a depth of water as to render it impossible 
to gain the breach. The troops immediately attempted to 
ascend by the bastion, but the obstacles they met with were of 
so serious a nature, that their utmost efforts were unsuccessful, 
though the colours of the 12th native infantry were planted 
within a short distance of the top. 

The column from the Bombay division under Lieut.-Colonel 
Taylor, notwithstanding every exertion, -could not effect their 
object. They were considerably delayed on their march by a 
large body of the enemy’s horse; and, by a mistake on the part 
of their guide, were very early exposed to a most heavy and 
destructive fire from the town, which by destroying their ladders 
rendered the attempt on the gate impracticable, and obliged 
Lieut.-Colonel Taylor to draw his men under cover, until he 
received orders to return to camp. 

I fecl it my duty to assure your Lordship, that though unfor- 
tunately not crowned with success, the exertions of Colonel Don 
were meritorious and gallant in the extreme, and I feel under 
infinite obligations to this officer. 

I have the honour to be, My Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most faithful humble servant, 
G, LAKE. 


77. Lieut.-General Lake to the Marquess Wellesley. 
Fourth unsuccessful assault on Bhurtpore. 


Head Quarters, Camp before Bhurtpore, 
February 22, 1805. 
My Lord, 

My despatch of yesterday’s date will have conveyed to your 
Lordship intelligence of our want of success, in a fourth attempt 
made to carry this place by assault. 

As it appeared that our failure on the 20th was to be ac- 
counted for, in a great measure, by the occurrence of unexpected 
accidents and delays, as part of the corps who formed the storm- 
ing party had surmounted the principal difficulty, and had nearly 
gained the summit of the bastion, where I was informed a few 
hours more battcring would render the ascent perfectly easy, I 
determined to make another attempt yesterday. 

The party for this service consisted of the whole European 


550 THOUGH REPULSED, THE TROOPS BEHAVED WELL. 


force, and two battalions of native infantry of the Bengal army, 
and the greater part of his Majesty’s 65th and 86th regiments, 
and the grenadier battalion, and flank companies of the ist 
battalion 3d regiment, from the Bombay division. The whole 
moved on to the attack about three o’clock in the afternoon, 
under the command of the honourable Brigadier Monson. 

The troops, most confident of success, commenced the attack 
and persevered in it for a considerable length of time, with the 
most determined bravery, but their utmost exertions were not 
sufficient to enable them to gain the top of the breach. The 
bastion which was the point of attack was extremely stecp, the 
resistance opposed to them was vigorous, and as our men could 
only mount by small parties at a time, the advantages were very 
great on the side of the enemy. Discharges of grape, logs of 
wood, and pots filled with combustible materials, immediately 
knocked down those who were ascending, and the whole party, 
after being engaged in an obstinate contest for two hours, and 
suffering very severe loss, were obliged to relinquish the attempt, 
and retire to our trenches. 

I have to lament the loss of very many gallant officers and 
men, as will appear to your Lordship by the accompanying return 
of killed and wounded on this occasion. 

It is with sincere grief I inform your Lordship, that among the 
killed is my aide-de-camp, Major Menzies, of his Majesty’s 80th 
regiment, who proceeded with the storming party, and fell, whilst, 
among the foremost, he was making the most heroic exertions 
to ascend the breach. I feel sincere sorrow for his loss, no less on 
account of the great regard I entertained for his private worth, than 
from the high estimation in which I held his merits as an officer. 

The Honourable Colonel Monson, to whom the conduct of the 
attack was entrusted, made every possible exertion, and has 
received my best thanks for his uncommon gallantry and perse- 
verance on that occasion. 

Though the troops were unable to effect their object, Iam 
happy to assure your Lordship that they have on no occasion 
displayed greater steadiness. Those of the Bengal army sup- 
ported their former character, and the Bombay division displayed 
a degree of resolution and discipline which entitles them to my 
highest praise and approbation. 

T have the honour to be, my Lord, 
your Lordship’s most faithful humble servant, 
G. LAKE. 


GOV.-GENERAL’S CAUTIONS AS TO RENEWED ATTACK, 551 


78. The Marquess Wellesley to Lieut.-General Lord Lake. 
nsuccessful assaults on Bhurtpore. 


My dear Lord, Fort William, March gth, 805. 


In reading over my private communications to your Lordship, 
I fear that you may be impressed with an opinion that I feel too 
strong a desire for the carly termination of the war, even on any 
terms. I certainly am most anxious for peace, but I wish your 
Lordship to understand distinctly that my first object is the 
vigorous and steady prosecution of the war. With this view I 
entreat your Lordship not to attempt to accelerate operations at 
Bhurtpore (if you should resume the siege of that place), in any 
manner which can expose us to the risk of failure. Time and 
regular proceeding must ensure the fall of the place if an 
adequate battering train sufficiently supplied be duly provided 
and properly directed, with the application also of regular means 
for taking off the defences of the place. I request your Lordship 
not to attempt to renew the siege without full and ample means 
for its prosecution; nor to attempt any assault while the least 
doubt exists of success. I fear that we have despised the place 
and enemy so much as to render both formidable. 

The resumption of the sicge of Bhurtpore previously to the 
pursuit of Holkar is also a point which I must seriously recom- 
mend to your attention. Unless the reduction of the place be 
absolutely necessary previously to that pursuit, or essential to 
our honour, I wish your Lordship to consider whether the risk of 
another failure, and the consequent loss (to say no more), ought 
to be hazarded. To your superior judgment I commit this 
important question. The health of the troops must also be most 
scriously and tenderly considered. A large army must be 
cantoned on the right bank of the Jumna, and a force must 
drive ITolkar from our frontier. 

My advices from Scindiah’s camp of the 10th February still 
Icave that chicf’s views in a painful state of doubt. If he should 
move towards our frontier your Lordship will march directly 
against him. His conduct is inexplicable and most vexatious. 
Your Lordship will judge of my sufferings amidst all the vexa- 
tions which have fallen upon me in a manner so miraculous and 
distressing 

Ever, my dear Lord, 


yours, most affectionately, 
WELLESLEY. 


552 INADEQUACY OF EUROPEAN ARMY IN INDIA. 


VI. DEFENCE OF THE INDIAN 
EMPIRE. 


I, EUROPEAN ARMY. 


79. The Marquess Wellesley to the Right Hon. Henry 
Dundas. 


Reform and increase of the European army. 


July 13th, 1800. 
My dear Sir, 

The representations which I have lately received from Fort 
St. George, relative to the reduced state of his Majesty’s regi- 
ments of infantry serving at that Presidency, have suggested 
such serious considerations to my mind, as render it my indis- 
pensable duty to direct your immediate and unremitting atten- 
tion to this most important subject. 

It would be superfluous to detail in a letter to you, the 
reasons which demonstrate that the security of our interests 
in India require the European force, which may be deemed 
necessary for the different establishments in India, to be main- 
tained as complete and efficient as possible. The total number 
of European troops to be maintained for the general service of 
India, may admit of a variety of opinions... My own judgment 
is, that the augmentation of our European force should always 
bear a due proportion to the increased value and extent of our 
possessions in India; since in every arduous crisis we must 
principally depend, for the preservation of those possessions, on 
our European troops.j If, therefore, previous to the late war in 
Mysore, the European establishment in India did not exceed the 
requisite Proportion,\ that establishment must be edecmed in- 
adequate to our present extended dominions, as well as to the 
increase which it has been unavoidably necessary to make in the 
native part of our Indian army. \Considerations of prudence as 
well as of military convenience demand, that every augmentation 
of our native troops in India should be accompanied by a due 


ITS EFFECTIVE FORCE DIMINISHES RAPIDLY, 553 


augmentation of our European force, artillery as well as infantry 
The conquest of Mysore, by diminishing our danger in India 
from the native powers, may appear to diminish the necessity 
of augmenting our European force; but if the extension of our 
dominions, and of our alliances has rendered an increase of our 
native force indispensable, the same reasons demand a propor- 
tionate augmentation of the European part of the army) {a 
addition to these considerations it must be observed that, 
while the war in Europe shall continue, our empire in India 
must constantly be exposed to the attempts of the French, 
although that danger also is certainly much diminished by the 
fall of Tippoo Sultaun. 7 

It is unnecessary to observe to you, that no augmentation 
of our European force has taken place since the late war in 
Mysore. But I desire to call your particular observation to 
the alarming condition of our European force in India since 
that period. The casualties of the several corps have neces- 
sarily becn numerous, and the supply of recruits from Europe 
has either totally ceased, or been extremely inconsiderable. The 
number of his Majesty’s regiments of infantry in India, continues 
indeed to be the same; but instead of consisting of 1,200 rank 
and file, according to the establishment, those employed under 
the Presidency of Fort St. George, are stated to be reduced to 
an average of about 500 rank and file fit for duty. The regi- 
ments belonging to the establishment of Bombay, and those on 
the Island of Ceylon, are abo very incomplete. His Majesty's 
three regiments of infantry at this Presidency do not exceed 
2,400 rank and file, or about 800 men each. The Company’s 
Iuropean artillery are everywhere extremely weak. The fixed 
establishment of this corps is defective at all the Presidencies ; 
and the numbers wanting to complete even that defective 
establishment are now so considerable, that I intend without 
delay to reduce one of the Company’s European regiments in 
Bengal, for the purpose of augmenting the artillery of this 
Presidency, and I shall probably carry into effect a similar 
measure at Fort St. George and Bombay. 

Troma statement which I have received from the Commander- 
in-Chicf it appears that the sixteen King’s Regiments of Infantry 
now in India, consisted on the ist of May, 1800, of about 11,000 
rank and file; the deficiencies amounting to above 8,000 men. 
The Company’s four European Regiments may be reckoned at 
2,500 rank and file; the Swiss Regiment De Mcuron at about 


554 PROPOSED PERMANENT STRENGTH OF INFANTRY. 


600, making the total European infantry in India, King’s and 
Company’s, about 14,000 rank and file. 

But as these numbers include the sick, from this amount must 
be deducted at least one-fourth in calculating the numbers now 
ready for service, which would leave the total number of Euro- 
peans actually able to take the field in the British empire in 
India, about 10,500 men. 

This European force is far inferior to the strength of that 
which ought to be constantly maintained. in India, in a condition 
for field service. Cin Bengal alone 6,000 European infantry 
should always be ready for active duty; and the establishment 
of Bengal, in order to be enabled at all times to furnish such a 
disposable force, ought to consist at least of eight regiments of 
the present nominal strength, or 1,200 rank and file each. ! 

\_Eight thousand European infantry should always be ready for 
service on the Coast of Coromandel including Mysore] and at 
east 4,000 for the service of Ceylon and Bombay, and the Coasts 
of Canara and Malabar.} To furnish 12,000 efficient men for 
these different points would require an establishment of at least 

- 20,000 rank and file. 

I would therefore propose that the European infantry for 
India should be fixed at twenty-five regiments of the present 
establishment of strength 1,200, (making altogether 30,000 rank 
and file) which number, accarding to past experience, would be 
requisite in order at all times to furnish a force of 18,000 men 
for field service. This calculatiofi however, supposes an im- 
proved degree of attention to the regular supply of recruits from 
Europe. 

The whole of this European infantry should consist of King’s 
troops; and the Company's European regiments in Bengal, at 
Fort St. George and Bombay, should be converted into artillery as 
far as the men might be found serviceable in that branch of the 
army. The remainder might either be drafted into his Majesty’s 
regiments, or returned to Europe. 

Tam not of opinion that it will be necessary that the Europcan 
regiments of the Company, which I propose to be reduced, shall 
be replaced by new regiments of native infantry raised merely 
for that purpose. The course of our subsidiary engagements, 
and the extension of dominion to which they are likely to lead, 
by means of the commutation of subsidy for territory, will 
necessarily require some increase of the native infantry, and 
consequently afford sufficient means of disposing of the officers 


PROPOSED INCREASE OF CAVALRY AND ARTILLERY. 555 


belonging to the reduced European corps. But whatever aug- 
mentation of the native infantry may hereafter be requisite on 
account of our new subsidiary engagements, and the augmenta- 
tion of our territorial resources; you will observe that the 
expense will not prove any additional burthen to the Company, 
but will be defrayed either in money or cession of territory by 
the state, for whose service or protection the additional troops 
shall have been raised. 

An augmentation of our European cavalry in India is scarcely 
less necessary than that of our infantry. |{_I am of opinion that 
we ought to maintain at least eight complete regiments of 
dragoons. Of the additional regiments, two should be stationed 
in the Peninsula of India, and two in the province of Oude! 

I have already stated the alarming deficiency of our artillery 
throughout India, and the expedient to which I intend to resort 
for the remedy of this serious evil. But the best remedy which 
I may be enabled to apply will be insufficient, on account of the 
great deficiency of officers of artillery; some companies have 
now no more than one commissioned officer doing duty with 
them. CThis deficiency proceeds in a great measure, from the 
original inadequacy of the establishment in point of commis- 
sioned officers; and partly from the neglect of a regular supply 
of cadets. Of the establishment of officers, defective as it is, 
nearly one-third are eithcr on furlough, or employed in staff 
offices which preclude them from the performance of regimental 
duty, One additional subaltern at Icast should be posted to 
every company of artillery; and I most particularly request your 
attention to the necessity of sending out to India without delay, 
both an ample supply of private artillery men, and of cadets for 
the artillery corps. 

As connected with the subject of artillery, I beg leave to call 
your particular attention to the declining state of the foundery 
at Fort William, which, owing to the ignorance of those in charge 
of that department, is no longer able to supply the ordnance 
required for the use of this, and of the other Presidencies. This 
failure has made it necessary that we should apply to England 
for a supply of ficld ordnance, and I earnestly entrcat you to 
adopt the requisite mcasures for enforcing a complicte compliance 
with the Indent of the military board for this purpose. \I also 
most particularly recommend to your immediate consideration 
the absolute necessity of sending as soon as possible to Bengal 
one or more scientific persons properly qualified to conduct the 


556 DEBT’ OUR ONLY MORTAL FOE IN INDIA, 


foundery at Fort William, this is an evil which requires the most 
serious attention, and the most prompt remedy, - 
Believe me, my dear Sir, 
With the greatest regard and esteem, ever 
Yours most faithfully, 
WELLESLEY, 


80. The Right Honourable Henry Dundas to the Marquess 
Wellesley. 


The same subject. Financial and other objections to the proposed 
scheme. Counter proposals. 


Wimbledon, Dec. 30th, 1800. 
My dear Lord, 


A few days ago brought me your overland despatch in cypher, 
dated 13th July last, and I conceive it so matcrial to put your 
Lordship in immediate possession of the impression it has made 
upon me, that it is my intention to suggest to the Chairman of 
the East India Company the propriety of despatching this letter 
by an overland conveyance. 

In our various private correspondence I have had occasionally 
an opportunity of stating to your Lordship the deep importance 
T attach to the necessity of such a stcady and regulated system 
of economy, as may enable us to reduce the great load of debt, 
by which our affairs in India are encumbercd, and unless we are 
able to accomplish that important object, all our ideas of boasted 
prosperity are mere delusion, and the bubble will burst the first 
moment we are again involved in any severe struggle for the 
protection or security of our Indian interests. For my part I 
consider an overgrown and unwieldy load of Indian debt as our 
only mortal foe: our debt even at its present amount is of so 
formidable a nature as to blast every prospect of future pros- 
perity, if it is permitted to remain at that amount. I must 
therefore fight it down, and unless that most dangcrous of all 
enemies is subdued, the fall of Seringapatam and the acquisition 
of Mysore will only be found ultimately to encrease our weak- 
ness, by having extended our establishments beyond our means 
of maintaining them. From the closc of the former Mysore war 
down to the commencement of the present, I had the satis- 
faction, year after year, of detailing to the public, through the 
medium of my Indian exposition, the gradual diminution of our 
debt, and the gradual amelioration of our Indian concerns at 


TO REDUCE IT, WE MUST LIVE WITHIN OUR INCOME, 557 


home and abroad. Neither was I in any degree alarmed by the 
rapid progress of debt, which the late war in India has pro- 
duced; but my reason for not being alarmed, was, that if our 
debt in India was not permitted upon the whole to exceed about 
fourteen millions sterling, I saw clearly before me the means of 
a rapid reduction of it, the moment that peace was restored in 
Europe, and there ceased to be any such exigency of affairs 
at home, as to render any further loans necessary on the part 
of the public. But every idea I entertain of seeing a rapid 
reduction of our Indian debt is bottomed on the foundation of 
believing, that the restoration of peace in India would be pro- 
ductive of such a state of our finances there, as would enable 
‘us at Icast to have a large surplus for the discharge of the prin- 
cipal, and interest of our debts, after defraying every necessary 
establishment. If such is the state of our finance, we know by 
expcricnce that the provision of investment, and the discharge 
of our Indian debt can be made mutually and_ beneficially 
subservient to each other, and I have greatly deceived myself 
if I have not formed a plan, by which, on the restoration of 
peace in Europe, that system of combining the reduction of debt 
and the provision of investment may be improved upon in a 
degree hitherto unpractised ; but I repeat again to your Lord- 
ship that this plan and every other for the solid and permanent 
prosperity of India must prove abortive if at that period we shall 
find the state of our finances in India, such as that our large 
revenues in that quarter are found inadequate even to the 
discharge of our establishments, 

I have contented myself with giving your Lordship this 
general sketch of my idcas without troubling you with detailed 
explanations; because I am so confident in my own opinions, 
and in the certainty of the propositions and conclusions I have 
stated, that neither your Lordship, nor any man equally con- 
versant with you in the affairs of India, can entertain a doubt 
of the truth of any thing I have stated. I have therefore only 
to refer your Lordship to the facts as they exist, and the 
application of them is too obvious. I refer you to the statement 
prepared by Mr. Myers under your own authority, and trans- 
mitted by your Lordship for my information. I further refer 
you to the statement of the India budget as last prepared 
and transmitted to India for your perusal, and upon examining 
the statements therein contained, founded upon the data ag 
I thought mysclf then warranted to assume them, you will 


58 ENGLAND WILL NOT PAY INDIAN CHARGES. 


in 


perceive how much upon a level our revenues and establish- 
ments appear to be, and what a pittance only of surplus revenue 
is there held out in expectation ; but even at that time, additions 
appear to have been made to the establishments of which I was 
then ignorant, and which when brought forward into calculation 
and statement, will be found to absorb and exceed every 
existing revenue. 

With these feelings operating upon my mind, your Lordship 
will not be surprised, when I profess myself truly alarmed by 
the extent of establishment which your Lordship’s letter of the 
13th July recommends to my adoption. I lay entirely out of 
view all considerations of a collateral nature, and therefore do 
not enlarge upon the topic how far the population of the’ 
country amidst all the other calls upon it, could easily bear such 
a drain for the maintenance of its European establishment in 
India. I wish at the present moment to consider the subject 
merely upon the footing of finance, and in that view I should be 
without hope indeed, if I could be persuaded, that so great an 
establishment, especially of a European description, was neces- 
sary to be kept up for the security of our Asiatic possessions, 
I should be without hope because in the present state of our 
finances or under any near prospect of what they may arrive at, 
it would be impossible for us to pay such an cstablishment 
without having recourse to the finances of this country, and in 
so far making our Indian Empire a burthen upon the mother 
country. Jam sure your Lordship would be as sorry as I could 
be, to see such a new circumstance arise out of the events which 
have recently taken place in India; but it is altogether unneccs- 
sary to dwell upon such speculations, for I can venture to assert, 
that if such a contingency was to occur the disappointment and 
chagrin of the country would soon put an end to any valuc they 
have recently been accustomed to attach to our Indian empire. 

In considering this subject, I have made a comparison of the 
establishment at a former period, with that which would be the 
amount agreeable to the letter to which I am now replying. 
With this view I have referred back to the cstablishment as 
settled in 1796. This was a period when the establishments 
underwent a revision, and when the power of Tippoo Sultaun 
and the danger resulting from it were fully before us; and yet 
including artillery, cavalry and infantry, European and native, 
the establishment does not seem to have excecded eighty 
thousand men. Since that time, and particularly since the end 


YOUR PLAN WOULD COST £500,000 A-FYEAR EXTRA. 559 


of the late Mysore war, it has been increasing by rapid strides, 
and if put upon the scale recommended by your Lordship’s 
letter, it would, notwithstanding the fall of Seringapatam, and 
the Mysorean power, amount to no less than 142,600 men. The 
addition of expense is.enormous in proportion, and the addition 
alone which your Lordship recommends of European force, 
would, as nearly as I can conjecture, upon a rough guess, 
amount to above £500,000 sterling per annum. 

I am sure, when I bring those particulars so pointedly before 

* you, you will consider both your own time and mine as usefully 
employed, when we enter upon a calm discussion how far there 
can be a utility, far less a necessity, for such an overgrown 
establishment. 

In the first place I greatly doubt if upon a re-examination of 
the particulars of your letter, your Lordship will find yourself 
accurate in the data on which you proceed. You rest your 
opinion of the European infantry establishment necessary for 
India on the following principle, viz. that whatever be the 
number actually borne on the army returns, one fourth must be 
deducted for the number probably sick, or otherwise unfit for 
duty. On this principle your Lordship argues, that an effective 
force for Bengal of 6,000 rank and file will require eight 
regiments or 9,600 rank and file; and that an effective force 
for Coromandel, Bombay, Malabar, Ceylon, &c. of 12,000, will 
require 20,000 rank and file, or seventeen regiments taken 
together; that to furnish 18,000 effective men will require an 
establishment of twenty-five regiments of 1200 each, or 30,000 
rank and file. 

Even if the principle be allowed to be correct, the calculation 
docs not appcar to be so; 9,600 men or eight regiments less by 
one fourth, will leave 7,200 instead of 6,000, or one fifth more 
than you reckon upon, and 20,400 men or seventcen regiments 
less by one fourth, will leave 15,300 instead of 12,000, being 
above a quarter more than you reckon upon. Take both 
together; 30,000 men or twenty-five regiments as proposed by 
your Lordship, less by one fourth, will leave 22,500 men, or more 
than the force wanted by your Lordship’s statement by 4400 or 
one fourth, 

Admitting the principle to be just, viz. that whatever the 
establishment is, one fourth must be deducted for non-effectives, 
and that the strength required in effective men is, as stated by 
your Lordship, 18,000, the number of regiments necessary to 


560 I CANNOT ADMIT YOUR DATA TO BE CORRECT. 


furnish that force is twenty, or at 1200 rank and file each, 
24,000 men; deduct one fourth, and we have 18,000 the number 
required, and five regiments less than proposed by your Lordship, 
will be sufficient for the purpose. 

But the deduction of one fourth of the number on the army 
returns for sick does not correspond with the actual state by the 
returns from Madras and Bombay in which alone the distinction 
is made; however, as the greatest number of European regiments 
are stationed at those Presidencies and their dependencics, (viz. 
16 out of 21) it may be sufficient in a general view to take the 
calculation from those returns. 

At the end of 1799 the number of King’s infantry rank and 
file at Madras was 5941, of which sick or invalids 853, little 
more than 1~7th; the Company’s infantry rank and file were 
1286, of which sick 10g, about 1-12th—both together 7227, 
sick, &c. 962—rather more than 1-8th. 

At Bombay the King’s infantry rank and file were 3837, of 
which sick, &c. 448, not 1-8th—the Company’s 754, of which 
sick 65, not 1-11th; both together 4591, of which sick, &c. 
513, or about 1-gth. 

Take both establishments together, the total rank and file 
are 11,818, of which sick, &c. 1475 or 1-8th. 

It appears from what is above stated, that an allowance of 
1-8th for sick would be sufficient, and the force required to 
furnish 18,000 effective men, would therefore be about seventeen 
regiments of 1200 rank and file each, making 20,400, deducting 
1-8th leaves 17,850 or 150 short of the complement. 

But as the returns from Bengal do not specify the sick, and as 
they may be more in proportion there, than at the other Presi- 
dencies ; in order to make an apparently ample allowance Ict the 
deduction be stated at 1-6th. In this case, to furnish 18,000 
effectives will require 18 regiments of 1,200 cach, or 21,600— 
deduct 1-6th or 3,600, and we have the exact number 18,000. 

In the above observations your Lordship will perceive that 
I have proceeded upon the supposition, that your proposi- 
tion of having, at all times, a force of 18,000 men for ficld service 
was necessary for the security of India. But you have not laid 
before me any detailed data by which to judge of this as a 
military proposition. If I judge from past experience and some 
general maxims which I have often heard stated on that subject, 
I should be disposed to doubt, if such an extent of European 
establishment was necessary. 


I CANNOT SANCTION THE PROPOSED INCREASE, 564 


Your Lordship’s opinion upon this subject seems to rest upon 
two general grounds of reasoning. In the first place you state 
that our establishments ought to increase in proportion to the 
extent of our territory, and secondly, that our European 
establishment should increase in proportion as we increase our 
native. 

Upon the first of those propositions, I must beg leave to pause, 
and to substitute another criterion as more applicable to the 
subject. The criterion by which that question ought to be 
decided, is rather, by the relative power of our supposed enemies 
than by our own extent of territory. Iam perfectly aware that 
the internal peace and the security of a newly acquired territory 
may require an addition of establishment to a certain extent; 
but if, at the same moment we acquire that territory, we have 
narrowed our former frontiers, and subdued a restless hostile and 
enterprising neighbour, it does by no means follow, that our new 
territory is to receive an establishment in proportion to our old 
one. The application of this principle to our present state in 
India is so obvious, I need not consume your time by an illus- 
tration of it. 

Your second proposition I admit to be true, in so far as to 
agree that there must be a certain proportion of European force, 
corresponding to the number of native troops maintained upon 
the establishment. But still the question occurs, what that pro- 
portion ought to be. Some military men have stated a fifth of 
the whole to be sufficient. None with whom I have conversed 
have ever stated more than a fourth to be necessary. When 
your Lordship examines the extent of European establishment 
as detailed in the orders, which I hope the Court of Directors 
will send out without delay, and as more particularly to be 
stated in the sequel of this letter, I believe that your Lord- 
ship will find that the European force, consisting of artillery, 
infantry, and cavalry, amounts to about a fourth of the whole 
military establishment, which can, with any attention to economy, 
be maintained in our possessions in India. 

Upon the best consideration, therefore, I can give to the 
subject, I do not find myself at liberty, consistently with any 
attention to necessary economy, to authorize an establishment of 
twenty-five Europcan regiments of infantry, I am satisfied that 
seventeen is adequate to evcry purpose, even with a view to our 
subsidiary treaties, unless in one event, viz. that of a permanent 
arrangement being made with the Portuguese for retaining the 

00 


562 COMPANY'S EUROPEAN REGIMENTS TO BE RETAINED. 


possession of Goa. In that event, two more would be necessary; - 
but even in that case it would be six short of what your Lordship 
proposes. I would propose six King’s regiments at Bengal for 
the service of our own provinces and the Vizier’s country. I 
would propose six King’s regiments at Madras for the purposes 
of our former territories, together with our new acquisitions upon 
the coasts of Canara and Malabar, and to enable us to perform 
our engagements with the governments of Hydrabad and Mysore. 
I would propose two King’s regiments for the protection of 
Bombay and its dependencies as now regulated. 

These upon the whole amount to fourteen regiments, which 
together with one Company’s European infantry regiment at 
each settlement, would make the whole seventeen regiments. 

I have deliberated much in my own mind how far it would 
not be expedient to urge the Directors at the present moment 
to give up totally their European infantry, and to rest the whole 
of their European strength upon their artillery, which I agree 
with your Lordship ought to be put upon the most respectable 
footing. I hold a well regulated artillery and a highly disciplined 
cavalry to form our most solid and permanent pre-eminence for 
the preservation of our military superiority in India. You will 
observe that I have proposed to get rid of one regiment of 
Company’s European infantry, in order to make good a part of 
the expense necessary for the artillery. If I had been to consult 
my own judgment only, I should have urged the Court of 
Directors to get rid of their whole European infantry with the 
view of a still further immediate addition to their artillery, and 
I feel my reasons for the measure to be so forcible, I think I 
should have been successful in persuading the Court of Directors 
to acquiesce in my judgment; but as it has been stated to me 
from quarters too respectable to be resisted, that it is essential 
for preserving the strength and connection of their different 
establishments, that there should be a proportion of European 
infantry, from which their non-commissioned officers must be 
drafted for their native troops, I do not feel myself at liberty 
to be pertinacious in my own opinion; but acquiesce in the 
propriety of keeping up and recruiting, at each of the settle- 
ments, one European regiment of infantry, under the immediate 
authority of the Company. 

I have another objection to the proposal of sending out such 
a multitude of regiments to India, for if ever any storm should 
arise in the north of Europe to threaten our Indian possessions, 


COMPANIES TO BE ADDED TO PRESENT REGIMENTS. 563 


or if ever that menace should become more formidable by a 
union between any great European power and the northern 
tribes of India, it is not likely such a confederacy would be so 
sudden as not to enable us to take the necessary precautions, 
Against any combination that is not of a tremendous size, I hold 
the proposed establishment perfectly adequate to our security; 
but if from any such causes as I have suggested, it should become 
a necessary policy to increase our European force, your Lordship 
will agree with me in thinking, that it is always a matter of 
great importance to study how far you can add to your military 
strength without increasing the number of officers, which not 
only from the expense of their establishment, but from the 
contingent charges attending them, add greatly in proportion to 
the expense of a military establishment. If, therefore, at any 
time it should be necessary to add to our European force, it 
should be done, not by additional regiments with additional field 
officers, but by additional companies to the 17 I have already 
mentioned. Two companies to each regiment would at once 
add an European force of above 3000 men, and so in proportion. 
Even if four companies were in case of urgency to be added, they 
could on a short warning be got from the army at home, and 
would, when added to the fourteen King’s regiments established 
for India, make each regiment consist of not more than two 
battalions of 800 men each. : 

By adhering to the system I have mentioned, the expense 
and inconvenience of sending new and raw regiments would be 
avoided, and the addition made to your European infantry, when 
required, would have the advantage of being engrafted on old 
disciplined well seasoned regiments. 

The same principle ought now to be applied to the other parts 
of the service in so far as there is just ground for the augmenta- 
tion of any part of it. { I entirely agree with your Lordship that 
the present artillery is inadequate to the great additional services 
now to be performed by that valuable corps; and I likewise 
agree with you in thinking, that the great extension of territory 
and the fulfilment of the subsidiary treatics must render an 
addition to our cavalry strength absolutely necessary. But in 
both those cases, it docs not appear to me that there is at present 
any occasion either for new battalions of artillery or for those 
additional regiments of European cavalry which your Lordship’s 
letter suggests. The Court of Directors, I make no doubt, will 
approve as a temporary expedient, under a pressing exigency, 

0024 


564 CEYLON TO BE RESTORED TO THE CROWN. 


of the measure you have resolved to adopt of completing your 
artillery establishments by drafts from their European infantry ; 
but besides completing that corps up to its former establishment, 
it-is necessary to make an addition to it, and for the present this 
should be done by adding two companies to each battalion, and 
each company to have an additional Lieut.-Fireworker, and ten 
additional matrosses. 

With regard to the cavalry, there are at present four European 
regiments, and in place of adding to the number of the regiments, 
the addition should be made to the strength of the existing 
regiments. This can be speedily and effectually done by adding 
two companies and twenty men to each regiment, whereby a 
very considerable addition of strength would be obtained at a 
moderate expense of officers, namely, one field officer, and the 
officers necessary for the additional companies; whereas by 
additional regiments the expense is enhanced beyond all ne- 
cessity by an addition of no less than five ficld officers, besides 
all the others of inferior rank. 

This reasoning equally applies to the native cavalry. By 
adding two troops to each regiment, you will in like manner, at 
a moderate expense, comparatively speaking, make an addition 
to your cavalry strength both at Bengal and Madras of not less 
than twelve troops at each. 

Up6n the principles I have detailed, I have resolved to recom- 
mend to the Court of Directors a revision of their establishments, 
making every economical reduction where circumstances will 
admit of it, and at the same time, making such additions to 
some branches of thcir service as necessity dictates; but even 
in those additions consulting economy in every instancc, and 
adopting that mode, which gives the additional strength at the 
least possible expense. 

In the detail I have given, it will not escape your observation, 
that I have taken no notice of Ceylon. It is because I have 
formed a decided opinion that the protection of that island 
cannot be left as a burthen upon the revenucs of India. Indeed, 
at present those revenues cannot afford it. But independent of 
that consideration, Iam fully satisfied that the measure of con- 
necting the administration of that Island with the governments 
of India was prematurcly and inadvertently adopted. The pos- 
session of Ceylon, I conceive to be of the last importance to the 
permanent security of India; but the principles by which it is 
to be governed, and the establishments by which its affairs are 


CONFLICTING DEMANDS OF THE EAST AND THE WEST. 565 


to be administered, cannot be formed upon the model of our 
Indian establishments. The European part must be very limited 
in point of number, and their establishments such as they may be 
settled, must be upon a scale of expense and allowances, far 
inferior to the establishments upon the Continent of India. I 
wish not to dwell upon the mischief which has already happened 
from blending the service of Ceylon with that of Madras. There 
may certainly be some exceptions to the observation; but as a 
general proposition, I am fully satisfied upon a minute examina- 
tion of the subject for some months past, that as on the one 
hand it would be unwise and inexpedient to admit only the 
refuse of the Indian servants to the charge of affairs at Ceylon, 
so on the other hand, it would be unreasonable to expect that the 
servants upon the Indian establishment of superior talents would 
be induced to come to Ceylon with the very limited prospects, 
which the service there would afford to them. 

For these and various other considerations, unnecessary for 
the present purpose to be detailed, I shall submit to his Majesty 
my opinion, that Ceylon be restored to the state of a royal 
government, and administered upon the same principles as the 
government of the Cape is now conducted. 

In the perusal of your Lordship’s Ictter I have not been 
inattentive to what you state as to the deficiencies in the pre- 
sent establishment of our European force, and the inadequacy 
of the supply of recruits which latterly have been sent to India, 
and your obscrvation is true in point of fact, that since the late 
war in Mysore, no augmentation of our European force has taken 
place; but your Lordship will recollect that, on the first sus- 
picion which arose in my mind of the probability of a war in 
India, I sent near 5000 of the flower of the British army to the 
assistance of our Indian establishments, and that valuable force 
arrived in duc time to perform most important service. And 
this very circumstance will fully account to your Lordship why 
there has been such a scanty supply of recruits from that period 
to the present. The defence of India was to the greatest degree 
pressing, and therefore the force I have referred to, was sent 
there in preference of every other service. But your Lordship 
knows enough of the state of Europe at that time and ever 
since, and -likewise of the state of Ireland and our extended 
distant possessions, to be aware how sensibly every other pressing 
service was affected by that great rcinforcement sent to India, 
and therefore, when the immediate danger of India was at an 


566 COUNT WELL THE COST OF EVERY REFORM. 


end, and its safety ensured by the brilliant issue of the contest, 
it was natural and wise to appropriate all the recruits we could 
collect to supply the deficiencies in other quarters. I have only 
further to observe, that this inconvenience would not have been 
remedied if there had existed in India an establishment consist- 
ing of the number of regiments which your Lordship’s letter 
suggests. The number of recruits for the service of India could 
not have been larger than it was, and the only consequence 
would have been an immense additional expense without any 
additional strength. I have had a full communication with the 
Commander-in-Chief upon the subject, and I trust effectual 
means will be concerted for maintaining complete the European 
establishments to the amount I havé mentioned in this letter, 
and which will be more accurately detailed in the official orders 
which will be sent without delay from the War Office and from 
the Court of Directors. 

It only remains for me to advert to the concluding part of 
your Lordship’s letter. I never before heard of the defective 
state of the foundery at Fort William, which your Lordship 
describes as no longer able to supply the ordnance required 
for the use of Bengal and the other Presidencies. Your Lord- 
ship may rest assured IJ shall, without delay, call the attention of 
the Court of Directors to the subject, and an immediate and 
radical cure must be administered to so serious an evil. 

As your Lordship’s letter was confined to the subject of military 
establishments, my reply is of course confined to the same topics. 
But I am sure when your Lordship adverts to the foundation of 
a deep-rooted anxiety, which I entertain upon one branch of our 
expenditure, you will so far concur with me in that feeling as 
to extend the same principles to every other species of expendi- 
ture. Iam well aware that valuable improvements may still be 
made upon many of our Indian concerns, and I know that many 
of those improvements will likewise lead to expense, I am 
likewise aware that it is natural for men of ardent minds to wish 
the rapid execution of improvements which they reckon to be 
valuable and important, but in the present state of our finances, 
I have no hesitation in being of opinion that we had better for 
some time remain stationary and postpone for a while even 
desirable improvements, if they are to lead to immediate ex- 
pense. In short, my present creed with regard to India is, that 
nothing new is to be attempted without weighing well every 
rupee it will cost. 


THE REAL VALUE OF OUR INDIAN EMPIRE, 567 


I have troubled your Lordship with a long letter; but when 
you consider the importance and extent of the subject I have 
been under the necessity of discussing, your Lordship will be 
satisfied that I could scarcely compress the subject within a 


narrower compass. 
I have the honour to be, 


my dear Lord, 


_ your most obedient humble servant, 
HENRY DUNDAS. 


2. GENERAL POLICY, ESPECIALLY AGAINST THE FRENCH. 


81. Copy of a private Paper written by General Stuart prior 
to his leaving India in January 1800, and submitted to 
the Right Honourable Henry Dundas, on his arrival in 
England, in July in that year. 

Danger of foreign invasion, by land and sea. Importance of 
securing the whole sea-board. Commercial policy. 


There are some important circumstances respecting Bombay 
and this side of India, which are neither understood in England, 
nor in this country. 

As it is of consequence to the welfare of the British pos- 
sessions in this part of the world, and of infinite moment to the 
interests of a large body of men; I would communicate although 
in ever so hasty a manner, the opinions which I have been led 
to form on this subject; connecting them with some more 
general observations on the state of our relations with India. 

(It seems to be too much the practice to neglect the western 
parts of India, and to value nothing but the fertile fields of 
Bengal; while in point of real riches, I am not sure but we 
excel them. We have a variety of articles fit for commerce, and 
we occupy a soil fit for every production. ) 

It may be doubted whether the revenue derived in cash from 
the ground in this country, is in any degree less hurtful in its 
effects with regard to us, than so much money dug from a mine. 
It is true, that it enables us to pay our troops, and keep up a 
formidable appearance; but without some other principle of 
vigour, this kind of wealth would Icad to poverty and indolence, 
as has happened to the Spaniards in America, and to the Dutch 
in Asia. (The true utility of our establishments in India arises 
from the commerce they produce, the sailors they maintain, 
the numbers of people to whom they afford food or labour, the 


568 THE COAST OUR PROPER DOMAIN IN INDIA. 


commodities by this means exported, or imported, with the 
industry and the spirit of adventure thence created.) 

Commercial pursuits first made us visit India; but a scene 
of brilliant exploits, little connected with commerce, led to the 
establishment of an extensive empire, which must now be sup- 
ported by a just combination of military strength, with objects 
relating to trade. Hence the encouragement of military and 
commercial exertion, is the chief object of national concern.) \ By 
this means we have acquired, and by these means we must 
maintain our dominion over this country.’ 

Whether or not we do wisely, in extending our possessions to 
the interior parts of India, further than we have already done, 
is a question of great political consideration. It is difficult to 
resist the temptation and allurements of conquest. Nations and 
individuals are alike insatiable in thcir desires; and it is rarely, 
that either know the temperate medium which should bound 
their acquisitions. (Prudent men, and those who have been 
accustomed to examine on the spot the state of India, and the 
nature of our connection with it,would rather sec us in possession 
of the coasts, which would secure to us every where the com- 
merce, and which would always be accessible to our ficets) (We 
must at all times support a vast establishment to resist, or keep 
in awe the great Indian foreign powers; but this will be more 
formidable by being concentrated, than by an excessive cxten- 
sion of territory, which is more likely to produce weakness, from 
the necessity in that situation of scattering and dispersing our 
forces. 

The expense of the armies can as well be maintained by 
territories near the sea, as by those more inaccessible and dis- 
tant. Their efficiency can be much better supported, as when 
close to the shore their wants can be more casily supplicd, 
and the connection with the parent state kept alive, an object 
which distance and time are apt to diminish, and which should 
therefore never be lost sight of. (From the great superiority 
which we possess in courage and scicnce, our danger from the 
nations of India, will never probably be very imminent.) They 
have been from the remotest times successively reduced by 
men of colder regions, partaking of a fiercer and more hardy 
temperament. In the beginning exposed to the alternate 
ravages or conquest of the nations of the Caspian Tartary, and 
Persia; they were only at intervals relieved by the vast distance 
which separated them from these hordes, and which put a stop 


SOME DANGER TO US FROM NORTHERN BARBARIANS. 569 


for a time to their incursions. “It is now upwards of forty years 
since India was visited by these barbarians: and they are at 
present supplanted by the English) (The facility afforded of 
reaching this country by ships, and the great ease of transport- 
ing men and stores, have obtained us this superiority.) An 
attention to the same means may no doubt long maintain us in 
this advantage; but an advertency to the former periods of 
history, and in particular the recent attempts of Zemaun Shah 
to march by land to India, ought to caution us to keep a 
watchful eye on this quarter, and not to conclude the danger to 
be overs because its effects have not been lately felt. 

The route by which Alexander, and other conquerors arrived 
in India, is still open, and the people whose ancestors composed 
their armies, possess at this moment perhaps an equal degree 
of courage and adventure as their forefathers, (They require 
but an ambitious or enterprizing leader, to pour forth their 
uncivilized bands, and to overspread like a torrent, the fertile 
ficlds of Hindostan, which, aided by the remembrance of the 
exploits of their predecessors, holds out a perpetual object of 
temptation, 

( But it is easier to resist the unregulated efforts of barbarians, 
than the constant and systematic attempts of European nations.) 
The supcriority which has always attended the people in pos- 
session of the commerce, or power of this part of Asia, must 
ever excite jealousy and raise up opponents. (The present 
interest, the ancient rivalship, and the fixed ambition of the 
French nation, will perpetually incite them to drive us from 
this country. Under whatever government they may fall, and 
whatever diminution their power may sustain in the issue of 
this war, the principle will be pursued with the same vigour, 
and the first moment of prosperity, or of opportunity, will be 
seized to establish themselves in India, or to expel us from it. ) 
The first step indeed, will have in view the last. 

To effectuate either of these objects, no resources of genius, 
policy, or activity will be wanting. It is on a return of peace 
probably, that we shall have to combat the practice of every art, 
which will, in spite of conventions, or treaties, and in defiance 
of thcir import, be resorted to by this enterprizing and unprin- 
cipled rival, to obtain a footing in India, 

To accomplish this design, the French have in their power 
other advantages, of which they will not fail to avail themselves, 

(The possession of the Mauritius affords them a safe harbour, 


570 MORE FROM THE FRENCH, HELPED BY NATIVE CHIEFS. 


a situation where they may concert their plans in secret} and 
containing a population that would contribute a considerable 
number of soldiers and sailors towards their success. ‘The 
French at these Islands possess a colony within the tropics of 
white men, as active and ardent as the mother country. They 
are the only European nation in possession of this advantage ; 
for the English colony of St. Helena is too weak to be any 
assistance ; and it is yet to be seen whether the colonists at the 
Cape, who from their situation are able to give great support to 
our Indian empire, are more disposed to obstruct than promote 
the views of Government. 

It is not perhaps so much to be imputed, as matter of blame 
to us, as to the natural consequence of superiority under the 
‘most circumspect behaviour, that the French character is more 
popular in India than ours. This is however very true, and 
individuals ofthat nation are always sure of a more favourable 
reception from the Native Princes. This predilection affords 
them an opportunity of introducing themselves at the principal 
durbars, where many of them have engin great influence, 
and risen to the first offices of the state. ' It was chiefly by the 
degree of personal esteem and favour that they obtained such 
weight and power at the court of the Nizam) ‘It was by the 
instrument of force, and the agency of fear, that we succeeded 
in expelling them from Hyderabad) The imbecility of the 
Nizam’s government, and the necd he was in of our protection 
against Tippoo, made him consent to a mcasure which otherwise 
it was his interest and inclination to oppose. 

The Mahrattas more independent and with great prejudices, 
have not yet given themsclves up to either nation. It cannot 
however be doubted, but that they are sccretly disposed to the 
French, and will, whenever occasion may offer, assist their 
schemes of commerce, or aggrandizement in opposition to us. 

In finishing this cursory and imperfect view of the danger to 
which our possessions in this country stand exposed; as I am 
of opinion that the greatest peril to them will proceed from the 
attempts of the French; I would according to that view regulate 
the distribution of the forces, and the choice of our positions. 
When we retire into the inland parts of India to collect the 
revenue of the ground, we are forgetful of our real welfare, our 
real strength, and the origin of both in this country. The 
natives of India are ignorant of the value of the sea; trade 
is not their object; they neither know its importance, nor its 


OUR DEFENSIBLE PUSITION IN CEYLON AND BENGAL. 571 


principles. They would willingly relinquish a territory bordering 
on the sea, for one in an inland situation, which should produce 
a few more rupees per annum. They never would allow the 
vast benefits that might arise from the ocean, the source of all 
our greatness, to enter into their calculation. If this observation 
is a just onal it results from it, that without much difficulty we 
could secure to ourselves by exchange, every part of the coasts 
of India. The wealth and power of the interior states would 
then be equally at our disposal.) 

The late war with Tippoo Sultaun has shewn us pretty nearly 
what an Indian enemy can do, and that we have not much to 
fear from them alone. (It cannot be too often repeated, that 
our danger will arise from a foreign enemy, who could secure 
alliances in this country. This ought to be the great object of 
our attention, as it is the true source of any apprehension. 

The best way of considering this circumstance, is to take an 
impartial view of our situation in this country, and examine 
where we are sufficiently secure, or where we are defective in 
strength, 

We are in the first place in possession of the sea coasts of 
Ceylon, and may be considered as the sovereigns of the whole 
Island. This is a possession of the greatest importance to the 
defence of all our Indian dominions, and in the hands of an 
active nation, would soon be turned into the most dangerous 
instrument of powcr against us. If the Island should be con- 
firmed to us at a peace, it ought to be more strongly fortified, 
and defendcd by a large body of Europeans. 

At present being in possession of the sea coasts of Ceylon, 
we have all the strength there that can be required from 
situation, more especially as there can be little danger from the 
native Prince of the Island. 

The Bengal provinces appear very safe from an external 
enemy coming by sca to that side of India. The river is a 
dangerous one, of itself forming a strong defence, and we are in 
possession of nearly the whole of the coast towards Madras. 
The part that does not belong to us is savage and fruitless, and 
would never be thought of as the direction of entrance or attack 
from without. (We have besides a large army in that valuable 
country ; and Fort William, a very strong fortress, must in the 
first place fall before any invading enemy from the sea could 
make much progress against us in Bengal. The most immediate 
danger to these provinces will probably proceed from Zemaun 


572 HOW WE SHOULD GUARD THE EASTERN COAST. 


Shah, or some of the northern states in conjunction with the 
Seykes and Mahrattas,) As these nations are all ignorant of 
the art of sieges, the interior frontiers of Bengal ought to be 
strongly secured by fortifications, which would form insur- 
mountable barriers to such enemies: and this is one of the few 
, Situations where the construction of forts appears advisable in 
India, or where it is necessary to keep up a large body of forces 
inland. The difficulty that an European enemy would have in 
reaching Bengal, either by land or sea, and of establishing 
themselves afterwards, seems fortunately to secure it for a long 
‘time from any attempt of the kind. Neither have any of the 
European nations a sufficient footing there to begin upon, and 
we shall no doubt prevent their forming encroachments on our 
territories, for every step they advance must be a diminution of 
our power. 
, From Madras to the southernmost point of the Peninsula, the 
whole of the sea coast is in our possession. ) It is guarded by 
a powerful army, which if collected, would always overcome any 
force which could arrive there by sea, as there is no country 
power here that could Iend material assistance to an enemy. 
The Nizam and the Mahrattas are too remote, and the former 
is besides watched by a large body of English troops quartered 
at his capital, who will be able to check the first symptoms of 
disaffection. Nor can the French have a direct communication 
with either of these states by sca from this quarter. 

The coast is however open to invasion from the occan, and 
there should constantly be a great army on foot in the Carnatic. 
It may therefore be doubted whcther we have added to our 
security by fixing so large a part of the forces in Mysore, where 
they are at such a distance from the object of attack. (The 
three Presidencics form the basis of our power in India, and 
an enemy landing on the coast of Coromandel would march 
directly to Madras, if he was not prevented by a superior army. 
The best part of a month would be consumed before the troops 
could collect and move to its succour from Mysore. What may 
not an enemy do in this time? )It may also be asked what 
imminent danger threatens Mysore, or what particular interest 
have we there that requires a large force to be maintained in 
that country >We must first fight on the sea coast for our 
empire in India; when defeated thefe, it may be necessary to 
retire to the interior holds, and all that should be done in this 
case is to sccure the means of retreat? But when scparated from 


~~ 


DANGER OF FRENCH LANDING ON WESTERN COAST. 573 


the sea and obliged to seek for an inland posture of defence, 
our affairs must be in a desperate state. 

Although the Carnatic is every where open to attack from 
the sea, Chis is certainly not the point where an European 
enemy will choose to invade India, nor even look for a com- 
mercial establishment. Both these objects will be sought for, 


’ I apprehend, on the western shores of the Peninsula, and it is” 


now necessary to turn our attention to them.) 

Since the acquisition of Kanara, we may be considered as 
possessing the coast on this side from Cape Comorin to Goa, 
for it is needless to except the country of Travancore; and 
we may even include Goa while we have so large a body of 
troops there. By these late arrangements we have acquired 
an additional degree of safety in this quarter. But from the | 
Carwar to the mouths of the Indus northward, the sea coast, 
with a few exceptions, is in the possession of the Mahrattas, the 
most formidable power of Hindostan. The intermediate, that 
are not in this situation, are the island of Bombay, Salsctt, 
Carranjah, Demaun, Diu, the small settlement of Bancoote, and 
the City of Surat, the whole belonging either to the English or 
Portuguese. 

The long tract of coast subject to the Mahrattas abounds 
with harbours where an enemy could easily land, and where in 
a fertile country he would find himself amply supplied with 
all he could want for nourishment or war. This is not the 
place to enquire into the causes that have kept Europeans from 
acquiring scttlements in this rich country; but as this only 
depends on their forbearance, it may be safcly predicted that 
these valuable and defenceless possessions will not remain much 
longer neglected. 

If a French force were to land in the Conkan or Guzerat with 
the goodwill of the Mahrattas, they surely would not be less 
formidable than if they were sct down at the gates of Fort 
William. On the contrary, they would be more formidable, for 
they would have leisure to secure whatever they had not time 
to bring with them, and to be joined by bodies of their friends, 
Such a combination is far from being improbable. The storm 
would fall on Bengal a little later, but not with less violence. 

If they should land without the consent of the Mahrattas, they 
might effect an cstablishment in Guzerat in spite of their oppo- 
sition, nor would it be difficult to reconcile them to a measure 
which would serve as a counterpoise to us.) Before the reduction 


574 MAHRATTAS MIGHT JOIN THE FRENCH AGAINST US, 


of Seringapatam, had’the French succeeded in reaching this 
country, they would have landed in Tippoo’s states or at Goa, 
which is in their neighbourhood, and which they looked on as an 
easy conquest. 

The political change since that event will induce them to 
seek the same support from the only remaining independent 
power, the Mahrattas, whom they will conclude from that reason 
to be in a natural state of opposition to us. 

From this circumstance and others which I have pointed out, 
the French will still be led to direct theirCdesigns on India to the 
western part of the Peninsula, where they can alone hope for an 
ally, and where an extensive region of fertile country lies open 
to their enterprize.) 

There is no individual, I believe, of any observation on this 
side of India, who does not look with the same apprchension at 
its defenceless state. 

Notwithstanding every provision that has been made in the 
power of the Bombay government, if a body of French troops 
were to land at Surat, it must instantly fall into their hands, and 
laying aside all consideration for the misfortunes of 2 or 300,000 
inhabitants which it contains, or the disgrace which would attend 
its loss to us, it is evident what resources of all kinds such a city 
and such a country would afford. ‘ It would open an immediate 
means of communication with the Mahrattas, and lay the foun- 
dation of a connection that might annihilate our commerce and 
our consequence in this part of the world. 

The forts of Diu and Demaun belonging to the Portuguese are 
in this neighbourhood. They are both naturally strong, and 
they are well fortified but weakly garrisoned. ¥ These places 
would almost fall without resistance into the hands of an enemy, 
and he would thus find himself in possession of forts, than which 
we have perhaps nothing superior, and requiring only men to 
defend them.{ He would obtain this footing in a fertile, and 
probably too a friendly country. That this is not a needless 
cause of fear, I beg to call to remembrance that the French 
actually made an attack within these few years past on Diu, but 
fortunately with a very insufficient force. 

While Tippoo’s government existed, and he was holding out 
offers to the French, it is pretty certain, that if they had been 
able to come to India, they would have endeavoured toget 
possession of Goa, or to land thereabouts, 

The situation of all things is changed. The only power to 


WE OUGHT TO ACQUIRE GUZERAT. 575 


which that nation can now look is the Mahrattas, and the place 
of attack, especially since we have secured Goa by our troops, will 
_Most probably be transferred to some part of the coast, to the 
( northward of Bombay.) Here besides easiness of conquest, they 
would find wealth and every thing necessary to support war. 

We should on all these accounts strengthen ourselves not only 
at Bombay, the coast of Malabar and Surat, but endeavour to 
procure a part or the whole of Guzera¥, which would give us a 
sufficient influence from Cape’ Comorin to the mouths of the 
Indus. (The possession of the Guzerat would be attended with 
military and commercial advantages of the first importance,) It 
is a small country; but it is the richest in India, From it almost 
all the cotton is brought which is exported from Bombay to 
China and Europe. The produce of sales at Canton in this 
article of the private trade alone, amounts to nearly a million a 
year. This serves to pay for the Company’s investments, and 
makes an annual return of so much property to the mother 
country: the more valuable, as it is the entire fruit of industry. 
The landed revenues of Guzerat are also very considerable ; and 
from its peculiar geography, it could be defended by a small 
number of troops. 

When Mr. Hastings ceded Broach and Bassein to the Mah- 
rattas, he certainly diminished the resources of Bombay, whether 
for its own defence, or the assistance it might afford the Com- 
papy’s finances. 

The possession of Guzerat would give us a new bulwark 
against Zemaun Shalt whose possessions extend to the banks 
of the Indus, It would secure to us the best manufacture of 
piece goods; and the command of the cotton market, the most 
valuable staple of India. 

Another evident advantage besides eee a security would 
arise from our possessing this line of coast.) From its different 
ports all the pirates that infest this part of India are known to 
issue. It is our duty to protect the fair trader who daily suffers 
by those robbers: but putting this out of the question, the 
import trade from Europe can never be considerable while they 
are allowed to exist! This trade is carried on by boats or small 
vessels, who distribute to the different ports whatever production 
or manufacture of Europe is required for the internal consump- 
tion of India, The facility of entering rivers and shoal water, 
the want too of capital, with the necessity of retailing the goods 
at many different places, confining these vessels to a small size ; 


‘ 


576 IT MUST SOON BELONG TO US, OR TO OUR ENEMIES. 


they are thereby rendered an easy and constant object of piratical 
depredation. 

What kind of gain will make up for such a risk? The Com- 
pany have desired to know why their exports of woollens have 
ceased to some ports? This is the solution of the question: 
The demand is not sufficient at one place for the cargoes of 
large ships that could protect themselves, and the smaller craft, 
that could distribute to a great amount, dare no longer venture 
to trade. The marine are quite incapable of affording the neccs- 
sary degree of protection, nor does there appear any other way 

¢ than by possessing the coast, and subduing the strongholds of 
the pirates. 

But, it will be asked, shall we go. to war without a shew of 
justice, in order to accomplish all those desirable changes? 

With respect to the pirates, this question is easily answered, as 
we are in fact in a state of hostility with them; and we are 
justly charged with imbecility for not ere now crushing the nests 
of so many robbers. 

In regard to any views on the Guzerat, these will demand a 
more serious consideration ; and we should not certainly go to 
war when that can be avoided. Something may be amicably 
settled by exchanging with the Mahrattas our inland territory, 
for what would be more for our advantage in all respects, and 
more acceptable to them. But this question of war will soon 
resolve itself. It may be considered as a thing certain that the 
time is not far distant when the avarice or ambition of some 
European state will lead them to form establishments in Guzerat. 
The bad government of the Mahrattas, the well-known wealth of 
the country, and the vast commercial advantages which it holds 
out, are temptations too powerful to be long resisted. The 
question then really is, whether we shall be the first to possess 
ourselves of these advantages, or wait until we have to dispute 
them with others? 

( To these arguments we may add, that the strongest political 
motives press us to secure the sea-coast of India, as the only 
effectual method of excluding Europeans from this country; and 
of preventing them disturbing its peace, cither by their intrigues 
or their arms. 

No native state can ever be very formidable without the 
assistance of an European ally; and there is but little reason 
of apprehension from their aggrandizement by an extension of 
territory, so long as that is confined to the inland countries, 


HINTS FOR EXTENDING OUR COMMERCE, 577 


A much greater intercourse seems to have formerly subsisted 
between the western ports of India and Persia than at present. 
A great quantity of English goods, particularly woollens, found 
their way into that country. We obtained in return silks and 
silver. This formed a considerable branch of commerce, which 
may be again revived, but which has long since had but a 
nominal existence. 

In a political light our intercourse with Persia deserves 
attention, for it is in the power of the sovereigns of that country 
to repress or assist the hosts of barbarians ready at all times to 
precipitate themselves on India as on a certain prey. 

Bombay is our natural emporium with Persia, as well as the 
Red Sea, which has acquired a new degree of political import- 
ance since the attempt of the French to reach India from 
Egypt. Whatever may be the present success of this attempt, 
it becomes incumbent on us to watch henceforward this avenue 
to India. The design is in itself practicable, and would most 
likely have succeeded, had the Turks either been in alliance with 
the French, or had the enemy pushed on, immediately after he 
reached Cairo. 

However this may be, if we mean to secure ourselves in 
India, the evacuation of Egypt will be made the first condition 
of peace. 

The trade to the Red Sea also secms capable of improvement, 
and may probably defray the expense of the establishments, 
which it may be found necessary to maintain in that quarter. 
Piece goods and grain may be made barter for any quantity of 
coffee. The former and coarse woollens are in demand in 
Abyssinia. 

; The East India Company once carried on a considerable com- 
merce with Japan. They lost this advantage by the ill-judged 
conduct of the Portuguese, and have been prevented regaining it 
by the intrigues of the Dutch. It is a censure on us that they 
have alone for such a period enjoyed the profits of this trade, 
and a reproach on the commercial spirit of the nation, that we 
have made no attempt to recover our former footing in Japan. 
The promotion of science should have been a sufficient incite- 
ment to the cnterprize. The present low state of the Dutch 
nation would be favourable to this effort. Furs, cotton, picce 
goods and woollens may be imported into that country. The 


returns would be chiefly in gold and copper. 
J. STUART, 


Pp 


578 FRENCH STRICTURES ON ENGLISH RULE IN INDIA, 


82. Enclosure in a Letter from the Acting Resident at 
Poona, dated 20th of February. 


French incendiary proclamation to the Chiefs of Hindostan. 
Received 11th March, 1804. 


Translation of the Declaration by his Excellency Gencral Decaen, 
Captain-General and Governor of the Isles of Mauritius and 
Bourbon, and of their dependencies, addressed to all the Chiefs 
of Hindostan. 

From the time when the English obtained possession of more 
than half of Hindostan, they have continually laboured to defame 
the character of the French, and have endeavoured to persuade 
you that we are a faithless and a perfidious people. Without 
noticing the gross falsity of this asscrtion, I will withdraw the veil 
with which they have hitherto concealed their cunning. 

Be it known unto you, that, at a time when the French nation 
was convulsed by internal contests, the English endeavoured to 
extend the flames of civil discord, as they had before done in 
Hindostan ; but they did not accomplish their infernal object. 
Aware of their treacherous designs, we composcd our animositics, 
and cordially uniting with cach other, we attacked them with 
so much vigour that they were compelled to consent to terms of 
peace. Of this circumstance you have doubtless been already 
informed. | 

You have observed the line of conduct which the English 
pursue in Hindostan; you have witnessed the treachery by which 
they obtained possession of Bengal and Behar; you have seen 
their tyranny and cruelty in expelling Rajah Cheyt Sing from 
Benares ; their savage and unmanly treatment of the unhappy 
Begums at Fyzabad; their injustice and violence in wresting 
from their rightful owners the countrics of Oude, Arcot, and 
Surat; their fraud and rapacity in seizing the territorics of 
Tippoo Sultaun; and, lastly, the unjust and aggressive war in 
which they are now engaged with the Mahratta Chieftains. 

Had you opposed their first attack with the same spirit as 
our sclves, they would not have now had it in their power to 
exercise their tyrannical and oppressive sway over the countries 
of Hindostan. : 

A remedy may be found, Your cnemies are by no means 
numerous. In the whole of Hindustan there are only a few 


THE INDIAN CHIEFS CALLED ON TO EXPEL US, 579 


thousand ; the remainder of their force consists of native soldiers, 

your own subjects. 

( Tell those deceived and unfortunate persons, that they will 

hereafter be accountable to God, the Prophets, and the (Tacoor) 

deities, for thus drawing their swords against their liege sovereigns. 
Ye chiefs, descended from the stock of the ancient kings and 

rulers of Hindostan, know your own power—you have hearts, 


and soldiers, and treasures. 
Attack them with your united force, and liberate Hindostan 


from their violence, oppressions, and tyranny. 

Farewell! direct your observation to Ceylon; imitate the 
example which the inhabitants of that island have placed before 
you, and the plan which they have pursued. 


83. The Marquess Wellesley to Lord Hobart. 


Precautions against the revival of French power and influence 
in India. 


(Official and Secret.) 


(Extract.) Fort William, June 20, 1803. 


My Lord, 
This letter having necessarily involved a discussion of con- 


siderable detail, it may be convenient to your Lordship that I 
should conclude by recapitulating the principal questions on 
which I am anxious to obtain your Lordship’s instructions. 

First. Whether the convention of 1787 has been formally 
revived between his Majesty and France, or whether the admis- 
sion of the French to the benefits of that treaty rests absolutely 
upon his Majesty’s indulgence, and cannot be claimed as an 
obligation of public faith. 

Secondly. By what jurisdiction and in what manner civil and 
criminal justice is to be administered to the subjects of France 
within the territories and dependencies of the British Government 
in India. 

Thirdly. By what regulations the cstablishments of the 
French within the British possessions and dependencics are to 
be limited or restrained. 

Fourthly. Whether the French Government in India is to 
be considered as a mere commercial establishment, or as a 
political and military power. 

Fifthly. If the French Government in India is to be con- 
sidered as a political and military power, what are to be the 
relations of that power towards the British possessions, depen- 

Pp2 


580 SUGGESTIONS FOR CHECKING FRENCH INFLUENCE. 


dencies, and allies, and also towards the independent and unallied 
native powers ; what is to be the extent of the military power to 
be maintained by France in India, and what is to be the extent 
of her right to repair or to construct fortifications, or to strengthen 
her military resources in India by alliances or by other means. 

Sixthly. If the French Government in India is to be con- 
sidered in the situation merely of a commercial establishment, 
with relation to all the powers of India, European and native, by 
what regulations, and by what system of policy, is the local 
British Government of India to be authorized to enforce the 
obligations of such a condition upon the French Government, and 
upon the other powers of India. 

Seventhly. What is to be the condition of the Batavian 
Government in India, with reference to military and political 
power. 

Eighthly. The nature and extent of the naval power of the 
French and Batavian Governments in India. 

Ninthly. Whether the French and Batavian Republics re- 
spectively, are to be permitted to interchange their respective 
territories and possessions, or to make cessions of territorics or 
possessions to each other respectively; or to reccive interchanges 
or cessions of territory from any other European, or native powcr 
in India. 

In examining the various topics which this despatch embraces, 
I have omitted to observe to your Lordship, that some of our 
dependents exercise a local and distinct sovercign authority 
within their immediate possessions; the Nawaub of Oude, the 
Rajah of Mysore, and the Nizam, with several other states are of 
this description. It may become a question whether French 
subjects or others, residing within the possessions of such princes 
or states, should be amenable exclusively to the civil and criminal 
jurisdiction on the spot, or to the Company’s, or to any con- 
current jurisdiction of these authoritics. On this point your 
Lordship will receive the most correct opinion from the high 
legal authoritics in England. It is desirable that the conduct 
of European forcigners resident within the immediate territories 
of our dependent princes should be controlled by some jurisdic- 
tion of more just and regular operation, and of more efficacious, 
certain and speedy effect than can be derived from the arbitrary, 
corrupt, and precarious administration of any native state in India. 

T have the honour to be, &c. 
WELLESLEY. 


ANTICIPATED RENEWAL OF WAR WITH FRANCE. 581 


84. The Right Hon. Lord Castlereagh to the Marquess 
Wellesley. 


Iinpending renewal of war with France. Economy to be combined 
with military efficiency in India. 


London, March 16th, 1803. 
[Received July 6th, 1803.] 
My dear Lord, 

You will probably hear from me, by an overland express, 
before this despatch may reach you by sea. I shall delay my 
communication, by the former channel, in hopes that I may be 
enabled, in the course of a very few days, to apprize you, with 
more precision than I can do at this moment, of the actual or 
probable result of the present discussions carrying on with the 
French Government. It is enough for me at present to say, 
that his Majesty’s ministers felt that the situation, in which we 
were placed, as well by the importance and delicacy of those 
discussions, as by the military preparations which have been 
carrying on for some time past in the ports of France and 
Holland, destined ostensibly for St. Domingo and Louisiana, 
was such as to call for active measures of precaution on our 
part; and accordingly a strong squadron has been ordered to 
be equipped for sea. Press-warrants have been issued ; and the 
entire of the militia has been called out. 

The usual communication has been made to Parliament on 
this subject, and was received preciscly with the temper one 
could wish, A strong disposition is shewn from all quarters to 
support the honour and the interests of the country. Opinions 
naturally withheld till information can be given, but no attempt 
made to press Government for premature explanation. 

The funds, as might be expected, fell on the first alarm, but 
have since considerably recovered. 

In the present state of things we can only furnish your 
Lordship with intelligence of what is passing, and desire you 
to wait for the result before you adopt any measure which 
can be productive of expence. You will reccive, through the 
Secret Committce, a despatch to this effect, coupled with some 
observations referable to the principles upon which it may be 
wise to regulate the future measures of your government in the 
event of a renewal of hostilitics, 

Tt is unnecessary for me to press these observations upon 
your Lordship’s particular attention, The discussions which 


582 DON'T LET WAR ABSORB THE SURPLUS ! 


have lately taken place both at home and abroad on the 
important measure of reducing the debt, now so happily brought 
to a decision by the plan for that purpose, before transmitted, 
having received nearly the unanimous sanction both of the 
Court of Directors and of Proprietors, and the honourable 
exertions which you have been making by retrenchments of 
expence, for giving effect to such a measure, will render you 
amongst the most unwilling to disturb, beyond what the 
exigency shall absolutely require, those arrangements, on which 
the success of the plan depends. 

I am sure your Lordship will keep in view how much will be 
gaincd in positive strength by directing our exertions, even in 
war, against the debt, so long as there is little appearance of 
the enemy being enabled to menace India. Ilowever jealous 
France is of our power in the East, and however stcady she may 
be in her purpose of aiming at positions, from which she might 
one day hope to shake that’ power, yct I cannot persuade myself 
that she has, or can have for a length of time, the means to 
attempt any direct attack against possessions so defended as 
ours are by the army now on foot. 

I wish you, therefore, to consider how, under the smallest 
possible extension of expenditure, the army can be kept in that 
state of adequate preparation which belongs to war. For the 
five first years of the late war, the surplus abroad was as 
follows, — 1792-3, 41,326,000; 1793-4, £1,683,000; 1794-5, 
1,458,000 ; 1795-6, £977,000; 1796-7, £508,000, 

Whatever efforts France may be able to make in Europe, 
India cannot be considered as more exposed now than in the 
years 1795 475, &c., whilst Tippoo was yct formidable. I must, 
therefore, indulge a sanguine hope that your Lordship will find 
it practicable to adopt a system, even in war, which shall be 
compatible with our financial objects, and that the surplus 
revenue, as in the ycars alluded to, will be stil! applicable in a 
large amount to the reduction of debt. If peculiar difficultics 
arise, we must make corresponding exertions; but Ict us save 
our means till those difficultics appear, as far as prudence will 
permit. 

I conclude that the several restitutions have ere this been 
made to the French and Dutch Governments. How we stand 
at present with respect to the Portuguese settlements, which 
were garrisoned by us during the war, I cannot ascertain, cither 
from any orders sent from home, or from any intelligence 


THE MAHRATTAS INCREASE OUR WAR CHARGES. 583 


received from abroad. Under present circumstances I have 
only to request your Lordship, till you hear further from home, 
to turn your attention to the possible result of the discussions 
now pending, and to digest previously in your own mind the 
war system, on which you would propose to act, if hostilities 
should actually recommence, limiting it within the narrowest 
bounds in point of expence, which you deem at all consistent 
with the public safety. In the latter event, you shall receive 
early instructions from home as to the precise measures to be 
taken, with respect to the possessions of the several European 
powers either on the Continent of India, or in the Eastern Seas. 
I have the honour to remain, 
with great truth and regard, 
your Lordship’s most faithful and sincere 
humble servant, 
CASTLEREAGH. 


85. Marquess Wellesley to Right Honourable Lord 
Viscount Castlereagh. 


Difficulties of such a combination. Reduction of Mauritius, the 
Cape, &¢. desirable, and how to be effected, 


(Secret.) 
Fort William, 25 July, 1803. 
My dear Lord, eas 

1, I have the honour to acknowledge the reccipt of your letter 
of the 16th March 1803, 

2, I return your lordship many thanks for the’ iuformation 
communicated in that despatch. 

3. Your Lordship may be assured of my utmost endeavours 
to accclerate the success of the measures adopted in England 
for the reduction of the Indian debt ; and I entertain a confident 
expectation that the circumstance of a renewal of hostilities with 
France, unaccompanicd by the danger of military operations 
of the French in India, or by a rupture between the Company 
and the Mahratta powcr, would not occasion any material delay 
in the progress of the system adopted for the liquidation of the 
Indian debt, provided the Court of Directors shall duly supply 
treasure from home equal to the prime cost of investment in 
India. 

4. It is however my positive duty to apprize your lordship 


584 DANGER OF THE INDIAN DEBT OVERRATED. 


that I received the letter from the Secret Committee under 
date (the 17th March 1803) with sentiments of the utmost 
concern, as well as of the most serious apprchension. 

5. The orders contained in that letter directing the principal 
attention of this government in the supposed event of a renewal 
of hostilities with France to the reduction of the Indian debt 
appears to me to inculcate principles of policy which may prove 
injurious to the safety of this empire, especially in time of war. 

6. The proportion which the Indian debt now bears to our 
annual revenues, the proportion of our annual charges to our 
annual revenues, the reduction effected in the rate of interest 
upon public loans since the year 1798, the amount and operation 
of the sinking fund established in India, the present high credit 
of all the securities of Government, and the flourishing and 
progressive condition of every branch of our resources, must 
satisfy your lordship that exaggerated apprehensions have bcen 
disseminated with respect to the magnitude and pressure of the 
debt in India; and that its existence cannot be considered to 
form the principal object of danger to India in a scason of war 
with France. 

4. Just economy in time of war is a bulwark of strength 
against the enemy; and I trust that your lordship will confide 
in my anxious solicitude to avail myself of this powerful aid as 
well as of every other means of prosecuting war against France 
in India. At the same time I am convinced, that your lordship 
will not suffer commercial prejudice and the eager desire of 
temporary mercantile advantage to contract the comprchensive 
scale of our military preparations or to repress the activity of 
military enterprize in India in the event of a renewal of hos- 
tilitics with our formidable and implacable foc. 

8. My construction of the tenor of the Ictter of the Secret 
Committee may I hope prove crroncous: it appears to me to 
contain orders calculated to abate that spirit of alacrity and 
forward military preparation which it has been my anxious 
endeavour to encourage, and on which must ever depend the 
security of the British possessions in India not only during the 
existence of war with France, but even in time of peace. 

g. In my letter addressed to your lordship under date 20th 
April 1803, I had the honour to request your attention to the 
deficiencies in the effective strength of the European force 
destined for the peace establishment of India. The peace 
establishment proposed by your lordship if completely main- 


DANGER OF DAMPING THE MILITARY SPIRIT. 585 


tained (with some additions which I shall have the honour 
of submitting to your lordship’s consideration in a separate 
despatch) would in my opinion answer every ordinary purpose 
of security; even in time of war. 

10. Extraordinary emergencies must be met by adequate 
efforts; but it is absolutely necessary that the military estab- 
lishment maintained in India (especially the European troops) 
even in time of peace with France, should be formed upon a 
scale calculated to frustrate surprize from the French and to 
maintain a commanding superiority over the improving military 
establishments of the Mahratta powers. 

11. The degree of danger to be apprehended from the efforts 
of France in India in time of peace, is stated in a despatch 
to Lord Hobart (of the 20th June 1803), a copy of which is 
enclosed for your lordship’s information. Your lordship appears 
to be fully impressed with the necessity of maintaining in India 
even in time of peace with France an European army equal to 
all the ordinary exigencics of war: and my opinion, with regard 
to the amount of the force adequate to that purpose, will not 
be found at variance with your lordship’s judgment to any 
considerable extent. 

12, The reductions which I effected in the strength of our 
native regiments upon the conclusion of peace with France were 
expressly founded upon that event, with reference also to the 
existing state of peace with all the native powers. In referring 
to my despatch (of the 8th February 1802) to the Commandcer- 
in-Chief on that subject, your lordship will observe that I have 
considered those reductions to be inseparably connected with 
the continuance of general peace in India and Europe. 

13. The degrce of danger to be apprehended from France in 
India during the existence of war is in my opinion inconsider- 
able in the present state of our power in India, provided that 
power be duly exerted in maintaining a commanding supcriority 
in these seas, and in preserving our European and native land 
forces in a state of complete efficiency and strength. It is also 
essential to the security of these dominions to cultivate the 
military energy of the government, and to animate its vigilance 
and zeal, together with the spirit of the army, by encouraging 
the free and unrestrained course of our exertions against the 
enemy in India. 

14. While the Cape of Good Hope, the Mauritius, Batavia 
and Amboyna shall remain in the hands of the French and 


586 LARGE DEMANDS ON THE INDIAN ARMY. 


* 


Batavian Republics, the security of this empire in time of war 
must rest upon the extent and condition of the naval and 
military force stationed in India; upon the constant and diligent 
observation of the enemy’s motions, and upon the prompt 
application of our means of defence to such operations as may 
frustrate the attempts, which may be expected from those places 
during the progress of the war. 

15. In addition to these considerations it is to be observed 
that the several forts and settlements of the French, the Dutch, 
and Portuguese in India in time of war with France must cither 
be garrisoned by British troops or must afford considerable 
advantage to France in the prosecution of hostile designs against 
our power. This consideration necessarily requires the employ- 
ment of a considerable body of our troops either for the purpose 
of occupying those places, or of observing the movements of 
any French force which may be stationed in those places 
respectively, or may menace them. 

16. All the possessions of the French and Dutch on the 
continent of India now remain in our hands, and Goa must 
be garrisoned by British troops. It would therefore have been 
necessary with reference exclusively to these circumstances 
to maintain our European establishment at Icast upon the 
full scale of efficiency proposed by your lordship for a peace 
establishment, and to raise all the native corps to the war 
establishment. 

17. The state of preparation required by the commotions in 
the Mahratta empire, by the conduct of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, 
and of the Rajah of Berar, by the position and strength of 
Scindiah’s French corps under the command of M. Perron, has 
already compelled me to restore the native corps to the war 
establishment, even previously to the certainty of a renewal of 
hostilities with France; and the subsidiary engagements con- 
cluded in the Deccan have required the addition of three native 
regiments in Bengal. 

18. The orders from the Secret Committce prohibit any 
attempt against the Mauritius or Batavia, Any such attempt 
from India in the present state of the Mahratta power would be 
imprudent. But it is my duty to state to your lordship my con- 
scientious opinion that in the event of a renewal of war with 
France, the carly conquest of the Isle of France would be an 
object of the utmost importance to the commerce and _ political 
security of these possessions. 


NAVAL DEFENCE OF INDIA PRECARIOUS. 587 


19. While the French shall retain the Isle of France with the 
advantage of an amicable communication with the Cape of Good 
Hope, a force may be maintained between these two settlements 
which may be employcd either in attempting some vulnerable 
point of our extensive coast, or in endeavouring to aid some 
native power in effecting conquests of neutral possessions which 
might enable the French to menace our frontier. 

20. Your lordship will observe that this last suggestion relates 
fo the probable designs of France upon the coast of Ava. 

21, I shall entertain no apprchension of being enabled to meet 
the most vigorous attempt which France could probably make 
on any part of our possessions, provided the military establish- 
ments be preserved in complete vigour. But the arrival of a 
French force on the continent of India (an event which may be 
expected in the progress of the war if the French should retain 
the Cape of Good Hope and the Mauritius) and the partial or 
temporary success of such an invasion would occasion alarm, and 
might encourage some of our tributarics or dependants to excite 
disturbances, 

22, A French force might be employed from the same scttle- 
ments against Malacca or Prince of Wales’ Island, (if not against 
any of our continental possessions) and in that case a consider- 
able expense must be incurred for the purpose of expelling it in 
the probable event of its first success. 

“ 23, Under these circumstances all our measures of defence 
must be adopted with the supposition that the French may 
assemble at the Isle of France and at the Cape of Good Hope 
a force adequate to hostile purposes, and your lordship is 
apprized that at certain scasons of the ycar no superiority 
of naval strength can entirely secure all our possessions from 
attack, 

/ 24. The great extent of the coasts of India, and the variety of 
services which may require the attention of his Majesty's ships, 
added to the defective authority of the Company’s Government 
with regard to the navy in India, render the naval defences of 
our Indian empire ,extremely precarious even with a decided 
superiority in the number and strength of his Majesty’s ships 
over those of France and Holland. 

25. At present the French and Dutch ships in the Indian and 
Kastern seas exclusive of those at the Cape of Good Hope, are 
supposed to be superior in number and weight of metal to his Ma- 
Jesty’s squadron within the same seas. But Iam not apprehensive 


588 MARINE FORCE, A CHARGE ON INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


of any early junction of these forces. The distance between 
Batavia, the Isle of France, and the Cape of Good Hope, and 
the actual position of the squadron which brought M. Decaen, 
together with the state of all the French and Dutch ships and 
men, appear to preclude all immediate danger; and I conclude 
that early reinforcements to the navy and army in India will 
speedily arrive from England. But in any case the Company’s 
Government must provide for the immediate defence of our ports 
and of their trade, while the French and Dutch shall retain an} 
possessions or force in thase seas. 

26.(While the French shall remain in possession of the Isle of 
France, the British Government in India will be subjected to a 
heavy expense in supporting a separate marine force for these 
objects and for the protection of the country trade, and of the 
Company’s ships. During the last war with France the captures 
made in India by privateers fitted out from the Isle of France, 
are estimated at four millions sterling.) 

27. This additional expense for maintaining a marine force 
must be incurred immediately upon the commencement of war 
with France. 

28.\During the last war his Majesty’s squadron was never 
equal to all the objects which demand the protection of a naval 
force on these seas, and the immediate defence of the trade of 
the ports of Calcutta and Bombay devolved principally on the 
Company’s Government. Similar difficulty must be expected 
to arise on the renewal of hostilities with France and Holland. 

29. (The possession of the Isle of France would diminish the 
danger to our trade and dominions in India which must be 
expected to arise from the possession of the Cape by the 
Batavian Republic, if it should not be found convenient or 
deemed advisable to recover that colony from the hands of the 
enemy) 

go. I have learnt with considcrable concern that opinions are 
entertained by most respectable persons in England tending to. 
{ undervalue the importance of the possession of the Cape of Good 
Hope in time of war with France and Holland) I cannot 
furnish your lordship with a more satisfactory testimony of my 
opinion on that question, than by requesting your attention to 
the annexed extract of a letter which I addressed to Mr. Dundas 
from the Cape of Good Hope in (the month of February) 1798, 
during my residence in that colony, at which I touched upon my 
voyage to India. 


MAURITIUS AND THE CAPE SHOULD BE REDUCED, 589 


31 Your Lordship, I trust, will pardon the emotions of zeal 
for the security of these possessions, which induce me to express 
an earnest hope that an early attempt may be made to disturb 
the strength of the enemy either at the Cape of Good Hope or 
at the Isle of France.) 

32. The reduction of either of those possessions would afford 
great additional security to our Indian empire, and it will be 
obvious to your Lordship that the reduction of either possession 
would facilitate our operations against the other. 

33. It would not be advisable to, undertake an expedition 
against the Isle of France by a combined operation from Eng- 
land and from India. It is always to be apprchended that some 
branches of the arrangements for a combined operation from 
such distant points may fail. The scason may be lost, and the 
enemy may easily obtain information of the intended attempt, in 
time to prepare resistance. Under any state of affairs on the 
Continent of India no considerable aid in European troops could 
prudently be afforded from India, even if the peace establish- 
ment, proposed by your Lordship, of seventeen regiments, of one 
thousand men, were completed. 

34. In the present state of the European force in India, your 
Lordship is apprized of the deficiencies which render it unequal 
to the purposes originally in your Lordship’s contemplation. 

3% After the reduction cither of the Isle of France or of the 
Cape of Good Hope, it would be a practicable and expedient 
measure to compose a part of the garrisons of either of those 
places of native scpoys from India; and in that event, a part of 
the European force originally sent from England to the ag 
of Good Hope, or to the Mauritius, might proceed to India. 

36. Any operation against the Cape of Good Hope would, in 
all probability, (appear to his Majesty’s ministers to promise 
most speedy and effectual success by being despatched directly 
from EnglandJand I would strongly recommend that in any 
expedition against the Cape of Good IIope no reliance should 
be placed upon co-operation from India. 

37. It would be difficult to despatch an expedition against the 
Mauritius directly from Europe ; if, therefore, any expedition be 
intended against the Mauritius, it would appear most advisable 
to commence the operation by a considerable reinforcement of 
the European troops in India.) Those reinforcements might be 
divided between Madras, Borhbay and Ceylon, distributing the 
largest proportion at Madras and Ceylon. 


590 JI HAVE KEPT WITHIN THE ESTIMATES OF LAKE, ETC, 


38. An expedition might then be prepared by the Government 
of India for the attack of the Mauritius, with the advantage of a 
short voyage, of the most recent information relative to the 
defences of the Island, and also with the aid of a proportion of 
native troops. 

39. Your Lordship will remark that most of the contingencies 
supposed in this letter require an increase of military and marine 
charges, and that the state of affairs with the Mahrattas has 
already compelled me to restore the native army to the war 
establishment, while the subsidiary engagements concluded with 
the Peishwa and the Guicowar have rendered an increase of the 
native force in Bengal indispensably necessary. 

40. In stating the necessity of these expences, I have not 
pointed your Lordship’s attention to any other opinions than 
such as I have been enabled to form upon the important question 
of our military establishments and state of preparation. 

41. Entertaining a firm persuasion that I have the honour to 
possess your Lordship’s confidence, I am satished that you will 
give me full credit for the most anxious desire to avoid every 
increase of expence which is not absolutely essential to an ade- 
quate state of preparation for war. If, however, I were to refer 
your Lordship to the opinions of the Commander-in-Chief 
General Lake, of Lieut.-General Stuart, and of the Govern- 
ments of Fort St. George, Bombay and Ceylon, your Lord- 
ship would find that the additions which I have made to our 
military force in consequence of the events to which I have 
adverted is inferior to the augmentations proposed by those 
respectable authorities. 

42. The Commandcr-in-Chief General Lake, for whose opinion 
I entertain the highest respect, concurs with me on the suffi- 
ciency of the augmentations made in Bengal, and I trust that if 
our European establishment be maintained complete, according 
to suggestions which I shall have the honour to submit to your 
Lordship in a separate letter, no further increase of our military 
force can be required, unless with a view to fulfil new treaties of 
subsidy, which, of course, will include the provision of additional 
funds. 

43. To meet the expences incident to the preparations for war, 
and to the execution of our treatics with the Pcishwa and with 
the Guicowar, the subsidiary grants of territory from those states 
will prove an efficient resource. 

44. If war should take place with the Mahrattas and Monsicur 


MERCHANT PRINCES MUST NOT BE PEDDLARS. 591 


Perron, it will probably be attended by the conquest of territories, 
which will speedily repay our expences. 

45. With respect to the account which your Lordship has 
enclosed of the surplus realized in India from the peace of 
Seringapatam to the year 1796-7, it is difficult to apply that 
account to present circumstances without entcring into a minute 
examination of the principles on which the surplus in India was 
calculated during those ycars. 

46. It would also be requisite to examine whether during that 
period of time the military cstablishments in India were main- 
tained in a state of adequate preparation for war. At the timc 
of my arrival in India, I have no hesitation in repeating to your 
Lordship the opinion which I recorded at that moment, that our 
Indian empire was not in a state of military or naval preparation 
in any degree calculated to meet the exigency of war. 

47. The destruction of Tippoo Sultaun’s power has removed 
the most formidable enemy of the British power in India, but the 
actual condition of the Mahratta powers connected with the views 
of France and the constitution of some branches of Scindiah’s 
military establishment will require the most vigilant and exten- 
sive state of military preparation. 

48. I entertain no apprehension, however, of mecting the 
expence incident to these preparations without any material 
check to the Company’s commercial investment, and without 
any important delay in the operations for the reduction of the 
debt. My apprehensions of the approaching crisis would be much 
more scrious, if [ were not confident that your Lordship will 
oppose the gencrosity, vigour and firmness of your mind to the 
progress of any system of compromise between the conflicting 
characters of merchant and sovereign, which compose the con- 
stitution of the East India Company. While that Company 
shall represent the sovereign executive authority of the realm in 
so great, populous, and flourishing a portion of the British empire, 
its dutics of sovercignty must be deemed paramount to its 
mercantile interests, prejudices, and profits. In time of peace, 
the happiness of its subjects, the permanent improvement of its 
dominions, the dignity, purity, and vigour of its government must 
take precedence of commercial considerations. The sovereignty 
of the Company is the basis and strength of its commerce ; and 
from the faithful discharge of the dutics of empire in India must 
ever flow the wealth and credit of the trading corporation in 
London. In time both of peace and of war, the strength and 


592 TRADE INSECURE WITHOUT MILITARY POWER. 


efficiency of the army, and above all, the military spirit and 
character of the government in India must be cultivated with 
uninterrupted assiduity, and determined perseverance. To that 
spirit and character we owe the origin of this empire; and in 
preserving the cause of its origin we shall provide the most 
effectual security for its preservation. The most indispensable 
duty of the sovereign executive government in India is there- 
fore the maintenance of the military power, without which no 
security can exist for the mercantile or financial interests of the 
Company, or even for the tranquillity and welfare of our Indian 
subjects. 

49. I shall have the honour of addressing despatches to Lord 
Hobart relative to the restitutions to be made to the French 
and Dutch Governments, to the Portuguese settlements, and 
generally to the possessions of the several European powers 
on the Continent of India, or on the Eastern Seas. Copies of 
these despatches will be transmitted to your Lordship for your 
information, and I shall hope to receive his Majesty’s further 
instructions, relative to those points, from your Lordship, or 


from the Secretary of State. 
I have the honour to be, 


with great respect, my dear Lord, &c. 
WELLESLEY. 


3. NORTH-WEST FRONTIER. 


86. Tho Earl of Mornington to Major General Sir James 
Henry Craig, K.B. 


Enquiry as to military precautions to be taken against 
Zemaun Shah's threatened invasion, 


Fort William, Sept. 16, 1798. 
Sir, 

This letter will be delivered to you by Lieut.-Col. Collins, who 
having been appointed Resident at the Court of Scindiah, is 
procecding to take charge of the interests of the British Govern- 
ment at that Court. 

The continual reports of the approach of Zemaun Shah to 
Hindostan engaged my attention at the earliest period of my 
arrival in Bengal, and I have already taken every step (which 
appeared to me justifiable in the great uncertainty of the 


ZEMAUN SHAH THREATENS THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL. 593 


prevailing rumours) for checking the motions of the Shah, in 
the event of his advancing towards our frontier. 

It could not be supposed that such an expedition, as that 
meditated by the Shah, would be planned without any view to 
the plunder of the most opulent and flourishing parts of Hin- 
dostan; I have, therefore, always considered that he must intend 
to advance to Lucknow, and to our provinces, if circumstances 
should favour his progress. And with this opinion, I have 
thought that his march ought to be opposed at the carlicst 
possible period, and his operations checked at the greatest 
possible distance from our frontier.) 

But if I had ever entertained any doubt of the tendency of 
the Shah’s operations, it would have been removed by his own 
distinct declaration to the Vizier and to me. (That he should 
consider our not joining his royal standard, and our not assisting 
him in the restoration of Shah Allum, and in the total expulsion 
of the Mahrattas in the light of an act of disobedience and 
enmity! As it is utterly impossible for me to aid-the Shah in 
such a project, or to submit the honour and faith of the British 
Government to such conditions}!I must suppose that the Vizier 
and this Government, will be treated as encmics by him, when- 
ever he shall have an opportunity of bringing his army to act on 
our fronticr. The most useful barrier against this invasion, in 
the first instance, would be the resistance of the Seiks, of the 
Rajpoots, especially the Rajahs of Jyenagur and Judpoor, and 
of Dowlut Rao Scindiah., » 

My attention has been directed to a system of measures, the 
effect of which, (if successful) would have occasioned the imme- 
diate return of Scindiah to his dominions in ITindostan, and have 
given us the benefit of a defensive alliance with him against the 
Shah. I cannot yet ascertain, what the motions of Scindiah are 
likely to be, or what may be the ultimate turn of his fate. But 
at all events, it will be necessary to consider the terms of a 
defensive league to which, whether Scindiah shall be a party or 
not, the Rajpoots and Sciks must be invited. 

The most difficult question in the formation of such a treaty, 
will be ofa military nature. It may be thus stated. What is the 
extreme limit beyond the fronticr of the Vizier, to which the 
operations of the British force could be advanced, without danger 
to that frontier, and to the force so advanced. (On the one hand, 
it would certain]? be desirable to restrain the operations of our 
army, as nearly as possible, to the exclusive protection of the 


Qq 


594 HOW FAR SHOULD OUR ARMY ADVANCE AGAINST HIM? 


Nabob’s and Company’s possessions. Cput on the other hand, 
it could not be expected, that any efficient or cordial assist- 
ance could be derived from any practicable system of defen- 
sive alliance, if our army was to be exclusively exempted 
from any share in the common defence of the dominions of the 
contracting powers.) 

I am aware of the difficulty under these circumstances of 
fixing such a point for the extreme advance of our army, as 
shall relieve us from both of the embarrassments which I have 
stated. 

But as I am persuaded, that the question which I have pro- 
posed in this letter, must frequently have occurred to you in all 
its military bearings and consequences, I take the liberty of 
requesting, that you will have the goodness to favour me with 
your opinion upon it, in order that I may hereafter be enabled to 
enter upon the consideration of it more advantageously and 
accurately, whenever it shall become necessary to discuss it with 
the Commander-in-Chief. 

I shall also esteem it as a favour, if you will state your ideas on 
this subject to Lieutenant Colonel Collins, who will be employed 
in the negociation of any defensive engagements which it may be 
deemed advisable to contract. 

If any other suggestions, with regard to the defence of our 
North Western frontier, should appear to you important to the 
public service, I should be happy to receive them. One defect 
has necessarily attracted your notice; the useless, or rather the 
dangerous condition of the Vizier’s own army. This subject is 
at present under my consideration ; and I confess I sce but one 
effectual mode of obtaining a serviccable army in the Vizicr’s 
pay. The substitution of regular regiments from the Company’s 
service, in place of the Nabob’s own troops; or in other words, 
such an increase of our force in Oude, as would warrant nearly a 
total reduction of the Nabob’s present army. I believe that this 
measure might be accomplished not only with infinite advantage 
to the external defence, but also to the internal tranquillity of 
the Nabob’s dominions, to the safcty of his person, to the sta- 
bility of his authority, and to the order of his finances. 

I have the honour to be, Sir, with great respect, 
Your most obedient and humble servant, 
MORNINGTON. 


- 


WANT OF FORTRESSES ON THE NORTH-WEST FRONTIER. 595 


87. Major General Sir James H. Craig to the Earl of 
Mornington. 


Reply to the enquiry. Importance of a Mahratta alliance, 
military imbecility of Oude, and probable weakness of the 
Sikhs. 


My Lord, 

I am sure your Lordship will believe that it is not without 
giving it every attention in my power, that I sit down to lay 
before your Lordship the various considerations which have pre- 
sented themselves to my mind, on the subject of the question 
upon which your Lordship has honoured me with your commands 
that I should give you my opinion. 

In the consequence which your Lordship is pleased to attach 
to any opinion of mine, your Lordship hag certainly manifested 
that confidence in my judgment which I should have felt to have 
rested upon a better merited claim had it been applicd solely 
to my ambition of being useful to the service of my country; 
but whatever may be the sense that I entertain of my capacity 
to do it fully, I feel at the same time the force of the demand 
on me which your Lordship has established, that I should make 
the best return that is in my power to the confidence that your 
Lordship places in me; and it appears to me that I should ill 
discharge that obligation were I to confine myself to the con- 
sidering the question as a mere abstract proposition, and did not 
enter into it more fully as connected with the probable circum- 
stances of our situation, in the event from whence alone can arise 
the necessity of your Lordship’s decision upon it. 

I have already had the honour, on another occasion, to explain 
to your Lordship my idca upon the nature of our frontier, which I 
shall request that your Lordship will have the goodness to carry 
in your mind in what I may now have occasion to offer to your 
Lordship. It is singularly unfortunate, and surely much to be 
regretted, that in the thirty odd years that we may be said to 
have been in possession of this country, it has, I should suppose, 
never been considered in a military point of view as being within 
the possibility of attack; hence it arises, that except Allahabad, 
which hardly yet deserves the name, there is not a single fortress 
or place of strength in the whole country. It is not necessary 
to enter into the various inconveniences, and indeed essential 
circumstances of danger, which may arise from this deficiency. 

Qq2 


Cawnpore, 6th October, 1798. 


596 A FORWARD MOVEMENT THE BEST DEFENSIVE. 


It is here alluded to principally as connected with and certainly 
very materially affecting the object in question. 

However such as is the natural barrier which limits our frontier, 
and with every inconvenience which we might experience from 
the deficiency to which I have adverted, I have not a doubt but 
that if the army in the field is carried to 20,000 men, the position 
that I have pointed out in the memoir which is already in your 
Lordship’s hands, and the other measures of precaution that are 
there recommended to be adopted, would be equal to our 
security, although I have laid it down as an axiom, that it can 
be endangered only under circumstances of previous advantage 
to the enemy, by which his numbers will be increased to almost 
any extent to which he may wish to carry them; but were we to 
confine ourselves thus solely to our own defence, however suc- 
cessful we might at present be in that object, I for my own part 
have scarcely a doubt, that a new and formidable power would 
establish itself in our nearest neighbourhood, a power which 
would overset the whole political state of Hindostan, would 
require an unremitting vigilance and constant state of prepara- 
tion on our part, attended with an enormous expense, and that 
at last we should have to contend for our existence, under 
circumstances of infinitely greater difficulty and embarrassment 
than those which will now attend our opposition to its first 
establishment. I ought to apologize to your Lordship for thus 
obtruding an opinion which has not been called for, but I have 
been led to it by the view of acceding, most fully, to the wisdom 
of the measure of a junction with the Mahrattas, and as pointing 
out the grounds on which I may allude to the expediency of 
doing it with cordiality and effect. 

It appears to me to be impossible to point out any precise 
bounds at which danger commences to the army that quits a 
frontier, and to the frontier which is left by it. Its communica- 
tion, indeed, becomes more and more precarious in proportion 
as it abandons the country with which it is to be preserved, but 
in all situations, with respect to action, it is equally liable to the 
fate of war; and with respect to the frontier, it is impossible, 
except under local circumstances of peculiar advantage, very 
rarely to be met with, that it can be covered by any army that 
is advanced before it. The true question, however, that I think 
arises is, how far the object in view will justify the possible 
danger that may attend the movement, and the principal cir- . 
cumstance of consideration should be, to adopt the best measures 


WE MUST ADVANCE TO SUPPORT THE MAHRATTAS. 597 


that human wisdom can devise, to lessen or to meet the danger, 
with the best means within our command. 

The expediency of a defensive alliance with the Mahrattas 
being admitted, it follows of course that as the object must 
be their defence as well as ours, the operations of the armics 
employed must be directed by what appears to be the best 
means of accomplishing that end. It is not to be supposed 
that the Mahrattas would sacrifice a part of thcir country in 
order to contract the line of defence to what may lIcssen the 
danger ‘to ours. Their object will be to mect the enemy on 
their frontier; and it will scarcely be practicable to make them 
comprehend that they can receive any advantage from an 
alliance with us, unless we join them there. Fortunately every 
step we take to defend their dominions is equally applied to 
the protection of our own; their frontier becomes, in fact, ours, 
which is truly and effectually covered by it; and having once 
quitted the precise line which would be obviously marked out 
by our confining ourselves solely to our own defence, it matters, 
I think, very little whether we are 50 miles farther from or nearer 
to that line. 

At the same time that I hazard this idca, for it will, I am 
persuaded, meet many opponents, I beg your Lordship to be 
assured that I by no means overlook the consequences that 
may attend its being adopted in its fullest extent, I am well 
aware of the difficulty of communication, I am fully sensible 
of those that may be experienced with respect to subsistence, 
and I feel all the dangers and hazards that would attend us 
in the unfortunate event of a defeat, when, unquestionably, every 
mile we should have advanced would increase the peril of retreat. 
I am even inclined to give additional weight to these circum- 
stances, because it is my decided and fixed opinion, that our 
encmics are as numerous as the inhabitants of the country; and 
I have not a doubt but that a reverse of fortune would exhibit 
them starting from every tope and from behind every bank. 
But all these inconveniences and dangers commence,{to a certain 
degree, the moment our army quits the banks of the Ganges. 
It is to the greater or less extent to which they may be carried 
that my reasoning applies; and it is under the conviction, that 
the benefits to be derived from a junction with the Mahrattas 
will be found to justify and to overbalance them all, that I 
observe that their being more or less increased by a greater or 
Icss distance from our fronticr is of no weight when put in 


598 ADVANTAGE OF FIGHTING BEYOND OUR FRONTIER. 


competition with the expediency of acting with the strictest 
cordiality, and in the closest union with those people. It is not 
to be imagined that they will give up Delhi without a contest: 
their first position will certainly be beyond it. Their frontier 
extends to Carnaul, which is 60 coss, perhaps something better 
than roo miles from Delhi. I should have no hesitation to 
recommend that there should be no restriction to our advancing 
so far in co-operation with them. The only condition that I 
would annex to the permission would be, that they should put 
into our hands some place of strength between Anopshecr and 
the army, to serve as a depét and magazine., The question, in 
short, appears to me to be reducible to this: Whether we shall 
meet the enemy and oppose him, though at a distance, under 
every advantage of the assistance to be derived from a numcrous 
and powerful body of friends, equally interested in the cause 
with ourselves, and masters of the intermediate country between 
our own frontier and the scene of our operations, by which the 
danger, which might otherwise arise from that distance, will 
be very considerably lessened; or whether we shall wait to be 
attacked at home, when we shall be deprived of that assistance, 
and when our enemy will himself have acquired all the advan- 
tage to be derived from increased resources, augmented numbers, 
and established authority, exerted with the ardour and en- 
thusiasm usual in a career of victory and conquest, and with our 
own native troops, perhaps, labouring under all the effects of a 
contrary impression ? . 

But in viewing the subject of the danger attending our ad- 
vancing, it is necessary that we should advert to the numbers 
of which the army will consist that may be applicd to the 
defence of our north-western fronticr. I have ventured to 
suppose that that number may be carried to 20,000 meny but 
as I am entirely ignorant of the services for which, independent 
of the internal security of our provinces and the necessary atten- 
tion to Fort William, the remainder of our army may be required, 
I may err very considerably in my calculation on this subject. 
One circumstance is, however, clear to me, and that is, that if 
we cannot command that number at least, independent of the 
garrison of Allahabad, our mcans of defence will be scarcely 
proportionate to the magnitude of the danger with which we are 
threatened. 

After determining the actual strength of the army that can 
be collected for the whole of the service required, it will then 


OUDE ARMY USELESS. AMOUNT OF ADVANCED FORCE, 599 


remain to proportion its several parts into the different branches 
into which that service will divide itself. For if it is judged 
expedient that the principal corps should be carried beyond the 
frontier to any distance, that a cordial co-operation with our 
allies may require, I believe there is no one will doubt the 
necessity of leaving no very inconsiderable force in these pro- 
vinces, as well to assist in guarding the passes on the river as 
to insure to us that command and influence, and those services, 
that may be indispensable to our safety.) Your Lordship judges 
most rightly that, in its present shape, no sort of service can be 
expected from the Nabob’s army, and I am confident that 
without a total change in the policy of the Court and the 
manncrs of the people, there exists no possible means by which 
it can ever be rendcred such as can merit that the smallest 
degree of confidence should be placed in it. The money now 
expended on them is thrown away, and can only be rendered 
subservient to the object of general defence, by being appro- 
priated to the increase of the Company’s army. But I much 
fear that it is too late to adopt such a measure, with the hope 
that any troops that would be raised with this view can be of 
service if the Shah’s invasion take place this scason. This con- 
sideration should, however, only act as a spur to us to begin the 
attempt as early as possible; and it may perhaps be much 
facilitated by the possibility of taking into our service some of 
his battalions entire. They are all, to a certain degree, disci- 
plined, and under the charge of a proper sclection of officers, 
might soon become serviccable, There scems to be little doubt 
of their willingness to engage. 

With respect to the number of which the corps that is to 
act with our allics should consist, there appears to me to be 
no medium. It should cither be a simple detachment of two 
or three battalions, such as was that which, under Captain Little 
from Bombay, accompanied a body of the same people during 
the Mysore war, and that which was on the same occasion 
attached to the Nizam’s army, or it should consist of the utmost 
strength that can be collected, with a due regard to other 
services. I hold it for certain that in all situations in which we 
are to act with any of the country powers, the whole brunt of 
the operations will rest with us; nor will our particular safety 
ever be considered by them as an object that can be put in 
competition with any danger that a regard to it might entail 
upon themselves, Our force should, therefore, be such that any 


600 MAHRATTA—ESSENTIAL TO RAJPOOT & SEIK—ALLIANCE, 


( misfortune that might befall it could have no sensible influence 
upon the general state of our affairs ) or Gt should be such as is 
sufficient for its own eae Ber can, if necessary, act upon the 
means which it possesses within itself, and as can give us that 
influence, and entitle us to that pre-eminence, which it is so 
essential for us on all occasions to preserve’ A medium force 
would only expose us to insult from our arrogant and selfish 
friends, and to defeat and ruin from our more open enemies, 
whilst the deficiency which might be occasioned in our general 
means of defence, by a loss which as such would be considerable, 
might very materially cripple, perhaps render vain, our further 

_ efforts. (Could, by any means whatever, the acting army be 
carried to any thing near the strength I have proposed, and could 
a corps of five or six thousand men be formed at the same time 
in these provinces, and provided decisive measures for the tran- 
quillity of Rohilcund be adopted, I should certainly imagine that 
we might hope to give the Shah such cause to repent his incur- 
sion as would secure the future tranquillity of Hindostan, at Icast 
from foreign invasion, for some time. 

I feel, my Lord, that in what I have hitherto had the honour 
of offering to your Lordship, I have in some shape departed 
from the datum upon which your Lordship’s questions secm 
in some degree to be founded. Your Lordship observes, 
that it will be necessary to consider the terms of a defensive 
league, to which, whether Scindiah shall be a party or not, 

Cthe Rajpoots and Seiks must be invited, whereas I have con- 
fined myself entirely to the supposition of an alliance and 
hearty co-operation with the Mahrattas; that is, I presume, 
with Scindiah, without once adverting to either the Rajpoots 
or the Seiks. 

The truth is, my Lord, that, with all deference to better 
information, and still greater to better Judgment, it docs not 
appear to me that it can be practicable for us to enter into 
any alliance (with either of the Powers mentioned, but through 
the Mahrattag, if I may use the expression.) I mean by it 
that it is utterly impossible that we(can join or co-operate with 
the former but by the concurrence and in concert with the 
latter, for we cannot even communicate but through the do- 
minions of Scindial) (ednaive of the geographical difficulty, 
there would, I apprehend, be found a much greater in the 
inveterate hatred that exists between the two people. Any 
communication between us and the Seiks, without the partici- 


DOUBTFUL POLICY OF ADVANCING TO }0IN THE SEIKS. 601 


pation of Scindiah, would excite a jealqusy that would, I fear, 
be fatal to our friendship with the latter.) The same circum- 
stances exist with respect to the most powerful of the Rajpoots, 
the Rajahs on the westcrn frontier of Scindiah’s territory.(_ It 
appears, therefore, to mc, that if we cannot form an alliance with 
Scindiah, it will be difficult, if not impossible, to form any other. 
If, indeed, we can convince him of his true interests, I believe it 
will be an easy mattcr to engage the Rajah of Jynajur, and 
others whose territorics are adjacent to his, for it is impossible 
that they can be desirous that the Shah should establish himself 
in these parts. With respect to the Seiks, the task may be more 
difficult. What advantages can we hold out to induce them to 
act in co-operation with us? They will naturally ask if we expect 
that they should abandon thcir country and possessions to join 
us, and of what use we can be to them while posted on the 
fronticrs of the Mahratta dominions? The answers to these 
questions scem difficult) 

Another consideration arises, however, upon this subject. 
Suppose the Seiks were found to be cordially disposed to join 
in the league, and should the Mahrattas on their part be equally 
willing, would it be expedient that we should carry our opera- 
tions to the length of advancing into the country of the former, 
upon which terms alone it would be possible to bring into action 
the united forces of the three Powers? I do not, indeed, think 
the casc is likely to occur, in which a decision may be necessary 
on this question, at least beyond a certain degree. (If the Shah 
carrics his intentions into effect, he is probably at this moment 
on his march, and the fate of the Scik fronticr, most likely of 
Lahore itself, will be decided long before we can possibly be at 
hand to take a part in the contest. Our movement, therefore, to 
that extent, cannot in any case be necessary; but the Rajah of 
Patiala is represented to be a powerful prince, commanding at 
all times a force of 10,000 horse, and as many footmen, and 
capable of raising many more in case of necessity. Ilis terri- 
torics border on those of the Mahrattas: and shquid the Sciks 
have remained disunited and separate, or should he by any 
means have escaped the effects of any defeat which his country- 
men may have suffered on the fronticr, so that his force may 
remain entire, and probably increased by the junction of such 
as may have escaped the Shah’s army ;—I think such an addition 
of strength would be an object, and would justify a further 
advance ; but certainly not unless our force were such as would 


602 THE MAHRATTAS WILL READILY BECOME OUR ALLIES. 


command the respect of both parties, and place us in the light of 
umpires, capable of enforcing our wishes on either. 

I have no doubt of the Mahrattas readily acceding to any 
alliance your Lordship may propose; and Scindiah’s return 
seems more probable now than it did when your Lordship’s 
letter was written, but even should that event not take place, 
though it will be a circumstance much to be regretted, as 
crippling the energy with which his strength might be exerted 
under his own direction, yet it would appear that the approach 
of so manifest a danger must unite all parties to avert it, which 
they would be perhaps more inclined to do under our controlling 
influence than if they were Icft to themsclves. 

Ihave the honour to be, with great respect, 
My Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient and 
Most humble Servant, 
J. H. Craic. 


88. Sir J. H. Craig to the Earl of Mornington. 


Same Subject—English army deficient in training and ammu- 
nition, Danger of underrating the enemy. 
Cawnpore, 13th October, 1798. 
My Lord, 

The letter from my Kurnaul correspondent, to which I have 
alluded in my public letter, is principally on the subject of 
Gholaum Mahommed, whose motions I have directed him to 
watch. After, however, mentioning the construction of the 
bridge over the Attock, he adds— 

‘A constant intercourse is maintained between the Chiefs of 
the Siek nation and those of the Mahrattas. The former arc 
all at their stations.’ 

I have written to him for a further explanation, and have 
directed him to make particular enquiry, as far as may be in 
his power, as to the probability of the two people entering into 
an alliance to oppose the Shah; and more especially as to the 
disposition of the Seiks, and how far they are united among 
themselves, for that purpose. I have also written in the same 
terms, on the latter subject, to my friend at Amrutsir. In the 
meantime I have forwarded the account to Colonel Collins; as, 
if these people should really have an intention of entering into 
a defensive league against the common enemy, it may be much 
facilitated I think by its being known that your Lordship 


° 


POWER OF THE SEIKS PROBABLY OVERESTIMATED. 603 


is willing to be a party in it, whilst that circumstance will 
undoubtedly have a, tendency to inspire them with a little 
more confidence jn. the force of any treaty that may take 
place between them, than is otherwise likely to exist betwixt 
inveterate enemics, each knowing the other to be capable of 
every treachery. 

Not having the -honour to be known to your Lordship, it 
may now be necessary that I should assure you that I am not 
apt to obtrude opinions, or to step out of my sphere in the 
presumption of offering advice. The only merit to which I lay 
any claim is that of an ardent zeal in the service of my country, 
but I wish not that it should be intemperate, and if I assume the 
liberty, on this occasion, of continuing a private correspondence 
with your Lordship, you owe it to the honour which you did 
me in your first Ietter: by the frankness of which I was Ied to 
believe that it would be received by your Lordship precisely in 
the light in which alone I can assure you it is ventured upon. 

I have not heard from Colonel Collins since he left this for 
Futtyghur. In the conversation that I had with him here I 
endcavoured to impress him with a conviction of the necessity 
of his losing no time in entering into the negociation with which 
he is charged, and I am sure he was himself sensible of it; but 
since we have such good reasons for believing that the Shah 
has actually begun his march, so far as to be on the banks of 
the Attock upwards of twenty days ago, I now feel it to be of 
double importance that he should proceed without an instant’s 
delay. I am concerned to have to say, that from all the in- 
formation I can get, and I have made every inquiry in my 
power, Iam led most firmly to believe that the Sciks, if left to 
themselves, will not make any opposition at all to the Shah's 
approach ; or if they do, that it will be very feeble. I believe, 
indeed, that the power of the Sciks rest very much upon opinion, 
and that in the day of trial the delusion will appear. I neither 
-belicve them to be so numerous, or so hardy, as they have been 
represented, although sufficiently so to lord it over the real 
inhabitants of the country, for I make no doubt that your 
Lordship is aware that the Sciks are not the forticth part of 
the inhabitants of the district over which they have established 
their dominion. The mass of these are a mixture of Mussulmen 
and Ilindoos; the former of which from every motive, and the 
latter in detestation of the oppressions of their present Lords, 
will rejoice in the Shah’s approach. Nothing I believe can 


604 DESPATCH ESSENTIAL, VIZIER’S ARMY DANGEROUS. 


produce any important exertion from the Seiks but a junction 
with the Mahrattas; and giving even credit to the letter from 
Kurnaul, whatever appearance it may carry of the probability 
of such an event, I still imagine it will be with difficulty accom- 
plished, but under your Lordship’s auspices; but I much doubt 
the ability of the Mahrattas themselves to assemble in time 
such a force as will give confidence to the others. There is no 
appearance of it that I can yet hear of; they are quarrelling 
among themselves at Delhi, without seeming much to think of 
the danger with which they are threatened. The Attock is but 
a little better than 400 coss from Delhi, a space that may with 
the utmost ease be marched in six weeks, and that without 
adverting at all to the celerity with which the Shah’s army is 
reported to move. If, (and it is no very improbable supposition) 
despising the Sciks, whose behaviour in 1796 was no ways such 
as to give him cause to hold them in high estimation, the Shah 
should adopt a bold step; and, leaving a corps of troops to keep 
them in awe, he should move on with rapidity, in the view of 
anticipating the Mahrattas at Delhi, he may be there in a time, 
that I almost tremble to think of. It is not utterly impossible, 
my Lord, that he might anticipate our preparations; though it 
is indced hardly to be expected that, entcrtaining the same 
opinion of the Mahrattas as that which I have supposed him to 
do of the Seiks, he should venture to Jcave them behind in order 
to attack us, especially before the fords of the Ganges are open. 
However, I wish to shew the expediency of exertion and activity 
on our part. The extent to which it is meant to carry the army 
being ascertained, the troops that are to compose it should be 
immediately assembled, not in the slow progress of the ordinary 
relief, when battalion relieves battalion, but the utmost expe- 
dition should be used in it. The ordnance and stores should be 
hurried up in some very unusual way, unless it can be furnished 
from Chunar, as I have suggested to the Commander-in-Chief ; 
and, above all, some steps should be adopted, with respect to 
further arrangement, that might preclude the necessity of a daily 
reference to the present seat of Government. 

I know not what to say with respect to the Nabob’s troops, 
T would be content that they should be useless, but I dread their 
being dangerous, unless some step is taken with regard to them. 
I should be almost as unwilling to leave them behind me as 
I should be to leave a fortress of the encmy, The Nabob is 
highly unpopular, and of all his subjects, I believe he would 


BRITISH TROOPS RAW, ENEMY NOT TO BE DESPISED, 605 


least expect attachment from his army. I fear much that it is 
too late to reap any benefit from the arrangement which your 
Lordship proposes with respect to them; and if we should be 
called to the frontier I doubt whether it may not be hazardous 
to attempt to reduce them. We shall have of oursclves too 
many recruits in our ranks, indeed, a number that will very 
much weaken the dependence to be placed in our battalions. 
On this subject I feel that I tread on tender ground; but I write 
to your Lordship in the confidence of a private communication. 
Neither the discipline of the army, or the knowledge of the 
officers, are such as to admit of our being insensible to other 
disadvantages. We are to expect a numerous and ferocious 
enemy, undisciplined and disorderly, but impetuous in their 
attacks, and rapid in their movements,—abounding in cavalry, 
and acting in a country the most favourable to that arm, where, 
if we can secure one flank, it will be a fortunate position. 
Against them our reliance must be on our artillery, and on the 
steadiness of our infantry,—where discipline should keep them 
firm in their ranks, and where confidence in their advantages 
should teach them not to shrink under the impression of a 
tumultuous charge of cavalry, the circumstance of all others the 
most likcly to affect the mind of a young soldier, while the 
knowledge of the officers, and the previous training of the corps, 
should ensure the ability of moving with the utmost precision 
and rapidity, and of forming in every direction, to resist a 
surrounding cavalry. Battalions, with full one-third of recruits, 
are little cqual to this description in its first part, and truth 
compels me to say that I have not yet seen one that came any 
where near it in the latter. , 

Your Lordship will do me justice in believing that I do not 
mean to hold out discouragement by this description. We 
must act, and we must make the best of the tools in our hands. 
My view is, that your Lordship may be aware of the true state 
of the army, which it is at least possible that you may not 


become through any other channel ; three-fourths of them with? 


whom your Lordship may converse do not themselves know it, 
and the other fourth will not confess it. There is a third class of 
people which your Lordship may mect,~and it is a numerous 
one, even in my own profession—who either do, or affect to, 
hold in contempt the idea of the necessity of its being other- 
wise. It is a fact, however, past controversy, that within these 
four years, and owing to these very circumstances of want of 


» 


606 INADEQUATE SUPPLY OF AMMUNITION, 


discipline and knowledge, the fate of our Empire in India 
probably hung by a thread of the slightest texture; since even 
the impetuosity of the enemy ought naturally to have led to the 
very advantage which his ignorance would not permit his being 
sensible of. 

Our stores are utterly incompetent to any forward move, such 
ax I have ventured to suggest as justifiable, if co-operation with 
the Mahrattas can be purchased by it. Our proportion of 
musquet ammunition is 120 rounds per man, and that for the 
small arms of the cavalry is 40; with this I most certainly would 
not venture to stir a step from the Ganges, and how we are to 
get up more, in the time in which I think it is probable that it 
may be requisite for us to do so, I know not; I have written 
in strong terms to the Commander-in-Chief upon the subject. 
For our artillery we have 300 rounds, but that is, if possible, 
still less equal to what we ought to have, at Icast in a depot, to 
which we could have a much more ready access than we have to 
Chunar or Allahabad. The latter should be our grand depét, 
in which should be fodged a quantity of stores of every spcecics, 
equal to every possible emergency; while a ficld depét fed con- 
tinually from it, should move successively from post to post as 
we-advance, and be always at hand to renew our deficiencics. 
Upon the whole, do not, my Lord, consider it as presumption 
if I say that I feel a great deal more arrangement to be neces- 
sary than’ appears to me to occur to others as such. It is an 
easy thing to put the whole upon the issue of one battle, and 
unfortunately it is the mode which is attended with the least 
trouble. 

I really beg your Lordship’s pardon for this long and very 
free intrusion; but my apology is already offered in the fore 
part of my letter, and I shall therefore say no more, but that 
I have the honour to be, 

My Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient and humble Servant, 
J. H. Craic, 


CONCLUSION OF TREATIES WITH PERSIA, 607 


4. PERSIA. 


89. The Marquess Wellesley to the Honourable the Secret 
Committee of the Honourable the Court of Directors. 


. Persian embassy and Treaty, and advantages thus secured. 
Why an European ambassador, in state, was required, 


Monghyr, September 28th, r8or. 
Honourable Sirs, 

Your Honourable Committee has been apprized of the motives 
which induced me to despatch Captain Malcolm to the Court 
of Persia, and of the gencral objects of his mission. I have 
now the satisfaction to inform you, that Captain Malcolm re- 
turncd from his embassy in the month of May, after having 
completely succceded in accomplishing every object of his 
mission, and in establishing a connection with the actual govern- 
ment of the Persian Empire, which promises to the British 
nation in India, political and commercial advantages of the most 
important description, and of as great a degree of stability as 
appears compatible with the nature and character of the Persian 
Government. 

2. I have the honour to transmit separate numbers in this 
despatch, copies of two treaties, the first relating to a political 
connection, and the second to a commercial arrangement, and a 
copy of a letter from Captain Malcolm, which accompanied the 
communication of these treaties from Persia. These treaties 
have been concluded by Captain Malcolm, between the British 
Government of India, and the Court of Persia. 

3. Tlikewise transmit copics of the whole of Captain Malcolm’s 
correspondence with this Government from the date of his ap- 
pointment until his return, from which your Honourable Com- 
mittee will be informed of all the circumstances attending this 
interesting and important mission, 

4. Notwithstanding the fluctuations which have occurred in 
the Government of Persia, the power of the reigning Prince 
appeared to me to have acquired sufficient stability to render 
it an object of considerable importance to conciliate the attach- 
ment of that Prince to the British interests, and to establish with 
Persia an intimate connection founded on durable and compre- 
hensive principles. The policy which dictated my opinion, was 
calculated to provide not only against the menaced invasion of 
Zemaun Shah, but also against the views which other powers 


608 MEHDI ALI KHAN A DIPLOMATIC PIONEER. 


may entertain of attacking the British possessions in India. This 
object is important in proportion to the hazard to which the 
British interests would be exposed, by a connection between the 
Court of Persia, and those European powers, whose views have 
long been directed to this quarter of the British dominions. 
Great advantages in a commercial point of view were likewise to 
be expected from the connection which I proposed to form with 
the Court of Persia. 

5. To accomplish these important objects, it was indispensably 
necessary that the embassy should be so constituted as to convey 
to the Court of Persia, and to the inhabitants of that country, a 
respectable impression of the power, wealth, and dignity, of the 
British Government in India. To produce this effect upon the 
minds of a nation peculiarly devoted to outward form and 
ceremonies, I judged it to be necessary to attach to the embassy, 
appointments calculated to ensure from the Court of Persia, a 
reception suited to the dignity of the British Government and to 
the importance of the mission. 

6. From the perusal of the correspondence your honourable 
Committee will find, that my opinion on this subject-was amply 
justified, and I am satisfied that the extent of the appointments 
of the embassy, and the liberal manner in which it was con- 
ducted, materially contributed to its success, and tended to 
excite in the minds of the inhabitants of Persia, an exalted 
opinion of the power and liberality of the Company’s govern- 
ment in India. 

7. Your honourable Committce in your Ictter of the roth of 
September, 1800, has expressed a doubt of the policy of Captain 
Malcolm’s mission, founded on the accounts which had been 
received from Bombay, of the success of Mchdi Ali Khan’s excr- 
tions in a similar capacity. 

8. The objects of Mchdi Ali Khan’s mission were compa- 
Ritively of a limited and temporary nature. This mission was 
neither intended, nor calculated to embrace those important 
and comprehensive views which I had in contemplation, in 
furnishing Captain Malcolm with credentials to the court of 
Persia. The value of Mehdi Ali Khan’s services on that occa- 
sion was certainly considerable, but he was not in my opinion 
a proper person to be entrusted with the negotiation of such 
important objects as those which I had in contemplation at the 
Court of Persia, in the mission of Captain Malcolm, Indepen- 

“dently of any disqualifications applicable to Mchdi Ali Khan, the 


NATIVES NOT FIT FOR HIGHER DIPLOMACY. 609 


objections to the employments of a native of India in sucha 
mission are numerous and insurmountable. 

g. It is not consistent with the dignity of the British Govern- 
ment, to employ any native of this country as its representative 
at a foreign court, nor could the British interests be with any 
degree of safety confided t6 any person of that description. 
Intrigue, falschood, and collusion, are the uniform characteristics 
of such of the natives of India, as aspire to the qualifications of 
statesmen. They are ignorant of the national honour, and 
insensible fo every emotion of public spirit; they are, therefore, 
ever disposed to sacrifice the public interests to views of private 
ambition and individual profit. 

10. No native of India can possess a sufficient knowledge of 
the political interests of the British nation, nor of the principles 
and maxims which regulate its conduct, to qualify him for 
the arduous duty of superintending an important branch of the 
political relations of the British empire in India, nor can he 
assume that degree of consideration at a foreign court, which is 
indispensably necessary in a situation so distinguished and im- 
portant as that of the representative of the honourable Company 
in Asia, 

11. The natives of India may occasionally be employed with 
advantage for the promotion of temporary views of policy, or for 
the attainment of scparate and limited objects. They may 
somctimes be rendered, in a subordinate situation, successful 
instruments for opening the way to political systems of a more 
permanent and comprchensive nature. In both these respects, 
I consider the services of Mehdi Ali Khan to have merited 
reward and approbation; but I should have betrayed the im- 
portant interests committed to my charge, if I had attempted 
to accomplish views of such magnitude as those which suggested 
the mission of Captain Malcolm, through the agency of Mchdi 
Ali Khan, or of any other native agent. 

12, I shall now proceed to make some remarks upon the 
nature and effects of the alliance so happily established with 
the Court of Persia, for the purpose of enabling your honourable 
Committce to form a just estimate of the advantages which may 
be expected to result from the success of Captain Malcolm's 
mission, 

13. A firm and intimate connection has now been established 
between the British Government and a State, the resources of 
which are capable of aiding in an cssentiql manner the hostile 

Rr 


610 ADVANTAGES SECURED B¥ MALCOLM’S MISSION. 


views of the enemies of the British nation against our Eastern 
possessions. 

14. The measures which have succeeded in conciliating the 
favourable disposition of the Persian Government towards the 
British nation, have produced a proportionate opposition in that 
Court to the views and interests of our enemies, and have opened 
to us the prospect of commanding those resources and local 
advantages, which, under a different state of circumstances, 
might eventually have been employed against us. I entertain 
the fullest confidence that the Court of Persia, in conformity 
to its declarations and engagements, will cordially resist any 
attempts which may be made, either by negotiation, or by 
force, on the part of our enemies, to obtain any establishment 
in that country, or to render it in any manner subservient to 
their views. 

15./I consider the unrestrained use of the Persian sea-ports, 
and the ceplusion of our enemies from them, to be an essential 
advantage.’ By securing the entire command of the Persian 
coast, we shall facilitate the means of defeating any attempts 
on the part of our enemies to establish themselves in that 
quarter, and as the encmy’s cruizers will be deprived of all 
refuge and assistance in those ports, the commerce of the 
Persian Gulph, (which, under the operation of the commercial 
treaty, may be expected rapidly to incrcase), will in a great 
measure be free from interruption, and the communication 
with Europe, by the way of Bussorah, will be less subject to 
molestation, 

16, The active measures adopted by the Court of Persia 
against Zemaun Shah, which were instigated in the first in- 
stance by Mehdi Ali Khan, and subsequently encouraged by 
Captain Malcolin, produced the salutary effect of diverting the 
attention of Zemaun Shah from his long projected invasion 
of Hindostan during three successive seasons. The hostility of 
Baba Khan unquestionably proved the ruin of Zemaun Shah’s 
power. The assistance afforded by Mehdi Ali Khan under my 
orders, to the -Prince Mahomed Shah, originally enabled that 
Prince to excité those commotions, which have recently termi- 
nated in the defeat of Zemaun Shah, in his deposition from the 
throne, and in the entire extinction of his power; to the con- 
solidated and active government of Zemaun Shah, has succeeded 
a state of confusion in the country of the Afghans highly favour- 
wile to our security in that quarter. “Since the fall of Zemaun 


ITS BEARING ON ZEMAUN SHAH’S AND OUDE AFFAIRS. 611 


Shah, several competitors for the throne have opposed the 
establishment of Mahomed Shah, and the Afghan power is 
broken down by their mutual contentions, while the vicinity of 
the King of Persia’s force, now connected with our interests, 
operates as an additional cause of weakness to the empire 
formerly held by Zemaun Shah. The relation which that 
Prince had formed with Tippoo Sultaun, and the probability 
of his concurrence in the hostile views, either of Russia‘ or 
of France, render the actual state of affairs in Candahar a 
most favourable contrast with that which existed in the year 
1798. 

17. The details of the transactions which have led to the fall 
of Zemaun Shah accompany this despatch. 

18. The engagements which Captain Malcolm has lately con- 
tracted with the Court of Persia, relative to the Afghans, afford 
abundant reason to believe, that the provinces of Hindostan will, 
for a long course of years be effectually relieved from the appre- 
hension of an Afghan incursion. 

19. The immediate effect of these arrangements has been to 
enable me to prosecute with confidence my negotiations at 
Lucknow, and to relicve me from the necessity of making ex- 
pensive military preparations on the fronticrs of Oudc,a measure 
which, under other circumstances, I should have thought it my 
duty to adopt. 

20. I consider the liberty granted by the Court of Persia 
to British merchants to scttle at any of the ports in the Persian 
dominions, for the purposes of commerce, to be a valuable con- 
cession, calculated to cstablish the foundation of important 
benefits to our commercial and political interests in that quarter, 

21. The proposed settlement in the Gulph of Persia, which 
your honourable Committee will observe, is suggested in several 
parts of Captain Malcolm’s correspondence, is a question worthy 
of the most serious consideration. I shall communicate my senti- 
ments to your honourable Committce on this important subject, 
in a future despatch, 

22. From the perusal of Captain Malcolm's correspondence, 
your honourable Committce will have the satisfaction to observe, 
that this important and beneficial alliance with the Court of 
Persia has been concluded under circumstances, which warrant 
a perfect confidence in the sincerity of the Persian Monarch, and 
that the impression, which the embassy has produced upon the 
minds of the inhabitants of Persia, is so favourable to the interests 

Rra2 


612 OTHER POWERS CONCILIATED BY MALCOLM. 


of the British nation, as to leave no apprehension of its being 
effaced by the intrigues of a rival power, or by any internal 
changes or revolutions in the Persian empire. 

23. Your honourable Committee will further have the satis- 
faction tq observe that these important advantages have been 
obtained without any sacrifice whatever, either of interest or of 
honour on the part of the British Government. The returns 
which the British Government is bound to make, are of a nature 
to improve the advantages acquired by us, and are consistent 
with every principle of true policy and honour. 

24. The issue of Captain Malcolm’s negotiation with the Imaum 
of Muscat, has proved highly advantageous to the interests of 
the British nation. The importance of cultivating a good under- 
standing with the Government of Muscat, is sufficiently obvious, 
and the arrangements which have taken place with that govern- 
ment, through the agency of Captain Malcolm, may be ex- 
pected to ensure all the benefit of which that connection is 
susceptible. 

25. The intercourse which Captain Malcolm held with the 
Pasha of Bagdad, appears to have produced upon the mind of 
that Prince, an impression extremely favourable to the British 
interests, and to have laid the foundation of future essential 
advantages, intimately connected with the alliance so happily 
contracted. with the Court of Persia. 

26.LJnder these circumstances, adverting to the great public 
advantages which have already resulted from Captain Malcolm’s 
mission, as well as to those which may be expected to flow from 
its future consequences, I anxiously solicit the particular atten- 
tion of your honourable Committee, and of the Court of Directors, 
to the ability, firmness, temper, and dignity, which have dis- 
tinguished Captain Malcolm’s conduct, through the whole course 
of the arduous and important duties committed to his charge. 

27. Your honourable Committee will observe by Captain 
Malcolm’s letter, under date the 31st of July, that he has trans- 
mitted to me the journal of his mission to Persia, which I should 
have forwarded by this despatch to your honourable Committee, 
had I not understood from Captain Malcolm that it was his 
intention, as soon as he should have leisure to arrange the 
- materials which he had collected, to prepare a much more 
complete and extended work upon this interesting subject. 

28. I have the honour to annex to this letter, two documents 
which I have received from Captain Malcolm, and which contain 


CEYLON, UNDER THE CROWN, WILL NOT PAY ITS WAY. 613 


discussions serving to illustrate the objects and consequences of 
his mission. 
I have the honour to be, &c. 
WELLESLEY. 


5. CEYLON. 


80. The Marquess Wellesley to the Right Hon. Henry 
Dundas. 


Importance of placing Ceylon under the Indian Government. 


Barrackpore, May xoth, 1801. 
My dear Sir, 

1. The object of this despatch is to intimate to you, my sen- 
timents on the plans which you appear to have in contemplation 
relative to the permanent government of the Island of Ceylon, 
if that possession should remain in our hands after the peace. 

2. The present civil establishment of Ceylon is certainly a 
heavy burthen on the finances of the Company in India, and 
as far as relates to them, it would be a relicf to throw the 
burthen of the civil government of Ceylon on the Crown. With 
respect to the European force to be maintained for the defence 
of that island, I think it might be provided without any addition 
to the number of 18,000 effective infantry, which I proposed in 
my Ictter of the 13th July, 1800, for the whole of our present 
Indian Empire, continental, as well as insular, including Ceylon, 
the Moluccas, Malacca, and Goa, as a British possession. 

3. The revenue of Ceylon is not adequate to the payment of 
the necessary establishments under a scparate royal govern- 
ment; nor can I think, that the revenue of that Island will be 
found answerable to its necessary expenditure under a scparate 
government, if ever, for many years to come. The deficiency 
must, therefore, be provided from home, if Ceylon be entirely 
separated from the general Government of India. To mect this 
charge at home, the cargocs of cinnamon, and the investment of 
Ceylon, might possibly be taken by the Crown; still however, 
an advance must annually be made by Parliament for the 
expenses of Ceylon, to be balanced by the sale of its investment, 
as the charges of our colonics in the West Indies may be 
balanced by the dutics levicd on the produce of those colonics. 
But I rather suppose that the Crown would take no direct con- 
cern in the commercial investment, but would leave that trade, 
either to the East India Company, or to private traders under 


614 UNDER THE COMPANY, IT WOULD COST LESS. 


‘certgin regulations, and that the Crown would levy duties on the 
trade, as a more natural and proper mode of drawing a resource 
from the possession of Ceylon. 

4. The transfer of the civil and military expense of Ceylon to 
the Crown, would render that part of our Indian Empire a charge 
on the public of the United Kingdom, and would be sub- 
stantially the same measure which you so earnestly deprecate. 
For the direct operation of such an arrangement necessarily 
must be to render that part of our Indian Empire a burthen 
upon the mother country, and to have recourse to the public 
finances at home, for the payment of that branch of our Indian 
establishments. 

5. In this view of the subject, therefore, the account between 
the British Islands and India, would stand, precisely the same 
as if aid were to be granted by Parliament, to a similar extent, 
in the shape of direct assistance to the finances of the East 
India Company, holding Ceylon as a territorial possession, and 
defraying the general charges of that possession, together with 
those of the continental empire of India. 

6. In this case, as in the separate case of Ceylon, if annexed 
to the Crown, the public would be remunerated by the duties 
derived from the trade, and by other collateral benefits resulting 
from the extensive power of Great Britain in the East. 

7. It appears to me, however, to be a perfectly just and 
reasonable statement in taking a general view of the expecta- 
tions which you have held out at various times to Parliament 
respecting India, to exclude from the account altogether, the 

. charge of Ceylon, and of our possessions acquired from the 
Dutch in the Eastern Seas, of Goa, and perhaps of all our 
acquisitions in the East obtained from European powers during 
the present war. 

8, But the same benefit must in reason and justice be allowed 
to the Government of India, and to the credit of the Company's 
finances; and with this allowance, after having excluded the 
charges of those acquisitions, a large surplus revenue would 
certainly accrue applicable to the combined purposes of reducing 
debt, and of maintaining commercial investment. 

g. As far as the questions of expense and finance are to be 
viewed distinctly from other branches of political consideration, 
Iam convinced that the revenue of Ceylon would be infinitely 
better administered, and more productive, and that its expenses 
would be much more moderate, if it were permanently annexed 


LATTER PLAN EXPEDIENT ON POLITICAL GROUNDS. 615 


as a province to the Government of Fort St. George, than if it 
be retained as a separate and distinct Government under the 
Crown. 

10, The permanent annexation of Ceylon to the Crown, while 
the continent of India shall remain under the Government of the 
East India Company, is however, a measure more important in 
my estimation with respect to its political, than to its financial 
operation. ‘ 

11. It is essential to the vigour of this Empire, that the 
administration of all its parts should be uniform, framed upon, 
the same system, combined by similar principles, and directed 
to similar objects and views. Unity of power, and an invariable 
correspondence of system and action throughout the whole 
fabric of our government, are the best securities which can be 
provided against the dangers to which we are necessarily ex- 
posed in India, by the vast extent of our possessions, and by 
the variety of interests which they embrace. If to the natural 
principles of division and discord, resulting from the remote 
position of our provinces, and from the differences of local pre- 
judice and conflicting interests, be added the establishment of 
distinct authorities, different in substance and in form from the 
general government of the Empire, and exempt from its control, 
the weakness of overgrown dominion must ultimately fall upon 
us, and in every arduous crisis our power will be found inefficient 
in proportion to its nominal magnitude and cxtent. 

12. Whatever, therefore, may be the nature of that Govern- 
ment which the wisdom of Parliament may permanently estab- 
lish for India, I ‘hold two principles to be indispensable to its 
permanent efficiency and vigour. 

First, that every part of the empire in India, continental as 
well as insular, shall be subject to the general control of one 
undivided authority; which shall possess energy in peace, to 
maintain ordcr, connection and harmony between all the dis- 
persed branches of our dominion, and to extend cqual benefits 
of good government to every class of our numcrous and various 
subjects ; and in war, to direct every spring of action to similar 
and correspondent movements, to concentrate every resource in 
an united effort, and by systematic subordination, to diffuse such 
a spirit of alacrity and promptitude to the remotcst extremities 
of the Empire, as shall secure the co-operation of every part in 
any exigency which may demand the collective strength of th 
whole. 


616 CEYLON A BULWARK OF OUR INDIAN EMPIRE. 


Secondly, that the constitution of every branch of the empire 
should be similar and uniform; and above all, that no sub- 
ordinate part should be so constituted as in any respect to hold 
a rivalry of dignity even in form with the Supreme Power. 

43. The distinction between the Royal Power and that of 
the Company is perfectly understood by the natives of India, 
and more sensibly felt by them than by any class of persons in 
Europe. Even by Europeans in India a degree of respect is 
attached to the representation of the Royal Power, which they 
either boldly refuse, or reluctantly yield to the Company’s 
Government. 

14. The application of these principles to the case of Ceylon 
would lead me to submit most seriously to your consideration 
the absolute necessity of preserving the controbef the Governor- 
General in Council over the Government of Ceylon entire, and 
in the fullest efficiency; without this control the possession of 
Ceylon, instead of being as you justly estimate it, the great 
bulwark of this Empire, may become nearly as useless to the 
common cause as if it were in the hands of a neutral power. 

15. An independent Governor of Ceylon, acting in the King’s 
name, might prove the source of the most dangerous confusion 
and distraction in the bosom of our dominions. In the next 
place, I should feel it to be my duty to represent to you, that if 
the Governor of Ceylon shall permanently hold a commission, 
civil and military, from the Crown, the Governor-General should 
hold a commission, civil as well as military, from the same 
authority. Without this arrangement, I doubt whether it would 
be possible permanently to maintain an efficient control over 
Ceylon when annexed to the Crown. 

16. An anxiety for the good government of India being the 
common sentiment of your mind and of mine, will be my excuse 
for having submitted these ideas to you, you will use them 
according to your discretion. 

T have the honour to be, &c. 


WELLESLEY. 


EVENTS HAVE YUSTIFIED MY VIEW AS TO CEYLON. 617 


91. The Marquess Wellesley to Lord Hobart. 
The same subject. 
(Extract.) (Official and Secret.) 
My Lord, Fort William, Nov. 30th, 1803. 

36. The events however which have passed in Ceylon, have 
occasioned serious reflections in my mind with regard to the 
security of that valuable possession, and to the operation of the 
present constitution of its government upon the general interests 
of the British empire in India. 

37. The separation of the government of Ceylon from the 
control of the general government of India, always appeared 
to me to be a measure of the utmost danger to this empire. 
Accordingly at an early period of time, I submitted my opinion 
upon the subject to the President of the Board of Commissioners 
for the affairs of India in a secret letter dated 10th of May 1801, 
of which I have the honour to enclose a copy for your Lord- 
ship’s information. 

38. The separation of Ceylon from the Government-General, 
was however deemed advisable; and the consequences which 
have resulted from that measure appear to me to have confirmed 
the justice of those apprehensions which I expressed in my letter 
to the President of the Board of Commissioners in May 1801. 

39. Under the new constitution, treaties have been concluded, 
and a war has been undertaken by the government of Ceylon 
without the previous knowledge of the Government-General ; the 
expences of that war however, have been supplied in the first 
instance by the Government-General; and the calamities which 
have attended the progress of the war, have occasioned demands 
for troops from the Government-Gencral. Whether the war in 
Ceylon could have been altogether avoided, whether its com- 
mencement could have been postponed to a more convenient 
season, or whether its conduct could have been improved, and 
an early and honourable peace established upon permanent 
foundations, are questions, which it is ncither my present duty 
nor intention to examine; but it is evident that every arrange- 
ment connected with these questions might have been formed 
with greater advantage under the direct authority of the power 
which must ultimately furnish the supplies for war, and provide 
the securitics for peace, Had the government of Ceylon re- 
mained subordinate to this government, the war in that island, 
if deemed necessary, would have been undertaken after a 


618 IN PEACE ITS POLITICS AFFECT THOSE OF INDIA. 


deliberate preparation of sufficient resources, and after a full 
consideration of the most effectual mode of applying them. 
This government could not have been taken by surprize with’ 
respect to the actual commencement of the war, or to its result; 
and an opportunity would have been afforded of apportioning at 
an early period of time to the service in Ceylon such aid, as might 
have appeared on a just comparison of objects and means to be 
compatible with due attention to other branches of the service in 
India, or to be indispensably necessary for the safety of Ceylon. 

40. The independence of Ceylon has placed all these con- 
siderations beyond the reach of the Governor-General in council, 
who was unapprized of the approach of war in Ceylon until it 
had actually commenced, and of the probable demand for con- 
siderable reinforcements in Ceylon, until a war on the continent 
of India had limited the means of furnishing them. 

41. The operation of treaties and political arrangements con- 
cluded by the separate authority of his Majesty’s Government 
of Ceylon may materially affect the general interests of the 
British empire in India, even in those cases which may not 
immediately involve the issues of peace and war. His Majesty’s 
instructions together with the Company’s charter, and the 
various acts of regulation, appear to preclude the Governor of | 
Ceylon from the right of concluding treaties, or of making war 
with any of the continental states of India, or with any state 
situated beyond the limits of the island of Ceylon. It is 
perhaps doubtful whether the Governor of Ceylon possesses 
even within the limits of that island, the same powers relative to 
peace and war, which are granted by special Act of Parliament 
to the Governor-General in council within the limits of the 
Company’s charter. Thése points certainly require full and dis- 
tinct explanation by the highest authority; but whatever may be 
the legal right of the Governor of Ceylon with regard to these 
questions, the practical operation of the new constitution of Ceylon 
has been amply proved by the experience of the last year. 

42. Even if the political powers of the government of Ceylon 
be limited to the island, the nature of treaties concluded with 
the King of Candi, or with his ministry, nobility, or other 
authorities in the island, may be contrary to the general policy 
pursued by the Company’s Government in India, and may there- 
fore prove injurious to the British character and influence on the 
Continent of India, and among such insular states in these seas 
as may have formed or solicited connections with the Company. 


WAR IN CEYLON MUST BE SUSTAINED BY BENGAL, 619 


43. The king of Candi is particularly venerated by the Court 
of Ava, and a considerable degree of sanctity is attributed in 
the Burmese dominions to the character of the king of Candi, 
and to the island of Ceylon, whence the Burmahs derive the 
source of their mythology, and of their religious institutions, 
The conduct of the British Government, therefore, towards the 
king and kingdom of Candi, and the general tenor of the policy 
pursued in the island of Ceylon, is important to the reputation 
of the Company’s Government on the Continent of India, in 
proportion to the importance of the Burmese empire in the 
general scale of Asiatic powers. To your Lordship’s intimate 
knowledge of the affairs of India, it is unnecessary to add more 
detailed facts or arguments to prove that the operation of any 
system of treaties, alliances, or political or diplomatic arrange- 
ments pursued towards the native states and subjects within 
the limits of the island of Ceylon, cannot be confined to the 
coasts of that island, even if such system should exclude the 
contingency of war in Ceylon. 

44. If treaties or political systems concluded with the native 
states or powers in Ceylon should involve the issue of hostilities, 

7 although the theatre of the war may in the first instance be 
confined to Ceylon, it is evident that even the first and most 
limited operation of such a war must affect the finances, as well 
as the general security of the British empire in India. 

45. The charges of war in Ceylon must be defrayed from 
Bengal. If the war should prove unfortunate in Ceylon, troops 
and every military resource must be supplied from Bengal. 
Even in the most favourable supposition, troops occupied in 
hostile operations within the island of Ceylon, (omitting all 
consideration of the fatality of the climate,) not only become 

(iheppiicable to any purposes of general defence on the Continent 
of India, but are withdrawn from the protection of the coasts 
and maritime forts of the island. The danger will be aggravated, 
if, at the same moment, the Company’s government shall be 
engaged in war upon the Continent of India, and shall be unable 
to supply troops for the support of a war in Ceylon, or for the 
defence br the forts and coasts of that island, deprived of the 
aid of its proper military establishments, 

46, In the event, therefore, of an existing war with France, 
Holland, or with any power capable of attacking Ceylon, the 
existence of an internal war in the island may convert that bul- 
wark of our Indian empire into a powerful instrument of offensive 


“ 


620 GOVERNOR-GENERAL ONLY SHOULD MAKE SUCH WARS. 


war in the hands of our enemies; and the consequences of a 
treaty concluded by a Governor of Ceylon within the limits of 
that island may endanger the whole fabric of this vast empire. 

47. The situation of the Governor-General under the circum- 
stances described will be duly appreciated by your Lordship. 
Ignorant of the approach or causes of war, he may be suddenly 
required to furnish resources for its prosecution at a moment 
when the exigencies of his own government, and the general 
service of the empire in India may preclude the possibility of 
affording adequate supplies either of money or men. Without 
power to direct the conduct, or to check the progress of 
hostilities, he may be compelled to abide their consequences, 
and to remain an inactive and helpless spectator of the perils of 
his own government, of the disgrace of the British name and 
arms, and possibly of his own reputation and honour, involved 
in the result of counsels and operations contradictory to his 
judgment, and exempt from his control. 

48. On the other hand, the Governor of Ceylon, by the 
practical operation of the present constitution of the island, 
exercises the sole prerogative of making war within that island, 
but must depend for the means of prosecuting war upon an 
authority which he cannot control. 

49. The legislature has vested in the Governor-General in 
council, subject to the control in England, the sole power of 
making war against any native state on the Continent of India. 
The same principle requires that the Governor-General in 
council should possess similar powers with regard to war in 
Ceylon. The wisdom of the legislature has provided an unity 
of executive power as the most effectual security for the British 
empire on the Continent of India, and has determined that the 
authority invested with the sole power of disposing of all the re- 
sources necessary for the prosecution of war, should also possess 
the sole power of making war, and that no provincial, local, or 
subordinate authority should be enabled to involve the gencral 
interests of the empire in the expense and hazard of hostilities. 

50. The same principles have been wiscly established with 
regard to the political powers of the Supreme Government on 
the Continent of India, and it has been determined by Par- 
liament that the Governor-General in council, who alone can 
be competent to form a comprehensive view of the interests 
affected by treaties or by wars with the native states, shall alone 
be competent to conclude treaties, or to make war. But under 


DANGEROUS ANOMALY OF THE PRESENT SYSTEM. 625 


the existing constitution of the island of Ceylon, your Lordship 
will observe that the order and system established for the 
general government of India are absolutely reversed. The 
Governor of Ceylon exercises the exclusive authority of con- 
cluding treaties, of making war, and of conducting military 
operations in the island, without the power of furnishing sup- 
plies, either of men or money, beyond the fixed establishment 
of the island; while the Governor-General in council is required 
to furnish supplies of men and money for the prosecution of 
war in Ceylon, without possessing any power of controlling the 
origin, conduct, or progress of the war, which may, however, 
deeply affect the security, interests and honour of the general 
government of India. 

51. The island of Ceylon, however, cannot be excluded from 
the general operation of these wise and salutary principles, 
unless it be also excluded from the general system of the 
British civil and military government in India. But that island 
has justly been termed the bulwark of our empire in India; 
it is therefore an essential part of our strength, and the due 
administration of its civil and military government is of the 
utmost importance to the defence of all our dominions in India. 
No sccurity for that administration can be so effectual as the 
uniform operation of the same authority which has been ex- 
tended over every other branch of the British possessions ; 
nor can an argument be adduced to prove the importance of 
Ccylon, which will not also demonstrate that its interests arc 
inscparably blended with those of the empire on the Continent, 
and that its government cannot be separated from the general 
control without hazard to the safety both of that empire, and 
of the island of Ceylon. 

52. The entire military establishment of India ought to be 
applicable to the general defence of the whole empire. The 
subdivision of that establishment, and the separation of our 
general strength into detachments subjected to independent 
commands, and appropriated to exclusive provincial and local 
services, must impair the gencral efficiency of our army, by 
destroying the unity of our military power, 

53. The same principle applics with equal force to the civil 
authority which, in an empire of such magnitude and extent, 
cannot be separated from the military power without the hazard 
of confusion. 

54. In reviewing these considerations, your Lordship will 


622 THE PROPOSED CHANGE WILL INCREASE THE DANGER. 


anticipate the regret and concern with which I have learned that 
not only the civil and military government of the island of 
Ceylon are to remain independent of the general superintend- 
ance and control of the Governor-General in council, but that 
the military establishments of that island are to be entirely 
disjoined from the chief command of the forces on the Continent 
of India; and that the allowances and other regulations respect- 
ing the military establishments are to be framed in Ceylon upon 
principles different from those established at any of the presi- 
dencies on the Continent of India. 

"55. The effect of this arrangement will entirely remove the 
military establishments at Ceylon from the superintendance and 
control of the general officer commanding in chief his Majesty’s 
and the Company’s forces in India. 

56. Every sentiment of public duty requires me to submit to 
your Lordship my most serious apprehension of the evil conse- 
quences which must result to the discipline and efficiency of the 
military forces in Ceylon, if exempted from the salutary control 
of the officer holding the chief command in India. 

57. Every facility should be afforded to the employment of 
the military establishment of Ceylon in purposes of general 
defence in India, whenever the exigency might require such 
an effort. But the entire separation of the civil and military 
authorities, and the difference of the regulations and consti- 
tutions of the separate military establishments will oppose diffi- 
culties nearly insuperable to the employment on the Continent 
of India of any part of the military establishment of Ceylon, and 
especially of his Majesty’s regiments. 

58. On the other hand, the same causes will oppose nearly 
equal difficulties to the employment of any portion of the military 
establishments of the Continent of India, and especially of his 
Majesty’s regiments in the island of Ceylon, in the event of any 
exigency which might demand a reinforcement of the troops on 
that island. The utmost confusion and disorder might be ex- 
pected to result from the conflicting authorities which must be 
mixed in conducting any military operations on that island, 
which should demand the aid of troops from the Continent of 
India. It might even become a question whether the Governor- 
General would be justified in exposing the army destined to 
defend the British empire in India, to be wasted in the prosecu- 
tion of petty wars in Ceylon (of which the cause and issue might 
be equally doubtful), under a system of management calculated 


USE OF CEYLON, AS AN OFFENSIVE DEPOT, IMPAIRED, 623 


to injure the discipline, to break the spirit, and to destroy the 
health of the troops. In the present state of the government 
and military command in Ceylon, it is doubtful whether the 
governments or commanders-in-chief on the Continent of India 
could retain any power over troops landed in Ceylon, and whe- 
ther those authorities could in any degree control the discipline 
or operations of their own troops within the island, or could limit 
the objects to which the services of such troops should be applied, 
or the time or mode of recalling such troops to the Continent of 
India, or of embarking them for distant service. 

59. The independence of the government and military com- 
mand of Ceylon would considerably embarrass the Government- 
General in the prosecution of operations against the remaining 
possessions of the French and Dutch to the eastward of the Cape 
of Good Hope, or in any eventual expedition against the Cape 
of Good Hope, or against Egypt, or against various places in 
these seas, or even in any transfer of troops from the several mari- 
time garrisons in India. Your Lordship is intimately acquainted 
with the advantages which the ports of Ceylon offer for assem- 
bling troops and ships, and for completing every necessary depét 
in the preparation of such services. The Government-General 
repeatcdly derived important advantages from the full command 
of those ports during the last war. In the present state of the 
island it would not be possible to use its ports and resources 
with similar effect. A considerable portion of the value of 
Ceylon in time of war is therefore actually suspended by the 
existing constitution of the government of that island. 

60. Your Lordship is apprized of the nature and extent of the 
military commission with which his Majesty was pleased to honour 
me under date of the 7th of August, 1800. By the terms of that 
commission I have hitherto understood that I possessed the 
general command over all the land forces serving in Ceylon, as 
well as over those serving in every other part of the East Indics. 

61, The terms of this commission secmed to enable me to 
issue orders to the troops in Ceylon, but the effect of such orders 
appeared to me to be entirely frustrated by the independent 
powers of the civil government of the island, which must be 
deemed paramount to any powers d@rived from a mcre military 
commission, unless that commission in express terms had super- 
seded the authority of the civil government. 

62, It would be extremely advantageous to furnish me with a 
distinct rule for my guidance with regard to the operation of my 


624 ONE HAND SHOULD WIELD THE STRENGTH OF THE EMPIRE. 


commission of Captain-general of the land forces over the island 
of Ceylon. 

63. The preceding statements will apprize your Lordship, that 
if Ceylon be entirely exempted from the control of the general 
civil and military government of India, and from the command of 
the commander-in-chief, and of the Captain-general, in India, the 
military establishments of that island cannot be deemed to consti- 
tute an efficient part of our general resources and power in India, 
excepting only to the extent to which these establishments may 
be sufficient to prevent the reduction of the island of Ceylon by the 
forces of any enemy, directed exclusively against that possession. 

64. Your Lordship’s judgment and experience in the affairs 
of this quarter of the globe will enable you to decide with facility, 
whether such a separation and subdivision of powers be pre- 
ferable to an union of all the British resources and strength in 
the hands of one supreme authority in India, possessing power 
. to apply every branch of the General Government to the defence 
of each part, or of the whole; and embracing in one compre- 
hensive view the general welfare and security of the empire, 
together with the particular and local interests of every province 
and possession. 

65. The despatch addressed to the President of the Board of 
Commissioners for the affairs of India, under date 10th May, 
1801, to which I had the honour to refer in the 37th paragraph 
of this letter, will convey to your Lordship my sentiments on 
this important question. These sentiments have been confirmed 
by the most mature and deliberate reflection, and by every event 
relating to the affairs of Ceylon which has reached my knowledge 
since the independence of that government has been established. 

66. In one respect only has my opinion undergone any degrce 
of variation. I am now convinced that the most effectual mode 
of rendering Ceylon a valuable addition to the British possessions 
in India, and an efficient augmentation of our military and political 
power would be to annex it, as a province directly to the Supreme 
Government of Bengal, with orders to the Governor-Gencral in 
Council to adopt such measures as might appear requisite for 
regulating the citil and military government and establishments 
of the island. Such an affangement would unite considerable 
advantages in point of economy, with a great improvement of 
the internal tranquillity, happiness, and prosperity of the island, 
and with a correspondent increase of its military strength. 

67. The government of Ceylon might either be formed upon 


CEYLON TO BE RULED FROM INDIA, AT PRESENT ,CRISIS. 625 


the model of that of any of the provinces subject to the im- 
mediate government of Bengal, and made the station of a Court 
of Circuit and Appeal, with establishments for the revenue and 
commerce of the island, and with one of his Majesty’s general 
officers upon the staff commanding the troops ; or the Govern- 
ment of Ceylon might be similar to that of Prince of Wales 
island, with a Lieutenant-Governor appointed from the civil 
service of Bengal. In this case also Ceylon should be the station 
of a general officer on the staff. 

68. I am satisfied that, under either of these arrangements, the 
island of Ceylon would become a more valuable and a more 
secure possession than it can prove under the present constitu- 
tion of its civil and military government. Your Lordship will 
receive these observations as a testimony of my anxicty for the 
safety and prosperity of this great empire. My opinions are 
founded upon mature deliberation and practical experience; and 
it appears to me to be my positive duty to submit them to your 
Lordship in the most direct and unequivocal language. I request 
your Lordship, however, to be assured that I offer my sentiments 
on the subject of this despatch to your judgment, with the 
highest sense of respect, and with a just impression of my obliga- 
' tions of obedience and subordination to your Lordship’s authority. 
Whatever may be his Majesty’s determination with regard to 
the government of Ceylon, my submission will be implicit and 
cheerful; and your Lordship may rely on my most earnest 
endcavours during the present crisis, and at every future exigency, 
to mitigate the evils which I have respectfully represented, by 
the most cordial exertion of a sinccre public zeal, and by an 
unfcigned spirit of effectual co-operation in the common cause. 

6y. I cannot however conclude this despatch without express- 
ing a most anxious hope, that if it should not be deemed 
expedient to change the entire constitution of the government of 
Ceylon, his Majesty may at Icast be advised immediately to 
issue the necessary orders for subjecting, during the existing 
war with France and Holland, the civil and military government 
of Ceylon (including the exercise of all political power, and the 
command of the army,) to the control of the Governor-Gencral 
in Council, of his Majesty’s Commander-in-Chicf, and of his 
Majesty’s Captain-Gencral of the land forces in the East Indics. 

970, Without such a control, I shall entertain serious appre- 
hensions, in the event of protracted war with France. Your 
Lordship however may be satisfied, that while IT shall continue 

ss 


626 WANTON AGGRESSION OF THE FRENCH IN EGYPT. 


to hold my present charge, no possible combination of difficulties 
or dangers can abate my zeal for the defence, security, and 
welfare of every part of the British possessions in India, for the 
defeat of every project of the enemy, and for the effectual prose- 
cution of every service connected with the execution of his 
Majesty’s commands, with the success of his Majesty’s arms, 
and with the honour and interests of our country in the present 
arduous contest. 
I have the honour to be, &c. WELLESLEY. 


6. RED SEA EXPEDITION. 


92. To the Shereef of Mecca, the Imaum of Senna, and the 
Sultaun of Aden. 


Summons to join us in expelling the French from Egypt. 


Fort William, roth March, 1801. 

The friendship and harmony which during a long course of 
years has firmly subsisted between the Sublime Porte and his 
Britannic Majesty, is well known to you; that friendship has 
been still more closely cemented by the faithless conduct of the 
French towards the Ottoman Porte; the French are now become 
the common enemy of both states. That perfidious people, dis- 
regarding all the obligations of friendship and the stipulations of 
treaty have sent forth their armies to invade the pcaccful pro- 
vinces of Egypt, the acknowledged territory of the Ottoman 
Porte; without urging the slightest pretext to justify this out- 
rage, but on the contrary professing sentiments of perfect fricnd- 
ship and regard, these disturbers of the peace of nations have 
carried war and desolation into the most fruitful provinces of 
the empire, the venerated sanctuary of the Mahomedan faith ; 
they have attempted to establish their authority upon the ruins 
of your religion; they have now uncquivocally declared their 
resolution to maintain by forcé what they have acquired by the 
violation of every principle of public faith, and of every maxim 
of civil and religious: obligation. 

I entertain too high an opinion of your attachment to the 
interests and independence of the parent state, and of your zeal 
for the support of the religion which you revere, to believe that 
you can have witnessed without indignation and alarm, this 
unexampled instance of the inordinate ambition and perfidious 
conduct of the French nation. 


LET NOT THEIR FALSE WORDS SEDUCE YOU, 627 


I am persuaded you cannot view with unconcern the ambitious 
and encroaching spirit of the French nation which, unresisted, 
must inevitably complete the downfall of the Mahomedan autho- 
rity, not only in Egypt, but in all the neighbouring territories, 
and must establish the supremacy of the French power in the 
most sacred seats of the Mahomedan religion. 

It has been the uniform policy of the French to endeavour to 
disarm the resentment of the people, whose country they have 
invaded, by professing the most amicable intentions, and by pre- 
tending that the sole motive of their actions is to mitigate the 
tyranny of oppressive governments, to establish the independ- 
ence of oppressed nations, and to secure to mankind the full 
enjoyment of civil and rcligious rights. By these insidious arts, 
the French have succeeded in reducing: to their absolute power 
many of the states of Europe, which they have invaded and 
ravaged, without the slightest pretext or provocation. 

They have employed the same means to reconcile the inhabit- 
ants of Egypt to thcir unprovoked violence and unjust usurpa- 
tion, and they will endcavour to practice the same perfidious 
policy for the purpose of subjugating the remaining dependencies 
of the Ottoman empire in Arabia. 

They will labour to impress you with a belief of their 
amicable disposition, and of their regard for the sanctity of 
your religion ; under the pretence of establishing your independ- 
ence, they will endcavour to subvert your government, and to 
erect their tyrannous misrule upon its ruins. 

With the most friendly solicitudc, I warn you to take 
example from the unhappy fate of other states, and to beware 
of yiclding to the insidious professions of a nation, which has 
forfeited all pretensions to credit by a systematic contempt 
of the obligations of public faith, and of the cstablished law 
of nations, especially by their unprovoked and unjustifiable 
invasion of Egypt. 

You have no other security -for the preservation of your 
independence, and for the maintenance of your rights, than a 
determination to resist the force, and to frustrate the frauds of 
the French nation. 

You are called upon, thercfore, by every motive of interest 
and of sclf-preservation, by every principle of national honour 
and religious attachment, to unite your efforts with the combined 
excrtions of the British power, and of the Ottoman state, for the 
expulsion of the French from Egypt. A formidable army 

$s2 


628 BUT HELP US AGAINST OUR COMMON ENEMY. 


of Turkish troops is already acting with vigour, for the purpose 
of dispossessing the French of their usurped authority in Egypt, 
and a numerous body of British troops now co-operates in Egypt 
with the army of the Porte, in effecting the expulsion of the 
French from Egypt. 

With a view to second the operations of this combined army, 
I have detached a considerable force of European and native 
troops from India, to unite in a joint effort for the expulsion of 
the common enemy. This measure while it favours the success 
of the operations to be carried on from the side of Syria and the 
Mediterranean, is calculated to provide for the security of the 
Mahomedan possessions, on the Arabian side of the Red Sea. 

As the existence of the Mahomedan dominion in Arabia, and 
the interests of the Mahomedan religion are obviously concerned 
in the expulsion of the French, I cannot doubt that you will 
employ all the resources of your country, and the influence of 
your authority in promoting the success of the projected enter- 
prize; Iam the more induced to rely upon your exertions by 
the report which has been made to me by Captain Wilson, and 
by Lieutenant-Colonel Murray, (who were deputed under my 
orders to the Red Sea,) of the friendly disposition which you 
entertain towards the British nation. 

I trust you will employ every effort to procure and to facilitate 
the despatch of provisions, and of stores to the troops employed 
in the Red Sea, that you will furnish a reinforcement of the 
troops of your country to act with the British army, and that 
you will encourage the several chiefs and states in Arabia, and 
in Egypt, to make common cause against the common enemy of 
your nation, and of the British power. 

Major-General Baird the commandcr-in-chief of the Indian 
forces, or a proper person deputed by him, will have the honour 
to deliver to you this Ictter, and will present to you a few articles, 
the produce of Europe, and of this country, as a token of my 
friendship and regard. 

I request your favourable attention to the suggestions and 
applications which may be made on my part for your assistance 
‘in promoting the object of the expedition. 

For the rest, believe me anxious for accounts of your welfare &c. 

WELLESLEY. 
(A true Copy.) N. B. Epmonsrong, 
Secretary to the Government. 


SCINDIAH AND PERRON USED THE EMPEROR’S NAME, 629 


7. THE EMPEROR. 


93. The Governor-General in Council to the Secret Committee 
of the Honourable the Court of Directors. 


Danger of the French availing themselves of the Imperial preten- 
sions, Importance of placing Shah Allum and his family under 
British protection. 

(Extract) 
Fort William, 13th July, 1804. 

Honourable Sirs, 

67. Your honourable Committee is aware that the late 
Mahajce Scindiah, after having rescued the unfortunate repre- 
sentative of the house of Timour from the sanguinary violence 
of Gholaum Kaudir, obtained from his Majesty the grant of the 
office of Vakeel ool Mutluck, or executive prime minister of the 
Moghul Empire, for his Highness the Peishwa, and was hitself 
appointed to execute the functions of that office under the title 
of deputy, and that Dowlut Rao Scindiah succeeded to the 
office of deputy Vakeel ool Mutluck, and to the consequent 
control which his predecessor had established over the person 
and family of the aged and unhappy monarch of Delhi. By 
successful intrigue, M. Perron obtained the office of commandant 
of the fortress of Delhi, which is the residence of the royal 
family, and thus secured the possession of the person and of the 
nominal authority of the Empcror. 

68. Notwithstanding his Majesty’s total deprivation of real 
power, dominion, and authority, almost every state and every 
class of people in India continue to acknowledge his nominal 
sovercignty. The current coin of every established power is 
struck in the name of Shah Aulum. Princes and persons of the 
highest rank and family still bear the titles, and display the 
insignia of rank which they or their ancestors derived from the 
throne of Delhi, under the acknowledged authority of Shah 
Aulum, and his Majesty is still considered to be the only 
legitimate fountain of similar honours, 

69. The pride of the numcrous class of Mussulmans in 
India is gratified by a recognition of the nominal authority 
of the illustrious representative of the house of Timour over the 
territorics which once constituted the extensive and powerful 
empire of the Moghul, and the Mussulmans are still disposed to 
acknowledge the lIcgitimacy of pretensions or demands, osten- 
sibly proceeding from the authority of the imperial mandate. 


630 DANGER OF FRENCH WIELDING IT AGAINST US. 


70. Under these circumstances, the person and authority of 
his Majesty Shah Aulum might form a dangerous instrument 
in the hands of any state possessing sufficient power, energy, 
and judgment, to employ it, in prosecuting views of aggrandize- 
ment and ambition. 

71. The Moghul has never been an important or dangerous 
instrument in the hands of the Mahrattas, but the augmentation 
of M. Perron’s influence and power and the growth of a French 
interest in Hindostan, had given a new aspect to the condition 
of the Moghul, and that unfortunate Prince might have become 
a powerful aid to the cause of France in India, under the 
direction of French agents. 

72. The views with which the Government of France prepared 
to resume its possessions in India under the provisions of the 
treaty of Amiens, were unequivocally manifested by the extent 
and nature of the staff and equipments which accompanied the 
officer appointed to exercise the chief authority over all the 
restored possessions of the French in this country, and additional 
demonstrations of those views have appeared since the renewal 
of the war with France. No doubt remained that it was the 
intention of the Government of France after the conclusion of 
peace, to establish on the foundation of her possessions in India 
a political and military state, and to strengthen and augment it 
by every practicable connection with the native states of India, 
and by every art of indefatigable intrigue and systematic 
ambition. The system of introducing French adventurers into 
the armies of the native states, for the improvement of their 
discipline and efficiency, had been found to afford the readicst 
and most effectual means of establishing the influence and 
authority of the French in the government of those states, and 
of erecting an independent territorial and military power within 
the limits of a foreign dominion. The extension and improve- 
ment of this system during the continuance of peace, would 
undoubtedly have constituted a principal object of the attention 
of the Government of France in India, and adverting to the 
facilities which would be afforded to the views and projects of 
the French by the extent of territorial and military power and 
independence established under the direction of M. Perron in 
the north-west of Hindostan, it cannot be doubted that under 
the continuance of peace between his Majesty and France 
and between the- British Government and the Mahratta states, 
the -progress of French intrigue, and the aggrandizement of 


1 


DOCUMENTARY PROOF OF THIS DESIGN. - 631 


the French power in India, would have been most rapid and 
dangerous to our security. In the prosecution of these views, 
the French would manifestly have derived essential aid from 
the possession of the person and family of tht Emperor Shah 
Aulum. The name of that monarch would have been employed 
to justify exaction, violence and encroachment, and under the 
plea of restoring his Majesty to his hereditary dominion, the 
power of France in India might have been directed to the 
subversion of every state, and to the appropriation of every 
territory unprotected by alliance with the British nation. The 
Emperor might have been compelled to constitute the territorial 
possessions of France in India an independent sovereignty, and 
under the plea of possessing sovercign authority, the proceedings 
of the Government of France in India might have proved in the 
highest degree injurious to the interests and sccurity of the 
British Empire in this quarter of the globe. 

73. If any doubt could be entertained of the views of the 
French in this respect, that doubt would be removed by the 
tenor of documents obtained at Pondicherry and Calcutta, and 
transmitted by the Governor-General to the Right Honourable 
Lord Hobart, of which copies are now annexed to this 
despatch. 

74. With a view however to submit to your hon. Committee’s 
immediate and particular notice a distinct proof of the projects 
in the contemplation of the Government of France with respect 
to the Emperor Shah Aulum, the Governor-General in Council 
deems it advisable to insert in this place a translation of an 
extract from one of the documents to which the preceding 
paragraph refers, 

75. That document is entitled a Memorial on the present 
importance of India, and on the most ‘ efficacious means of 
re-cstablishing the French nation in its ancient splendour in 
that country, 

76. That document was obtained at Pondicherry from a 
French officer, named Le Febre, who accompanicd Gencral 
Decaen to India. ‘Such has been the treatment reccived from 
a company of merchant adventurers by the Emperor of Hin- 
dostan, the sole branch of the illustrious house of Timour, so 
revered throughout the East, that his sovereignty is universally 
acknowledged although his power is no more, and the English 
Company derived its own constitutional power from his infinite 
goodness. It is evident that Shah Aulum ought to be the 


632 HOW THE DESIGN IS TO BE FRUSTRATED. 


undisputed sovereign of the Moghul Empire, as the great grand- 
son of Aurung Zebe, the tenth succession in a direct line from 
Tamerlane. This great question with respect to the sovereignty 
of the Empire being decided, it remains to consider whether it 
is not possible that the branches of this unfortunate family may 
find at some time protectors, who shall assert their sacred rights 
and break their ignominious chains. It will be then that a 
mutual alliance, and a judicious union of powers shall secure the 
permanent sovereignty of the Emperor, and render his imme- 
diate subjects, as well as his tributaries, happy in the enjoyment 
of personal security, and of that wealth which springs from 
peace, agriculture and a free trade. The English Company, by 
its ignominious treatment of the great Moghul, has forfcited its 
rights as dewan and treasurer of the Empire; the Nabobs of 
Oude and of Bengal are equally criminal, because they have 
acted as traitors towards their lawful sovereign: thus the 
Emperor of Delhi has a real and indisputable right to transmit 
to whomsoever he may please to select, the sovereignty of his 
dominions, as well as the arrears due to him from the English. 
These arrears of the tribute of 26 lacs of rupces, promised by 
the Company, with the interest of the country added, will 
amount at this present time to four hundred and fifty-two 
millions tournois, a sum which greatly exceeds the value of the 
Company’s moveable capital,’ 

77. The preceding observations may serve to illustrate the 
importance of placing the person, family and nominal authority, 
of his Majesty Shah Aulum under the protection of the British 
Government, and the accomplishment of that arrangement was 
accordingly considered by the Governor-General to be a prin- 
cipal object, though not a causc of the war, and an indispensable 
‘condition of the peace. 

78. Independently of the considcrations above stated, ad- 
verting to the degree of veneration with which the illustrious 
‘descendant of Timour is regarded by all classes of people in 
India, and especially by the class of Mussulmans, and to the 
state of indignity and miscry to which that unfortunate monarch 
had been reduced under the oppressive control of the Mahrattas 
and the French, the Governor-General in Council considered 
among the most important political benefits of that arrange- 
ment, the reputation which the British name would acquire 
by affording an honourable and tranquil asylum to the fallen 
dignity and declining age of the King of Delhi, and by sccuring 


WE DO NOT MEAN TO RULE THROUGH THE EMPEROR. 633 


the means of comfort to his Majesty’s numerous and distressed 
family. 
We have the honour to be, 
Honourable Sirs, 
Your most faithful humble servants, 
WELLESLEY. 
G. H. BARLow. 
G. Upny. 


94, The Governor-General in Council to the Secret Committee 
of the Honourable the Court of Directors. 
Establishment of Shah Allum as titular King of Delhi. 
(Extract.) 

Honourable Sirs, Fort William, June 2, 1808. 

The Governor-General in Council now submits to your hon- 
ourable Committce the arrangement which has been adopted by 
this government for the purpose of providing for the future main- 
tenance of his Majesty Shah Allum and the Royal family, and 
for the general settlement of his Majesty’s affairs, and the 
principles upon which that arrangement is founded. 

It has never been in the contemplation of this government 
to derive from the charge of protecting and supporting his 
Majesty, the privilege of employing the Royal prerogative, as 
an instrument of establishing any control or ascendancy over 
the states and chieftains of India, or of asserting on the part of 
his Majesty any of the claims which in his capacity of Emperor 
of Hindostan his Majesty may be considered to possess upon 
the provinces originally composing the Moghul empire. The 
benefits which the Governor-General in Council expected to 
derive from placing the King of Delhi and the Royal family 
under the protection of the British Government are to be traced 
in the statements contained in our despatch to your honourable 
Committee of the 13th of July 1804, relative to the evils and 
embarrassments to which the British power might have been 
exposed by the prosecution of claims and pretensions on the 
part of the Mahrattas, or of the French, in the name and under 
the authority of his Majesty Shah Allum, if the person and 
family of that unhappy monarch had continued under the 
custody and control of those powers, and especially of the 
French. With refcrence to this subject, the Governor-General 
in Council has the honour to refer your honourable Committce 
to the content8 of the enclosure of our despatch of the 1 3th 


634 SHAH ALLUM TO BE A PROTECTED DEPENDENT PRINCE. 


of July 1804, marked A., and to the 73d paragraph of that 
despatch, in proof of the actual existence of a project for the 
subversion of the British empire in India, founded principally 
upon the restoration of the authority of the Emperor Shah 
Allum, under the control and direction of the agents of France. 
The difficulty of every project of that nature has been con- 
siderably increased by the events which have placed the throne 
of Delhi under the protection of the honourable Company. The 
Governor-General in Council further contemplated the advan- 
tages of reputation which the British Government might be 
expected to derive from the substitution of a system of lenient 
protection, accompanied by a liberal provision for the ease, 
dignity, and comfort of the aged monarch and his distressed 
family, in the room of that oppressive control and that degraded 
condition of poverty, distress, and insult, under which the un- 
happy representative of the house of Timur and his numerous 
family had so long laboured. 

Regulated by these principles and views, the attention of the 
British Government has been dirccted cxclusively to the object 
of forming such an arrangement for the future support of the 
King and the Royal family as might sccure to them the enjoy- 
ment of every reasonable comfort and convenience, and every 
practicable degree of external state and dignity compatible with 
the extent of our resources, and with the condition of dependence 
in which his Majesty and the Royal family must necessarily be 
placed with relation to the British power. In cxtending to the 
Royal family the benefits of the British protection, no obligation 
was imposed upon us to consider the rights and claims of his 
Majesty Shah Allum as Emperor of Hindostan, and the Go- 
vernor-General has deemed it equally unnccessary and inex- 
pedient to combine with the intendcd provision for his Majesty 
and his household, the consideration of any question connected 
with the future exercise of the imperial prerogative and authority. 

The Governor-General in Council has determined to adopt 
an arrangement upon the basis of the following provisions. 
That a specified portion of the territories in the vicinity of Delhi, 
situated on the right bank of the Jumna should be assigned in 
part of the provision for the maintcnance of the Royal family. 
That those lands should remain under the charge of the Resident 
at Delhi, and that the revenue should be collected, and justice 
should be administered in the name of his Majesty Shah Allum, 
under regulations to be fixed by the British Government. That 


ESTABLISHMENT PROPOSED FOR THE KING OF DELHI, 635 


his Majesty should be permitted to appoint a Dewan and other 
inferior officers to attend at the office of collector, for the purpose 
of ascertaining and reporting to his Majesty the amount of the 
revenues which should be received and the charges of collection, 
and of satisfying his Majesty’s mind that no part of the produce 
of the assigned territory was mis-appropriated. That two courts 
of justice should be established for the administration of civil 
and criminal justice, according to the Mahomedan law, to the 
inhabitants of the city of Delhi, and of the assigned territory. 
That no sentences of the criminal courts extending to death 
should be carried into execution without the express sanction 
of his Majesty, to whom the proceedings in all trials of this 
description should be reported, and that sentences of mutilation 
should be commuted. 7 

That to provide for the immediate wants of his Majesty, and 
the royal household, the following sums should be paid monthly 
in money, from the treasury of the Resident at Delhi :—to his 
Majesty for his private expences, 60,000 sicca rupecs; to the 
heir apparent, exclusive of certain Jagheers, 10,000 do.; toa 
favourite son of his Majesty, named Mirza Izzut Buksh, 5,000 
do.; to two other sons of his Majesty, 1,500 do.; to his Majesty's 
fifty younger sons and daughters, 10,000 do. ; to Shah Newauze 
Khan, his Majesty’s Treasurer, 2,500 do. ; to Syud Rezzee Khan, 
British Agent at his Majesty’s court, and related to his Majesty 
by marriage, 1,000 do.—Total per mensem, 90,000 sicca rupees. 

That if the produce of the revenue of the assigned territory 
should hereafter admit of it, the monthly sum to be advanced to 
his Majesty for his private expences might be increased to one 
lac of rupees, 

That in addition to the sums specified, the sum of 10,000 
rupees should annually be paid to his Majesty on certain festivals, 
agreeably to ancient usage. 

The Governor-General in Council deemed the arrangement 
proposed by the Resident at Delhi for the establishment of a 
military force for the protection of the assigned territory and 
of the north-western fronticr of our possessions in Hindostan, to 
be judicious, and accordingly resolved to confirm those arrange- 
ments, with certain modifications calculated to afford a provision 
for part of the irregular force in the service of the British Govern- 
ment, from the expence of which it was an object of the British 
Government to be relieved, and also for a proportion of the 
European officers heretofore in the service of Dowlut Rao 


636 THIS PLAN WILL BE WELCOME TO HIM, AND THE NATIVES. 


Scindiah, who quitted that service under the proclamation of the 
Governor-General in Council of the 29th August 1803. 

On the basis of this‘plan of arrangement detailed instruc- 
tions were issued to the Resident at Delhi, under the date the 
23d May, with orders to carry it into effect, with the least 
practicable delay. 

The Governor-General in Council entertains a confident ex- 
pectation that the proposed arrangement and provision will be 
satisfactory to his Majesty, and will be considered throughout 
all the states of India to be consistent with the acknowledged 
justice, liberality, and benevolence of the British Government. 

The Governor-General in Council also confidently trusts that 
the proposed arrangement will be sanctioned by the approbation 
of your honourable Committee, and of the honourable the Court 
of Directors. 

We have the honour to be, 
Honourable Sirs, 
Your most faithful humble servants, 
WELLESLEY. 
G. H. BARLOw. 
G. UDNY. 


= ee 


VII. MISCELLANEOUS DESPATCIIES. 


95. The Right Hon. H. Dundas to the Earl of Mornington. 


Foreign Politics. Relations of Anglo-Indian Government to the 
Nizam, Zemaun Shah, the Mahrattas, and Tippoo. 


Wimbledon, 18th March, 1799. 

[Reccived sth Aug. 1799.] 
My dear Lord, 

As the ships at present despatched are under orders to sail, 
it deprives me of the opportunity of writing to you upon the 
important subjects treated of in your letters, lately arrived over- 
land. These letters are so voluminous that they are not yet 
decyphered ; and from what {s reported to me as to the progress 
made in decyphering, I have great doubts if these despatches 
will be ready to be brought under my view before the ships 
actually sail. From your general Ietter to the Secret Com- 
mittee, I perceive that the subjects of those undecyphered 


APPROVAL OF THE TREATY WITH THE NIZAM, 637 


papers are of a very interesting nature, and your Lordship may 
be assured of hearing from me by the first opportunity after 
IT have considered them. 

It is my intention, in my present letter, to advert to some 
of the general topics to which you have referred in your letter 
of an earlier date, and the subject of which I may not have 
exhausted in any former communication, 

It is impossible for me not to begin with noticing the letter 
recently received, enclosing the Treaty you have made with the 
Nizam. ‘Your Lordship has long before this time anticipated 
the satisfaction I have derived from that transaction, which has 
been completed in so masterly and effectual a manner. Long 
before this, I trust, it has been carried into final execution. 
I have long felt uneasy from the circumstance of the French 
force in the service of the Nizam; and it was, perhaps, the 
circumstance of all others which gave me the most uneasiness, 
when I became satisfied that the powerful armaments under 
Buonaparte were destined for Egypt, as his best road for the 
annoyance of our Indian possessions. Your Treaty with the 
Nizam effectually puts an end to every alarm upon that part 
of the business, and whether you consider it negatively as 
removing the French force from our neighbourhood, or positively 
in respect of the additional strength it affords to ourselves and 
the aid it gives to our finances, it is a transaction which tells 
in our favour in a varicty of ways, and was well worth accom- 
plishing at any risk, even if the Mahratta powers had been 
dissatisfied with it. Ido not, however, see any real foundation 
for their being so, and I trust it will not be long before I shall 
hear that your Lordship has been able, by proper excrtions 
with the Mahrattas, to connect them with the Nizam and us 
still more closcly upon the principles of a common intcrest of 
defensive alliance against Tippoo, and every power in alliance 
with France. 

Upon the subject of the Rajah of Berar, it is only necessary 
for me to say, that in so far as my gencral knowledge and 
recollection of Indian affairs enable me at present to decide, it 
appears to me that he has always been friendly to the British 
interests in India; and I should conceive that in no respect & 
close connection with him can be prejudicial to our defensive 
system, and the desire of preserving the general peace of India, 
which, if it can be observed with cares certainly our wisest 
system ; and as it is most likely to be distarbed by the hostility 


638 HOW TO OBVIATE ZEMAUN SHAH’S AGGRESSION. 


of Tippoo, it of course follows that every connection which 
strengthens our power against him must be ultimately beneficial 
to the Indian interests of Great Britain. This naturally leads 
me to advert to the views of Zemaun Shah, and the situation 
of Scindia as connected with that subject, 

It was some time ago the fashion, in my opinion, too much 
to undervalue the menaces of Zemaun Shah respecting India, 
-but I think that opinion is gradually wearing away as it ought 
‘to do. | You are more in the way of collecting accurate infor- 
mation than J am; but if the French were ever to obtain such 
a footing as to enable them seriously to distress us, I have long 
thought that it would be a material point of the plan to obtain 
the co-operation of Zemaun Shah. And even if Tippoo himself, 
from any misguided ambition, should be induced to undertake 
any extensive project against us, I must always believe that his 
best endeavours would be used to obtain the assistance of 
Zemaun Shah. I take it for granted, Mr. Jones, at Bagdad, 
transmits regularly to India the information his situation there 
enables him to collect; but in case, by any accident it should 
not have reached you, I herewith send you a copy of the infor- 
mation! recently received from him on the subject of Zemaun 
Shah, and comparing it with others, it strongly confirms me in 
the belief of his hostile designs, and that we ought to keep a 
very watchful eye upon the motions of that Prince, whose 
talents, military force, and pecuniary resources, afford to him 
the means of being a formidable opponent. It would be too 
strong for me to state, that under no given circumstances our 
own forces were to go beyond our own provinces and the terri- 
tories of the Vizier; but the temptation must be very great, and 
the advantage very evident, to induce us to do so. The means 
of resisting any intended aggression on the part of Zcemaun 
Shah appear to be the following. First, to encourage and keep 
up those distractions and animositics within his own territories, 
the apprehensions of which must always, to a certain degree, 
keep him in a state of alarm, and which obliged him to return 
rapidly from his last attempt to invade Hindostan. Secondly, 
every cncouragement should be given to the Sciks and Rajpoot 
tribes to harrass and distress him in his progress. But lastly, 


1 *The information’ alluded to by Mr. Dundas not having been 
received in time will be forwarded under a separate cover. 
W. Cangte.’ 


MAHRATTAS TO BE INCLUDED IN DEFENSIVE ALLIANCE, 639 


what of all others appears most material is, upon the ground of 
his own danger, to engage Scindia cordially in that defensive 
system of alliance, which it is our interest, by every means, to 
strengthen and confirm, with a view to the security of our Indian 
empire. It is perfectly obvious, that if ever Zemaun Shah gains 
a material footing in Hindostan, Scindia and his power must 
fall the first sacrifice to his ambition. 

Under these circumstances I do not think your Lordship can 
do a more essential service to the interests of your country in 
India than by using your best endeavours to soothe and heal 
those jarring animosities which annihilate the force of the 
Government of Poonah, and render them an easy prey to the 
restless ambition either of Tippoo Sultaun or of Zemaun Shah. 
Nothing can more effectually tend to secure this object than 
persuading Scindia to abandon that system of wickedness, 
perfidy, and intrigue, which he is now pursuing at Poonah, and 
engaging him to return to the care and protection of his own 
territorics which require his best attention, and must ultimately 
tend to gratify his ambition, and consolidate his power, more 
than any advantages he can hope to attain by aiming at more 
remote or distant objects of ambition. I cannot more strongly 
convey to your Lordship the importance I aftach to the sug- 
gestions I have laid before you, than by stating it as my opinion, 
that if you are able to consolidate in one defensive system the 
Nizam’s power, the Mahratta power, and the power of Great 
Britain in India, we have nothing to fear in that quarter of the 
globe from any combinations that can be formed against us. 

Upon the subject of Tippoo Sultaun I have little to say in 
this letter, further than to express my approbation of the line 
of conduct you have pursued relative to that restless Prince. 
You will have secn long before this, from the letter I wrote to 
you in the month of June last, how much the principles upon 
which you have acted correspond with the suggestions I laid 
before you at that time,(when the object of Buonaparte’s expe- 
dition was not ascertained, but which for the reasons I then 
gave, I was satisfied was intended for the prosecution of those 
objects which afterwards proved to be the case. The first 
thought which you scem to have cntertained, viz., that of 
attacking Tippoo in consequence of his conduct at Mauritius, 
was a very natural fecling, and there can be no doubt that the 
Ambassadors he sent there, and the alliance he appears to have 
formed upon principles hostile to us, would have fully justified 


640 ADVANTAGES OF POSTPONING WAR WITH TIPPOO. 


you in any measures you might have thought proper to adopt. 
His conduct was tantamount to a declaration of war against us, 
but still I think you judged well in not bringing it to that 
extremity. By the line of conduct you have pursued towards 
him, you have asserted the pride and honour of the British 
name, which must never for a moment be let down; but you 
have done it in a manner to enable you to review, deliberately, 
your resources, and to arrange your force in such a manner as 
will enable you to act with effect, if the humility of his acknow- 
ledgments is not adequate to what our power and the justice of 
our cause entitle us to demand. By this delay, likewise, you 
have accomplished the important point of strengthening the 
connexion with the Nizam, and of disbanding that pernicious 
French force which had grown up within his territory. Besides 
this you have received the additional confidence naturally 
resulting from the military force which has been sent to you 
from this country and from the Cape, and I likewise trust that 
the bullion which has been sent from this country has reached 
you before this time, and has tended to enliven your circulation 
and resources. It shall not be my fault if much more is not 
done in the same line in the course of the present season, but 
I do not enlarge upon that subject at present, as I will have 
occasion to advert to it in a letter upon the trade and finances 
of India, which I intend to write to you time cnough I hope to 
go by the present conveyance. Neither has the delay been 
attended with any detriment to your affairs, 

It is unnecessary to trouble you with any details with regard 
to the situation of the French army in Egypt. Our information 
of what passes there is so slow and tedious, I trust that the 
means which have. been taken to supply you with intelligence 
from thence have kept you as well and early informed in India, 
if not more so than we are at home; but from what we have 
learnt from various quarters, I flatter myself Lord Nelson’s 
splendid victory, and the exertions of our flect in the Medi- 
terranean, leave us little reason to apprehend any danger at 
present to India from the French force which has landed in 
Egypt. I trust that army will find its grave in Egypt, and 
consequently as Tippoo must be well informed of those circum- 
stances, you will not find that his expectation of a French 
succour will add much pride or vigour to his communications 
with you. 

As your Lordship is perfectly familiar with the different 


GENERAL VIEIW OF OUR INDIAN DEFENSIVE POLICY. 641 


points of which I have treated in this letter, I have not thought 
it necessary to trouble you with minute details on each topic; 
but I flatter myself I have said enough to make you perfectly 
acquainted with my sentiments on those leading points of 
Indian policy. The result of the whole is, that our security 
rests, primarily, on our own reputation and power; but that in 
order to render our exertions efficient and permanent, it ought 
to be our unceasing care to kcep the power of the Nizam and 
of the whole branches of the Mahratta confederacy in a strict 
amity with us for the purpose of establishing an impregnable 
barrier against all Asiatic ambition, whether acting separately or 
in co-operation with European allies ; as an essential ingredient 
of this system, I have no hesitation in stating that your Lordship 
is warranted to consider the nourishing and maintaining any 
French force or French men, within any of their territories, as 
an insurmountable bar against any close connexion. with us. 

It still remains for me to state to you my opinion upon one 
or two separate points on which you desire to be advised. 

You desire to know what is meant by a considerable French 
force, which is the expression gencrally used in the instructions 
from home on the subject of Tippoo Sultaun receiving French 
force into his country. The application of the principle to the 
particular occasion must be Icft to the exercise of sound dis- 
cretion, but as a general principle, I have no hesitation in 
stating that we are entitled undcr the circumstances of the 
present times, to consider the admission of any French force 
into his army, be it greater or smaller, as dircct hostility to us. 

I remain, my dear Lord, 
your's very faithfully, 
HENRY DUNDAS. 


96. Tho Right Hon, Henry Dundas to the Earl of 
Mornington. 


‘Interior administration of our different settlements, Pengal, 
Oude, the Carnatic, Tanjore, the Northern Circars, The 
Malabar Coast. Indian Taxation. 


Whitehall, 2st March, 1799. 
[Received at Fort William, sth August, 1799-] 
My dear Lord, 

By this conveyance I have troubled your Lordship with a 
despatch on the gencral system of alliance, which we ought to 
pursue with a view to the sccurity of our Indian possessions, and 

Tt 


642 CAN WE IMPOSE FRESH TAXES IN INDIA? 


likewise with a despatch on the subject of our Indian finance 
and commerce. In the present letter, I wish to bring under your 
view a few observations on the interior administration of our 
different settlements. 

On the subject of Bengal, I have much satisfaction in feeling 
that I have occasion to say very little. The wise system adopted 
during Lord Cornwallis’s administration, and to which I make 
no doubt you will adhere, leaves me no reason to apprehend any 
real danger to the wealth and resources of the valuable provinces 
under your immediate administration. I think, for the last two 
years I have observed, that the arrears of land revenue were 
somewhat larger than they used to be; I trust this has been 
owing to some accident, and not to any defect in the system of 
permanent security given to the landowners of India. Among 
the many other important benefits expected to arise from that 
beneficent plan, a prominent one was the regularity in payment 
of the stipulated jumma, and nothing has ever occurred to me, or 
been stated to me, which had a tendency to lessen the prospect 
of that benefit resulting from it. I could not however, refrain 
from bringing the circumstance to which I have referred, imme- 
diately under your view. 

As we have limited the extent of land revenue in India, by the 
measure of a permanent settlement, it has sometimes occurred to 
me to reflect, that the principles which Iced to the adoption of 
that system, naturally opened a prospect of other sources of 
revenue, in so far as it entitled us to expect an incrcase of the 
wealth, industry and population of the country. Every circum- 
stance which has since happened, has led to the conviction that 
these effects have been produced by it. The encreasing produce 
of the revenue on salt, opiim and spiritous liquors, all tend to 
corroborate this observation. I wish therefore to direct your 
attention to consider, and report to me, how far in your opinion, 
there is, either in the articles | have mentioned, or in any others 
of a similar nature, any prospect of raising more revenue on 
articles of general consumption among the natives of India. 
This can never be attempted but with a perfect consideration to 
their happiness and content; and I am likewise aware that a 
people whose wants are very limited and simple, do not present 
to their Government the same various objects of taxation, which 
exist in other countries differently circumstanced. It appears 
however, to be a point worthy your consideration, if possible, at 
all times to insure a revenue in India, equal to all the exigencies, 


OUDE REFORMS SUGGESTED, DOUBLE GOVERNMENT BAD. 643 


not only of our expensive establishments, but for the payment 
of a tribute to this country, through the medium of a beneficial 
and encreasing commerce. 

The circumstance connected with the Government of Bengal, 
to which one can look with the least confidence is the situation 
of Oude. I trust the late arrangements made by Lord Teign- 
mouth, may enable your Lordship to give further improvement 
_ to this essential part of our system. I have nothing very minute 
to suggest; all I have to say, is comprehended under two 
general heads. The first is, a just and pure administration by 
the Vizier of his own country, in which is comprehended an 
accurate collection of his real revenues, and an economical ex- 
penditure of them. The sccond is, that he could be induced to 
keep up an efficient military cstablishment for the security of 
his own, and our frontier. This object never can be accomplished, 
but by dispersing his uscless rabble, and forming an army to 
be kept up and disciplined under our immediate superintend- 
ance. 

Respecting the affairs of the Coromandel coast, I had so full 
a communication with you before your departure, it is not neces- 
sary to add much more at present. I think for some time past 
the interior administration of affairs there, has considerably 
improved. Their revenues are encreasing, their estimates are 
made with more accuracy, and their accounts are kept much 
more regularly than they used to be; and I have a perfect 
reliance on the assiduity, talents and integrity of Lord Clive, 
that the improvement will be progressive. Our chief difficultics 
in the administration of the Carnatic, are, first-—the anomalous 
connection in which we stand with the Nabob of Arcot. Secondly, 
a similar inconvenience attending the Government of Tanjore. 
Thirdly, the insubordination and distractions so frequently 
prevalent in the northern Circars. 

The double government existing in the Carnatic has long 
been felt as a scrious calamity to that country. It enfecbles the 
natural resources of the country, and above all, tends to continue 
that system of intrigue and consequent corruption which has 
been imputed to the Madras Government so much more than to 
our other settlements, It is singular to remark, that the country 
of Oude is the other part of India, where the purity of the 
Company’s servants has been most suspected, and that the same 
circumstance of a double government has always been assigned 
as the cause. Consistently with our treatics with the Nabob of 

Tt2 


644 REMARKS ON TANFORE, CIRCARS, AND MALABAR. 


Arcot, we cannot at present materially meliorate his govern- 
ment, but must wait favourable opportunities, and embrace such 
means of conciliation and attention to him, as are most likely to 
accomplish this desirable object. We must lay our account with 
being at all times obstructed in our views, by that corruption and 
intrigue to which I have referred. Nothing will counteract it 
but a pure and steady government, acting instantancously 
against any of the Company’s servants, who may be detected in 
those practices. Lord Hobart’s administration was characterized 
by a very laudable spirit in this respect, and you cannot doubt, 
that the same purity and spirit will actuate the conduct of Lord 
Clive, who will have the additional advantage of the newly-estab- 
lished judicature to aid him in the punishment of those offenders. 
I have always thought, however much it has been the fashion to 
clamour against it, that the Supreme Judicature at Calcutta, has 
had very beneficial effects in preserving the purity of the scrvants 
under that presidency. 

The affairs of Tanjore are more simple in their nature, and 
less complicated in their administration. It is exposed in a 
certain degree, to the same inconvenicnces which have been in- 
jurious to the government of the Carnatic; but from the recent 
transactions which have taken place there, and from the feelings 
of gratitude which appear to operate on the mind of the Rajah, 
. I flatter myself he will be inclincd more and more, to listen to 
the admonitions of our government, to whose power and justice 
he is indebted for his situation. If those sentiments regulate his 
conduct, our part is simple and casy; we have nothing to ask 
of him, but a pure and virtuous administration of the affairs 
of his country, the effects of which will be cqually felt by him 
and us, in the respective intercsts we have in the prosperity of 
Tanjore. 

The northern Circars have certainly never produced to us 
those advantages which the extent of the country, and the fer- 
tility of the soil in many parts, entitle us to expect. I know not 
to what cause to attribute it, but the inhabitants of some of its 
higher parts seem to be in a state of very uncivilized socicty, 
and this can only be gradually removed by a steady, just and 
vigorous government. We must not too rapidly apply to that 
part of our possessions the same principles of government, which 
have been wisely applied to the more civilized Provinces of 
Bengal, I believe the same observations may to a considcyable 
degree be made, with regard to some parts of the Circars, that 


ADVANTAGES GAINED BY HYDERABAD TREATY. 645 


I shall immediately bring under your view, with regard to the 
Malabar Provinces. 

From the situation of the countries in our possession, on the 
Coast of Malabar, they are calculated to be either a great 
security, or a great annoyance to our power in India; and 
whether they shall be one or the other, depends much on the 
manner in which they are managed. 

I remain, my dear Lord, 
Your’s most faithfully, 
HENRY DuNDAS, 


97. The Earl of Mornington to the Right Honourable 
Henry Dundas. 


Foreign and internal politics. Chiefly in answer to the two last. 
Civil Service reform. Sudder Courts. Supreme Court. 
Also on Finances, and Commerce. 


Fort William, March gth, 1800. 
My dear Sir, : - 

Although.most of the points touched in your several de- 
spatches have alréady been anticipated, cither by my Ictters to 
you, by the communications which I trust you have reccived 
through Mr. Wellesley, or by my despatches to the Secret 
Committee and the Court of Directors, “L’propose in this letter 
to reply regularly to such of yout gohymunications as have not 
already been directly answered jbyrteg _ «7. 

HYDERABAD.—I reccived with “the ‘greatest satisfaction your 
approbation of the treaty of Hyderabad. Subsequent events 
have abundantly confirmed the justice of the expectations, which 
you formed upon the first view of that treaty. It was indeed 
the source of all our recent successes in India; and even if it has 
in any degree aggravated the characteristic jealousy of the 
Mahrattas, it has furnished ample compensation in establishing 
an impregnable barricr against their power. The system on 
which the treaty of Hyderabad was founded, would certainly he 
most effectually completed by the conclusion of a similar en- 
gagement at Poonah, and I am resolved never to lose sight of 
that most desirable object. 

The various instances in which the jealousy of the Mahratta 
State has lately been disclosed, are rather to be attributed tox 
peculiar character of that nation, and to the singular dis sition 


646 WE MAY BE ASKED TO INT'ERVENE IN MAHARASHTRA. 


of the present Peishwa, than to any formed aversion to a nearer 
connection with the British power. 

The influence of Scindia has also contributed to frustrate my 
proposed measures, because their necessary effect must have 
been to restore the Peishwa to a certain degrce of credit and 
power; and to reduce Scindia in the same proportion. I have 
no reason to believe that Scindia would be averse to a separate 
connection with us, but not perceiving any possible advantage 
which could arise from such a connection under all the circum- 
stances of the present moment, I have taken no steps to culti- 
vate it, while I have avoided any manifestation of an unfriendly 
disposition. 

The distractions of the Mahratta empire must continue to 
increase, until they shall be checked by forcign interference. 
No power in India excepting the British now possesses sufficient 
strength to interpose with effect in these dissentions ; and I shall 
not be surprised if ultimately the subsidiary force, which I am 
so anxious to establish at Poonah, should be required with equal 
anxiety by the Mahratta State, as the only means of restoring 
order, and of saving the whole of that country from plunder and 
desolation, 

Mr. Colebrooke has now resided several months at Nagpoor, 
and I have every reason to believe, that the Rajah of Berar will 
prove well inclined to support whatever plan the British Govern- 
ment may ultimately adopt with regard to the affairs of the 
Mahratta empire. 

With respect to the views of Zemaun Shah, the papers found 
in the palace at Seringapatam have completely justified your 
opinion of Tippoo’s disposition to obtain the assistance of that 
Prince ; and of Zemaun Shah’s inclination to afford it. 

For some time to come, I trust that Zemaun Shah will be too 
much occupied at home, to admit of turning his arms against 
Hindostan; and I am inclined to think that the encouragement 
of divisions in his own government{and of hostility between the 
contiguous State of Persia and his dominions, is the system of 
defence against Zemaun Shah on which it is most safe to rely 
under the present circumstances of affairs in India) 

The profligacy of Scindia’s character, the distracted state of 
‘his councils and armies, and the distress or rather ruin of his 
finances preclude the hope of effecting a secure or useful alliance 


th him. 
~ SER cotablishment of a subsidiary force at Poonah, would 


SHOULD AN INDIAN FORCE BE SENT TO EGYPT? 647 


compel Scindia to return to his own dominions; and in that 
event, it might not be difficult to convince him that his best 
security would consist in imitating the example of the Nizam and 
of the Peishwa; and in placing himself under the immediate 
protection of the British power. 

With respect to the general system of policy to be adopted by 
us in India in consequence of the conquest of Mysore, I shall 
review all the important considerations connected with that 
extensive question in a separate despatch, addressed by some 
future opportunity, either to you or to the Secret Committee. 

I conclude, that the power of the French in Egypt is either 

already extirpated, or that you will continue the war until that 
indispensable object shall be completely effected. Notwithstand- 
ing the present proud and commanding predominance of the 
‘British power in India, we cannot expect an uninterrupted con- 
tinuance of tranquillity while France shall be permitted to 
maintain a powerful establishment in Egypt. 
SSince I wrote the preceding paragraph, I have received de- 
spatches from Lord Elgin, dated the 22nd December, 1799, by 
which it appears that Kleber remains in Egypt with 15,000 men, 
and that Buonaparte is at the head of a new Government in 
France,4 Lord Elgin proposcs a powerful diversion from India, 
through the Red Sca, for the purpose of accelerating the evacua- 
tion of Egypt by the French; but aftcr a full discussion of this 
subject with Gencral Stuart, Iam satisfied that it would be an 
uscless waste of treasure and blood to attempt such an expedition 
on a large scale, unless the whole plan of co-operation from the 
Mcditerranean had becn previously concerted. Desultory opcra- 
tions against any places retained by the French on the shores 
of the Red Seca may be advantageous, they would neither be 
perilous, nor expensive. 

You are already apprized of my entire coincidence in your 
opinion, respecting the importance of Goa; and I trust that you 
will be enabled to give full effect to the measures which I have 
adopted for the purpose of rendcring that possession an addi- 
tional source of strength to the British Empire in India, I also 
consider the possession of Diu to be a most desirable object, 
particularly with a view to the coercion of the Piratical States on 
the north-western coast of the peninsula of India. 

FINANCES. — Notwithstanding the large import of bullion 
during the present season, the expences of the war, and the 
considerable amount of the 12 per cent. sccuritics, coming in 


648 FINANCES OF BENGAL AND MADRAS IMPROVED. 


course of payment within the current and succeeding year of 
account, have compelled me to continue the system of adding 
to the debt in India, in order to secure a considcrable com- 
mercial investment for the ensuing season. I have however, the 
satisfaction to assure you, that every symptom has concurred to 
confirm my opinion, that the debt in India is likely to become 
more manageable in every succeeding year. The loans which I 
have opened at this Presidency during the current year, have 
been made at a rate of interest much more favourable than any 
which has been raised since the ycar 1796, as will appear by the 
terms of the loans of this year. Although the second loan on 
the same terms is actually open, the state of the public securities 
is now— 
5th March, 1800. 
Buying. Selling. 


6 percent. . : » 1300 1400)},.. 

8 percent. . ‘ be  EBONG 680 p Discount: 
ro percent. . ; : . 1080 980 Premium. 
12 percent. . ; ‘ . 180 ae 


Having been at the corresponding period in the preceding year— 
5th March, 1799. 
Buying. _ Selling. 


6 percent. . : : . 24 80 25 80 

8 percent. . : ; . 14 80 15 80 Discount. 
iO per cent. : : : —— — 

12 percent, . . 020 o60 


(The distress for specie has gradually vanished, and private 
credit has proportionably been improved; and I have been 
enabled to send home with valuable cargoes every regular ship 
belonging to the Company in India, while on the other hand, I 
have employed the whole tonnage which the Port of Calcutta 
could furnish since the month of December, to carry to the Port 
of London, nearly the whole of the goods of individuals, which 
had been tendered for exportation previous to that month, over 
and akove the 3,000 tons which the Company is bound by law to 
aa 

The finances of the Government of Madras have improved in 
a still greater proportion than those of Bengal. At that Presi- 
dency they have opened a loan, under which they have been 
enabled to raise a large supply. The great augmentation of 
the resources of Fort St. George, under the subsidiary treaties 
of Hyderabad and Scringapatam, and the partition treaty of 


OUR ENLARGED EMPIRE LEAVES LITTLE SURPLUS. 649 


Mysore, together with the improvements in the revenues of 
Tanjore and of the country of the Polygars will render the 
finances of that Presidency an object of the highest considera- 
tion. It may also be expected that industry, population and 
manufacture, and all the sources of public and private credit will 
take a new spring in our possessions on the Peninsula of India, 
in consequence of our increased security in that quarter. 

To these causes of progressive prosperity, it is reasonable to 
add the benefits which cannot fail to accrue from the extension, 
to that part of our empire, of the system of judicature and revenue, 
under which these provinces have attaincd so eminent a degree 
of opulence and internal tranquillity. 

I trust that the 8 per cent. loan now opened in Bengal, will be 
rapidly filled, and will enable me to provide for all the services 
stated in my several estimates ; I expect hereafter to be able to 
borrow moncy at 8 per cent. under the former system of repay- 
ment of the public securities according to priority of date. 

Notwithstanding these favourable expectations, Iam of opinion, 
that the surplus revenue of India is not likely to afford any con- 
siderable or certain resource. The increasing magnitude of our 
empire in India, and the continual expansion of every branch of 
our numcrous and complicated interests, must preclude any con- 
siderable reduction of our permanent charges civil, military, or 
commercial. (More cannot be hoped from the utmost exertion 
of vigilance, integrity and ability in any persons to whom the 
government of this empire may hereafter be entrusted than to 
check, by a scasonable and diligent system of revision, that 
tendency to excess and abuse which is the inherent vice of all 
great establishments. On the other hand, it is my decided 
opinion, that the growing resources of India will keep pace with 
the demands upon them. 

With respect to the resource which you expect to derive in 
India from bills upon the East India Company under the plan 
of remittance, the prosperous state of public credit in Iengland 
and in India will co-operate to render that resource of little avail. 
The state of the public funds in England will diminish the 
desire of remitting private fortunes to England from India in 
proportion to the increase of the public prosperity at home, and 
the high degree of security which our Indian empire has acquired 
by the success of the late war against Tippoo Sultaun, has 
inspired so general a confidence in the stability of the British 
power in India, that individuals will think their capital equally 


650 DEFECTS OF THE COMPANY'S EXPORT SYSTEM. 


safe in India, where it will certainly be more productive than 
in England. 

These circumstances, added to the vast increase of the export 
of goods from India to England will probably detain much 
capital in this country, and retard the operation of any plan of 
remittance which could be devised. 

Private merchants, for commercial purposes, will always offer 
more advantageous terms than the Company; and in time of 
public prosperity the bills of individuals of undoubted capital 
will be received by many in preference to bills drawn on the 
Company on terms less favourable. 

The same causes will naturally tend to maintain, if not to 
increase the present high rate of exchange upon bills on England; 
and while the natural and current rate of exchange shall be so 
much higher (as it is at present) than that allowed by the plan of 
remittance through the Company, it is not to be expected, that 
individuals will resort to that plan to such an cxtent as shall 
furnish any important financial resource, 

COMMERCE.—That the export of British manufactures to India, 
under proper regulations, might be extended to the amount of a 
considerable resource, IJ entertain no doubt; but I must observe, 
that before such an effect can be expected an entire reform must 
take place in the conduct of the East India Company’s exports 
to India. 

The leading points which require minute and diligent care in 
the management of this branch of the Company’s affairs appear 
to me to be, first, that the goods should be of the first quality; 
secondly, that they should be invoiced at a reasonable and just 
price; and thirdly, that they should be assorted in a manner 
suitable to this market, and conformably to the indents sent 
from hence. 

Under the present system the quality of the goods is fre- 
quently defective ; for the two last years the invoice price has 
been considerably increased without any correspondent improve- 
ment in the quality of the goods, and the assortments have been 
injudicious and contrary to the indents sent from hence by 
those officers who are best acquainted with the nature of the 
market. 

As connected with this subject, in one point of view, I desire 
to call your particular attention to the defective and unservice- 

able state of the arms annually exported to India for the use of 
"our troops. This is a disgraccful.evil, and of a most pernicious 


CAUSES OF INEFFICIENCY UF THE CIVIL SERVICE, 651 


tendency. I am apprehensive that the whole system of the 
Company’s exports to India is rendered subservient to private 
interests at the expense of the public. 

Mr. Pitt’s Bill for the reduction of the duties upon imports 
from India has grievously disappointed the expectation of the 
commercial part of the community. The duty imposed by that 
bill upon the Sugars, particularly on the coarser sort, ts much 
TOO HIGH ; and the object of inviting the trade of India to the 
Port of London, will not, I fear, be effected by the general scale 
of duties adoptcd in that bill. 

INTERNAL ADMINISTRATION OF BENGAL.—The increasing 
arrears of the land revenue of Bengal occupied my attention 
immediately after my arrival in India. 

After full consideration I passed a law for the purpose of 
remedying the increasing evil! of accumulating balances. The 
beneficial effects of it have already been felt to so great an 
extent as to warrant a confident expectation that the stipulated 
income will hereafter be paid with great regularity. 

My judgment and experience coincide entirely with your 
opinion, that the system adopted by Lord Cornwallis has 
proved and must continue to prove a fruitful source of happi- 
ness, wealth, industry, and population to this flourishing country. 
That system, however, has still to encounter some avowed and 
many sccret enemics; nor have its benefits becn yet fully 
realized, it/ias not been carricd into execution with cordiality, 
zeal, and energy proportioncd to its merits; it has received no 
aid of collateral institutions calculated to furnish a supply of 
men properly qualified to fill the several stations of judicature 
and revenuc; nor has a due and impartial sclection been uni- 
formly made of the persons best qualificd in the actual state of 
the service to fill such stations as have progressively become 
vacant; nor has the administration of justice throughout the 
provinces been superintended with a sufficient degree of vigilance 
and care. 

T have nearly matured a plan with a view to these salutary 
objects. The principal measures on which it will be founded 
will be, first, the institution of a Court of Sudder Dewannee and 
Nizamut Adawlut distinct from the Council; but of which the 
Chief Justice shall be capable of sitting in Council, if appointed 
from home to a seat in Council. The province of this new Court 


' Regulation No. VII, 1799: 


652 JUDICIAL REFORM. COLLEGE FOR CIVILIANS. 


shall be, not only to receive and judge appcals, but also to super- 
intend the administration of justice and the general state of police 
in all the inferior courts, branches and departments of the 
judicial institutions. 

t is my intention to constitute this court of those persons who 
bore a principal share in framing the system so happily adopted 
by Lord Cornwallis. Their talents, integrity, and experience, as 
well as the peculiar propriety and dignity of their manners render 
them the fittest to hold this distinguished station, to which it is 
my intention to annex the highest rank which the law enables 
me to grant. } 

\Whe Chief Justice of this new court may hercafter become a 
member of the Council, in which event he will still continue to pre- 
side in the court. In the meanwhile I wish to be empowered by law 
to give a rank to the Chief Justice of the Sudder Dewannec and 
Nizamut Adawlut, which shall place him as nearly as possible on a 
level with the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Judicature. | 

and. The institution of a Collec or University at Calcutta in 
which the Writers shall be subject to the rules of collegiate 
discipline for the first two or three years subsequent to their 
arrival; and shall study the languages, history, laws, manners, 
and customs of India, the laws enacted by the Governor-General 
in Council, and such rudiments of the laws of England as are 
necessary to cnable the judges throughout these possessions to 
administer the laws of India in the spirit of the British con- 
stitutio 

3rd. propose to pass regulations subjecting all persons 
appointed to offices of the judicature or revenue to public 
examination in the several branches of knowledge requisite in 
their respective stations, before they shall be entitled to receive 
the emoluments of the office to which they may have been 
appointed 

4th. In the several stations of revenue and judicature through- 
out the provinces many public officers are to be found avowedly 
incompetent to the due discharge of their duties. LSome from 
ignorance, natural incapacity or fixed habits of indolence and 
dissipation, others from age and infirmity. Such persons have 
been suffered to retain thcir stations under the orders of the Court 
of Directors, prohibiting the grant of pensions of retreat to the civil 
service. This prohibition is contrary to true principles of cconomy. 
The inevitable operation of it has been to fix incapable persons 
in stations requiring efficiency; and the loss sustained by their 


HOW THE C. 8, IS TO BE MADE MORE EFFICIENT. 653 


negligencies or crrors infinitely overbalances the expense of pro- 
viding for them at the public charge. The application of this 
prohibition to persons who have grown old or infirm in the 
public service is illiberal and cruel, as well as impolitic. Qn the 
other hand it may, perhaps, be questioned whether those whose 
ignorance, natural inability, or other defects disqualify them for 
the public service, can be entitled to any compensation from the 
state which has already supported them ata considerable expense, 
under the presumption of their sufficiency to discharge the duties 
for which they receive Bee 

But viewing the actual state of the civil service at this Presi- 
dency, I know that many persons do not, and never will, render 
justice to the public in the stations which they now hold, although 
it would appear an act of great harshness and rigour to remove 
these persons, without making some provision for them) Their 
number is not very considerable, it bears no proportion to the 
mischicf occasioned by their cvil administration, and by the 
dangerous example which their conduct affords to the younger 
branches of the service. My intention, therefore, is (without 
waiting for orders from: home) to remove all persons of any of 
the descriptions to which I have adverted from efficient office; 
and to provide for them by adequate pensions for life, payable 
to their agents in India on the condition of their returning to 
England. he present allowance to the Company’s servants out 
of employment being payable only to such as reside in India 
would not answer the purpose proposed.| Among the servants 
now out of employment, but xesiding in Bengal, few, if any, are 
qualified for efficient office ;{the amount of the pensions to be 
paid under the new plan must bear a just proportion to the 
period of service as well as to the offices actually enjoyed at the 
period of removal: it will be for the Government at home to 
consider whether any permanent plan of pension for civil servants 
retiring from the service in India shall hereafter be adopted. 
The measure which I propose to carry into effect, is more 
immediately applicable to the actual state of the civil service in 
India; but the principles on which it is grounded may furnish 
the foundation of a permanent system, which shall for ever 
secure this Government against the evils of inefficiency, ignor- 
ance, and negligence in the subordinate branches of the executive 
administration. 

TAXATION.—The accounts which you will have received this 
year of the revenuc on salt will be highly satisfactory to you, and 


—_— 


654 SALT AND OPIUM REVENUE, CALCUTTA CUSTOMS. 


you will have observed with peculiar pleasure that the revenue 
arising from the sale of opium has been completely restored by 
the improved system of agency, by the extreme care applied to 
_ the manufacture of the drug, by the due proportion now preserved 
| between the quantity manufactured and the current demand, and 
I by the measure which I have uniformly carried into effect of 
publicly destroying all such opium as had been declared to be 
adulterated. The produce of the two last sales of opium (which 


“included the whole annual quantity for the last scason) has 


exceeded that of the most favourable sales of that drug ever 
experienced in Bengal, the nett profit to the Company on the 
two sales in December, 1799, and February, 1800, having 
amounted to more than 23 lacs of rupees (£287,500 sterling). 
U have little doubt that this branch of revenue will continue to 
flourish under the same judicious system, vigilantly administered. 
The public service is greatly indebted to Mr. Fleming, second 
Member of the Medical Board, for his careful inspection of the 
opium, as well as for his various suggestions by which the 
manufacture has becn placed under improved regulations, 

fYou will observe with great satisfaction the considerable 
increase which has taken place in the Government customs at 
Calcutta since my arrival in India. This is to be attributed 
entirely to increased care and vigilance in the business of the 
custom house. The customs were placcd for some time under 
the management of Mr. Haldane, a Member of the Board of 
Trade, who was principally aided by a young gentleman of the 
name of Twining, in restoring order to the business of the 
custom-house. Mr. Twining has distinguished himself very 
much in this transaction; he is at present too young in the 
service to be placed in the enjoyment of a salary adcquate to 
his merits, but I shall take the first practicable opportunity of 
promoting him; in the meanwhile I have appointed Mr. Dash- 
wood to the collection of the customs. I can rely on his dili- 
gence and integrity, and Mr. Twining will act under him. 

It is necessary to observe that the right of the Governor- 
General in Council to raise the dutics on goods in the Port of 
Calcutta is questioned by the lawyers here, in the present in- 
definite state of our powers of legislation. 

An improvement of the tax upon spirituous liquors and 
intoxicating drugs is now under my consideration, and I have 
little doubt that this branch of the revenue may be much 
increased. But here again I feel mysclf embarrassed by the 


GOV.-GENERAL’S POWER OVER CALCUTTA TOO LIMITED, 655 


anomalous constitution of this government. Under the con- 
struction given to the laws for the government of the British 
possessions, it is a received doctrine, that the Governor-General 
_in Council cannot legislate for the town of Calcutta. Therefore 
the capital City of this empire must be exempt from the opera- 
tion of any law imposing additional duties on the articles above 
mentioned, unless I can contrive to pass such a law under the 
pretext of an improvement of the duties appropriated to the 
support of the police. I am disposed to hope that sources of 
just and moderate taxation may be discovered on other articles 
of general consumption; but this measure must be adopted 
gradually and with great caution. I must here also observe, 
that although Calcutta must necessarily be the place of the 
greatest consumption, as well as that where any new tax would 
be less sensibly felt than in the country, the supposed restrictions 
of the law, and the strange conflict of authoritics between the 
Supreme Court of Judicature and the Government, preclude the 
possibility of my applying any system of taxation on articles of 
gencral consumption to the town of Calcutta. I trust you will, 
without delay, relieve this Government from a predicament so 
embarrassing. 

PoLick.—The Police of Calcutta is now in a deplorable con- 
dition, and if speedy measures be not adopted the town will 
soon relapse into jts ancient state of filth and unhealthiness, and 
will again become fatal to European constitutions. It is my 
intention immediatcly to proceed to improve the drains and 
roads, to widen the strects and avenues, and clear away the 
jungles, and remove the tanks and other nuisances situated in 
the neighbourhood of the town. These improvements will neces- 
sarily | occasion Cpe but it is an igen yess the Cor aay 
“munificent : sovercign. In aid of this seocnee it would be just to 
levy an assessment on the inhabitants of Calcutta; but I have 
already stated that measure to be impracticable in the limited 
state of my powers, Various other regulations of police are 
requisite for the preservation of the peace and order of the town; 
Ios these I shall find it difficult to enforce until my right to 

gislate for Calcutta shall be rendered indisputable by act of 
parliament. 

OuDE.—Of the two general heads, under which you have 
stated the objects of your anxicty, with regard to the situation of 
Oude, I trust that the second is now nearly accomplished ; 


656 REFORM IN OUDE, AND MADRAS PRESIDENCY. 


namely, the substitution of an efficient military force under the 
Company’s authority, in place of the Nabob Vizier’s dangerous 
and undisciplined army. This reform has not been effected 
without great reluctance on the part of the Vizier, whose cha- 
racter has been displayed on this occasion in the genuine colours 
of Asiatic treachéry and falsehood. I have nothing to hope from 
any other quality in his Excellency’s mind, excepting his ac- 
knowledged pusillanimity, which I flatter myself will induce him 
‘ to submit to the introduction of such a portion of the British 
- authority into the management of his country, as is indispensably 
' necessary to the just and pure administration of the Government; 
to the accurate collection and economical expenditure of his 
revenues ; and to the relief of his people from the cxtortion, 
cruelty and oppression, under which they now suffer, ’ TI shalt 
hereafter submit to you a detailed view of my proccedings in 
Oude; at present it may be sufficient to say, that I éonsider the 
reform of the Vizier’s military establishment to be far advanced, 
and that in consequence of the success of that preliminary step, 
I entertain a sanguine hope of being able to carry the same spirit 
of reform with vigour and effect into every other branch of his 
affairs. 

GOVERNMENT OF Fort ST. GEORGE—I am happy to be 
able to express my entire concurrence in your opinion, with 
regard to the progressive improvement of the administration of 
affairs at Fort St. George; and I have no doubt that the same 
system will continue to be pursued by Lord Clive and by the 
persons who now constitute his advisers at that Presidency. 
My long residence at Fort St. George, and the cordiality, 
temper, and honour of Lord Clive have completely identified 
the two Governments, and I find no more difficulty in governing 
our extensive possessions on the coast, with all our recent 
acquisitions of territory and influence, than in regulating any of 
the collectorships in Bengal. You will observe, by the public 
proceedings, that I have lately transmitted to Fort St. George 
detailed order$ for introducing into the posscssions under the 
immediate Government of that Presidency, the same system of 
internal administration, under which these provinecs have so 
happily flourished. I entertain no doubt, that, under the present 
Government at Fort St. George, my orders will be carricd into 
effect with the utmost degree of honesty, alacrity, and zeal. 
The execution, however, of those orders must necessarily be 
imperfect unless accompanied by the application to the civil 


PROPOSED FUNCTIONS OF THE SUDDER COURTS. 657 


Service at Fort St. George, not only of all those subsidiary 
improvements still requisite in Bengal, but of other remedies 
more peculiarly demanded by the state of the service at Fort 
St. George. My present inclination is to render thé Court of 
Sudder Dewannee and Nizamut Adawlut in’ Bengal the 
Supreme Court of Appeal from all the Company’s possessions, 
and to vest in it the general superintendence of the adminis- 
tration of justice and the regulation of police throughout the 
British empise in India, This arrangement appears to be well 
calculated to secure uniformity, consistency, and purity in the 
conduct of all the subordinate courts of justice, and in every 
institution of police. I do not apprehend that it will be neces- 
sary or expcdient to establish any intermediate Court of Appeal 
at Fort St. George between the Sudder Dewannee Adawlut in 
Bengal, and the ordinary Courts of Circuit and Appcal, to be 
instituted oh the coast of Coromandel. I am also inclined to 
_ think that the writers destined for Fort St. George may advan- 
tagcously pass the two first years of their residence in India at 
the University of Calcutta; where proper professors may be 
established for their instruction in the languages peculiar to 
the territorics subject to the immediate Government of Fort 
St. George. 

The adoption of a Sign for pensioning public officers incapable 
of service is required at Icast as much at Fort St. George as in 
Bengal. But the peculiar evil now inherent imthe constitution 
of the service at Fort St. George is not only unknown in Bengal, | 
but directly contrary to the fundamental principle on which 
Lord Cornwallis rested all his plans for amending and purifying 
the administration of affairs in these provinccs, Ife prohibited 
all indirect and secret cmoluments, and all mixture in pursuits 
of commerce, or of other affairs incompatible with a due attcn- 
tion to the public service; and he established the allowances of 
the public officers on so liberal a scale as might enable them 
not merely to subsist during the period of their public labours, 
but to realize, with due cconomy, a compctent provision after a 
moderate period of service. 

This system is not founded on any principle exclusively 
applicable to the characters, habits, or intcrests of the public 
servants in Bengal. It is founded in a just and correct know- 
ledge of mankind, for no proposition can be more self-evident, or 
of more universal application, than that the best security against 
the temptation of illicit profit, is to annex liberal emolument 

Uu 


658 MADRAS CIVILIANS TO BE BETTER PAID, 


to honest labour. It is, therefore, difficult to conceive on what 
ground an expectation can be formed, that the public service 
at Fort St. George should be as pure and correct as that in 
Bengal; while the civil servants of Fort St. George shall be 
permitted to mix in pursuits foreign to their public duties; and 
while the general scale of the allowances at Fort St. George 
shall remain so low as to preclude those prospccts of honest 
profit deemed necessary in Bengal for securing the integrity of 
the public servants. I am aware that this remark does not 
apply with so much force to the commercial as to, other 
branches of the Company’s service at Fort St.George. Some 
of the commercial allowances have been increased at that Presi- 
dency, on the very principle of rendering them so ample as to 
preclude the temptation of irregulan profit; and yct the irre- 
sistible application of the same principle to other branches of 
the service at the same Presidency has never been admitted in 
practice, however it may have been acknowledged in argument. 
For it can never be supposed that the Company can deliberately 
deem it to be a more incumbent duty of Government to secure 
the honest discharge of its commercial concerns, than to preserve 
its revenues from peculation, and the administragion of its laws 
from corruption and oppression. It is possible that the limited 
and precarious condition of the revenues of the 'lresidency of 
Fort St. George, and its state of insecurity during the cxistence 
of the contiguous hostile power in Mysore, may have retarded 
the due consideration of this subject. But in the present in- 
creased, and, I trust, progressive state of the prosperity and 
security of that valuable possession, no such obstacle exists to 
a reform urgently demanded by every principle of humanity, 
policy, and justice> 

\fam convinced that the continuance of the present inadequate 
allowances of the public servants at Fort St. George would prove 
an insuperable bar to the improvement of the revenues, and to. 
the due administration of justice in that part of our Empire. 
At present the public servants at Fort St. George, in most of 
the offices, can find no alternative but poverty or corruption. 
Is it the part of wisdom or honour in any Government to reduce 
its servants to such an alternative? During my residence at 
Fort St. George a most respcctable member of the Board of 
Revenue, Mr. Harrington, resigned his seat at the Board be- 
cause his salary did not afford him the hope of providing a 
,competent maintenance for his family at the expiration of his 


PENNP WISDOM IS POUND FOOLISHNESS, 659 


service; and he entcred into a Commercial House of Agency, 
withdrawing from the Company’s service talents, integrity, and 
zeal, which had proved highly useful, and might have been 
exerted with increased benefit to their affairs. I know that 
Mr. Cockburne, (whose abilities, knowledge, and integrity, are 
not surpassed by any person in India,) entertains similar inten- 
tions of retiring from the Company’s service. And it must be 
evident to your comprchensive view and long experience of 
public affairs that this evil will be aggravated in proportion 
to the increased magnitude and importance of the ifterests 
entrusted to the management of the public servants at Fort 
St. George; and that ultimately a service so defective must be 
deserted by all who are not disposed to take advantage of its 
abuscs. 

\_The consideration of all these circumstances has induced me 
to call Lord Clive’s particular attention to the scale of allow- 
ances at Fort St. George; and it is my intention to accompany 
the institution of the new Courts of Judicature at that Pre- 
sidency by a general revision of the salaries of their civil service ; 
the result of which will, I trust, enable me to place all the 
allowances on a proper level. 

The delay attendant upon the expectation of orders from 
home and the urgent pressure of the evil will, I trust, sufficiently 
justify my determination to apply, with all practicable despatch, 
such a remedy as shall appcar to my judgment to promise the 
most speedy, beneficial, and permanent effect. 

I entertain little doubt that the revenues, under the manage- 
ment of the Government of Fort St. George, will be consider- 
ably improved in al] their branches; and that the additional 
expense of providing for the important objects stated in the 
preceding paragraphs will be far overbalanced by the con- 
sequent amelioration of all our resources in that quarter, 

CARNATIC.—The double Government of the Carnatic is a 
dificulty which continucs to present the most scrious and 
alarming obstacles to every attempt at reform. The expecta- 
tion of favourable opportunities of negociation with the Nabob 
of Arcot, and of the effects of conciliation and attention towards 
him will, I am convinced, be ever disappointed by the event. 
You recollect with what sanguine hopes I looked forward to 
the result of measures adopted in a spirit of mildness and per- 
suasion, but I have found them entirely vain and fruitless; nor 
can I cherish the slightest ray of hope that such a course can 

Uu az 


660 EVIL OF ROYAL INTERCOURSE WITI! NABOB OF ARCOT. 


ever prove successful, during the life of the present Nabob. His 
Highness is surrounded by European advisers of the most 
dangerous and profligate character, whose interests are deeply 
involved in the perpetuation of the abuses of his Government, 
and who (amongst other means of perverting his councils) 
labour to inspire him with the notion of a distinction of interests 
and powers between the Royal Government and that constituted 
by Act of Parliament for the administration of the British 
Empire in India. In all his conversations and correspondence, 
he studiously distinguishes his Majesty’s Government from that 
of the Court of Directors; uniformly treating the latter with 
disrespect, and even with ridicule and contempt. In my last 
conversation with his Highness he plainly declared to me that 
he considered his Majesty to be his father, friend, ally, and 
protector, but that the Court of Directors desired to ‘ obtain his 
country any how.’ 

The principles of this distinction are encouraged in his 
Highness’s mind by the Ictters and embassics which have 
occasionally reached him from his Majesty through channels 
not only unconnected but avowedly at variance with the British 
Government in India. All such letters and embassies have the 
most pernicious tendency to withdraw the confidence and re- 
spect of the natives from the governments in India, and to fix 
their attention on his Majesty’s naval or military officers, or 
such persons (of whateyer character) as may accidentally be the 
bearers of his Ictters. \ The frequent Ictters which his Highness 
the Nabob receives from his Royal Highness the Prince of 
Wales greatly aggravate the same evil; and it is with the utmost 
concern that I feel myself bound by my public duty to request 
that you will take an opportunity of representing to his Royal 
Highness that his correspondence with the Nabob of the Car- 
natic has produced an effect entirely contrary to his Royal 
Highness’s wishes, and has been highly injurious to the public 
service in India. 

Few, if any,'of the Company’s servants at Madras are now 
directly engaged in the intrigucs of his Highness’s Durbar. 
The principal and most mischicvous agents and counsellors of 
his Highness are to be found among persons who have been 
[the bearers of letters to his Highness from England, and among 
the attorneys and low practitioners of the law, who notoriously 
conduct his Highness’s correspondence with the Government.) 
Nor can I entertain any expectation that the newly established 


BETTER TONE IN BENGAL NOT DUE TO SUPREME COURT. 661 


Judicature at Madras, under its present constitution, will in any 
degree assist the Government in repressing the intrigues and 
corruption of the Durbar, (My experience during my residence 
at Fort St. George lcads me to believe that the powers of the 
Court of the Recorder will prove entirely inadequate to the 
detection and punishment of the usurious and corrupt practices 
which that Court was intended to repress, while the establish- 
ment of such a Court will tend to confirm the audacity of 
the tribe of pettyfoggers which now infests the Carnatic, and 
governs the Nabob’s Durbar. I confess that I cannot concur 
with you in ascribing the purity of the service in Bengal to the 
influence of the Supreme Court of Judicature at Calcutta. The 
most corrupt period in the history of Bengal, or perhaps in that 
of any of our foreign establishments, is to be dated from the 
institution of the Supreme Court to the arrival of Lord Corn- 
wallis, a period of time, during a considerable portion of which 
that Court exercised its powers to their utmost possible extent.) 
The purity of Lord Cornwallis’s personal cxample, and the inte- 
grity and wisdom of his institutions, the increase of the regular 
and avowed public allowances, the separation of the legislative, 
judicial, and exccutive powers of the Government, and the 
consequent subjection of the Government itself to the con- 
troul of its own laws, were the real foundations of the reform 
at this Presidency. This constitution was the source, and its 
operation has been the security, of that reform; neither the 
design nor the execution of the amended system of adminis- 
tration in Bengal was in any degree aided by the co-operation, 
influence, or example of the Supreme Court. During the 
administrations of Lord Cornwallis, and of Lord Tcignmouth, 
the Supreme Court teemed with abuses of every description, 
and would have afforded a much fitter subject than an instru- 
ment of reform. Respectable and honourable as the person is 
who now presides in that Court, and cminent as his public 
services have been in the detection and remedy of the abuses 
abetted by his predecessors, I cannot discover in what manner 
the influence or authority of the Supreme Court now opcrate to 
preserve the purity of the service of Government. 

\ The public servants look exclusively to the person in whose 
hands the Government resides, and to the practical result of 
that constitution which he is bound to administel. Under that 
constitution he possesses ample powers of reward and punish- 
ment; and the due exercise of those powers constitutes the 


662 GOVERNOR-GENERAL NOT TO BE SUBJECT TO SUPREME COURT. 


vital principle of the public service, and the sole spring from 
which the purity or corruption of the subordinate officers must 
ever flow. The responsibility of the Governor-General in 
Council to the Government at home, and the conspicuous station 
in which he is placed, sufficiently secure the duc exercise of his 
arduous functions. 

(The Supreme Court possesses no power of rewarding the 
public servants, and with respect to their punishment, it can 
never procecd vigorously or efficaciously without the co-opera- 
tion of Government; even with that co-operation, the powers 
of the Supreme Court must be limited by the difficultics of 
obtaining legal proof of malversation; and even where such 
proofs can be obtained, the specics of punishment which the 
Supreme Court can inflict can neither be so speedy nor so for- 
midable to the public servants as the powers of suspension and 
subsequent prosccution at home vested in the Government. 
Whenever punishment in the form of public prosecution may 
become requisite, Iam convinced that it would be much more 
effectually inflicted, if the prosecution were always to be insti- 
tuted in England. With regard to petty cases of abuse every 
uscful purpose would be answered by a tribunal, independent of 
the Government, but placed towards it in the relation of a mere 
interpreter of the laws of England, modified by such as may be 
enacted by the Governor-Gencral in Council) 

\ The supposed controul of the Supreme Court over the person 
of the Governor-General never can be exercised without occa- 
sioning a convulsion in the Government ; it is, therefore, cither 
uscless, or dangerous, and every trace of it ought to be abolished. 
The extreme cases in which the crimes of the Governor-General 
may require the controul of a superior authority, cannot be pro- 
vided against in India without the application of a remedy 
infinitely more perilous than the supposed evil ; the existence 
of which is scarcely within the verge of possibility. The remedy 
of such cases should be left on the same ground as it stands on 
in Ircland with relation to the possible personal crimes of the 
chief Governor exercising the sovercign executive power. No 
power in India should appcar to be co-ordinate with the Govern- 
ment, and still less to rival or to control it. 

I shall hereafter address you more in detail on the present 
constitution of the Supreme Court of Judicature, (particularly on 
such parts of it as have proved practical impediments to the 
exercise of the control of this government over its own native 


SHOULD NOT THE COMPANY ANNEX THE CARNATIC? 663 


officers, civil and military and native subjects); but it would have 
been uncandid in me to pass without notice a passage in your 
correspondence, relating to so important a subject, in which I 
have the misfortune not to concur in your opinion. 

I cannot conclude this subject without adding my cordial 
testimony in favour of the moderation, discretion and propriety 
with which the present Court (under the direction of Sir John 
Anstruther) has uniformly exercised its powers not only without 
a symptom of jealousy, but with every possible attention to the 
dignity, vigour and efficacy of the government ;(but a power 
radically dangerous ought not to find protection_in the temporary 
forbearance of those hands in which it is vested. 

The duty of communicating to you without reserve, my senti- 
ments on this subject of the utility of the Supreme Court of 
Judicature, has led me to digress from the actual state of the 
Carnatic. 

I am thoroughly convinced, that no effectual remedy can ever 
be applicd to the evils which afflict that country, without obtain- 
ing from the Nabob powers at least as extensive as those vested 
in the Company by the late treaty of Tanjore. At the death of 
the present Nabob, such a treaty might easily be obtained from 
his successor, (if after that event it should be thought advisable 
to admit.any,nominal sovercign of the Carnatic, excepting the 
Company.) LA young man resides at Chepauk, who is treated. 
by the Nabob as his Highness’s son.) This young man is 
certainly the son of a dancing woman, who was received for 
some time in his Highness’s house; and the Nabob dcclarcs 
himself to be the father. Numerous legitimate descendants of 
Wallajah are in existence) The whole question of the succes- 
sion will therefore be completely open to the decision, of the 
Company, upon the decease of the present Nabob. (The inclina- 
tion of my opinion is, that the most advisable scttlemcnt would 
be, to place Omdut ul Omra’s supposed son on the Musnud, 
under a treaty similar to that which was latcly concluded with 
the Rajah of Tanjore): it will however, be expedient that you 
should immediately consider whcther it might not be a more 
effectual arrangement to provide liberally for every branch of 
the descendants of Wallajah and Omdut ul Omra, and to vest 
even the nominal sovercignty of the Carnatic in the Company. 

On this subject I request your immediate instructions; which 
you will frame with reference to the following most important 
and interesting considcrations. 


664 NABOB’S HOSTILITY DURING THE MYSORE WAR. 


During the whole course of the late war with Tippoo Sultaun, 
the conduct of all the Nabob’s officers without exception, 
amounted nearly to positive hostility in every part of his terri- 
tories through which the British army, or that of the Nizam 
marched, or even in which supplics were ordered to be pro- 
cured or collected for their use. When complaints were stated 
to his Highness he promised redress, but never afforded it in any 
instance. 

I was compelled to seize the persons of some of his principal 
officers, and to bring them down to Fort St. George, from 
districts in which our force was not sufficiently considerable to 
furnish an effectual check to their treasonable practices. In all 
districts so circumstanced his Highness’s officers did not scruple 
to proceed to open violence for the purpose of obstructing our 
supplies, 

During this arduous crisis, his Highness frequently endca- 
voured to anticipate my complaints by alleging pretended gricv- 
ances to justify the conduct of his officers, but upon examination 
his Highness’s complaints uniformly appeared to be utterly 
devoid of foundation. 

At the most critical period of our military preparations, when 
every European and native at Madras, emulated cach other in 
aiding the public service by loan and contribution, his Highness 
could not be induced to advance, even on account of his acknow- 
ledged debts, any assistance to the public treasury. Ie indeed, 
with much reluctance, under the apprchension of a cessation of 
all friendly intercourse between him and me, engaged to advance 
a sum on account of his new cavalry debt; but after the most 
solemn protestations of punctuality, he broke his faith with every 
circumstance of infamy and dishonour, at a moment when this 
violation of his engagements might have proved fatal to the 
progress of the army; if I had suffered myself to be so far the 
dupe of his repeated assurances, as to have relied in any degree 
on their performance for any pecuniary supply of the troops in 
the field. 

During the whole of this period, I have every reason to be 
confident that his Highness possessed the ready means of satisfy- 
ing a much more considerable demand, than I had deemed it 
expedient to make upon him. 

It was perfectly evident during the progress of our success, 
that his Highness derived no satisfaction from the triumph of 
our arms; and it is remarkable that he never appeared in public 


DISCOVERY OF HIS INTERCOURSE WITH TIPPOO. 665 


at the celebration of any of the rejoicings occasioned by the 
glorious termination of the war. 

Whatever suspicions of his Highness’s personal disaffection to 
the British Government pe have been warranted by all these 
combined circumstances,I was rather disposed to attribute them 
to the weakness of his government, or to the corruption and 
intrigues of his advisers than to any spirit of positive treachery 
in his own disposition; but the records of the late Tippoo Sul- 
taun, which fell into our hands after the capture of Scringapatam, 
have furnished me with the most authentic and indisputable 
evidence that a secret correspondence of a nature the most hostile 
to the British powcr, was opened with Tippoo Sultaun by the 
late Nabob Wallajah towards the close of his life, through the 
agency of Omdut ul Omra the present Nabob. 

Omdut ul Omra appears to have been extremely zealous and 
forward in the conduct of this secret intercourse during the life of 
his father, and no question can be entertained that the late 
Nabob, as a principal, and Omdut ul Omra as an agent, were 
guilty of a flagrant violation of the treaty of 1792; as well as of 
the fundamental principle of their connection with the Company. 
Omdut ul Omra was a party to the treaty of 1792, and on that 
circumstance founds all his present rights. Sufficient proof 
appears that Omdut ul Omnra, after his accession, manifested a 
disposition to maintain the correspondence commenced by his 
father through him; and I entertain no doubt that his objects 
in that correspondence were of the same hostile and treacherous 
character, as they had been previous to the death of his father. 
The proof arising from written documents of his overt acts of 
hostility since his accession, is not so full and distinct as that 
which relates to his former agency. But this defect may be 
supplicd by oral testimony, as all the neccessary witnesses are 
alive and in our hands. 
© "No doubt exists in my mind, that the ‘British Government 
would now be completely justified, in depriving the Nabob of 
all power aver his country, and reducing him to the state of a mere 


pensioner? 
& The only questions which remain for decision are the time of 
carrying this mcasure into exccution, and the amount of the pro- 
vision to be made for the Nabob, for his descendants, and for 
those of Wallajali. As soon as you shall have reccived this 
letter, I request you to despatch an express to me with your 
opinion, although mine is so decided, that I shall not wait for 


666 AFFAIRS OF TANYORE, CIRCARS, AND MALABAR, 


the communication of yours, if the scason should appear to me 
to be favourable for the great measure which is now become in- 
dispensable on every principle of justice and policy. 

TANJORE.—With respect to Tanjore, the treaty which I framed 
previous to my departure from Fort St. George, and which has 
since been carried into effect by Lord Clive, will, I trust, place 
the administration of the affairs of that country on an improved 
foundation. The difficulties which I encountered in obtaining a 
correct and consistent account of Tanjore, are scarcely to be 
described or imagined. 

After a most tedious enquiry, I brought the several contending 
parties to a fair discussion (or rather to a bitter contest) in my 
presence ; and after an argument which lasted three or four days, 
T proceeded to review the whole case in a regular manner, ad- 
verting to every fact and argument on both sides of the question. 
At length the contending partics unanimously concurred in the 
expediency and justice of the treaty, in the form in which it has 
been concluded. 

A question will arise with respect to the unregistered debt of 
the late Rajah of Tanjore. I am inclined to believe that some 
branches of that debt, as well as that of the unconsolidated debt 
of the Nabob of the Carnatic, are at cast as well entitled to con- 
sideration as any part of the debt sanctioned by parliament. 
The subject merits your attention. I shall not feel myself at 
liberty toact upon it without orders from home ; but I am satis- 
fied that you will find some cases of great hardship among many 
rather deserving prosccution than payment. 

CIRCARS.—The Northern Circars, according to the report of 
the Board of Revenuc at Fort St. George, are now in a state to 
teceive the same principles of government, with some local 
modifications, which have been applicd to Bengal. The new 
settlement now about to be introduced upon the coast, will 
therefore include that vast tract of country. It may be con- 
venient to observe to you in this place that my determination to 
render the new settlement of the land revenue on the coast 
perpetual, without previous reference to the Court of Directors 
was founded on intelligence from Mr. Cockburne that the terror 
of such a reference would render all scttlement impracticable, 
and above all would entirely frustrate the sale of the Havelly 
Lands. 

MALABAR.—The condition of the coast of Malabar has been 
so entirely changed by the conquest of Mysore, that the principles 


MONTHLY OVERLAND DESPATCH DESIRABLE, 667 


stated in your despatches to the Government of Bombay, and in 
General Stuart’s letters to you, are no longer applicable to the 
actual circumstances of that district. The conquest of Mysore 
will, I trust, enable us to settle Malabar and Canara on a sys- 
tematic and durable plan of government. The subject is now 
under my consideration. One principle however, I am persuaded 
wil appear as evident and incontrovertible to your mind as it 
does to mine ; that whatever may be our ultimate determination 
with respect to the power of the several Rajahs, it must appear 
to flow from the gencrosity, justice and power of the British 
Government; and not to be derived from a timid submission to 
the refractory spirit of any rebellious tributary. 

COMMUNICATION WITH ENGLAND,.—If the war with France 
should be protracted, and Buonaparte continue at the head of 
affairs, I am persuaded that some attempt will be made by 
France against our Indian empire. A regular monthly despatch 
overland from London to India will, in that event, be of the 
utmost importance. Indeed, under any circumstances, a speedy 
and certain communication between England and India, appears 
to me to be an object in which the interests of both countries are 
decply involved. My opinion is, that, in addition to the de- 
spatch overland, monthly packets should be established to sail 
regularly both from Europe and India. They might carry small 
cargoes and passengers, which, with the profits of postage on 
Ictters, would more than defray their expence. 

In reviewing your correspondence, I have not thought it neccs- 
sary to return any particular replics to your several letters of 
recommendation, The reccipt of them is noted in the annexed 
memorandum. Being in possession of your principles with respect 
to recommendations, I do not think any further cxplanation 
necessary. 

I remain, my dear Sir, &c. 
MORNINGTON. 


08. The Marquess Wellosloy to Lord Castlereagh. 


General vindication of territorial acquisitions during Lord 
Wellesley’s administration, 
Fort William, Dec. 15th, 1803. 
My dear Lord, 
Your Lordship has been already apprized of the motives 
which had induced me to continue in this government beyond 


668 ALL EXTENSION OF TERRITORY NOT FORBIDDEN. 


the period of the month of January 1803, with a view to the 
important crisis of affairs which had occurred in the Mahratta 
empire. Subsequent events have proved that I was not mis- 
taken with regard to the importance of that crisis, and to the 
nature of my public duties as connected with it. 

I received with great satisfaction the determination of his 
Majesty’s ministers, and the Court of Directors upon the late 
settlement of the Carnatic. 

Your Lordship and the public being in full possession of the 
information upon which my decision respecting the affairs of the 
Carnatic was formed, I entertain no doubt that a correct judg- 
ment will be delivered upon the issue of any public discussion 
relative to that scttlement. Having exercised my judgment 
upon the question to the best of my ability, my duty appears to 
me to be completely discharged, and I retain no further solici- 
tude upon the subject than that such an arrangement of the 
affairs of the Carnatic as may appear to Parliament to be just, 
wise, and honourable, may be secured upon permanent founda- 
tions. 

Your Lordship’s superior understanding, and your high scnse 
of the public interests and honour, have already led you to 
draw a just conclusion from the transactions in the Carnatic ; 
and I am satisfied that your sentiments on that subject will be 
confirmed by further deliberation, and will be maintained with 
the ability and energy, which have always distinguished your 
public opinions. 

The act of 1793 declares, that the ‘pursuit of schemes of 
conquest and cxtension of dominion in India, is repugnant to 
the wish, the honour, and policy of the nation.’ This declara- 
tory preamble introduces the regulation of preventing the com- 
mencement of hostilitics in India, in the conclusion of treaties of 
guarantec involving the contingency of war, without the express 
command and authority of the Court of Directors, or of the 
Secret Committee. 

No inference can be drawn from the Ictter or spirit of the act 
of 1793, to preclude the extension of the British territories in 
India, by just and legitimate means, unconnected with schemes 
of conquest and irregular ambition. 

The extension of territory which followed the conquest of 
Mysore in 1799, might otherwise have been condemned on 
similar grounds. That conquest as the result of a just and 
necessary war, and the transfer of the enemy's dominions to 


TERRITORY GAINED THROUGH CORNWALLIS’S TREATIES. 669 


our authority, although involving considerable extension of ter- 
ritory, was never deemed for that reason to be inconsistent with, 
the policy of the act of 1793, but was declared to be justified by, 
the same principles which had justified the commencement of 
the war. 

With the Nabob of the Carnatic, and with the Rajah of 
Tanjore subsidiary engagements were concluded by Lord Corn- 
wallis in 1792, which eventually stipulated for a considerable 
extension of the territory of the Company, in the contingency 
of ultimate failure on the part of those princes in the regular 
payment of the subsidy; but it never yet has been contended 
that in the event of such failure, it would have been incon- 
sistent with the policy of the act of 1793, to have insisted upon 
the right of the Company to demand the execution of thosc 
articles of the respective subsidiary treatics,.which either in 
direct terms or by manifest implication entitled the Company 
to an extension of territory in commutation of the subsidiary 
payments, 

The Company on various occasions, with the authority of his 
Majesty, has expressed great anxicty to commute the subsidies 
of the Carnatic, and Tanjore, for adequate territorial security. 
Tt never has occurred until the present moment, to represent 
such a commutation as in any degree repugnant to the wish, the 
honour, or policy of the nation, or to the letter or spirit of the 
acts of regulation. 

On my arrival in India in April 1798, I endeavoured in con- 
formity to my original instructions from the Court of Directors, 
to obtain a commutation of this nature in the Carnatic. Your 
Lordship is apprized of my repeated and anxious efforts to effect 
this object, and you are also informed that in pursuing it I fol- 
lowed the steps of Lord Hobart’s government, which had pro- 
ceeded also under the commands of the Court of Directors, 

Lord Hobart and I were equally unsuccessful, but our efforts 
have received the most uncquivocal and frequent testimonics of 
public and official approbation, nor was an attempt ever hazarded 
to represent our endeavours for the improvement of the subsist- 
ing subsidiary engagements of the Company in the Carnatic, as 
a systematic violation of the act of 1793; although the success 
of those endeavours must have been accompanied by an exten- 
sion of the territory of the Company in India. 

In the settlement of Mysore upon concluding subsidiary en- 
gagements with the Rajah of Mysore, I have already declared in 


670 MYSORE, TANFORE, NIZAM, SURAT, GUIKOWAR, OUDE. 


my letter of the 3d of August 1799, to the Court of Directors, 
that my express purpose was td facilitate the direct control of 
the Company over the whole territory of Mysore, with a view to 
the more effectual security of the subsidy. In fact, the territory 
governed in the name of the Rajah was actually annexed to the 
Company’s dominion, by that article of the subsidiary treaty of 
Seringapatam, which empowers the Company at any time to 
assume the direct management of the whole country. But this 
treaty has not yet been quoted to prove the existence of a 
systematic plan of territorial acquisition inconsistent with the 
policy of the act of 1793. 

In Tanjore, I effected in the ycar 1800, a commutation of 
subsidy founded on the spirit of my original instructions respcect- 
ing the Carnatic, and accordingly the territory of Tanjore was 
annexed to the Company’s possessions. 

In the year 1800, a new treaty of subsidy was formed with 
the Nizam; adverting to the uniform policy pursucd by the 
Company since the act of 1793, to the tenor of my instructions 
respecting the Carnatic, and to my expericnce of the cvils 
resulting from the existing systems of subsidy in Oude and the 
Carnatic, I formed the subsidiary treaty with the Nizam upon 
the principle of obtaining territorial security for the payment of 
the subsidy, instead of depending for the safety of those funds 
on the precarious power, and imperfect administration of an 
Indian Government. 

The new treatics with the Rajah of Tanjore, and with the 
Nizam, have not hitherto been arraigned on the grounds recently 
stated. 

The treatics of Surat, and the treaties with the Guikowar, 
were founded on similar principics with those of Tanjore and 
Hyderabad, substituting territorial security for an engagement 
to pay the amount of the subsidy from the treasury of the state. 

The right to conclude a subsidiary engagement with the Gui- 
kowar was derived from that stipulation of the treaty of Salbyc, 
which constitutes the Company to be the guarantee of the 
succession and government of the Guikowar state. 

The new subsidiary treaty concluded with the Nabob of Oude 
in November 1801, rested on the same foundations, and effected 
a commutation of all the Nabob Vizier’s engagements with 
respect to subsidy and aid in war, for a cession of territory. 

The treaty of Bassein recently concluded with the Peishwa 
proceeds on the same grounds. In renewing the ancient alliance 


PEISHWA, CARNATIC, PRINCIPLES OF EXTENSION. 677 


between the Peishwa and the Company, it has constituted that 
alliance by a subsidiary engagement, and by a territorial cession 
formed upon the improved plan of policy repeatedly sanctioned 
by the authority of his Majesty, and of the East India Company, 
and already effected with other dependent states, in preference 
to that defective scheme of subsidiary alliance which had pro- 
duced innumerable evils in various parts of our dependencies in 
India, which for many years had constituted an annual theme of 
lamentation for all the governments in India, and for the 
honourable Court of Directors, and the policy of which appeared 
to have been exploded by the deliberate wisdom and long 
experience of that sage body. 

The transfer of the civil and military government of the Car- 
natic to the Company, was warranted by the justice and necessity 
of that procecding, founded upon the forfeiture incurred by 
Mahomed Ali, and Omdut ul Omra, and upon the dangers which 
menaced the sccurity of the Company’s rights on the coast of 
Coromandel, in consequence of the treachery of those faithless 
and abandoned characters. The justification of this proceeding 
rests upon principles similar to those by which war is justifiable 
against any public encmy, and the extension of territory which 
accompanicd the prosecution of a just and legitimate public 
right, cannot be condemned upon any principles correctly derived 
from the act of 1793. . 

In prosecuting the just rights of the Company against the 
Nabob of the Carnatic, I resorted to my original instructions 
respecting the Carnatic; and I framed the new settlement with 
reference to the acknowledged expediency of effecting commu- 
tation of the subsidy for territorial security, and of rescuing 
the Carnatic from the evils of divided government and con- 
flicting powcr, by establishing over that province one distinct 
authority in the hands of the Company, with a liberal pro- 
vision for the Nabob and his family. I am ata loss to compre- 
hend the application of the act of 1793, to any part of this 
transaction. 

The acquisitions of territory which have been accomplished in 
India during my administration, have proceeded cither from the 
successful prosccution of war, or from forfeiture in consequence 
of the violation of dependent alliances, or lastly from the im- 
provement of existing, or the formation of new treatics of 
subsidy and guarantee. The first description includes those 
Provinces and possessions of Tippoo Sultaun, retained by the 


672 JUSTICE AND POLICY OF WELLESLEY’S ACQUISITIONS, 


Company under the partition treaty of Mysore. The second 
description consists of the possessions of Omdut ul Omra in 
the Carnatic; and the last comprehends the territories com- 
muted for subsidy by the Rajah of Tanjore, by the Nizam, 
and by the Nabob of Oude, and the territorics ceded in payment 
of subsidy by the Nabob of Surat, by the Guikowar, and ulti- 
mately by the Peishwa. 

The records of the Company will furnish your Lordship with 
sufficient evidence that every extension of territory acquired 
under each of these classcs, has originated in principles not only 
strictly conformable to the act of 1793, but to the general 


maxims of justice and policy, applicable to our Indian 
empire. 

No extension of territory has been acquired otherwise than 
by the prosecution of just and necessary war, or ofejust and 
legitimate public right; the result of these acquisitions has 
not involved the necessity of defending any territory, which 
had not previously furnished increased means of offensive war 
to our enemies, or which we were not previously bound to defend 
either by the obligation of positive treaty, or of our own manifest 
interest. Our means of defence in every case are now greatly 
augmented, by the annexation of the civil and military govern- 
ment of the territories, from which we derive the military 
resource applicable to defray the charge of their respective 
protection and security. 

With regard to the question of the floating debts of the 
Nabob of the Carnatic, 1 have already intimated my opinion 
to Mr. Addington, as far as it appeared to me proper to offer 
any opinion, while the scttlement of the Carnatic remains in 
suspense in Parliament, after a public notification of an inten- 
tion to subject that scttlement to the result of a parliamentary 
enquiry. 

I trust that your Lordship will not recognize any part of the 
Nabob’s unconsolidated debt, without previous investigation 
under the authority of the legislature. When that authority 
shall have been furnished, I shall be fully prepared to offer my 
sentiments on every branch of the subject. 

In the meanwhile I have the honour to enclose for your Lord- 
ship’s notice, extracts of the opinions which I have already 
communicated to Mr. Addington in a private letter, 

I cannot suppose that the condition of the Company with 
relation to any part of its territorial possessions in India, can be 


THE COMPANY CANNOT RULE AS MERE MERCHANTS, 673 


considered to be similar to that of a private individual pro- 
prietor of a landed estate. The Company with relation to 
its territory in India, must be viewed in the capacity of a 
sovereign power. If any other principle be recognized, and the 
Company be permitted to hold the nominal sovereignty of 
India, endless confusion must ensue; in such an extremity no 
possible remedy could save this country from anarchy and ruin, 
but the instantaneous assumption of the direct executive power 
of the British possessions in India, by the Crown of the United 
Kingdom. 

If any accommodation with the Nabob’s creditors should 
be attempted, it appears to me that the proposition which I 
offered to the Nabob Omdut ul Omra, in my letter of the 24th 
of April 1799, would form an cligible basis of such an arrange- 
ment. But in the present circumstances, it would not be 
advisable to recognize any part of the debt, without previous 
enquiry under authority from Parliament to the Court of 
Directors, and from the Court of Directors to the Government 
General. 

Your Lordship’s observations respecting the settlement of Oude, 
and the conduct of Mr. Henry Wellesley in the negotiation of 
the treaty with the Vizier, and in the superintendance of the 
provincial government of that country, have afforded me the 
highest satisfaction. On this subject your Lordship has received 
such ample details by the Szwa/low packet, as preclude the 
necessity of any further remark from me. 

It has becn a matter of great surprize as well as of consider- 
able satisfaction to me to have found myself enabled within so 
short a space of time to establish the regular civil authority of 
the Company, in a country of which the disorderly and lawless 
state under the government of our ally the Vizier had long 
afforded occupation to the main body of the army of Bengal; 
I should have deemed it a rcasonable compromise for the 
Court of Directors, to have secured the settlement of the 
country, and the regular introduction of their civil servants at 
the expiration of a military commission of the duration of five 
or seven years. 

I feel however considerable pleasure in assuring your Lordship, 
that although the tranquillity of that province is not yet com- 
pletely secured, and although the final settlement of the Doab 
may hereafter require the employment of authority, great advan- 
tages have been derived in the prosecution of the present war, 

XX 


674 PROUDLY HUMBLE TONE ON OUDE AWARD. 


from the improvements already accomplished in the state of 
Oude, under the operation of the commission over which Mr. 
Henry Wellesley presided. 

With regard to the policy and justice of the treaty of 
Lucknow, and to the recent settlement of Oude, your Lord- 
ship’s lgtter (to which I have now the honour to reply) 
expresses a sanguine hope that I shall receive the approba- 
tion of the honourable Court. On this question, as on the 
subject of the Carnatic, my duty has been completely dis- 
charged, by applying the most assiduous exertion of my 
judgment to the formation of a scttlement on principles 
which appear to me to be just, expedient, and desirable, and 
by submitting to the Court of Directors the grounds. of my 
decision. I entertain no further anxiety on any part of this 
question, than that the public interests in Oude should be 
saved for my country; and if the honourable Court should be 
pleased to condemn the arrangements by which I have saved 
those interests from ruin, I trust that the wisdom and justice 
of that body will amend my errors, and reform the present 
government of the ceded provinces. 

My correspondence with the Secret Committee upon the 
subject of Finance, embraces every point stated by your Lord- 
ship upon that important question. No doubt can exist that if 
the prime cost of investment in India be regularly supplied with 
bullion from Europe for a few years, every object in your 
Lordship’s contemplation will be fully secured. 

War with France, unless extended to India by active opera- 
tions of the French, will not materially retard the progress of 
your Lordship’s plan for the reduction of the debt. 

War in India must be expected to produce a temporary delay. 
The war in which we are now engaged has however been 
attended with so large and immediate an increase of revenue, 
that I trust our accounts at the close of the year will appear 
highly favourable; and as an carly peace may be expected on 
terms of considerable advantage, and of permanent duration, 
the ultimate result of your Lordship’s plan for the reduction 
of the debt will I trust, be rather accelerated than retarded by 
the events of the present war. 

I cannot close this letter without repeating to your Lordship 
the sincere expressions of my high respect, and entire confidence: 
It is due to that confidence to apprize your Lordship, that you 
will find the primary object of all my views to be, the success of 


THE COMPANY’S POSSESSIONS A GREAT EMPIRE. 67 5 


your Lordship’s just, and wise plans for the prosperity and 


honour of this empire. 
I have the honour to be, 


with great respect and regard, 
my dear Lord, 
always yours most faithfully, 
WELLESLEY. 


VIII. SUPREME AND LOCAL 
GOVERNMENTS. 


99. The Governor-General in Council to the Honourable 
Court of Directors. 


Constitution, Functions, and Reform of the Supreme ~ 
Government. 
Fort William, July gth, 1800. 


Honourable Sirs, 
The great pressure of the numcrous and important dutics now 


performcd immediately by the Governor-General in Council, 
has induced us to take a review of the constitution of the 
Government-General, considered as the supreme authority in 
India. 

It has been his Lordships object in this review to determine 
what dutics now executed immediately by the Governor-Gencral 
in Council ought still to be performed by him; what dutics 
ought to be delegated to other cstablishments, and lastly to 
make a permanent provision for the due discharge of those 
duties which the Governor-General in Council must necessarily 
retain, as well as of those which it has been deemed advisable 
he should relinquish, 

In the discussion of these important questions we have not 
hesitated to consider the extensive and valuable possessions 
to the government of which the Company have succeeded, as 
a great Empire. To view those possessions in any other light, 
must, we are persuaded, always Icad to the most erroneous 
conclusions as to the principles of policy by which they ought 


to be governed. 
XX 2 


676 BENGAL GOVERNMENT MODELLED ON BRITISH. 


The early administration of the Company succeeded to the 
despotic power of the native princes. 

Those princes, as in other despotic governments, united in 
their own persons the whole legislative, executive, and judicial 
powers of the State, and exercised them according to the 
dictates of their own discretion. 

No form of Government could be so ill adapted to these 
countries when they became dependent possessions of the 
British Empire, subject to be governed by persons occasionally 
deputed from the Mother Country. 

Experience of the evils attendant on this form of Government 
conducted by a delegated British administration, led to the 
modelling of the Government of Bengal, on principles drawn 
from the British constitution. 

A distribution of the legislative, executive, and judicial powers 
of the state, analogous to that which forms the basis of the 
British Constitution, was made the foundation of the new con- 
stitution of the Government of Bengal. 

Considerations, however, arising out of the nature of our 
situation in this country demanded that these fundamental 
principles of the British Constitution should be introduced with 
a variety of modifications. 

The lines between these three authorities were distinctly 
drawn, but it was obviously necessary that the Governor-General 
in Council should exercise exclusively the entire Icgislative 
authority. / 

{But at the same time that we excluded our native subjects 
from all participation in the legislative authority, abundant 
security was afforded to them, that the exercise of that authority 
would always be directed to their happiness and benefit) 

The confirmation of their ancient laws in all matters con- 
nected with their religious prejudices, or their domestic relations, 
formed one of the first acts of the Governor-General in Council 
under the new constitution. 

Provision was also made for ascertaining the sense which the 
people might entertain of the laws and regulations enacted for 
the government of the country, by the authority given to the 
judges of all the Courts of Judicature to propose such general 
or local laws as, from their intercourse with the natives in the 
administration of justice, might appear to them necessary to 
promote the public happiness and prosperity. 

As an effectual security against every abuse of the legislative 


HOW FAR ANALOGOUS TO BRITISH CONSTITUTION, 677 


power vested in the Governor-General in Council, it was made 

a fundamental principle of the new constitution, that he shall 

print and publish every Icgislative Act in a form which renders 
“him responsible to his country for the unjust or unwise exercise 
of that power. : 

-The executive authority was of necessity also exclusively 
vested in the Governor-General in Council. 

No check can be imposed on the Governor-General in Council 
in the exercise of this authority in the regulation of our con- 
nection with the foreign States of India. But as our own 
interest, and that of our subjects with regard to those connec- 
tions are necessarily the same, they have the best security that 
the most effectual mcans will always be taken to protect the 
country from foreign encmics, 

With regard to all acts of the executive power as they rclate 
to the internal government, of the country, the people possess 
the same security against any infringement by this power of the 
rights and principles which have been granted to them by the 
laws, as is enjoyed under the British Constitution. 

CIt was judged advisable, however, to restrict the controul over 
the exccutive authority to cases actually provided for by the 
regulations./ But as Icgislative provisions are made for all cases 
not included in the existing laws as such cases arise, the dis- 
cretionary power which the Governor-General in Council may 
now exercise in cases of that nature, must in progress of time 
entirely ccasc/ 

As constituting the Courts of Suddcr Dewanny Adawlut and 
the Nizamut, or the chief civil or criminal Courts, the Governor- 
General in Council also exercises a large portion of the judicial 
power, 

The reasons which originally occasioned the continuance of 
the entire legislative and executive authority in the Governor- 
General in Council, are obviously of a permanent nature, 

There is no change in our situation in this country, which 
can be supposed, in which it would be expedient to admit any 
_ part of our native subjects to participate in the legislative 

authority with the Governor-General in Council, « 

The same principle applics to the exccutive authority of the 
Governor-General in Council, as far as regards the relations of 
the British possessions with foreign states. It can never be 

_ expedient that our native subjects should be allowed to inter- 


fere in those relations, or that any local restrictions should be 


678 GOVERNOR-GENERAL TO RENOUNCE JUDICIAL FUNCTIONS. 


imposed on the Governor-General in Council, in the conduct of 
them. 

With regard to the executive authority of the Governor- 
General in Council, as far as relates to the internal government 
of the country, this authority can only be vested in him. But 
the nature of our situation affords additional reasons for sub- 
jecting the executive authority in .this branch gradually to the 
complete controul of the law, in the same manner as that 
authority is restricted by the laws of the British constitution. 

While our political security demands that the entire legislative 
and executive authority should continue to be vested exclusively 
in the Governor-General in Council agreeably to the principles 
of the existing constitution: it is at the samc time a satisfaction 
to know, that under the checks which are imposed on the 
Governor-General in Council in the exercise of these powers, 
the union of them in his hands, (notwithstanding the objections 
to which this union may be liable in theory) is perfectly com- 
patible with the ends of good government. 

There are no circumstances however connected with our 
political situation in this country, which require that the 
Governor-Gencral in Council should continue to exercise any 
portion of the judicial authority. 

It is equally necessary to the happiness of the people, to the 
prosperity of the country, and to the stability of the British 
Government, that such laws as the Governor-Gencral in Council 
may sanction in his legislative capacity, should be administered 
with ability, integrity, impartiality and expedition. 

All the provisions made by the British constitution for pre- 
cluding the legislative and the exccutive powers of the state, 
from any interference in the administration of the laws, are not 
only applicable to the government of this country, but, if it were 
possible, demand to be strengthened. 

An efficient controul may be exercised from England over 
the conduct of the Governor-General in Council, in his legislative 
capacity. But no effectual controul can be exercised over him 
in the administration of the laws, and he may render the laws 
altogether nugatory by abuses, omissions, or delays in theif 
administration. 

It is essentially necessary that the security of private rights 
and property should be rendered altogether independent of the 
characters of those who may be occasionally placed at the head 
of your affairs in this country. This however, can never be the 


CIRCUMSTANCES DEMANDING THIS ALTERATION. 679 


case, while the Governor-General in Council who makes the law, 
and whose acts in his executive capacity, as well as those of the 
long train of officers who exercise authority under him in that 
capacity also, constitute the chief courts which controul the 
general administration of justice. 

\No inconvenience can arise from divesting the Governor- 
_ General in Council of all immediate interference in the adminis- 
’ tration of the laws, while he has the power of altering at his 

pleasure the law itself. 

These objections to the exercise of any judicial power by 
the Governor-General in Council, are founded on general and 
established principles of government; but other considerations 
render this duty incompatible with the proper functions of the 
Governor-General in Council. 

The administration of justice in open court, is one of the 
principal sccuritics for its due administration. 

The constant appearance of the Governor-General in Council 
in an open court of justice would be incompatible with that 
dignity which, to render him competent to the conduct of the 
government, it is essentially necessary that the person invested 

with the supreme exccutive and Icgislative power should main- 

tain, not only in the estimation of the people immediately 
subject to his government, but also of the foreign powers. 
CThe presence of the Governor-General in Council in open 
court, would prevent the pleading of causes with becoming 
freedom. No native pleader would venture to contest his 
opinions, and the will of the Governor-General, and not the law 
would be considered as the rule of decision.] 

As the Governor-Gencral must necessarily be often unac- 
quainted with the languages of the country, this circumstance 
alone would render it impracticable for him to preside at trials 
in open court, unless it should be determined that the trials 
should be conducted in English, and by English pleaders, 

In consequence of these circumstances, the Courts of Sudder 
Dewanny Adawlut, and Nizamut Adawlut are held in the 
council chamber. Neither the partics nor their pleaders are 
in any cases present. The proceedings are translated into 
‘English, and read to the members of the Court who pass their 
decision, which the register records. 

( The necessity of making these translations constitutes the 
chief cause of the delay in the decision of the causes which 
are brought before the chicf civil and criminal courts.) The 


680 SUPREME COUNCIL NOT TO FORM SUDDER COURTS. 


translations cannot however be dispensed with for the reasons 
above stated. ' They are also requisite for record and trans- 
mission to England, as they now constitute the only check on 
the Governor-General in Council in the administration of the 
law; but for these considerations, no translations of the pro- 
ceedings on trials would be necessary.| 

But there is another object, unconnected with any of the above 
considerations, which is of itself sufficient to establish the neces- 
sity of divesting the Governor-General in Council of the judicial 
authority now exercised by him. 

' A conscientious discharge of the duties of the Sudder Dewanny 
Adawlut, and the Nizamut Adawlut, would of itself occupy the, 
whole time of the Governor-Gencral in Council.) 

The proper duties of these courts are not confined to the 
determination of the causes which are brought before them. It is 
also their duty to superintend the conduct of all the other courts, 
to watch over the general police of the country, and to frame 
for the consideration of the Governor-Gencral in Council, new 
laws as cases may arise demanding further legislative provisions. 

When your Honourable Court shall advert to the extent of 
your dominions, to their population, to their growing prosperity, 
and to the consequent multiplicd concerns of individuals, it will 
at once be evident that it is physically impossible that the 
Governor-General in Council can ever dedicate that time and 
attention to the duties of these courts, which must necessarily 
be requisite for their due discharge. 

It is impossible to have the benefit of a regwar and systematic 
government without numerous laws, and for the due administra- 
tion of those laws, the necessary establishments must be provided. 

Of the value of a system of government founded on these 
principles as connected with your permanent interests, a com- 
petent judgment may be formed by a comparison of the present 
state of your territories in Bengal, with that of your ancicnt 
possessions on the coast of Coromandel, as described in the able 
report of the Board of Revenue at Fort St. George, forwarded to 
your Honourable Court by this despatch. 

These considerations have induced us to determine, under the 
sanction of the clause of the act, of the year of the 
reign of his present Majesty, that the Governor-General, and the 
members of council shall not constitute the Court of Sudder 
Dewanny Adawlut in future, but that distinct judges shall be 
appointed to preside in that court, with all the powers and 


THIS SEPARATION ORIGINALLY CONTEMPLATED. 681 


authorities now exercised by the Governor-General and the 
members of council, as the judges of that court. 

We have also determincd, that the same judges shall constitute 
the Court of Nizamut Adawlut, with all the powers now exercised 
by the Governor-General and members of council, as judges of 
that court. 

The adoption. of this arrangement will establish the prosperity 
of your dominions in Bengal, on the most solid foundations, 
Your Honourable Court will yourselves be able to exercise the 
most effectual controul over the Governor-General in Council in 
his legislative capacity, as his acts printed and published come 
under your revision. His executive authority as far as regards 
the internal government, will be subject to the controul of the 
laws, and the due administration of the laws, will be sccured by 
the courts appointed to administer them being rendered entirely 
distinct, both from the executive and legislative authority, at the 
same time that the conduct of the judges of the superior courts, 
will be subject to the most vigilant controul on the part of the 
executive power. 

The necessity of divesting the Governor-General in Council of 
the exercise of any judicial authority at some future period was 
foresecn at the first establishment of the present constitution. It 
will accordingly appcar, that throughout the code of regulations 
the powers of the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut and the Nizamut 
Adawlut are so framed, as to admit of these courts being at any 
time constituted in the manner now proposed. But the cautious 
spirit which will be found to pervade cvery part of that constitu- 

tion, wiscly Icft these judicial powers to be exercised by the 
Governor-Gencral in Council, until circumstances should dictate 
the necessity of his relinquishing them. 

The establishment of the new Courts of Sudder Dewanny 
Adawlut and Nizamut Adawlut, providing for the discharge of 
the judicial duties now exercised by the Governor-General in 
Council, the only point connected with the subject of this address 
which remains to be considered, is the permanent provision to be 
made for enabling the Governor-Gencral in Council to execute 
the legislative and executive dutics which are still to be performe 
by him. 

The duties of the Gevernor-Gencral in Council in his legislative 
capacity, are first, the framing of such laws or regulations as may 
occur to him to be necessary for improving the internal govern- 
ment of the country. Secondly, the consideration of such laws or 


682 EXECUTIVE DUTIES OF THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL. 


regulations as may be proposed to him by any of the Courts of 
Judicature, or other authorities cmpowered to propose regulations. 

In a despotic government the will of the ruling power stands 
in the place of law; but when it becomes the fundamental 
principle of a government, to be guided by written and defined 
laws, every case which occurs, for which no provision is made, 
and every defect discovered in the cxisting laws, calls for the 
interposition of the legislative authority. 

Numerous cases now demand that interposition; but it is un- 
avoidably withheld, from the various avocations of the Governor- 
General in Council, rendering it impossible to give his attention 
to the several cases, or defects, or to make the necessary Iegis- 
lative provisions for them. 

The superintendance of this important duty, on the due per- 
formance of which depend the happiness of the people, the extent 
of your resources, and the stability of your empire, will in future 
devolve chicfly on the new Court of Sudder Dewanny Adawlut 
and Nizamut. It will be the province of the Governor-Gencral 
in Council to determine on the expediency of adopting the regu- 
lations which may be submitted to him by these courts, or by the 
other authoritics empowered to propose regulations. 

The duties of the Governor-Gencral in Council in his executive 
capacity consist of—first, his dutics as exercising the executive 
authority of the government of the British possessions in India. 
Secondly, his duties as the chicf representative of the Company 
in India, in their commercial capacity. 

The first-mentioned dutics must be considered, as they relate 
to the conduct of the relations between the British power in India, 
and Foreign States; and sccondly, as they are connected with 
the internal government of your own posscssions. 

The glorious termination of the late war in Mysore, and the 
events which preceded it, have not only widely extended your 
political relations, but have established the ascendancy of the 
British power over all the States of India. 

The maintenance of this ascendancy, necessarily demands the 
constant and vigilant attention of the Governor-General in Council. 

The public records afford abundant testimony, how great a 
proportion of the time of the Governor-General in Council must 
necessarily be occupied by this most impostant duty. 

The executive duties of thc Governor-General in Council as 
connected with the internal government of the British posses- 
sions of Bengal, comprise the management of the public revenue, 


' 


DISTINCT BRANCHES OF THESE EXECUTIVE DUTIES. 683 


the superintendance of the general finances of India, the regula- 
tion of the army, and the infinite variety of miscellaneous business 
which falls under “the cognizance of the executive authority in 
every government. 

The general controul exercised by the Governar-General in 
Council over the civil and military affairs of the subordinate 
governments, forms another important branch of these executive 
duties. 

The two subordinate governments may be considered with 
relation to the supreme government as dependent states. The 
nature of the controul exercised over those governments, cor- 
responds in many material respects, with that exercised by 
the Crown, with regard to the American and West Indian 
possessions. 

It is essential that this controul should be extended to all 
matters in any respect connected with the unity, strength and 
stability of the British power in India. 

The various questions arising out of the scttlement of our 
recent conquests, of our connection with the dependent power 
established in Mysore, and lastly, the introduction of the con- 
stitution of the internal Government of Bengal, into the British 
territorics, subject to the Governments of Fort St. George and 
Bombay, demand at present a more than ordinary attention 
of the Governor-General in Council, to the affairs of those 
governments, 

Another branch of the dutics of the Governor-Gencral in 
Council in his exccutive capacity, is the superintendance of the 
subordinate settlements, and of our acquisitions from the French 
and the Dutch. 

As the chief representative of the Company in their com- 
mercial capacity the Governor-General in Council has the imme- 
diate superintendance of their commercial concerns in Bengal, 
and exercises a gencral control over the provision of the invest- 
ment at the other presidencies, including a considerable degrge 
of attention to their affairs in China. 

The establishment attached to the Governor-General in Council 
in his legislative and exccutive capacity, for the conduct of these 
various and important dutics under circumstances peculiarly 
arduous and critical, has hitherto consisted of a secretary, and 
four sub-secretarics. The assistants under these officers are 
necessarily incompetent to afford them any effectual aid, in their 
more important duties. 


684 CHANGE IN SIGNATURE OF DESPATCHES. 


e 

From the constitution of these offices of sub-secretary, these 
offices were not acceptable to persons of any pretensions in the 
respective departments, either from their rank in the service, or 
from their talents. They have accordingly for the most part been 
filled by junior servants, necessarily incompetent to afford any 
efficient assistance in the exccution of the dutics of government. 

It is of the greatest importance to the public interests, that the 
establishments of the several departments immediately connected 
with the legislative and executive capacity of the Governor- 
General in Council should be so constituted, as to ensure at the 
head of the respective departments, the assistance of men of 
ability, integrity and experience, competent to the due conduct 
of the ordinary duties of the government. 

Establishments so constituted, will form a great check to 
negligence or misrule; at the same time, that they will always 
be powerful instruments in the hands of those who are zcalous 
in the promotion of the public interests. 

The Governor-General in Council therefore determined to make 
the situations of the public officers, who are to be his instruments 
for the conduct of the government of the British possessions in 
India, offices of high honour, and of the first cmolument. 

This was the only mode of enabling the Governor-General in 
Council to command the services of men of the first talents and 
ability, in the respective departments. 

As connected with the principle of relieving the Governor- 
General in Council from all unnecessary labour of detail, our 
attention has been drawn to the number of papers which it has 
been the practice for the Governor-General in Council to attest 
with his own signature. Much of the time of the Governor- 
General in Council is occupicd unnecessarily in the signature 
of these papers, and the despatch of the public business is often 
considerably impeded in obtaining his signature to them, 

We have accordingly determined, that all public papers shall 
be authenticated by the signature of the secretary to the depart- 
ment. (From this general rule however, we have of course 
exceptcd our addresscs to your honourable Court, and to the 
subordinate Presidencics and all other papers, to which con- 
siderations of respect to superior authority, or other circum- 
stances, may render it proper that the signatures of the Governor- 
General in Council should be affixed. Conformably to this 
determination, your honourable Court will find the sets of the 
public proceedings which are transmitted to you, attested by 


DEFICIENT QUALIFICATIONS OF CIVIL SERVANTS. 685 


the secretaries of the respective departments, by order of the 

Governor-General in Council, instead of being signed by the 

Governor-General and the members of council. 

In this review of the constitution of the supreme Government 
of the Company’s possessions in India, it could not escape the 
,Governor-General in council, that the wisest system of govern- 
‘ment will but imperfectly answer its ends, unless means are at 

’ 'the same time taken for providing persons duly qualified for the 
conduct of the system. 

It would be useless to enter into any argument to prove that 
the same general qualifications necessary for the first political, 
judicial, financial and commercial stations in Europe, are equally 

- requisite for the due discharge of the dutics of similar situations 
in India. 

Your honourable Court can yourselves form an adequate judg- 
ment how far your servants are in general competent to discharge 
these high offices. You know at what age they are sent from 
England, and what are at that period their qualifications for the 
offices to which they are destined. You are also apprized how 
far the occupations on which the first years of their residence 
in India are employed, are calculated to give them these quali- 
fications. 

Your servants are nominated to the highest stations of civil 
government, without any test of their possessing the requisite 
qualifications for the discharge of the functions of these offices. 
No such test could now indeed be required, none having been 
prescribed, and no means having been afforded to individuals of 
acquiring the necessary qualifications for public stations. 

In consequence of this serious defect in the system of your 
government, it has been the practice to transfer your servants 
from one line of the service to another, with little regard to the 
qualifications for the offices for which they have been selected, 
No imputation attaches in this respect to your governments. 
Among those from whom the sclection was to be made, there 
could not possibly exist any material ground of preference. 

It is far from our intention in these observations to reflect on 
the gencral talents, character, or integrity of your servants on 
this establishment. Whatever may be their deficiencies, they 
are not ascribable to themselves, but to the nature of the service. 
Great exertions indeed have been made by individuals, and it 
affords matter of astonishment, that under such disadvantages 
they should have acquitted themselves with so much ability and 


686 PROPOSED REMEDY, A COLLEGIATE INSTITUTION. 


success, in situations which in Europe are to be attained only by 
regular and systematic education and laborious exertions. 

It is obvious that an education exclusively European or 
Indian, would not qualify your servants for the situations which 
they are destined to fill. The foundation of their education 
must be laid in England, and it must be completed sys- 
tematically after their arrival in India. 

The Governor-General in Council has, therefore, determined 
to found an establishment at this Presidency, of the nature of 
a collegiate institution, for the purpose of enabling the servants 
of the Company to perfect themselves in those acquircments, 
which form the necessary qualifications for the different lines of 
the service, in which they may choose to engage. It is our 
intention that the junior servants shall be attached to this 
institution for a certain period after their arrival, instead of 
being employed in the unprofitable occupation of transcribing 
papers, and abandoned to the dictates of thcir own discretion, 
both with regard to their morals and acquirements. 

An institution of this description will ensure a succession of 
men, equal to the support of the great interests of the Company, 
and of the British nation in India. 

The above observations with regard to the education and 
qualifications of your civil servants in Bengal, for the conduct 
of civil government apply with equal force to your servants 
under the other Presidencics. Under our instructions to Tort 
St. George, of the 31st December last, and the orders which we 
have it in contemplation to issue to Bombay, the civil servants 
on those establishments will be shortly called upon to exercise 
the same important functions, as the civil servants in Bengal. 

Whether it will be advisable to bring the junior servants 
attached to the Establishments of Fort St. George and Bombay 
to Bengal in the first instance, in order to cnable them to 
acquire the necessary qualifications here, or to found institutions 
for the purpose at those Presidencies, is a question which will 
demand further consideration. 

When the details of the plan of the intended institution shall 
have been arranged, we shall lose no time in forwarding it to 
your honourable Court. As it cannot fail to redound equally 
to the honour and happiness of the civil servants, as well as to 
promote the solid and substantial interests of the Company, and 
of the nation, we fecl the strongest conviction that it will mect 
your approbation. 


RIGHTEOUSNESS EXALTETH, A NATION, 687 


As connected with the subject of forming the characters of 
your servants, we cannot omit to notice the state of your 
religious establishments in this country. 

The sentiments which have occurred to the Governor-General 
regarding these establishments, will hereafter form the subject 
of a separate address to your honourable Court from his 
Lordship. 

It is of the last importance to the stability of the British 
power in India, that these establishments should be placed on 
the most respectable footing. Such establishments will cherish 
in the minds of the servants of the Company, a sense of moral 
duty, and teach those who fill important stations, that the great 
public duties which they are called upon to execute in India, 
are not of a less sacred nature than the dutics of similar 

_ situations in their own country. In proportion as persons 
“ holding such situations are brought to entertain these high and 
worthy notions of their functions, and to consider themselves 
as more especially accountable to that Being, whose instruments 
they are in the government of a large portion of the human 
race, in the same degrce will they discharge their duties with 
zcal, diligence and integrity. 

We feel that it would not only be impolitic, but highly 
immoral to suppose that Providence has admitted of the estab- 
lishment of the British power over the finest provinces of India, 

y-with any other view than that of its being conducive to the 
happincss of the people, as well as to our national advantage. 

In proportion as the policy and conduct of the British Govern- 
ment shall correspond with these beneficent intentions, we are 
persuaded that its power will acquire increasing stability. 

Impressed with a deep sense of the justice and wisdom of 
these principles, we are confident that it will always be equally 
for the intcrests of the Company, and of the British nation, that 
they should constitute the. basis of the system of our Indian 
Government; and that consistently with the considerations of 
a well regulated economy, we ought never to withhold that 

~V portion of the resources derived from these valuable possessions, 
which may be found indispensably necessary for dispensing to 
them the invaluable blessings of civil order and good govern- 
ment, 
We have the honour to be, &c. 
WELLESLEY and COUNCIL, 


688 EXCLUSIVE PROVINCE OF GOV.-GENERAL IN COUNCIL. 


100. The Earl of Mornington to Lord Clive. 
Relations of the Supreme to the Subordinate Governments. 


(Extract.) (Most Private and Confidential.) 


My Lord, Fort William, July 29th, 1798. 


Having troubled your Lordship with so much detail upon the 
subject of the internal Government of Fort St. George, I shall 
proceed to state some considerations with regard to the nature 
of the relation between that Government and the Governor- 
General in Council of Bengal. Your Lordship is, I doubt not, 
perfectly conversant with the provisions of the law on this point ; 
I shall therefore advert merely to the practical principles result- 
ing from those provisions; &nd I am anxious to explain my 
sentiments to your Lordship upon this head in the carliest period 
of your government, not only becausc the greatest inconveniences 
have resulted to the public service from misunderstandings of the 
distinct practical duties of the two Governments, but because I 
know that a faction exists at Madras, whose constant endeavour 
has been and will be assiduously employed to foment those 
misunderstandings into a systematic spirit of jealousy and con- 
tention. 

{_All measures relating to the gencral defence and protection of 
India, to the system of our alliances, and of our negociations or 
intercourse with the native powers, to the levying war or making 
peace, to the general administration of the revenues of all the 
Presidencies, to the employment of the military force, and finally 
to every point affecting the general interests whether civil, 
military, or political of the Company’s possessions, form the 
exclusive duties arising out of the superintending power of the 
Governor-Gencral in Council. For all measures of this descrip- 
tion, he alone is responsible ; and therefore the duty of the other 
Presidencies, with regard to such measures, consists in a cordial 
co-operation in the execution of that, which it is the peculiar 
province of the Governor-General in Council to determine. The 
Governor-General being in possession of the whole supcrin- 
tendence and control, as well as of the means of comprehending 
in one view the entire state of the Company’s empire and trade, 
and of all the various considerations and circumstances which 
may affect either, must frequently issue instructions, the funda- 
mental principles and final scope of which cannot at first sight 
be fully understood by the other Presidencics: in such cases 


"TIS MINE TO SPEAK, AND YOURS TO HEAR. 689 


(as well indeed as in any of those already described), I am 
persuaded that your Lordship will concur with me in thinking 
that the duty of the other Presidencies can (never be to mix 
direct or indirect censures with thcir formal obedience to the 
legal authority of the Governor-General in Council: still less 
can it be their duty, to anticipate his decisions by the premature 
interposition of their opinions and advice in any quarter, where 
such interference may counteract the success of his general plans, 
and may introduce all the mischiefs and confusion of divided 
councils, and of conflicting authority. The examination of the 
records of the late Government of Fort St. George, will manifest 
to your Lordship a constant tendency towards this fatal error ; 
and even since my arrival in Bengal, I have found it necessary 
to restrain the symptoms of the*same disposition in two in- 
stances; the one a letter written to Admiral Rainier, without 
any previous concert with me, suggesting a plan of operations 
for his Majesty’s squadron entirely incompatible with my views 
for the gencral protection of our possessiong.) The other, a letter 
to me in Council, containing both direct and indirect censures of 
the orders which I have latcly issued for assembling the army on 
the coast ; a measure indispensably necessary, and founded on a 
varicty of rcasons, of which the Government of Fort St. George 
could not at that time comprehend either the nature of extent. 
Under your Lordship’s administration, I am confident that no 
such embarrassment can ever occur. With the same freedom 
which I have used throughout this letter, I will state to you 
distinctly the mode in which I propose to conduct the inter- 
course between the two Governments, with a view to sccure their 
cordial co-operation, and to preclude the possibility of distrac- 
tion. Every endeavour shall be used on my part to communi- 
cate to your Lordship the fullest and earliest intelligence of the 
nature and object of any measure which I may have in contem~= 
plation, either with relation to your particular Government, or 
to the general interests of the whole British Empire in India. 
These communications will be made to your Lordship through 
the channel of my private correspondence. On the other hand, 
I make it my carnest request to your Lordship, that whenever 
any such communication shall be delayed, you will attribute the 
delay cither to the absolute necessity of the case, or to my vicws 
of the public service; and that you will therefore have the good- 
ness to prevent the Government of Fort St. George from pro- 
cecding to take any steps upon matters belonging to my exclusive 


* Yy ? 


s 
690 CLIVE INVITED TO OFFER PRIVATE SUGGESTIONS, 


responsibility, without a full previous communication with me, 
and without being apprised of my concurrence. In your Lord- 
ship’s private correspondence, I trust that your Lordship will 
permit me to hope for the advantage of your unreserved opinion, 
not only with respect to all matters within your own peculiar 
charge, but to any point which you may think essential to the 
general interests of the British Empire in India; and I assure 
your Lordship most sincerely that I shall always receive your 
private suggestions as personal favours. In regulating your 
public correspondence, I request that your Lordship will advert 
to the suggestions contained in this Ictter, and that you will 
exclude from the public records every indication of jealousy and 
counteraction, On my part you will always find a sincere dis- 
position in every transaction, both public and private, to consider 
your Lordship’s authority as a part of my own, and to repel 
every attempt to disunite the two Governments. 
T have the honour to be, &c. 
MORNINGTON. 


101. The Marquess Wellesley to the Right Honourable Henry 
Addington. 


Serious dangers involucd in the direct assumption of Indian 
patronage by the Directors, or the Board of Control. 


(Extract.) 


Cawnpore, Jan. 10, 1802. 
My dear Sir, 


The proper office of the Court of Directors is to superintend 
and control the local governments of India in the exercise of 
the power of appointment to the various exccutive offices of 
this country, as well as in every other branch of the exccutive 
government. 

It was not in the contemplation of the legislature, by the act 
of 1793, to vest in the Court of Directors the direct power of 
nomination to every office in the local government of India; the 
power of nomination to such offices, and indeed the whole civil 
and military government are in distinct terms vested by the 
act of 1793 in the Governors in Council of the three Presidencies, 
subject to the local control of the Governor-General in Council, 
and in Europe to that of the Court of Directors, and of the 
Board of Commissioners for the affairs of India, 


. 


¥ 
PATRONAGE BELONGS TO THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT, 691 


The Court of Directors may certainly issue orders directing 
the government of India to appoint any particular person to any 
executive office in India, but the government on the spot ought 
to possess and to exercise the same free discretion with regard 
to the execution of such orders, as it possesses and exercises 
with regard to any other orders from home, It is, however, 
highly incxpedient to issue any orders from England for the 
dircct nomination of any person to office below the Councils in 
India; and it is evident, that, under any modification, such 
orders, although not peremptory, must greatly restrain the dis- 
cretion of the local government in the choice of its instruments. 

If all such orders are to be considered as of a peremptory 
nature, the whole local patronage of India will, in fact, be 
disposed of in Leadenhall Street, and the most attentive con- 
sideration is due to the probable effects of such a system. 

If the King’s Commissioners for India and the Court of 
Directors should at any time agree to co-operate in filling from 
home all official vacancies which shall occur in India, it is 
evident that the result of such a combination might be the 
transfer of the whole local patronage of India, or of a certain 
share of it to the Crown. 

Whatever share of the patronage of India should be obtained 
by the Crown in this manner, would be exercised in the most 
dangerous and objectionable form; for as the appointments to 
office would be made in an indirect manner, and through several 
successive channels of authority, no direct responsibility would 
attach to the ministers of the Crown; and the influence of the 
Crown might become considerably extended through a secret 
and unobserved course, and without the possibility of public 
control. 

The direct transfer of the whole local patronage of India to 
the Crown, under a definite and public responsibility, would be 
infinitely less objectionable than the exercise of such an indirect 
and indefinite influence. That share of the local patronage of 
India which, under the arrangement supposed, would be allotted 
to the Gourt of Directors, would tend to establish in their hands 
a species of influence, which could never be regulated by a due 
control, and which, in a numcrous and fluctuating body, subject 
to the impulse of various interests, and necessarily exempt from 
individual responsibility, would not often be governed by the 
exclusive consideration of the prosperity of the public service in 
India. 

Yy2 


692 CONSTITUTIONAL DANGER OF HOME PATRONAGE, 


The Governor-General, and each of the Governors in India, 
acts under a severe personal responsibility in every nomination 
to office; and while the nominations of the respective local 
governments shall be superintended and controlled by the Court 
of Directors and by the Board of Commissioners, (neither 
authority possessing any private interest directly or indirectly 
in any such nomination,) the system of control would appear to 
be so complete, as to secure the public interests at home against 
the growth of any undue influence, and the public service 
abroad against any material abuse of the local patronage. 

But if the Court, or the Board, or both united, are to be 
considered as the direct sources of the local patronage of India, 
they will possess a private intcrest in the decision of every 
question which can arise concerning the nomination to any office 
in India; they will be interested to rescind appointments made 
-in India for the purpose of exercising their own patronage from 
home ; and they will become utterly disqualificd for the exercise 
‘of a pure and impartial superintendence and control of the 
‘conduct of the Indian government in the important duty of 
administering the local patronage of this vast empire. 

Such a system would be sufficiently objectionable even in its 

application to the public and constitutional interests in England; 
its application to the public service in India is however infinitely 
more perilous. 
* Tt must extinguish all local subordination in India, since no 
public servant would ever respect the local government, after it 
should have been deprived of the power of regulating official 
appointments and removals. All emulation to obtain the 
approbation of the local government would expire; no public 
servant would estcem the countenance or even the nomination 
of the local government to be any sccurity for promotion in the 
service, or woud dread the consequences of its disapprobation 
or censure. |The attention of the whole public service would be 
withdrawn from the Governor on the spot, and would be fixed 
on schemes of intrigue and cabal, for the purpose of forming 
and cultivating interests in England, by which the favour of 
the Court of Directors or of the Board of Control might be 
alata 

In such a situation the Governor on the spot would be an 
useless cypher without power, authority or respect. Fle might 
be compelled in every branch of the administration to employ 
instruments in whose capacity, knowledge or integrity he placed 


PATRONAGE ESSENTIAL TO VIGOR OF LOCAL RULE. 693 


no reliance, and to witness the exclusion from office of the most 
able, intelligent, and honest servants of the public. For it is 
impossible to suppose that the Government on the spot should 
not always possess the best means of ascertaining the relative 
estimation and value of the characters of the public servants 
‘and officers in India, and should not always feel the nearest and 
most urgent interest in the proper selection of the immediate 
instruments of the local executive power 

lL In this respect, a remote authority, constituted as the Court of 
Directors is, can neither possess equal knowledge, nor feel an 
equally pressing and sensible interest, nor be restrained _by 
equally powerful ties of responsibility and personal character, 

If any Governor be supposed incapable or unwilling to make 
such a proper selection of public servants and officers, let him 
be removed; but while he shall be suffcred to remain in India, 
the public service absolutcly demands that he shall possess 
and exercise that decisive influence in the distribution of office 
which may enable him to maintain due subordination, to excite 
honourable emulation, and to sccure the efficient, pure, and 
regular despatch of the public business in every department, 
by employing those in whom he confides, by excluding those 
whom he distrusts, and by convincing the public servants that 
his approbation is the certain road to public emoluments and 
honours, and that his censure is a public disgrace. 

All these important objects I have hitherto accomplished, by 
such a discharge of my duty in the distribution of the patronage 
committed to my trust, as it will be the happiness and pride of 
my life to submit to the most severe inspection of Parliament ; 
but I cannot consent to encounter the responsibility of this 
station, under a system calculated to bind my hands and to 
frustrate every dictate of my judgment and conscience, 

The great and wise object of Parliament in 1793 was, under 
due control, to impart such a degree of local authority and 
vigour to the government of India as should enable it to 
maintain this perilous empire against the hourly vicissitudes 
which surround it. Where is the sccurity of that object if the 
government of India shall be thwarted in every subordinate 
department, deprived of all local influence, and counteracted in 
every official detail by a remote authority, interfering in the 
nomination of every public servant and officer? (It would be 
impossible to conduct any government in any part of the world 
under the weight of such disgraceful chains; but it would be 


694 COUNCILS HAVE NO POWERS DISTINCT FROM GOVERNOR. 


the excess of rashness and insanity to attempt to hold this most 
arduous charge, in the present crisis, with hands so weakened, 
and with an authority so embarrassed and impaircd. ' 
Believe to be, my dear Sir, 
with the most sincere respect and regard your's, 
always most faithfully and affectionately, 


WELLESLEY. 


102. The EBarl of Mornington to the Hon. Jonathan Duncan. 


Working of the Local Government in the absence of the Governor, 
within the limits of the Presidency. 


(Extract.) 
Fort William, April 16th, 1800. 
Sir, 

While the Governors of Fort St. George or Bombay remain 
within the limits of their governments, it is evident that the 
members of the respective councils possess no powers distinct 
from the Governor, and that they are incompetent to perform 
any act of government otherwise than in his presence, and even 
otherwise than with his assent in every case excepting judicial 
proceedings, and those particularly specificd in the Act of 
Parliament. 

¥, therefore, the necessity of the occasional absence of the 
Governor from the Presidency be admitted, either the gencral ad- 
ministration of the affairs of the Government must be suspended 
during his absence, or he must exercise, under his separate 
responsibility, to the extent which circumstances may require, all 
the powers which are vested in him by law when in council at 
the Presidency, afterwards recording his acts in council. 

The legal incompetency of the council to exercise any portion 
of the public authority independently of the Governor, is not 
more evident than the expediency of limiting the exercise of the 
powers of government, in the case under consideration, to the 
Governor’s hands, and of precluding the members of council, in 
the absence of the Governor, from exercising any such indepen- 
dent authority. The Governor, by law, under all circumstances, 
is responsible for the administration of the affairs of the Govern- 
ment. He is not only authorized, but bound to act on his 


GOVERNOR’S SEPARATE POWER AN ACTIVE TRUST. 695 


separate opinion distinct from that of the council in all cases of 
deliberate difference on subjects of importance. A deference to 
the opinions of the members of council, or an inclination to con- 
ciliate their co-operation in the general system of the government, 
will not justify the Governor in any departure from his own 
conscientious judgment in any matter affecting the public 
interests; for the lettey and spirit of the law have rendcred it 
not only his right, butlhis duty to act on his own scparate judg- 
ment, wherever, in cases of magnitude, it shall, be clearly and 
decisively different from that of the council.) If the Governor 
should submit his opinion to that of the council, he alone is, 
and ought to be, responsible for the consequences of any act 
done under such circumstances} The power of acting separately 
is an active trust in the hands of the Governor, and he must be 
responsible, not only for its abusive exercise, but for suffering it 
“to lie dormant whenever the public service requires it to be called 
forthl As long as this responsibility attaches to the Governor, 
he ought to retain all the powers necessary to the discharge of 
his dutics. Were these powcrs to devolve to the council during 
the absence of the Governor, in the case supposed, it is evident 
that they might be employed during that period, to the subversion 
of the gencral system of mcasures which the Governor might 
have established. 

“It is, therefore, my opinion, that during your residence at 
Surat, no measure of importance should be taken by the members 
of council at Bombay without your previous sanction, where the 
case may be such as to admit of the delay of a reference to you ; 
and that all appointments to offices should proceed directly from 
yourself in the same manner as if you were prcscnt at the seat 
of government, 

I also recommend that you direct copics of all the papers of 
importance to be forwarded to you by the most expeditious con- 
veyance, and that you issue such orders on the subject of them, 
as you may think proper, under your own separate responsibility, 

The members of the council may conduct the ordinary details 
of government during your absence, and their acts, as well as 
your own, may be regularly recorded in council on your return 
to the Presidency. 


I have the honour to be, &c. 
MORNINGTON, 


696 LONG WAR MAKES THE INDIAN DEBT MORE SERIOUS. 


IX. FINANCE AND TRADE. 


103. The Right. Hon. Henry Dundas to the Earl of 
Mornington. 


Necessity and means of ‘keeping up a large investment from India? 
Encouragement of India-built shipping for Private Trade. °° 


Wimbledon, 18th March, 1799. 


Received at Fort William, 5th August, 1799. 
My dear Lord, 


The financial state of our affairs in India, and the arrangement 
of them in future, will be the subject of official correspondence 
from the Court of Directors, by some carly conveyance; but the 
present situation of the finances and commerce of India have 
suggested to my mind many important considerations, which I 
would think it wrong to withhold from you in the form of a 
private communication, as the opinions I shall lay before you 
may probably operate upon your conduct previous to the period 
when the same opinions may reach you in the more tedious 
form of despatches through the medium of the Court of 
Directors. This mode of earlier communication with you is the 
more necessary, as I am aware some of the opinions which 
I hold will be the cause of a difference of opinion among the 
Directors, and must ultimately be settled by the authority of 
the Board of Control, a form of proceeding necessarily pro- 
ductive of delay. 

If there had been the prospect of the war coming to any 
speedy conclusion, I should not have been uncasy by the 
circumstance of a very considerable addition of the debt in 
India, for the purpose of continuing a large investment from an 
Indian capital, because from the experience I have already had 
in extricating their affairs under very unpromising circumstances, 
I should have felt perfectly satisfied that a few years after the 
return of peace, would have sufficed, speedily, to wipe off the 


IMPORTANCE OF A LARGE INVESTMENT FROM INDIA. 697 


debt which the mixt exigencies of war and commerce had 
created. This, however, has its bounds, for if the debt in India 
is allowed to increase so much as to become unwieldy and 
unmanageable, we are cut off from the means of extricating our 
affairs when peace shall have returned. The loans, from being 
made in times of difficulty, are accomplished at an exorbitant 
rate of interest, and thereby exhaust the whole of the surplus 
revenue, which is to operate as the sinking fund for the 
redemption of the debt after the return of peace. It is the more 
necessary I should give a particular attention to these con- 
siderations, because it is very natural for the Court of Directors 
to turn their eyes chiefly to the state of their affairs in Leaden- 
hall-strect, and both they and the Proprietors are flattered, by 
the view of sales at home, uncommonly large, and a swelling 
balance in their coffers at home; while, at the same time, it is 
obvious to every person who will take a comprchensive view of 
their affairs, that this flattering delusion, permitted to go on for 
a very few ycars, would bring irretricvable ruin upon the finances 
of India, and totally disable us from maintaining there that pre- 
eminence of wealth and power which has proved so important to 
the general interests of the British Empire. 

Viewing this subject in all its bearings, J ani well aware of the 
importance of keeping up the means of a large investment from 
India. | This principle is important, not only from the encourage- 
ment it affords to the navigation and shipping of the kingdom; 
from the addition it makes annually to the wealth and capital 
of the country, and from its being a fruitful source of revenue ; 
but in addition to all these and similar considerations, I must 
add the necessity of such an investment, as immediately con- 
nected with the prosperity of our Indian provinces. /¢ zs fo the 
tnereased exports from India to Europe, that we are to attribute 
the increase of Indian prosperity, industry, population, and revenue ; 
and the manufacturers of that country would be reduced to very 
deplorable circumstances if any severe check was to be given to 
the usual investment and exports from India. These considera- 
tions necessarily Icad to the conclusion of bringing home as 
large an investment as our means will enable us to do. I see 
no difficulty in accomplishing this, but it must be done by means 
of resources which do not Icad to the ruin of our finances in 
India. The same circumstances which have led to putting the 
whole commerce of the world into the hands of this country, 
do operate in a proportionable degree to extend beyond the 


698 WHENCE THE INVESTMENT MAY BE PROVIDED, 


example of all former times, the trade of the East India Com- 
pany, and the produce of their sales in Leadenhall-strect. This 
ought to be encouraged by every means; but the overflowing 
balance from thence arising after defraying their necessary 
burdens at home, ought to be employed in the purchase of 
bullion, to be consigned to India and China, for the purchase of 
a large and profitable investment. The times, from the influx 
of wealth into this country, are highly favourable to such an 
operation, the beneficial effects of which are obvious in a varicty 
of ways. Your Lordship states, and all the other scttlements 
concur in the same statement, that our Indian possessions are 
greatly distressed from the want of specie. The measure I have 
mentioned effectually removes that distress, and is likewise 
productive of another essential benefit. It is stated that the 
increase of the loans at so high a rate of interest, checks all 
private credit, and obstructs all other pecuniary transactions ; 
but this inconvenience would not be found, if the system I have 
alluded to, was carried into exccution. 

It is with much satisfaction I observe in some of your Lord- 
ship’s recent despatches, that you find yourself warranted by the 
opinions of some of the most intelligent persons upon the spot, 
in stating, that the export of manufactures from this country may 
be considerably increased. This is certainly the most desirable 
of all resources for the supply of a commercial investment from 
India, and it ought to have no limits, except what are prescribed 
by the power of selling them in India or China. 

Another commercial resource, is what can be got in India 
upon the foundation of the remittance plan. This, I understand, 
has likewise received a check, in consequence of the high rate of 
interest paid for the government loans in India; but if thesc 
loans are stopped, and the capital of the debt itself considerably 
diminished cach year by the remittance plan, an effectual cure 
is administered to this inconvenience, and the commercial 
resources of the Company materially aided, without the neccs- 
sity of extravagant loans for that purpose. 

These are the ‘outlines of the system which, in my opinion, 
ought to be pursued during the remainder of the war, and as 
during its continuance our commerce will remain unbounded, 
and the wealth of the world continue to be collected here, no 
inconvenience whatever can arisc from the export of bullion to 
India and China; on the contrary, I understand it would rather 
be in this point of view, materially convenient. The result, 


COMPANY QUITE UNEQUAL TG THE EXPORT TRADE. 699 


therefore, of what I have stated, is that the investment ought 
not to be diminished, but kept up at its present standard, and 
the resources for doing so are,—1st, The surplus revenues in 
India, after defraying the expense of establishment and the 
interest of debt. This fund will increase in proportion as the 
debt is diminished by the plan of remittance. andly, By bills 
upon the East India Company to the amount of what can be 
got there, applicable to the reduction of the capital of the debt 
in India. 3rdly, An increased amount of the export of manu- 
factures from this country, which gencrally upon an average, 
has been reckoned for some years past for India, exclusive of 
China, to amount to about five hundred thousand pounds. And 
lastly, a remittance of bullion to whatever amount may be 
necessary, joined to the above mentioned resources, to keep up 
the usual investments from India. 

If this system is adopted, and invariably adhered to, we will 
be cnabled, without any material inconvenience, to continue the 
war so long as our invetcrate encmy shall be disposed, or in a 
condition to carry on the contcst. The many other collateral 
advantages resulting from such a system, and connected with 
theeprosperity and safety of India, are so obvious, it is unncces- 
sary to trouble your Lordship with detailing them. 

IIaving stated all that appears to be necessary, so far as 
concerns the finances of India, and the commercial resources 
of the East India Company, as connected with their finances, 
I wish now to direct your Lordship’s attention to the trade of 
India, in a more extended point of view. 

It is notorious that at no period the capital or commercial 
powers of the East India Company have been able to embrace 
the whole, or near the whole of the wealth of India, exported 
from thence by trade to Europe. This is placed beyond a doubt 
by a great share of the Indian trade now in the possession of 
neutral nations, a great part of which rests upon the capital 
and fortune of the servants of the East India Company. Your 
Lordship will recollect that at the time I introduced the pro- 
position for renewing the Charter of the East India Company, 
I endeavoured to remedy this obvious absurdity by obliging 
the East India Company to allot a certain proportion of ton- 
nage to the purposcs of private trade. They agreed to it with 
reluctance, and it is so managed as to render the provision 
almost illusory. I nced not cnumerate to your Lordship the 
causes which have rendered it of no avail. They appear in the 


700 PITT INTENDS TO REDUCE DUTIES ON INDIAN-IMPORTS. 


applications made to the Government of India by the resident 
traders in India, and are recorded in the correspondence between 
the Board of Trade and Supreme Council in India, so that they 
must be perfectly familiar to your Lordship. In truth, there is 
no remedy for this evil but two—ist, Alluring the trade of India 
to resort to the port of London, by diminishing the expenses of 
doing so. The 2nd is, By authorising the Government of India 
to license the appropriation of India-built shipping to the pur- 
pose of bringing home that Indian trade, which the means and 
capital of the East India Company is unable to bring home. The 
first of those ways will, I trust, be effectuated by the Bill which 
Mr. Pitt has agreed to introduce for the reduction of the duties 
upon imports from India, and the second must be accomplished 
by giving to the Government in India that authority to license 
India-built shipping, to which I have already alluded. 

This last measure will, I take it for granted, undergo much 
discussion before it can be carried into exccution, but it must 
be carried. The whole weight of the shipping interest will be 
opposed to such a proposition, under a most false and crroneous 
idea that it is prejudicial to thcir interests. Nothing but 
ignorance of the subject could Icad them to entertain such» an 
idea. They made an attempt to accomplish it by inflaming the 
interests of the ship carpenters in the river Thames, at the time 
of the general mutiny in the navy. It was an unhandsome 
proceeding upon their part, and was resisted by me in a Ictter 
I then addressed to the principal ship-builders in the river. 
I do not know whether they did not choose to answer it, or 
whether they found it to be unanswerable; but I never received 
any reply to it. I have often thought upon the subject since, 
and the more I have thought upon it, the more Iam convinced 
of the truth of every proposition which that Ictter contains ; 
I send you a copy of it, and you may rest assured, that no 
exertion shall be wanting on my part specdily to introduce into 
practice the system detailed in that Ictter. 

It has not reached me in any authentic form, but I am 
credibly informed that your Lordship, upon the application of 
the resident traders in India, has authorized a number of India- 
built ships to be taken up, for the purpose of bringing home the 
surplus trade of India. I hope the information is true, both 
because it is a measure of much wisdom, and because it will 
bring the point directly to issue, and you need not be under any 
apprehension as to the result of it. 


INDIAN -GOVERNMENT TO LICENSE INDIA-BUILT SHIPS, 7O1l 


Although, from the influence I have stated, there may be a 
contest in the Court of Directors with regard to the subject last 
mentioned, I do not believe there will be any material objection 
offered against any of the other measures I have had occasion 
to treat of in this letter; indeed, one leading principle has 
already been acted upon to a considerable extent, for the Court 
of Directors have already sent out to India, bullion to the 
amount of £759,226, and they have it in contemplation to send 
more. In short, I make no doubt of their being induced to send 
out what is requisite for the accomplishment of the commercial 
plan, I have detailed in the course of this Ictter. 

Ihave nothing further to trouble you with at present. It is 
only necessary for me to remind you, that although the opinions’ 
I have laid before you, rest for the present merely upon the 
footing of a private unofficial communication, I trust they, or the 
substance of them, will speedily be conveyed to you in due 
official form. 

I remain, my dear Lord, your’s very faithfully, 
HENRY Dunbas. 


104. The Marquess Wellesley to the Honourable the 
Court of Directors, 


Propriety of licensing India-built ships for Private Trade between 
India and England. 


Fort William, September 30th, 1800. 
Sirs, 

Having decmcd it to be my duty to revert during the present 
scason to my plan of the 5th of October, 1798, for the en- 
couragement of the private trade between India and the Port 
of London, I now have the honour to submit to your Honour- 
able Court, a view of the urgent considerations which have 
determined me to adopt this temporary arrangement for the 
current year, and to add the reasons which induce me to hope 
that your honourable Court will specdily confirm my procced- 
ings by a permanent system of gegulation, founded on similar 
principles. 

I entertained a confident expectation, that I should have 
received at an carly period of the season the sanction of your 
honourable Court for reverting to the plan of October, 1798, or 
for adopting some arrangement equally calculated to facilitate 


702 I NAVE BEEN OBLIGED TU EMPLOY INDIAN VESSELS. 

and encourage the private trade between India and England; 
but I have been disappointed in my expectation of receiving an 
early and seasonable notification of your final commands; and 
the usual season for exportation from this port to Europe, 1s 
already opening under such circumstances as absolutely compel 
me to adopt a resolution, which my duty and inclination would 
have induced me to delay. 

The employment of ships built in India, between this port and 
that of London, is no longer merely a question of expediency, 
or of liberal commercial policy;|the deficiency of the tonnage 
‘expected from Europe reduces me to the absolute necessity 
of providing a large proportion of Indian tonnage, for the ser- 
‘vice of the present season. in order to secure the conveyance of 
the heavy articles of your investment, and to fulfil your legal 
obligations... The only question, on which I retain the power of 
exercising a free judgment with relation to this subject, is (con- 
fined to the mode of obtaining the necessary tonnage for these 
indispensable purposes. 

In forming my decision on this question, it was also necessary 
to consider what provision should be made for the conveyance 
to the Port of London of such goods, as might be provided 
during the current season by private British merchants resident 
in India, beyond the amount of the statutable tonnage of 3,000 
tons ; and by what regulation the exportation of such goods 
should be governed. The importance and urgency of both these 
considerations were greatly enhanced by the actual state of the 
forcign trade of this port. 

The nature of the case appeared to me to limit my decision to 
an option between the regulation observed in the season 1799- 
1800, (conformably to the orders of your honourable Court. of 
the 25th of May, 1798,) and the plan contained in the advertise- 
ment, published by the Board of Trade under my orders on the 
5th of October, 1798. 

I have carefully compared the principles, objects, policy, 
and practical operation of both systems, and I now have the 


honour to lay before your honourable Court the result of that 


comparison. — 


The orders of your honourable Court of the 25th of May, 1798, 
were framed with a view of facilitating and encouraging the 
private trade between India and England. The primary objects 
of those orders were to protect the merchants, not being pro- 
prictors of ships, against any undue enhancement of the price 


BENEFITS OF THIS TO MERCHANTS AND SHIPOWNERS. 703 


of freight by the proprictors of ships, and to prevent persons, 
being proprictors of ships, and also merchants, from trading to 
greater advantage than such merchants as might not unite both 
capacities. 

Your orders of the 25th of May, 1798, were considered by the 
merchants, for whose benefit they were intended, (particularly 
by the proprietors of heavy goods) to be extremely prejudicial 
to their interests. 

Those orders were reccived with equal dissatisfaction by the 
proprictors of ships, who manifested the greatest reluctance to 
let their ships unconditionally to the Company, although the 
rate of freight allowed for the ships was comparatively high. 

The proprictors of ships, and the freighters (possessing no pro- 
perty in ships) considered it to be for their mutual advantage, 
that they should be Icft to make their arrangements with each 
other; both partics appearing equally adverse to the intervention 
of the Company’s agency. 

Under the plan contained in the advertisement of the 5th of 
October, 1798, the proprictors of ships were enabled to make a 
more perfect assortment of the cargocs; to load their ships in the 
most advantageous and expeditious manner; to despatch them 
at the most favourable periods of the season; and to prevent the 
loss, which (under the plan adopted in conformity to your orders 
of the 25th of May, 1798,) the proprictors of ships sustain by 
unavoidable delays in the adjustment of accounts, and in the 
payment of the freight by the Company in England. 

The proprictors of ships were enabled, under the plan of 
October, 1798, to afford the freight at a reduced rate, at the 
same time that they derived a greater profit on that rate than 
on the higher rates of freight fixed by the Governor-General in 
Council in 1799-1800, in conformity to your orders of the 25th 
of May, 1798. 

To the merchant who is not proprictor of a ship, the plan con- 
tained in the advertisement of the 5th of October, 1798, affords 
the most important advantages. IIe obtains a considerable re- 
duction in the rate of freight; he is cnabled to settle his enage- 
ments with the proprictor of the ship previously to the purchase 
of goods; to purchase such goods as may be advantageously 
invested under the existing rates of freight; and to regulate 
every consignment and draft according to the quantity of the 
tonnage engaged, to the period of despatching the goods from 
India, and to that of their expected arrival in England. 


704 GROWTH OF THE EXPORT TRADE OF CALCUTTA, 


The merchant is embarrassed, if compelled, under any modifi- 
cation, to depend on the Company for tonnage, for the arrange- 
ment of the rates of freight, or for the distribution of the cargo. 
He can neither be secure of the requisite quantity of tonnage, 
nor of the time of despatching his goods from India, nor of the 
ship on which they may be laden, nor of the mode in which they 
may be distributed ; and his trade is burthened with an expensive 
rate of freight, which deprives him of all reasonable expectation 
of profit. 

The quantity of tonnage (exclusive of the goods sent in the 
privileges of the commanders and officers of ships) annually 
occupied by private goods, shipped from this Presidency alone, 
in the several years clapsed subsequent to the Act of Parliament 
in 1793, is stated in the following account :-— 


Tons. Tons. Tons. 
1794-5 . 2,473 1796-7 . 4,659 1798-9 » 6,223 
1795-6 . 5,346 1797-8 . 3,787 1799-1800 . 7,748 


The correspondence of the Board of Trade with the Governor- 
Gencral in Council on the subject of the provision of tonnage 
has been submitted to the consideration of your honourable 
Court. The reports of that Board, with the documents annexed 
to them, afford abundant proof, that a much larger quantity of 
private goods would have been shipped for England during the 
seasons enumerated in the preceding account (particularly during 
the year 1799-1800) if adequate encouragement had been ex- 
tended to the navigation and commerce of your dominions in 
ships built in the ports of India, and if the British merchants 
resident in India had been assured of permanent indulgence to 
their trade with the port of London. 

Upon an average of the six years specified in the preceding 
account, about 5,000 tons of private goods from Bengal alone 
were annually exported to England; the amount, therefore, of 
the private goods exported from Bengal alone, during that period 
of time, has exceeded by 2,000 tons annually the amount of the 
tonnage allotted by law for all India. It is to be observed, that 
a considerable portion of the total amount of these 5,000 tons 
was annually furnished by ships built in India. 

Exclusively of two ships recently engaged, and provided with 
cargoes, to the amount of 1,500 tons, the port of Calcutta now 
contains above 10,000 tonsof shipping, built in India, of a descrip- 
tion calculated for the conveyance of cargoes to England, This 


TONNAGE FURNISHED FROM ENGLAND INSUFFICIENT. 705 


tonnage has already been tendered, and is actually at command 
for that purpose. * 

From the preceding statement, and from the porresondende 
of the Governor-Gencral in Council with the Board of Trade, it 
is evident, that the wise policy which ‘dictated the clauses of the 
Act of Parliament passed in 1793, with respect to the trade of 
private merchants between India and England, has been toa 
great degree frustrated by the insufficiency of the tonnage fur- 
nished from England, and by the unavoidable expense and 
inconvenience attending the terms and manner of its provision. 

From the quantity of private tonnage now at command in the 
port of Calcutta, and from the state of perfection which the art 
of ship-building has already attained in Bengal, (promising a 
still more rapid progress, and supported by abundant and in- 
creasing supplics of timber,) it is certain that this port will 
always be able to furnish tonnage to whatever extent may be 
required for conveying to the port of London the trade of the 
private British merchants of Bengal. 

The considerable amount of tonnage occupied by private 
goods from Bengal in the years 1795-6, 1798-9, and 1799~1800, 
compared with the amount occupicd by goods of a similar 
description in the ycars 1794-5, 1796-7, and 1797-8, affords a 
satisfactory proof that the permission granted to individuals 
of providing their own tonnage was equally favourable to the 
interest of the proprictors and to that of the freighters of the 
ships. 

This conclusion is not affected by the large quantity of goods 
shipped in 1799-1800, under the arrangement made in confor- 
-mity to your orders of the 25th of May, 1798; for it is well 
known, that, under a confident expectation of cnjoying the 
continued advantages of the plan of 1798, the merchants had 
considerably extended their provision of goods for the European 
markcts. Many from necessity, others from motives of respect 
to the laws, shipped thcir goods on the tonnage provided by the 
Government, while others disposed of their goods to the numerous 
forcign agents then employed in the port of Calcutta. 

The quantity of private goods shipped for England in 1799- 
1800, affords, therefore, an incontrovertible proof of the eager- 
ness and alacrity with which the British merchants resident in 
Bengal provided goods, with a view to embrace the expected 
opportunity of conveying their trade to London on terms of 
advantage ; but no argument can justly be drawn from the same 

ZZ 


706 TO OWN SHIPS, NO SPECIAL GAIN TO MERCHANTS. 


circumstance to prove that the continuance of the regulation 
adopted in 1799-1800 would afford adequate encouragement to 
the private trade between India and England. 

The preceding considerations satisfied me that the plan of 
hiring ships, on the part of the Company, and of re-letting them 
to the proprietors of ships, leaving the proprietors of ships and 
the merchants at liberty to settle the terms of freight, is more 
advantageous both to the proprietors and freighters of ships, 
than the arrangement adopted under your orders of the 25th of 
May, 1798. 

In your letter of the 25th of May, 1798, your Honourable 
Court appears to have intimated an opinion that persons uniting 
the capacities of proprietors and freighters of ships may trade 
from Bengal to the port of London, to greater advantage than 
merchants possessing no property in ships. It appcars to me 
that the difference between the actual charge incurred by mer- 
chants being proprictors of ships, on account of the freight of 
their goods sent to England in their own ships, and the rate of 
freight paid by merchants not being proprictors of ships, cannot 
be deemed a profit derived by the proprictor of a ship on his 
goods. No person will employ any part of his capital in the 
purchase of property in ships without the prospect of deriving an 
adequate profit on the capital so invested. Iam satisfied that it 
would not be practicable for the proprictors of ships in this port 
to maintain an effectual combination for the establishment of 
enhanced rates of freight; unless such a combination should be 
maintained, itis to be presumed that the profits of the proprictors 
of ships on their capitals invested in ships will never excecd, on 
an average, a reasonable advantage on the amount of those 
capitals after defraying all the expenses of their ships. This 
profit must, therefore, be deemed entircly distinct from the profit 
which the proprietors of ships may derive on their goods conveyed 
to England in their own ships; and consequently the proprictors 
of ships cannot be supposed to possess in the general course and 
conduct of their trade, in the purchase, transportation or sale of 
their goods, any material advantage over merchants who are not 
proprietors of ships. 

Various additional arguments, involving consequences of a 
more complicated and comprchensive description, appeared to 
me to demand, not only that I should recur without delay to the 
plan of the 5th of October, 1798, but that I should respectfully 
represent to your honourable Court, in the most distinct terms, 


BRITISH INDIAN TRADE RUNS IN FOREIGN CHANNELS. 707 


my decided and conscientious conviction, that the permanent 
establishment of:a systematic intercourse between the ports of 
India and that of London, regulated by principles similar to 
those adopted by this Government in October, 1798, is become 
indispensable to the united and inseparable interests of the Com- 
pany and of the nation in India. 

Under the beneficial influence of the British Government in 
India, combined with the increased demand both in Europe and 
in America for Indian commodities, the produce and manufac-~ 
tures of the British territories in India have increased to an 
extent far exceeding the amount which the capital applicable to 
the purchase of the Company’s investment can embrace. 

The wise policy, the just pretensions, and the increasing com- 
mercial resources and political power of Great Britain in India, 
claim for her subjects the largest attainable share in the valuable 
and extensive commerce of such articles of Indian produce and 
manufacture as are necessarily excluded from the Company’s 
investments. 

A large proportion of this valuable trade is already in the 
possession of foreign nations; and unlcss means be immediately 
adopted for depriving those nations of the undue share which 
they have obtained in that trade, the most serious consequences 
are to be apprehended to the combined interests of the English 
East India Company and of the British nation. 

The British merchants at this Presidency not having obtained 
the cxpected permission to freight their ships to the port of 
London in the last year, agrecably to the plan adopted in 
October, 1798; goods to a large amount, originally intended for 
the port of London, were sold to foreigners in the port of Calcutta, 
and thus diverted to the channel of the forcign trade. 

The nature and extent of that trade have undergone a par- 
ticular investigation. From the accompanying statcments your 
honourable Court will observe, that the trade of America and 
Portugal with the port of Calcutta alone in 1799-1800, 
amounted,— 


In Imports, 81,81,005 sicca rupees ; in Exports, 71,30,372 sicca rupees. 
Being an increase in 1799-1800 of the trade carried on in ships 
bearing American and Portugucse colours, compared with the 
average of that trade in the three preceding years,— 
In Imports, 63,98,678 sicca rupees; in Exports, 43,92,768 sicca rupees. 
On the other hand, the imports of the British subjects in the 
Zz2 


708 FOREIGN TRADE MORE PROFITABLY CONDUCTED, 


year 1799-1800 amounted only to 47,87,101 sicca rupecs, and the 
exports to 67,66,649 sicca rupees. 

Of the trade carried on in foreign bottoms with the other ports 
in India, from Europe and America, I possess no sufficiently 
accurate information. It is, however, known to be conducted on 
a very extensive scale. 

In the present season, the trade conveyed in foreign bottoms, 
if left unrestrained, promises to increase beyond even the rapid 
progress of last year. From the accompanying statement, your 
honourable Court will observe, that the port of Calcutta at this 
early period of the season contains about 8,500 tons of shipping 
under American, Portuguese, and Danish colours. 

I possess no means of forming an accurate estimate of that 
proportion of the forcign trade from India to Europe, and to 
America, which is supported by capital actually belonging to 
the nations, under whose flags the ships are navigated. 

It appears, however, from the statements prepared by the 
reporter of external commerce, that less than one-fourth of the 
funds imported by the Americans in 1799-1800, for the purchase 
of their investments, was brought from America. Of the bullion 
%200,000 was imported from London, and the remainder from 
other parts of Europe and from the Island of Madeira, T have 
not been able to ascertain the proportion of British capital 
employed in the trade between India and Portugal. Admitting 
the whole capital employed in the forcign trade with India to 
belong to the nations under whose flags the ships are navigated, 
the undue proportion which they have obtained of that trade, to 
the injury of the British merchants, demands the most scrious 
attention. 

The trade conveyed in the foreign ships is conducted with all 
the advantages of a comparatively low rate of freight ; of strict 

\// economy in the management of the concern ; and of voyages and 
returns of extraordinary expedition and cclerity. The voyage 
from America to Calcutta is frequently performed in less than 
four months. In the last scason several American ships disposed 
of their imports, purchased their cargo for exportation, and left 
the port within twenty-five, and some within twenty, days from 
the date of their arrival, 

Under all the existing impediments, and under the uncertainty 
which has hitherto embarrassed the trade of the British merchant 
in India, it is impossible that his goods can reach the markets of 
the continent of Europe through the channel of the public sales 


THUS FOREIGNERS UNDERSELL US ON THE CONTINENT. 709 


in England, at so lowa price as the goods conveyed directly from 
India to the same markets in foreign bottoms. The Company’s 
sales in England must necessarily be affected by the quantity of 
Indian goods passing into the markets of the continent of 
Europe through the channel of the foreign trade, and the profits 
of the private British merchant, whose goods are disposed of at 
the Company’s sales, must be proportionably diminished. 

Although the voyage by which the produce of India is con- 
veyed in foreign ships to Europe may occasionally be circuitous, 
the superior advantages, enumerated in the preceding paragraphs, 
enable the proprictors of the goods to dispose of them at a lower 
price than that for which the same descriptions of goods can be 
brought to the continental markets of Europe, if exported from 
India by British merchants under the heavy freight}, and other 
incumbrances to which their trade is at present subject. ; 

It must ever be impracticable, if it were justifiable or politic, 
by any restrictions or penaltics on the trade of the British sub- 
jects, to prevent the increasing produce and manufactures of 
India from being conveyed to the markets in Europe, where a 
demand for such articles shall exist. Such restrictions tend to 
throw the trade into the hands of forcign nations, and to enable 
them to supply the markets of Europe on terms which must 
equally affect the Company’s sales in England. If the same 
goods which now pass to the continent of Europe, through 
forcign hands, were brought to the Company’s salcs in England, 
the effect on the general price of articles exposed to sale at the 
Company’s warchouses would be less prejudicial than that now 
expericneed from the sale of those goods in the markets on the 
continent of Iurope. The Company and the private British 
merchant would cqually fecl the advantage in the improvement 
of the gencral sales in England, and the private trade of India 
would become a fertile source of wealth and strength to the 


1 The Portuguese and Americans pay only one per cent. on Indian 
produce imported and re-exported. By the Warchousing Act lately passed 
in Great Britain, calicocs pay 2}, and muslins 74, per cent. on the sales, 
if sold for exportation, All other goods (excepting cotton, spices, bul- 
lion, &c., diamonds, precious stones, which pay no duties) pay two per 
cent. exclusive of the convoy duty, payable by the Importers. <A re- 
duction of those dutics in England is absolutely necessary to com- 
plete the system of drawing the private trade of India to the port of 
London. 


710 JOINT INTEREST OF THE COMPANY AND THE NATION HEREIN. 


British nation, instead of contributing to the opulence and 
aggrandizement of foreign powers. 

The interests of the Company, and of the British nation, are 
undivided and inseparable with relation to this important question. 
Every principle of justice and policy demands the extension of 
the utmost practicable facility to the British merchants in India, 
for the export from India to the port of London, of the largest 
possible proportion of the manufactures and produce of India, 
not required for the Company’s investment. Such advantageous 
terms of freight and such other benefits should be opened to the 
British merchants in India as should not only remove every in- 
ducement to conduct the trade through foreign channels, but 
should enable the British merchants in India to enter into a 
competition in the markcts of Europe with merchants trading 
in goods of similar produce or manufacture provided by forcign 
capital. 

To foreigners the indulgence may safely be extended of pur- 
chasing, with their own capital, such part of the manufactures or 
produce of India, calculated for the European or American 
markets, as may not be embraced by the capital employed in 
the purchase of the Company’s investment and of the cargoes of 
the British merchants resident in India. 

It is, however, doubtful whether ? forcign nations would be able 
to retain any considerable proportion of the trade from India to 
Europe, were the British merchants in India permitted to avail 
themselves of their superior mcans of drawing the whole of the 
trade to England. Their local knowledge, added to all the 
advantages necessarily derived from a constant residence on the 
spot, must always enable them to command a supply of goods, 
of a better quality, and at a cheaper rate, than forcign merchants 
can obtain. In the conveyance of Indian goods to Europe rests 
the foreign merchant's sole advantage over the British. The 

* The Americans obtain Indian goods so much cheaper by a direct 
intercourse with India than they could through the circuitous route of 
Europe, that they will probably continue to deal largely even on their 
own capital with India. It is now the ordinary practice of the Amcricans, 
under the last treaty of commerce, to ship cargoes in India for America, 
to touch at some port in America, and without transhipping or unload- 
ing the goods in America to proceed directly to Europe, and to dispose 
of their Indian cargo in an European port. This practice ig unquestion- 
ably contrary to the treaty of commerce with America. 


BRITISH MERCHANT SHOULD FIND HIS OWN TONNAGE. 711 


superior facility which the foreign merchant enjoys in this respect 
gives him so decided a command over the trade, that he is 
enabled not only to outbid the British merchant in India, but 
also to underscll him in the markets of Europe. 

Were the British merchants in India permitted to provide 
their own tonnage as occasion might require, every reason exists 
to justify a belief that they would soon possess themselves of 
nearly the whole of the private export trade from India to 
Europe, and would render London the universal mart for the 
manufactures and produce of Asia. 

If the capital of the merchants in India, and the remittance of 
the fortunes of individuals, should not supply funds sufficient for 
the conduct of the whole private export trade from India to 
Europe, no dangerous consequences could result from applying 
to this branch of commerce capital drawn directly from the 
British empire in Europe. 

Beneficial consequences of the utmost importance would cer- 
tainly result to the British empire in India from any considerable 
increase of its active capital, which is known not to bear a just 
proportion to the productive powers of the country. 

The necessary effect of such an increase of active capital in 
India would be to augment the produce and manufactures of 
your dominions to the full extent of any possible demand, The 
high rate of interest on money applicd to mercantile purposes, 
and the charge of the public debt would consequently be dimin- 
ished in India, while every source, both of public and private 
credit would be proportionably improved. No _ possibility 
appears of any injurious consequences resulting to the British 
Empire in Europe from an event so advantageous to India. 
It cannot be supposed that the private trade of India will 
ever absorb any portion of British capital which can find more 
advantageous employment at home. If any portion of British 
capital be now cmployed in the American, or Portuguese, or 
Danish trade with India, the general interests of Great Britain 
will unquestionably be promoted by inviting, under increased 
advantages, the application of the same funds to the trade of 
the private British merchants resident within the Company’s 
dominions. 

(F rom whatever source the capital of the private British trade 
in India might be derived, the goods would be obtained in India 
under the same wise, humane, and salutary regulations now 
enforced with respect to the provision of every article of produce 


12 THIS WOULD NO THE COMPANY'S INTERESTS, 
712 THIS ULD NOT IN#URE THE C ; TERESTS 


or manufacture in this country, either by the Company or by 
private merchants ; Great Britain would enjoy all the advantages 
of that trade which is now a source of increasing wealth and 
strength to foreign nations, and which tends ultimately to intro- 
duce foreign intrigue, to establish foreign influence, and to 
agegrandize foreign power in India. 

It would be equally unjust and impolitic to extend any 
facility to the trade of the British merchants in India, by sacri- 
ficing or hazarding the Company's rights and privileges; by 
injuring its commercial interests ; by admitting an indiscriminate 
and unrestrained commercial intercourse between Iengland and 
India; or by departing from any of the fundamental prin- 
ciples of policy, which now govern the British establishments in 
India. 

It may be urged, that if a considerable proportion of the goods 
now exported from India to the continent of Europe by foreigners, 
were to be imported into england by the British merchants in 
India, under rates of freight more advantageous than those now 
paid by the Company, the demand for the Company's goods 
would be reduced, and the value of the Company’s goods would 
be impaired. 

It has already been observed that the public sales of East India 
goods in England must neccessarily be affected by the aggregate 
quantity of those goods sold in the continental markets of Europe; 
and that the effect on the sales in England, would probably be 
less prejudicial and could not be more so, if a larger proportion 
of the goods provided in India for the European markets should 
be imported into England, and sold in the first instance at the 
Company’s sales. 

The long establishment of the Company’s factories in India, 
the skill of its servants regularly educated for the conduct of 
those factories, the habitual confidence of the manufacturers in 
the good faith and integrity of the Company have secured 
to the Company so decided a superiority in the provision of 
the most valuable articles of piece-goods and raw silk, that no 
private merchant by any practicable reduction of freight can be 
enabled to rival the Company in these important articles of its 
investment. 

In the first purchase of sugar and other gruff goods, the trade 
of the private British merchant has more nearly reached that of 
the Company; nor will the Company ever be able to trade 
advantageously in these articles, unless the Government in 


COMPANY MAY USE INDIAN SHIPS, FOR GRUFF GOODS, 713 


India shall resort to ships built in India, for the conveyance 
of such goods; the valuable branches of your investment will, it 
is supposed, be always conveyed with more advantage in your 
regular ships. 

If the British merchants should be permitted to employ ships 
built in India under the plan of October, 1798, the Company’s 
gruff goods may also be conveyed to Englend in ships of a 
similar description, at rates of freight equally advantageous with 
those paid by the private merchants. The Company will, 
therefore, derive a considerable benefit in this branch of trade, 
from encouraging the trade of the private British merchants in 
India?; at present neither the Company nor the private British 
merchants can rival forcigners in the markets of Europe in the 
less valuable articles of Indian produce and manufactures, 

It is now evident that the extra tonnage engaged in England 
by the Company for the service of India can never be rendered 
a practicable channel through which the British private trade of 
India can contend with foreign adventure. This observation 
necessarily applics with more force to the regular ships of the 
Company, although experience has proved those ships to be 
admirably calculated for the conveyance of the Company’s 
valuable investment. 

The plan contained in the advertisement of the 5th of October, 
1798, affords to the British. merchants, every necessary facility 
for’ the conduct of the private trade from India to England, 
while the important principles of the trade and government 
of India are preserved from hazard, and sufficient precautions 
are provided against all the dangers justly apprehended from 
an unrestricted commercial intercourse between England and 
India. 

(The essential object of preventing the resort to India of per- 
sons unlicensed by the Company is not affected.| ‘The powers of 
the Government in India over unlicensed persons remain in full 
vigour and efficiency,’ No goods or passengers can be received 
in the private ships cither in India or in England, without the 
sanction of the Company or of its government; the voyage to 
I-ngland and the return to India, are required to be performed 
under the instructions and control of the same authority; and as 


1 The probable saving to the Company in the present season by the 
conveyance of their gruff goods in ships built in India may amount to 
£20,000. 


714 FOREIGNERS THE WORST ‘INTERLOPERS’ IN INDIA. 


the proprietors of the ships, the commanders and officers, the 
seamen, (mostly natives of India) and all the persons concerned 
in the immediate conduct of the trade, are subject to the au- 
thority of the British Government in India, it is always in the 
power of the Company and of its government, to prevent the 
perversion of an intercourse thus regulated between India and 
England to any gmister purposes endangering the rights and pri- 
vileges of the Company, or the interests of the British Empire. 

Omitting the difference in the rate of freight, these considera- 
tions alone are sufficient to recommend the employment of ships 
built in India in the private trade between India and Great Bri- 
tain. ‘Over private ships furnished from England the Company 
and their government in India, could not exercise an equally 
efficient control. 

It is remarkable that the principle which has hitherto regulated 
the commercial intercourse between India and England has ac- 
tually occasioned the very evils which it was intended to avert. 

The operation of this erroncous principle has forced the trade 
between India and Europe from a channel, in which it could have 
been controlled and regulated without difficulty, into the hands 
of foreign nations, where it cannot, without considerable difficulty 
be subjected to any degree of controul, regulation, or restraint : 
the same mistaken policy has filled the Ports of India with the 
ships of foreign nations, has enabled those nations to rival the 
Company both in Europe and in India in many articles of its 
export and import trade, has invited from Europe and America 
adventurers of every description ; and, by the number and activity 
of these foreign agents, has menaced the foundations of your com- 
mercial and political interests throughout every part of Asia, and 
even within your own dominions. 

If the extension of additional indulgences to the British mer- 
chant necessarily involved the admission of numerous British ad- 
venturers into India, the wisdom of your honourable Court could 
not fail to remark that your Government can always with less 
difficulty control the operations of British, than those of foreign 
agents; while the danger to be apprehended from the views and 
designs of foreigners of every description must ever be preater 
than any which can probably arise from an increased resort of 
British subjects, under such limitations and restraints as your 
wisdom may frame, and the vigilance of your government in 
India may be cnabled to enforce. 

But it does not appear probable that any increase of the 


POLITICAL DANGERS CAUSED BY FOREIGN TRADE, 715 


private British trade of India would necessarily produce a pro- 
portional augmentation in the number of British agents resorting 
to your dominions; the British merchants now resident in 
India being equal to the conduct of much more extensive con- 
cerns, and likely to be employed by persons engaged in com- 
mercial concerns at home, who might ‘easily conduct their 
operations with India through those British subjects actually 
established within your dominions. 

On the other hand, foreigners generally deal directly with the 
natives, or with foreign houses of agency: the number of these 
houses (in consequence of the war) is now inconsiderable; the 
increase of foreign adventurers will, therefore, be a necessary 
consequence of any considerable increase of the trade in foreign 
hands. Foreign ships also, being necessarily exempt from the 
control of the British Government in Europe, offer to every 
emissary of the encmy, and to every dangcrous political adven- 
turer, an easy entrance into India. In proportion to the in- 
creased resort of forcign ships to our ports in India, foreign 
intrigue will find a more rcady channel of admission, It is a 
well-known fact, that those to whom your permission and license 
to visit India have becn refused usually resort to foreign ships, 
and thus evade your authority. The same channel is also 
always open to afford refuge and the mcans of escape to every 
public defaultcr and dclinquent from the authority of your 
government in India. 

It is impossible to check the resort of the ships of foreign 
nations to India, by any other regulation than by rendering the 
trade unprofitable to foreign adventure. This effect cannot be 
accomplished otherwise than by enabling the British merchants 
tn India to undersell foreigners in the markets of Europe. A 
sy8tem, which, under due regulation, shall afford to the British 
merchants in India, the greatest practicable facility of conveying 
their trade to England, instead of endangering the stability of 
the trade and poWer of the Company, and of the nation in India, 
will, therefore, constitute the most solid basis of security for the 
preservation of both. 

The preccding observations may, I trust, satisfy your honour- 
able Court, that the principles of the plan of the 5th of October, 
1798, combine the requisite indulgence to the private trade, with 
the indispensable precautions necessary for securing your interests 
in India, 

It is not my duty to enter into any detailed discussion of the 


716 ENGLISH SHIPBUILDERS’ OBJECTIONS ANSWERED. 


objections urged by the ship-builders in England, against the 
admission of ships built in India, to a participation in the trade 
from India to the port of London ; it may not however be useless 
to add some remarks on this part of the subject. 

Experience having proved that tonnage cannot be furnished 
from England, on terms which would enable the British mer- 
chants in India to rival foreigners in the trade between India and 
Europe, the exclusion of ships built in India from the port of 
London would not increase the number of British ships hitherto 
engaged in the Indian trade, in any proportion which could 
materially benefit the ship-builders in England. This measure, 
therefore, without any proportional benefit to the ship-builders 
in England, would perpetuate and aggravate the evils now ex- 
perienced from the restraints imposcd on the private trade 
between India and England; on the other hand, by admitting 
ships built in India to partake of the trade to I-ngland, the ship- 
builders and other artists, manufacturers, and traders in Jengland 
will reap all the benefits arising from the large sums expended 
in the repair of the numerous ships annually resorting to England 
from the ports of India.) (Other interests connected with the 
building of ships in England will also derive the profit resulting 
from the great demand for the articles necessary in the construc- 
tion and outfit of the ships built in tho ports of India; the fact 
being established, that many of those articles must necessarily 
be brought from eae 

On their return to India, these ships from the modcration 
of their rates of freight will afford a most advantagcous mode 
of (conveyance for such of the manufactures of the British 
Empire in Europe, as may be demanded in India ; )consequently 
the facilitics granted to the private trade, and to the ships built 
in India will serve to encourage the exportation of British 
manufactures to Asia, to whatever extent the demand may be 
enlarged. 

I have thus carefully revised the plan contained in the adver- 
tisement of October, 1798, for the encouragement of the trade of 
the British merchants resident in India with Ingland; T have 
compared that plan with the arrangement adopted under the 
orders of your honourable Court of the 25th of May, 1798; I 
have considered the probable effects of any future attempt to 
provide for the conveyance of the private trade of India to the 
port of London, either in the Company’s regular ships, or in 
extra ships hired in England; and I have adverted to the com- 


A PROVISIONAL REMEDY APPLIED TO A GROWING EVIL. 717 


parative practical operation of the systems adopted by this 
government in the ycars 1798, 1799, and 1800, as it appears on 
the accounts of the exports and imports of the port of Calcutta 
in cach of those years; I have also submitted to your ex- 
amination a combined view of the motives which induce me 
to revert to the plan of October, 1798, for the present season, 
and to form an anxious expectation, that my conduct in this 
proceeding may meet with your approbation and countenance, 
and may become the foundation of an improved and durable 
system of intercourse between India and England under the 
sanction of your authority. 

The rapid growth of the forcign trade during the last season, 
urgently demanded the immediate interference of your govern- 
ment on the spot. The number of forcign ships actually in the 
port of Calcutta, the alacrity, enterprize and skill of the foreign 
agents now assiduously employed in providing cargoes, and the 
necessary inaction and Janguor of the British private trade, em- 
barrassed by the restraints of the existing law, created a serious 
apprehension in my mind, that any further delay in the decision 
of this momentous question might occasion evils, of which the 
remedy might hereafter become considerably. difficult, if not 
absolutely impracticable. The unrestrained progress of the 
forcign trade in the present scason, added to its great increase 
during the last, might have established its predominance over the 
private trade of British subjects to an extent, which no future 
regulation might have proved sufficient to limit or restrain, The 
difficulty of diverting this lucrative commerce from the channel 
into which it had been forced, would naturally be aggravated in 
proportion to the length of time during which the trade should 
continue to flow in that course. 

Under these scrious impressions, and convinced that a prompt 
decision was demanded with a degree of exigency equal to the 
importance of the question at issue, I directed the accompanying 
notice to be published at Fort William, on the 19th instant, and 
I ordered the governments of Fort St. George and Bombay, to 
publish correspondent advertisements at those Presidencies with 
such modifications, as local circumstances may render indispen- 
sably necessary. 

It will rest with your honourable Court to determine, whether 
this plan shall be rendered permanent. A temporary restraint 
is now applicd to the progress of the foreign trade in India, 
during the present season; and a temporary encouragement is 


918 EXPEDIENCY OF PERPETUATING THE REMEDIAL PLAN. 


granted, for the same period of time to that of British subjects 
resident within your dominions, ample time is thus afforded for 
the deliberate formation of your final judgment ; the result of 
which I shall await with a respectful, but confident hope, that 
your wisdom may approve and perpetuate the policy which 
dictated my orders of the 5th of October, 1798, and of the rgth 
of September, 1800; and that your liberality may confirm to all 
the interests affected by this important mcasure, the lasting en- 
joyment of those commercial and political advantages, which it 
has been my constant endeavour, under your countenance and 
favor, to cultivate, to improve, and to extend. 
I have the honour to be, honourable Sirs, 
with the greatest respect, 
Your most obedient and faithful servant, 
WELLESLEY. 


X. EDUCATION OF CIVIL SERVANTS. 


105. The Governor-General’s Notes with respect to the 
foundation of a College at Fort William. 


Necessity of a special collegiate training of Civil Servants. Plan 
of the proposed institution, and its anticipated benefits, 


Fort William, roth July, 1800. 


The British possessions in India now constitute one of the 
most extensive and populous empires in the world. The imme- 
diate administration of the government of the various provinces 
and nations composing this empire is principally confided to the 
European civil servants of the East India Company. Those 
provinces, namely, Bengal, Behar, Orissa, and Benares, the 
Company’s Jaghire in the Carnatic, the northern Circars, the 
Baramahal, and other districts ceded by the peace of Seringa- 
patam, in 1792, which are under the more immediate and direct 
administration of the Europcan civil servants of the Company; 
are acknowledged to form the most opulent and flourishing parts 
of India; in which property, life, civil order, and religious liberty 


ARDUOUS POLITICAL DUTIES OF THE CIVIL SERVANTS. 719 


are more secure, and the people enjoy a larger portion of the 
benefits of good government, than any other country in this 
quarter of the globe. The duty and policy of the British Govern- 
ment in India therefore require, that the system of confiding 
the immediate exercise of every branch and department of the 
government to Europeans, educated in its own service, and 
subject to its own direct control, should be diffused as widely 
as possible, as well with a view to the stability of our own 
interests, as to the happiness and welfare of our native subjects. 
This principle formed the basis of the wise and benevolent ' 
system introduced by Lord Cornwallis, for the improvement of 
the internal government of the provinces immediately subject to 
the Presidency of Bengal. 

In proportion to the extension of this beneficial system, the 
duties of the European civil servants of the East India Company 
are become of greater magnitude and importance: the denomina- 
tions of writer, factor, and merchant, by which the several classcs 
of the civil service are still distinguished, are now utterly in- 
applicable -to the nature and extent of the duties discharged, 
and of the occupations pursued by the civil servants of the 
Company. 

( To dispense justice to millions of people of various languages, 
manners, usages and religions; to administer a vast and compli- 
cated system of revenue throughout districts equal in extent to 
some of the most considerable kingdoms in Europe ; to maintain 
civil ordcr in one of the most populous and litigious regions of 
the world; these are now the dutics of the larger proportion of 
the civil servants of the Company.) The senior merchants 
composing the five Courts of Circuit and Appcal under the 
Presidency of Bengal exercise in cach of those Courts a juris- 
diction of greater local extent, applicable to a larger population, 
and occupicd in the determination of causes infinitely more 
intricate and numerous than that of any regularly constituted 
courts of justice in any part of Europe. The senior or junior 
merchants, employed in the several magistracics and Zillah 
Courts, the writers or factors filling the stations of registers 
and assistants to the several courts and magistrates, exercise in 
different degrees, functions of a nature, either purely judicial, 
or intimately connected with the administration of the police, 
and with the maintenance of the peace and good order of their 
respective districts. Commercial or mercantile knowledge, is 
not only unnecessary throughout every branch of the judicial 


720 THESE HAVE SUPERSEDED THEIR COMMERCIAL PURSUITS. 


department, but those civil servants who are invested with the 

powers of magistracy, or attached to the judicial department in 

any ministerial capacity, although bearing the denomination of 

merchants, factors or writers, are bound by law, and by the 

solemn obligation of an oath, to abstain from every commercial” 
and mercantile pursuit; the mercantile title which they bear, 

not only affords no description of their duty, but is entirely at 

variance with it. 

The pleadings in the several courts, and all fmportant judicial 
transactions, are conducted in the native languages. The law 
which the Company’s judges are bound to administer throughout 
the country is not the law of England, but that law to which 
the natives had long been accustomed under their former 
sovereigns, tempered and mitigated by the voluminous regula- 
tions of the Governor-General in Council, as well as by the 
general spirit of the British constitution. ( These observations 
‘are sufficient to prove, that no more arduous or complicated 
duties of magistracy exist in the world, no qualifications more 
various, or more comprehensive, can be imagined than those 
which are required from every British subject, who enters the scat 
of judgment within the limits of the Company’s empire in India. 

To the administration of the revenuc, many of the preceding 
observations will apply with equal force; the merchants, factors 
and writers, employed in this department also, are bound by 
law to abjure the mercantile denomination appropriated to their 
respective classes in the Company’s servicc; nor is it possible 
for a collector of. the revenue, or for any civil servant employed 
under him, to discharge his duty with common justice, cither 
to the state, or to the people, unless he shall be conversant in 
the language, manners, and usages of the country; and in the 
general principles of the law, as administered in the several 
courts of justice. In addition to the ordinary judicial and 
executive functions of the Judges, Magistrates, and Collectors, 
the Judges and Magistrates occasionally act in the capacity 
of Governors of their respective districts, employing the military, 
and exercising other extensive powers. The Judges, Magis< 
trates, and Collectors, are also respectively required by law 
to propose, from time to time, to. the Governor-Gencral in 
Council, such amendments of the existing laws, or such new laws 
as may appear to them to be necessary for the welfare and good 
government of their respective districts, In this view the civil 
servants employed in the departments of Judicature and Revenue, 


YOUR TRADERS WANT AN INKLING OF STATESMANSHIP, 721 


constitute a species of subordinate legislative council to the 
Governor-General in Council, and also form a channel of commu- 
nication, by which the Government ought to be enabled, at all 
times, to ascertain the wants and wishes of the people. The 
remarks applied to these two main branches of the civil service, 
namcly, those of Judicature and Revenue, are at least equally 
forcible in their application to those branches which may be 
described under the gencral terms of the Political and Financial 
Departments, comprehending the offices of Chicf Secretary, the 
various stations in the Secretary’s office, in the Treasury, in 
the office of Accountant-Gencral, together with all the public 
officers employed in conducting the current business at the seat 
of Government. To these must be added the Diplomatic branch, 
including the Secretary in the political department, and the 
several residencies at the Courts of our dependent and tributary 
Princes, or of other native powers of India. 

It is certainly desirable, that all these stations should be filled 
by the civil servants of the Company: it is equally evident, that 
qualifications are required in cach of these stations, either wholly 
forcign to commercial habits, or far exceeding the limits of a 
commercial education. 

Even that department of this empire, which is denominated 
exclusively commercial, requires knowledge and habits different, 
ina considerable degree, from those which form the mercantile 
character in Europe 3} nor can the Company's investment ever 
be conducted with the greatest possible advantage and honour to 
themselves, or with adequate justice to their subjects, unless their 
commercial agents shall possess many of the qualifications of 
statesmen, cnumerated in the preceding observations. The 
manufacturers, and other industrious classes, whose productive 
labour is the source of the investment, bear so great a proportion 
to the total population of the Company’s dominions, that the 
gencral happiness and prosperity of the country must cssentially 
depend on the conduct of the commercial servants employed in 
providing the investment :{their conduct cannot be answerable 
to such a charge, unless they shall be conversant in the native 
languages, and in the customs and manners of the people, as 
well as in the laws by which the country is governed. The 
peace, order, and welfare of whole provinces, may be materially 
affected by the malversations, or even by the ignorance and 
errors of a commercial resident, whose management touches the 
dearest and most valuable interests, and centers into the domestic 
+ 


72% CIVILIANS MUST HAVE A POLITICAL EDUCATION. 


concerns of numerous bodies of people, active and acute from 
habitual industry, and jealous of any act of power injurious to 
their properties, or contrary to their prejudices and customs. 
CThe Civil servants of the English East India Company, there- 
fore, can no longer be considered as the agents of a commercial 
concern) {They are, in fact, the ministers and officers of a 
powerful sovereign; they must now be viewed in that capacity, 
with reference, not to their nominal, but to their real occupa- 
tions. They are required to discharge the functions of Magis- 
trates, Judges, Ambassadors, and Governors of provinces, in all 
the complicated and extensive rclations of those sacred trusts 
and exalted stations, and under peculiar circumstances, which 
greatly enhance the solemnity of every public obligation, and 
aggravate the difficulty of every public chargg) Their duties 
are those of statesmen in every other part of the world, with no 
other characteristic differences than the(obstacles opposed by an 
unfavourable climate, by a forcign language, by the peculiar 
usages and laws of India, and by the manners of its inhabitants? 
Their studies, the discipline of their education, their habits of 
life, their manners and morals should, therefore, be so ordered 
and regulated as to establish a just conformity between thcir 
personal consideration, and the dignity and importance of their 
public stations, and to maintain a sufficient, correspondence 
between their qualifications and their dutics. ( Their education 
should be founded in a gencral knowledge of those branches 
of literature and science which form the basis of the education 
of persons destined to similar occupations in Europe. To this 
foundation should be added an intimate acquaintance with the 
history, languages, customs and manners of the pcople of India, 
with the Mahommedan and Hindoo codes of law and religion, 
nd with the political and commercial interests and relations of 
Great Britain in Asia. They should be regularly instructed in 
the principles and system which constitute the foundation 
of that wise code of regulations and laws enacted by the 
Governor-General in Council for the purpose of securing to 
the people of this empire the bencfit of the ancicnt and accus- 
tomed laws of the country, administered in the spirit of the 
British constitution. They should be well informed of the true 
and sound principles of the British constitution, and sufficiently 
grounded in the general principles of cthies, civil jurispru- 
dence, the law of nations, and gencral history, in order 
that they may be enabled to discriminate the characteristic 


VARIOUS STUDIES, AND MORAL DISCIPLINE, ESSENTIAL, 723 


differences of the several codes of law administered within the 
British Empire in India, and practically to combine the spirit of 
each in the dispensation of justice, and in the maintenance of 
order and good government. L1'inally, their early habits should 
be so formed, as to establish in their minds such solid foundations 
of industry, prudence, integrity, and religion, as should effectually 
guard them against those temptations and corruptions with 
which the nature of this climate, and the peculiar depravity of 
the people of India, will surround and assail them in every 
station, especially upon their first arrival in India} The early 
discipline of the service should be calculated to counteract the 
defects of the climate and the vices of the people, and to form a 
natural barricr against habitual indolence, dissipation, and licen- 
tious indulgence ; the spirit of emulation, in honourable and uscful 
pursuits, should be kindled and kept alive by the continual pros- 
pect of distinction, and reward, of profit, and honour ; nor should 
any precaution be relaxed in India, which is deemed necessary 
in England, to furnish a sufficient supply of men qualified to fill 
the high offices of the State with credit to themselves and with 
advantage to the public.) Without such a constant succession of 
men in the several branches and departments of this Govern- 
ment, the wisdom and benevolence of the law must prove vain 
and inefficient. Whatever course and system of discipline and 
study may be deemed requisite in England to secure an abundant 
and pure source for the efficient supply of” the public service, 
the peculiar nature of our establishments in the East, (so far 
from admitting any relaxation of those wise and salutary rules 
and restraints,) demands that they should be enforecd with a 
degree of additional vigilance and care, proportioned to the 
aggravated difficulties of the civil service, and to the numerous 
hazards surrounding the entrance of public life in India. } 

It is unnecessary to enter into any examination of facts to 
prove, that no system of cducation, study, or discipline, now 
exists, either in Europe or in India, founded on the principles, 
or directed to the objects described in the preceding pages ; but 
it may be useful in this place to review the course through 
which the junior civil servants of the East India, Company now 
enter upon the important dutics of their respective stations, to 
Consider to what degree they now possess or can attain any 
means of qualifying themselves sufficiently for those stations, 
and to examine whether the great body of the civil servants of 
the East India Company, at any of the Presidencics, can now 

ZA2 


724 DEFECTIVE EDUCATION OF THE MASS OF WRITERS. 


be deemed competent to discharge their arduous and compre- 
hensive trusts in a manner correspondent to the interests and 
honour of the British name in India, or to the prosperity and 
happiness of our native subjects. 

The age at which the writers usually arrive in India is from 
sixteen to eighteen; their parents or friends in England, from 
a variety of considerations, are naturally desirous, not only to 
accelerate the appointment at home, but to despatch the young 
man to India at the earliest possible period. Some of these 
young men have been educated with an express view to the 
civil service in India, on principles utterly erroneous, and inap- 
plicable to its actual condition ; conformably to this error, they 
have received a limited education, confined principally to com- 
mercial knowledge, and in no degree extended to those liberal 
studies which constitute the basis of education at public schools 
in England. (Even this limited course of study is intcrrupted 
at the early period of fifteen or seventcen years.) 

It would be superfluous to enter into any argument to demon- 
strate the absolute insufficiency of this class of young men to 
execute the duties of any station whatever in the civil service of 
the Company beyond the menial, laborious, unwholesome and un- 
profitable duty of a mere copying-clerk,) Those who have received 
the benefits of a better education, have the misfortune to find 
the course of their studies prematurely interrupted at the critical 
period when its utility is first felt, and before they have bcen 
enabled to secure the fruits of carly application. 

Both descriptions of young men, those whose cducation has 
been originally erroncous and defective, and those, the carly 
promise of whose studics has been unscasonably broken, once 
arrived in India, are equally precluded from the means, either of 
commencing a new and judicious course of study, adapted to 
their new situation, or of prosccuting that course which had 
been prematurely interrupted. \(Not only no encouragement’ is 
offered by the present constitution and practice of the civil 
service to any such pursuits, but difficultics and obstacles are 
presented by both, which render it nearly impossible for any 
young man, whatever may be his disposition, to pursue any 
systematic plan of study, either with a view to remedy the 
defects, or to improve the advantages of his former education, 

( On the arrival of the writers in India, they are cither stationed 
in the interior of the country, or employed in some office at the 
Presidency. 


HENCE PERSONAL INCAPACITY, AND PUBLIC LOSS. 725 


If stationed in the interior of the country, they are placed 
in situations which require a knowledge of the language and 
customs of the natives; or of the regulations and laws; or of 
the general principles of jurisprudence; or of the details of the 
established system of revenue; or of the nature of the Com- 
pany’s investment ; or of many of these branches of information 
combined. In all these branches of knowledge, the young 
writers are totally uninformed. They are consequently unequal 
to their prescribed duties. In some cascs, their superior in 
office expcricncing no benefit from their services, leaves them 
unemployed. In this state many devote their time to those 
luxurics and enjoyments which thcir situation cnables them to 
command, without making any cffort to qualify themselves for 
the important, stations to which they are destined. (They re- 
main sunk in indolence, until, from their station in the service, 
they succecd to offices of high public trust.) 

Positive incapacity is the necessary result of these per- 
nicious habits of inaction; the principles of public integrity are 
endangered, (and the successful administration of the whole 
Government exposed to hazard.) This has been the unhappy 
course of many, who have conceived an carly disgust in pro- 
vincial stations against business, to which they have found 
themselves uncqual, and who have becn abandoncd to the effects 
of despondency and sloth 

Even the young men whose dispositions are the most pro- 
mising, if stationed in the interior of the country at an carly 
period after their arrival in India, labour under great disad- 
vantages. They also find themselves uncqual to such duties as 
require an acquaintance with the languages, or with the branches 
of knowledge already described, If intensely employed in the 
subordinate details of office, they are absolutely precluded from 
reviving any former acquirements, or from establishing those 
foundations of useful knowledge indispensably necessary to 
enable them hereafter to execute the dutics of important stations 
with ability and credit. Ifarassed with the ungrateful task of 
transcribing papers and accounts, or with other equally fatiguing 
and fruitless labours of a copying-clerk or index-maker, their 
pursuit of uscful knowledge cannot be systematic; their studies 
must be desultory and irregular, and their attention to any 
definite pursuit is still more distracted by the uncertainty of the 
nature of those employments to which they may hereafter be 
nominated. No course of study having been pointed out by 


726 SYSTEMATIC STUDY IN INDIA IMPOSSIBLE, 


public institution, no selection prescribed by authority of the 
branches of knowledge appropriated to each department and 
class of the service, diligence is lost for want of a guide, and the 
most industrious are discouraged by the apprehension, that their 
studies may prove fruitless, and may frustrate instead of pro- 
‘moting their advancement in the public service. 

When their rank in the service has entitled them to succeed 
to offices of importance, the current duties of those offices 
necessarily engross their whole attention. It is then too late to 
revert to any systematic plan of study with a view to acquire 
those qualifications, of which, in the ordinary discharge of their 
official functions, they feel the hourly want. If, at this late 
season, they should make an effort to acquire knowledge, it 
must be sought by the interruption of their current business, to 
the detriment of the public interests, and to the inconvenience 
or injury of the individuals subject to their authority. 

With respect to the young men attached to offices at the 
Presidency, their duty consists chicfly in transcribing papers. 
This duty, if pursued with the utmost diligence and assiduity, 
affords little knowledge of public affairs, is often prejudicial 
to health, and would be better performed by any native or 
Portuguese writer. They attain ffo distinct knowledge of the 
public records; because they pursue no regular course of read- 
ing, examining, or comparing the documents which compose 
those records ;( they have, indeed, scarcely time to understand 
and digest those papers which they are employed to transcribe ;) 
their acquaintance even with the current affairs of the Govern- 
ment must be limited and partial, and must rather tend to 
confuse than to instruct their minds. At the expiration of the 
period, during which they usually remain in these situations at 
the Presidency, their knowledge of public business is necessarily 
superficial and incorrect. Having had little intercourse with the 
natives, these young men are in gencral extremely deficient in 
the knowledge of the language of the country. In the mcan- 
while their close and laborious application to the hourly business 
of transcribing papers has been an insupcrable obstacle to their 
advancement in any other branch of knowlcdge, and at the 
‘close of two or three years, they have lost the fruits of their 
European studies, without having gained any uscful knowledge 
of Asiatic literature or business.) Those whose dispositions lcad 
them to idleness and dissipafion, find greater temptations to 
indulgence and extravagance at the Presidency than in the 


MORAL DANGERS OF THE YOUNG WRITER’S POSITION. 727 


provinces; many instances occur in which they fall into irre- 
trievable courses of gaming and vice, and totally destroy their 
health and fortunes. | Some succecd, in the ordinary progress 
of the service, to employments, in which their incapacity or 
misconduct becomes conspicuous to the natives, disgraceful to 
themsclves and to the British name, and injurious to the Stated 

All these descriptions of young men, upon their first arrival 
in India, are now exposed to a disadvantage, the most pcrilous 
which can be encountered at an carly period of life. COnce 
landed in India, their studics, manners, morals, expenses or 
conduct are no longer subject to any degree of regulation or 
direction. No system is established for their guidance, improve- 
ment, or restraint; no authority has been constituted with either 
the duty or power of enforcing any such system; and they are 
abandoned, at the age of sixtcen or cightcen, with affluent 
incomes to pursue their own inclinations, without the super- 
intendence or control of parent, guardian, or master, often 
without a friend to advise or admonish, or even to instruct 
them in the ordinary details and modes of an Indian life) 

The practice of consigning the young writers to the care of 
friends resident in India, affords no adequate remedy to this 
evil. Those friends are often incompetent to the arduous and 
delicate task imposed upon them; and it frequently happens 
that they may be so far removed from the spot at which the 
young man may be stationed by the Government, that years 
may elapse before he may have been able even to see the 
persons appvinted by his Furopean friends to superintend his 
introduction into India.) 

In carlier periods of our cstablishment, when the annual 
incomes of the civil servants were of a more fluctuating nature, 
and derived from sources more vague and indefinite, the tables 
of the senior servants were usually open to those recently 
arrived from Europe; and the young writers, upon their first 
landing in India, were frequently admitted and domiciliated in 
the familics established at the Presidency or in the provinces, 

The objections to this loose and irregular system are numerous 
and obvious. Without entering upon that topic, it is sufficient 
to observe, that the definite and regular sources of profit, estab- 
lished in the civil service by Lord Cornwallis, have occasioned 
a material alteration in the economy of every private family 
among the civil servants, / 

Incomes being limited and ascertained, and no other source 


928 BRIGHT EXCEPTIONS ONLY CONFIRM THE RULE. 


of emolument now existing beyond the annual savings from the 
regulated salaries, the tables of the civil servants can no longer 
be open to receive the numerous body of writers annually 
arriving from Europe; still less can these young men be gene- 
rally admitted to reside habitually in families of which the 
annual expenses are now necessarily restrained within certain 
and regular bounds. 

(Many of the young men, on their first arrival, are, therefore, 
compelled to support the expense of a table; the result of this 
necessity is obvious, and forms one leading cause of expense and 
dissipation. ) 

Under all these early disadvantages, without rule or system 
to direct their studies; without any prescribed object of useful 
pursuit connected with future reward, emolument, or distinction; 
without any guide to regulate, or authority to control their con- 
duct, or to form, improve, or preserve their morals ; it is highly 
creditable to the individual characters of the civil servants of the 
East India Company} that so many instances have occurred in 
various branches and departments of the civil service at all the 
Presidencies, of persons who have discharged their public duties 
with considerable respect and honou 

It has been justly observed, that all the merits of the civil 
servants are to be ascribed to their own characters, talents, and 
exertions, while their defects must be imputed to the con- 
stitution and practice of the service, which have not becn accom- 
modated to the progressive changes of our situation in India, 
and have not kept pace with the growth of this empire, or with 
the increasing extent and importance of the functions and duties 
of the civil servants. 

The study and acquisition of the languages have, however, 
been extended in Bengal, and the gencral knowledge and 
qualifications of the civil servants have been improved. ¢ The 
proportion of the civil servants in Bengal, who have made a 
considerable progress towards the attainment of the qualifica- 
tions requisite in their several stations, appears great, and cven 
astonishing, when viewed with relation to the carly disad- 
vantages, embarrassments, and defects of the civil service) But 
this proportion will appear very different when compared with 
the exigencies -of the State, with the magnitude of these pro- 
vinces, and with the total number of the civil servants, which 
must supply the succession to the great offices of the Govern- 
ment. It must be admitted that the great body of the civil 


GOVERNMENT BOUND TO APPLY AN ADEQUATE REMEDY, 729 


Servants in Bengal is not at present sufficiently qualified to 
discharge the duties of the several arduous stations in the 
administration of this empire; and that it is peculiarly deficient 
in the judicial, fiscal, financial, and political branches of the 
Government. 

The state of the civil services of Madras and Bombay is still 
more defective than that of Bengal. Various causes have con- 
curred to aggravate, in an extreme degree, at both those Presi- 
dencics all the defects existing in the civil service of Bengal, 
while many circumstances peculiar to those Presidencies have 
favoured the growth of evils at present unknown in this. The 
condition of the writers, on their first arrival at cither of the 
subordinate Presidencics, is still more destitute, and more 
exposed to hazard, than at Calcutta, 

The study or acquisition of the languages, and of other neces- 
sary attainments, has not been extended in the civil service at 
Madras or Bombay to any considerable degree. To this remark, 
eminent and meritorious individual exceptions exist in the civil 
service at both subordinate Presidencics; but those exceptions 
are not sufficiently numerous to constitute a gencral rule. But 
whatever may be the actual condition of the civil service in its 
superior classes at any of the Presidencics, if the arduous dutics 
of that service have been justly defined in the preceding pages, 
if the qualifications requisite for their discharge have been truly 
described, if the neglected and exposed condition of the carly 
stages of the service has not been exaggerated, it must be 
admitted, that those stages of the service require additional 
safeguards, and a more effectual protection. The extraordinary 
excrtions of individual diligence, the partial success of singular 
talents, or of peculiar prudence and virtue, constitute no rational 
foundation of a public institution, which should rest on general 
comprehensive and uniform principles. If the actual state of 
the higher classes of the civil service were such as to justify a 
confidence in the general competency of the civil servants to 
‘mech the exigencics of their duty, the neecssity of correcting 
the evils stated in the preceding pages would still remain, unicss 
the facts alleged could be disproved. It would still be a duty 
incumbent on the Government to remove any obstacles tending 
to embarrass or retard the progress of their servants in attaining 
the qualifications necessary for their respective stations. The 
Government is not released from this duty by the extraordinary, 
or even general exertion of those servants to surmount the 


730 THE SERVICE HAS PROVED EQUAL TO GREAT CRISES. 


early difficulties of the first stages of the service. If the good 
Government of this empire be the primary duty of its sovereign, 
it must ever be a leading branch of that duty to facilitate to the 
public officers and ministers the means of qualifying themselves 
for their respective functions. The efficiency of the service can- 
not wisely or conscientiously be left to depend on the success of 
individual or accidental merit, struggling against the defects of 
established institutions. A due administration of our affairs 
can alone be secured by the constant effect of public institutions, 
operating in a regular and uninterrupted course upon the various 
characters, talents, and acquirements of individuals. The nature 
of our establishmgpts should furnish fixed and systematic 
encouragement to animate, to facilitate, to reward the progress 
of industry and virtue; and fixed and systematic discipline, to 
repress and correct the excesses of contrary dispositions. 

From these remarks may be deduced the indispensable neces- 
sity of providing some effectual and spcedy remedy for the 
defects in the education of the young men destined to the civil 
service in India. The nature of that remedy will afford matter 
of serious discussion. 

It may, however, be uscful, previously to that discussion, to 
advert to a gencral topic of argument, which may possibly be 
adduced to disprove the necessity of any new institution for the 
improvement of the civil service of the East India Company. 
It may be contended, that this service, through a long period of 
years, and in the course of various changes and chances, has 
always furnished men equal to the exigency of the occasion ; 
that servants of the Company have never been wanting to con- 
duct to a happy issue the numcrous revolutions which have 
taken place in the affairs of the Company in India; and that 
these eminent personages have ultimately fixcd the British 
empire in India on the most solid foundations of glory, wealth, 
and power. Why, therefore, should we apprehend, that this 
source, hitherto so fruitful and furnishing so abundant a supply 
of virtue and talents, will fail in the present age, and prove 
insufficient to the actual demands of our interests in this quarter 
of the globe? The answer to this topic of argument is obvious. 

Extraordinary combinations of human affairs, wars, revolutions, 
and all those unusual events which form the marked features 
and prominent characters of the history of mankind, naturally 
disclose talents and exertions adapted to such emergencics. 
That the civil or military service of the East India Company 


BUT SYSTEMATIC RULE REQUIRES REGULAR TRAINING. 731 


has supplicd persons calculated to mect all the wonderful revo- 
lutions of affairs in India, is a circumstance not to be attributed 
to the original or peculiar constitution of either service at any 
period of time. That constitution has undergone repeated 
alterations at the suggestion, and under the direction of the 
great characters which it has produced; and it has still been 
found answerable to every new crisis of an extraordinary nature. 
BufLit must never be forgotten, that the successive efforts of 
those eminent personages, and the final result of various revo- 
lutions and wars, have imposed upon the East India Company 
the arduous and sacred trust of governing an extensive and 
populous empire.) It is true that this empire‘must be maintained 
in some of its relations by the same spirit of enterprize and 
boldness which acquired it. (But duty, policy and honour 
require that it should not be administered as a temporary and 
precarious acquisition, as an empire conquered by prosperous 
adventure, and extended by fortunate accident, of which the 
tenure is as uncertain as the original conquest and successive 
extension were extraordinary; it must_be considered as a sacred 
trust, and a permanent possession. (In this view its internal 
government demands a constant, steady, and regular supply of 
qualifications, in no degree similar to those which distinguished 
the early periods of our establishment in India, and laid the 
first foundations of our empire. (The stability of that empire, 
Whose magnitude is the accumulated result of former enterprize, 
activity and resolution, must be secured by the durable prin- 
ciples of internal order; by a pure, upright, and uniform 
administration of justice; by a prudent and temperate system 
of revenuc; by the encouragement and protection of industry, 
agriculture, manufacture and commerce; by a careful and 
judicious management of every branch of financial resource ; and 
by the maintenance of a just, firm, and moderate policy towards 
the native powers of India. To maintain and uphold such a 
system in all its parts, we shall require a succession of able 
magistrates, wise and honest judges, and skilful statesmen, 
properly qualified to conduct the ordinary movements of the 
great machine of Government. 

The military establishments of this empire form no part of 
the subject of the present enquiry. It may be sufficient to 
observe in this place, that their extent, and the spirit in which 
they require to be governed, must correspond with the magni- 
tude of the empire, and with the general character of our civil 


73% SUMMARY OF DEFECTIVE STATE OF CIVIL SERVICE, 


policy. In the civil service, we must now scek, not the instru- 
ments by which kingdoms are overthrown, revolutions accom- 
plished, or wars conducted, but an inexhaustible supply of 
useful knowledge, cultivated talents, and well ordered and dis- 
ciplined morals. These are the necessary instruments of a wise 
and well regulated Government. These are the genuine and 
unfailing means of cultivating and improving the arts of peace; 
of diffusing affluence and happiness, willing obedience, and 
grateful attachment over every region and district of this vast 
empire ; and of dispensing to every class and description of our 
subjects the permanent benefits of secure property, protected 
life, undisturbed order, and inviolate religion. It is not the 
nature of these inestimable blessings to spring from a turbid 
source, or to flow in a contracted and irregular channel. 

The early education of the civil servants of the East India 
Company is the source from which will ultimatcly be derived 
the happiness or misery of our native subjects; and the stability 
of our Government will bear a due proportion to its wisdom, 
liberality, and justice. ' 

From the preceding discussion, it appears, that the actual 
state of the Company’s civil service in India is far removed from 
perfection or efficiency, and that the cause of this defect is to be 
found principally, if not exclusively, in the defective education 
of the junior civil servants, and in the insufficient discipline of 
the early stages of the service. The facts, which have been 
reviewed inthe course of this discussion, furnish the main 
principles on which an improved system of education and dis- 
cipline may be founded with a view to sccure the important 
ends of such an institution. 

The defects of the present condition of the civil service may 
be comprised under the following heads : 

First, An erroneous system of cducation in Europe confined to 
commercial and mercantile studics. 

Secondly, The premature interruption of a course of study 
judiciously commenced in Europe. 

Thirdly, The exposed and destitute condition of young men 
on their first arrival in India, and the want of a systematic 
guidance and established authority to regulate and control 
their moral and religious conduct in the early stages of the 
service. 

Fourthly, The want of a similar system and authority to pre- 
scribe and enforce a regular course of study, under which the 


WRITERS CANNOT FINISH THEIR EDUCATION AT HOME. 733 


young men upon their arrival in India might be enabled to 
Correct the errors, or to pursue and confirm the advantages of 
their European education, and to attain a knowledge of the 
languages, laws, usages and customs of India, together with such 
other branches of knowledge, as are requisite to qualify them 
for their several stations. 

Fifthly, The want of such regulations as shalk establish a 
necessary and inviolable connection between promotion in the 
civil service, and the possession of those qualifications requisite 
for the due discharge of the several civil stations. 

It is obvious, that an education exclusively European, or 
Indian, would not afford an adequate remedy for such of these 
defects, as rclate to the morals and studies of the East India 
Company’s servants, and would not qualify them for the dis- 
charge of dutics of a mixed and complicated nature, involving 
the combined principles of Asiatic and European policy and 
government. Their education must therefore be of a mixed 
nature{ its foundation must be judiciously laid in England, and 
the superstructure systematically completed in India?” 

An important question may arisc, with respect ty the pro- 
portion of time to be employed in that part of the cducation 
of the junior civil servants, which should be appropriated to 
England; and complcted previously to their departure for India. 
It may be contended, that many of the cnumerated evils may 
be precluded by not allowing the writers to proceed to India 
until they shall have reached a more advanced age, than that 
at which they now usually embark, and by requiring them to 
undergo examinations in Ingland, for the purpose of ascertain- 
ing their proficiency in the branches of knowledge necessary to 
the discharge of their dutics in India. 

To this arrangement various objections of a private, but most 
important nature, will arise in the mind of every parent, who 
may have destined his children for India. To attain any con- 
sidcrable proficiency in the course of cducation and study 
described in this paper, must necessarily require the detention 
of the student in L-urope to the age of 20 or 22 ce) many 
ae could not defray the expence of such an education in 
England, even if the other mcans of prosccuting it now existed, 
or could hereafter be provided at any school or college at 
home. ‘ 

Other objections of a private nature might be stated against 
this plan; but those which are founded on public considerations 


734 AND WOULD BE TOO OLD ON REACHING INDIA. 


appear to be absolutely insurmountable. It is a fundamental 
principle of policy in the British Establishments in the East 
Indies, that the views of the servants of the Company should 
terminate in the prospect of returning to England, there to 
enjoy the emoluments arising from a due course of active and 
honourable service in India. 

Were the civil servants, instead of leaving England at the 
age of sixteen or seventeen, to be detained until the age of 
twenty or two-and-twenty; a great proportion of them must 
abandon all hope of returning with a modcrate competence to 
their native country. 

Remaining in England to this advanced age, many would 
form habits and conncctions at home, not to be rclinquished 
at that period of life without great reluctance; and few would 
accommodate themselves with readiness and facility to the 
habits, regulations and discipline of the service in India. 

While these causes would render the civil servants intractable 
instruments in the hands of the Government of India, the 
regular progress through the service would also be retarded. 
Twenty-five years may be taken as the period within which a 
civil servant may regularly acquire, with proper habits of cco- 
nomy, an independent fortune in India. Upon this calculation, 
before the most successful could hope to be in a situation to 
return to England, they would have attained an age, when many 
of the powerful affections and inducements, which now attract 
the servants of the Company to return to their native country, 
would be greatly weakencd if not entirely extinguished, 

At that age, many from necessity, and many probably from 
choice, would establish themselves permanently in India. It 
is unnecessary to detail the evil consequences which would 
result to the British interests in India, were such an habit to 
become general in the civil service. 

Detention in England to the age of twenty or twenty-two 
years would certainly afford the writcrs an opportunity of ad- 
vancing their knowledge in the necessary branches of European 
study; but within that period of time, even in those branches it 
could scarcely be complcted ; especially in the important sciences 
of general cthics and jurisprudence (for how few understandings 
are equal to such a course of study previously to the age of 
twenty,) and it would be entirely defective in the essential point 
of connecting the principles of those sciences with the laws of 
India, and with the manners and usages of its inhabitants. No 


NOR COULD, IN ENGLAND, LEARN ALL THEY REQUIRE. 735 


establishment formed in England could give a correct! practical 
knowledge of the languages, laws and customs of India, of the 
peculiar habits and genius of the people, of their mode of trans- 
acting business, and of the characteristic features of their vices 
_or virtues. These most essential acquirements would, therefore, 
remain to be attained after the arrival of the student in India, 
‘sat an age when the study of languages is attended with additional 
difficultics, when any prescribed course of study, when any sys- 
tematic discipline, or regular restraint becomes irksome, if not 
intolerable. As the East India Company’s servants would 
arrive in India at a period of life too far advanced to admit of 
subjection to any system of public discipline or control, they 
must necessarily be Icft to the dictates of their own discretion 
with regard to whatever part of their knowledge had been Ieft 
incomplete in Europe. 

The wants and expenses of individuals arriving in India at 
the age of twenty or twenty-two years would greatly excecd 
the scale of the public allowances to the junior servants. At 
this age no restraint could be applicd in India to their a 
conduct, for the purpose of protecting them against the peculiar 
depravitics incident to the climate, and to the character of the 
natives. 

From the carly age at which the writers are now usually sent 
to India,(opportunity is afforded to the government on the spot of 
obtaining a knowledge of the characters of individuals, before 
they become cligible to stations of trust and importance) Of 
this advantage the government would be in a great degree 
deprived, if the ast India Company’s servants were all detained 
in England until the age of twenty or twenty-two: this incon- 
venience would prove nearly an insurmountable impediment 
to the important and necessary rule of selecting for public 
office, those best qualified to discharge its duties with propricty 
nd effect, 

( The junior civil servants must, therefore, continue to embark 
for India at the age of fifteen or sixteen, that they may be 
tractable instruments in the hands of the government of the 
country; that their morals and habits may be duly formed and 
protected by proper safeguards against the peculiar nature of the 
vices and characteristic dangers of Indian society; that they 


eee ee. 


' Sir W. Jones was not intelligible to the natives of India, when he 
arrived at Calcutta, in any of the orict tal languages. 


a 


736 A COLLEGE TO BE FOUNDED AT FORT WILLIAM. 


may be enabled to pass through the service before the vigour of 
life has ceased, and to return with a competent fortune to 
Europe, while the affections and attachments which bind them 
to their native country, continue to operate with full force; 
and lastly, that they may possess regular, seasonable and certain 
means of attaining the peculiar qualifications necessary for their 
stations.’ 

Under all these circumstances, the most deliberate and 
assiduous examination of all the important qucstions considered 
in this paper, determined the Governor-General to found a 
‘Collegiate Institution at Fort William, by the annexed regu- 
lation. / 

This regulation comprises all the fundamental principles of the 
Institution. The detailed statutes for the internal discipline 
and good government of the College will be framed gradually as 
circumstances may require. 

A common table and apartments are to be provided in the 
College, for all the civil servants who may be attached to the 
establishment. 

The benefits of the establishment are extended to the junior 
civil servants of Fort St. Gcorge and Bombay, who will be 
directed to proceed to Fort William as soon as the accommoda- 
tions requisite for their reception shall have been provided. 

This arrangement appeared in every respect preferable to the 
establishment of Colleges at both, or either of those Presidencies. 
Independently of the considerations of expense and other objec- 
tions and impediments to the foundation of such Institutions at 
Fort St. George and Bombay, it is of essential importance, that 
the education of all the civil servants of the Company should be 
uniform, and should be conducted under the immediate superin- 
tendance of that authority, which is primarily responsible for the 
government of the whole of the British posscssions in India ; 
and which must consequently be most competent to judge of the 
nature and principles of the education which may be most 
expedient for the public intcrests. 

It may be expected, that the operation of this part of the new 
institution will ultimately extinguish all local jcalousics and pre- 
judices among the several Presidencics ;( the political, moral, and 
religious principles of all the British Establishments in India, 
will then be derived directly from one common source } \the civil 
service of Bengal is unquestionably further advanced in every 
useful acquisition, \and in every respect more regular and correct, 


OLDER CIVILIANS AND MILITARY CADETS ADMISSIBLE. 737 


than that of either of the subordinate Presidencies; no more 
speedy or efficacious mode can be devised of diffusing through- 
out India, the laudable spirit of the service of Bengal, and of 
extending the bencfit of improvements, which, under the new 
institution, may be expected to make a rapid progress at the 
seat of the Supreme Government, than by rendering Fort William 
the centre of the education and discipline of the junior civil 
servants in India 

Provision is made for admitting to the benefits of the Institu- 
tion civil servants of a longer standing than three years (on their 
making application for that purpose) under such regulations as 
may be deemed advisable. The Institution may prove highly 
beneficial to many servants of this description; as many of 
them will be received on the establishment, as its funds and 
other considerations may admit. 

~Provision is also made for extending the benefits of the Insti- 
tution to as many of the junior military servants, as it may be 
found practicable to admit from all the Presidencies,’ ‘Essential 
’ benefits will result to the British armics in India, from the annual 
introduction of a number of young men, well versed in the lan- 
guages with which every officer, but particularly those belonging 
to the native corps, ought to be acquainted. It is also of most 
essential importance to the army in India, that it should be 
composed of officers attached by regular instruction, and dis- 
ciplined habits, to the principles of morality, good order, and 
subordination 

Further regulations are in the contemplation of the Governor- 
General, for the education of the cadets destined for the army 
in India, which will be connected intimately with the -present 
foundation. 

It cannot be denicd that, during the convulsions with which 
the doctrines of the French Revolution have agitated the Con- 
tinent of Europe, erroncous principles of the same dangerous 
tendency had reached the minds of some individuals in the civil 
and military service of the Company in India; and the state, as 
well of political, as of religious opinions, had been in some degree 
unsettled. The progress of this mischicf would at all times be 
aided by the defective and irregular education of the writers and 
cadets ; an Institution tending to fix and establish sound and 
correct principles of religion and government in their minds at an 
early period of life, is the best security which can be provided for 
the stability of the British power in India. The letter of the 


3B 


738 THE COLLEGE WILL REMEDY THE EVILS YOU CONDEMN. 


Court of Directors, under date the 25th of May, 1798, has been 
constantly present to the Governor-General’s mind; it is satis- 
factory to know, after the fullest consideration, that many appre- 
hensions stated in that letter, appear to have been conceived 
with more force than is required by the actual state of any of the 
settlements in India. 

But among other important advantages of the new Institution, 
it will provide the most effectual and permanent remedy against 
the evils, (as far as they existed) which it was the object of 
the orders of the Honourable Court of the 25th of May, 1798, to 
correct. 

The situation of the junior servants on their early arrival in 
India, has been fully described in this paper. Under the new 
Institution, they will be immediately received by the Provost, (a 
clergyman of the church of England ;) they will be provided with 
apartments in the College, and with a common table; conse- 
quently they will be removed from the danger of profusion, extra 
vagance and excess. Every part of their private conduct, their 
expenses, their connections, their manners and morals will be ° 
subject to the notice of the Provost, and principal officers of the 
College, and (through the collegiate authorities) of the govern- 
ment itself. 

While attached to the Institution, the junior servants will 
have the most ample means afforded to them of completing 
the European branch of their education, or of correcting its 
defects; of acquiring whatever local knowledge may be neces- 
sary for that department of the service, in which, (after mature 
reflection on their own inclinations, acquisitions and talents) 
they may determine to engage; of forming their manners and 
of fixing their principles on the solid foundations of virtue and 
rejigion. 

he acquirements, abilities, and moral character of every civil 
servant may be ascertained before he can be eligible to a public 
station; and every selection of persons for high and important 
offices may be made under a moral certainty, that the public 
expectation cannot be disappointed,) 
( The twenty-fourth clause of the Regulation will afford the 
foundation of a law which may at all times secure the civil 
service against the effects of the possible partiality or ignorance 
of any government. 

It is intended that the allowance of every civil servant of less . 
than three years’ standing, being a student in the College, should 


ITS DISCIPLINE, AND GENERAL ATTRACTIVENESS. 739 


be brought to one standard of 300 rupees per month, without 
any allowance for a Moonshy, 

As a table and apartments will be provided for the students, 
this allowance will place them in a better situation than any 
writer of the same standing now enjoys. With these advantages, 
under the control of the official authorities of the College, and 
with the benefit of their advice and admonition, aided by statutes 
for the prevention of extravagance and debt,*{t may be hoped 
that many young men will adopt early habits of economy, and 
will lay the foundations of honest independence at a much earlier 
period than is now practicable. This advantage will be consider- 
able in cvery view, in no one more than as it will tend to contract 
the period of each servant’s residence in India, to give a nearer 
prospect of return to England, and to keep that desirable object 
more constantly in vicy 

The discipline of the College will be as moderate as may be 
consistent with the ends of the Institution, It will impose no 
harsh or humiliating restraint, and will be formed on principles 
combining the discipline of the Universitics in England with that 
of the Royal Military Academics of France and of other 
European monarchic 

It may be expected that the grcat majority of young men on 
their arrival in India, will eagerly embrace the opportunities 
afforded to them by this Institution of laying the foundations of 
private character, of public reputation, and of carly independence. 
It cannot be supposed that many will be so insensible to their 
own honour and intercsts, and so destitute of every liberal fecling 
and sentiment, as not to prefer the proposed course of studics 
in the College to the menial labour imposed upon them of 
transcribing papers in an office where, in the nature of their duty, 
they are levelled with the native and Portuguese clerks; although 
infinitely inferior in its execution. ) 

Those young men who may not at the first view discover all 
the advantages to be derived from the Institution, will soon 
improve by the example and communications of others. If any 
individuals should continue insensible to the calls of public duty, 
and of private reputation, (and it is of importance that persons 
of this description should be known before an opportunity has 
been afforded to them of injuring the public interests, by their 
vices and defects,) the public good will demand that they should 
be punished by neglect and cxclusion from employment Con- 
sidcring the liberal manner in which the servants of the Company 

3 Ba 


740 DAWDLING WILL GIVE PLACE TO AMBITIOUS INDUSTRY. 


are rewarded for their services, the public may justly insist on 
submission to whatever regulations may be prescribed by this 
Institution. 

The incitements to exertion being as powerful as the conse- 
quences of contrary habits will be ruinous, instances of gross 
neglect or contumacy will rarely occur. In this respect the 
Institution possesses peculiar advantages, and it will become a 
powerful instrument in the hands of the Government in India, 
which will be enabled thereby to bring the general character of 
the servants of the Company to such a standard of perfection 
as the public interests require. To every other inducement, 
which any Collegiate Institution in the world can supply for 
the encouragement of diligence, will be added the immediate 
view of official promotion, increase of fortune, and distinction in 
the public service, 

If it be asked whether it be proper that the whole time of the 
junior servants, for the first three years of their residence in 
India, should be devoted to study in the College, and that the 
Company should lose the benefit of their services during that 
period, while the junior servants receive a salary? 

It may be enquired, on the other hand, what is now the occu- 
pation of the civil servants for the first three years after their 
arrival in India, what benefit the Company now derives from the 
services of the junior servants during that period, and what, in 
general, are now the characters and qualifications of those 
servants at the expiration of that period? 

To all these questions sufficient answers have been given in 
the preceding pages. 

Further details respecting the nature of the Institution will 
be forwarded officially to the Court of Directors at an early 
period. 

The reasons which induced the Governor-General to found 
the College without any previous reference to England were 

\ these ;—His conviction of the great immediate benefit to be 
derived from.the early commencement even of the partial opera- 
tion of the plan, 

His ‘experience of the great advantages which had been 

_ already derived by many of the young men from their attend- 
ance on Mr. Gilchrist, in consequence of the first experiment 
made on a contracted scale with a view to a more extendcd 

y Institution. 

His anxiety to impart to the very promising young men 


REASONS FOR NOT AWAITING DIRECTORS’ SANCTION. 741 


arrived from Europe within the last three years, a share of the 
advantages described in this paper, and his solicitude to super- 
intend the foundation of the Institution, and to accelerate and 
witness its first effects. 

This Institution will be best appreciated by every affectionate 
parent in the hour of separation from his child, destined to the 
public service in India. Let any parent (especially if he has 
himself passed through the Company’s service in India) declare, 
whether the prospect of this Institution has aggravated or miti- 
gated the solicitude of that painful hour—whether it has raised 
additional doubts and fears, or inspired a more lively hope of 
the honourable and prosperous service, of the early and fortunate 
return of his child ? 

With regard to the funds for defraying the expense of the 
Institution, the Governor-Gencral docs not intend, without the 

\ sanction of the Honourable Court of Directors, to subject the 
Company to any expense on account of the Institution, beyond 
that which has already reccived their sanction independently of 
the Institution. 

The Honourable Court have authorized this Government to 
purchase the Writers’ buildings, if they can be obtained on ad- 
vantagcous terms. These buildings cannot be obtained on such 
terms; nor can they be advantageously converted to the final 
purposes of the Institution. A sum equal to the just value of 
the buildings, or to the rent now paid for them, will be applicd 
towards the purchase of a proper spot of ground, and to the 
buildings requisite for the College. 

The ground proposed to be employed is situated on the 
Garden Reach, where three or four of the present gardens will 
be laid together, a new road formed, and a large space of ground 
cleared and drained, This arrangement will improve the general 
health of the neighbourhood of Calcutta, as well as afford ample 
room for every accommodation required for the use of the 
College, or for the health of the students, 

The expenses of the Institution will be defrayed by a small 
contribution from all the civil servants in India, to be deducted 
from their salarics, This resource will probably be sufficient for 
all present purposes, with the addition of the fund now applied 
to the Moonshy’s allowance, and of the profits to be derived 
from a new arrangement of the Government printing-press. 

The Governor-General has not deemed it proper, in the first 
instance, to subject the Company to any additional expense on 


742 PRESENT AND FUTURE FUNDS FOR THE COLLEGE. 


account of the Institution. The Honourable Court of Directors 
will, however, reflect, that the Institution is calculated to extend 
the blessings of good government to the many millions of people 
whom Providence has subjected to our dominion, to perpetuate 
the immense advantages now derived by the Company from 
their possessions in India, and to establish the British Empire in 
India on the solid foundations of ability, integrity, virtue, and 
religion. The approved liberality of the Honourable Court will 
therefore certainly be manifested towards this Institution to an 
extent commensurate with its importance. 

It would produce a most salutary impression in India if the 
Court, immediately on receiving this Regulation, were to order 
the Governor-General in Council to endow the College with an 
annual rent-charge on the revenues of Bengal, and issue a 
similar order to the Governor in Council at Fort St, George 
with respect to the revenue of Mysore; leaving the amount of 
the endowment, on each fund, to the Governor-General in 
Council. 

All those who feel any concern in the support of the British 
interests in India, and especially those whose fortunes have 
been acquired in the service of the Company, or whose con- 
nections may now or hereafter look to this service for advance- 
ment, will undoubtedly contribute to the support of this Institu- 
tion. Under the auspices of the Court, it is hoped that a large 
sum might be raised by subscription in Europe. CThe Governor- 
General considered the College at Fort William to be the most 
becoming public monument which the East India Company 
could raise to commemorate the conquest of Mysore.) He has 
accordingly dated the law for the foundation of the College on 
the 4th of May, 1800, the first anniversary of the reduction of 
Seringapatam, 

The early attention of the Governor-General will be directed 
to the Mahommedan College founded at Calcutta, and to the 
Hindoo College established at Benares. In the disorders which 
preceded the fall of the Mogul Empire and the British con- 
quests in India, all the public Institutions calculated to pro- 
mote education and good morals were ncglectcd, and at Iength 
entirely discontinued. The Institutions at Calcutta and Benares 
may be made the means of aiding the study of the laws and 
languages in the College at Fort William, as well as of correct- 
ing the defective moral principles too generally prevalent among 
the natives of India. 


WHY THE GARDEN REACH SITE WAS CHOSEN. 743 


An establishment of Moonshies and native teachers of the 
languages under the control of the collegiate officers at Fort 
William will be attached to the new College, and the young 
men will be supplied from this establishment, instead of being 
left (as at present) to exercise their own discretion in hiring such 
Moonshies as they can find in Calcutta or in the provinces. 

These arrangements respecting the native Colleges, while 
they contribute to the happiness of our native subjects, will 
qualify them to form a more just estimate of the mild and 
benevolent spirit of the British Government. 

In selecting the Garden Reach for the site of the building 
for the New College, two objects were in the contemplation 
of the Governor-General; first, that the ordinary residence of 
the students should be so near that of the Governor-General 
as that he may have the constant means of superintending the 
whole system and discipline of the Institution. The distance 
of fifteen or sixteen miles, in this climate, would often embarrass 
the communication. 

Secondly, That the College should be removed to some 
distance from the Town of Calcutta. The principle of this 
object is sufficiently intelligible without further explanation ; it 
is, however, desirable that the College should not be so remote 
from Calcutta as to preclude the young men from all intercourse 
with the socicty of that city. Advantages may be derived from 
a regulated intercourse with the higher classes of that society. 
The Garden Reach combines these advantages, with many 
others of space and accommodation. The situation of the 
Writers’ buildings is objectionable on account of their being 
placed in the centre of the town. Nor would it have been 
practicable in that situation (even if the Writers’ buildings could 
have been purchased on reasonable terms) to have obtained an 
area of ground sufficiently spacious for the new building. 

As it will require a considerable time before the new buildings 
in Garden Reach can be completed, it is intended in the mean- 
while to continue to occupy the Writers’ buildings, and to hire 
such additional buildings in the neighbourhood as may be 
required for the temporary accommodation of the students and 
officers of the College, for the library, the dining-hall, the 
lecture-rooms, and other purposes. It will be necessary to make 
some considerable purchases of books for the foundation of the 
library. The Governor-General will effect whatever purchases 
can be made with cconomy and advantage in India. Lists of 


744. THE LIBRARY. THE PROVOST AND VICE-PROVOST. 


books will be transmitted to England by an early opportunity, 
with a view to such purchases as it may be necessary to make 
in Europe; and the Governor-General entertains no doubt that 
the Court of Directors will contribute liberally towards such 
purchases. That part of the library of the late Tippoo Sultaun, 
which was presented by the army to the Court of Directors, is 
lately arrived in Bengal. The Governor-General strongly re- 
commends that the Oriental manuscripts composing this collec- 
tion should be deposited in the library of the College at Fort 
William ; and it is his intention to retain the manuscripts accord- 
ingly, until he shall receive the orders of the Court upon the 
subject. He will transmit lists of the collection by the first 
opportunity. 

It is obvious that these manuscripts may be rendered highly 
useful to the purposes of the new Institution, and that much 
more public advantage can be derived from them in the library 
of the College at Fort William, than can possibly be expected 
from depositing them in London. 

Such of the manuscripts as may appear to be mercly valuable 
as curiosities may be transmitted to England by an early 
opportunity. 

It is the intention of the Governor-General that the first term 
of the College should be opened in the course of the month of 

\\ November; and the lectures on several of the languages, it is 
‘hoped, be commenced in the course of the ensuing winter. 

With the aid of such temporary arrangements as may bé 
immediately made, it is expected that many other branches of 
the Institution may be brought into immediate operation, par- 
ticularly those which relate to the expenses, morals, and general 
studies of the young men. Fortunately for the objects of the 
Institution, the Governor-General has found, at Calcutta, two 
Clergymen of the Church of England, eminently qualificd to 
discharge the duties of Provost and Vice-Provost. To the 
former office he has appointed Mr. Brown, the Company’s first 
Chaplain; and to the latter Mr. Buchanan. Mr. Brown’s 
character must be well known in England, and particularly so to 
some Members of the Court of Directors; it is in every respect, 
such as to satisfy the Governor-General that his views in this 
nomination will not be disappointed. He has also formed the 
highest expectations from the abilities, Icarning, temper, and 
morals of Mr. Buchanan, whose character is well known in 
England, particularly to Dr. Porteus, Bishop of London, and to 


PROFESSORS. STUDENTS LOCALE BEST SETTLED IN INDIA. 745 


Dr. Milner, Master of Queen’s College, in the University of 
Cambridge. 

With respect to the Professorships, those which relate to the 
languages will be best filled in India; and the Governor- 
General entertains little doubt, that he shall soon be able to 
fill them permanently, in an efficient manner. In the mean- 
while, the most laudable zeal has been manifested by such 
persons in the civil and military service, as are competent to 
assist the Governor-General in making a temporary provision 
for the discharge of the duties of these Professorships. The 
persons properly qualified to fill certain of the other Professor- 
ships must be sought in Europe. The Institution will be so 
framed as to offer strong inducements to such persons; and the 
Governor-Gencral will endeavour, at the carliest possible period, 
to secure the assistance of talents, learning, and morals from 
Europe, adapted to the great purposes of this Institution. It 
may be useful to observe, in this place, that the Professors and 
native Moonshies or teachers will be prohibited from instructing 
any other persons than the students of the College. The object 
of this regulation is to prevent European parents, resident in 
India, from attempting to commence or to complete, by means 
of the ngw Institution, the regular education of their children in 
India. (It is an obviously necessary principle of policy to 
encourage the present practice of sending children, born in India 
of European parents, at an early age, to Europe for education.) 

The Governor-General means to recommend that the Court 
of Directors should hereafter nominate all persons destined for 
the civil servicc, at any of the Presidencics in India, to be 
Students of the College at Fort William. To cach studentship 
(as has already been observed) will be annexed a monthly 
salary of 300 rupees, together with apartments and a common 
table. It will be for the Honourable Court to decide whether 
the ultimate destination of the student to the Civil Establish- 
ment of Bengal, Fort St. George, or Bombay, shall be specified 
in the original appointment to the studentship at the College 
of Fort William : it would certainly be more advantageous to the 
public service, that no such appointment should be made. in 
England, and that the ultimate destination of cach student 
should be determined in India under the authority of the 
Government on the spot, according to the inclinations and 
acquirements of the students respectively. The improved state 
of the Civil Service at Fort St, George, and the indispensable 


746 RELATION OF COLLEGE PROGRESS TO OFFICIAL RANK, 


necessity of introducing the same improvements into the service 
at Bombay, will speedily render the Civil Service at each of 
those Presidencies no less advantageous and respectable than 
that of Bengal. 

The Governor-General highly applauds the wisdom of the 
late order of the Court regulating the rank of the cadets for 
the artillery according to the period of time when they may be 
respectively reported to be qualified for commissions under the 
institutions of the Academy at Woolwich. It would be a most 
beneficial regulation to declare that the rank of all students 
appointed to the College of Fort William, in the same season, 
should be regulated according to their respective progress in the 
prescribed studies of the College, and to the public testimonials 
of their respective merit, established according to the discipline 
and institutions of the College. 

If the Court of Directors should approve the principles and 
objects of this Institution, and should accordingly order the 
Governor-General to endow it with a rent-charge upon the land 
revenue of Bengal and Mysore, it would be a gracious act to 
relieve the Civil Service in India from the tax which the 
Governor-General intends to impose on the public salaries for 
the support of the College. The tax will indeed be very light, 
but the Court of Directors may probably be of opinion that such 
an Institution as the present ought to be supported, rather by 
the munificence of the Sovereign of the country than by any 
diminution, however inconsiderable, of the established allowances 
of the public officers. | 

7 WELLESLEY. 


106. Regulation for the College at Fort William. 
Fort William, July roth, 1800. 


Regulation for the foundation of a College at Fort William in 
Bengal, and for the better instruction of the Funior Civil 
Servants of the Honourable the English East India Company 
in the important duties belonging to the several arduous stations 
to which the said Funior Civil Servants may be respectively 
destined in the administration of justice, and in the general 
government of the British Empire in India——Passed by the 
Governor-General in Council, on the 10th Fuly, 1800; corre- 


THE COMPANY’S EMPIRE, AND ITS OBLIGATIONS. 747 


ponding with the 28th Assar, 1207, Bengal era; the 4th 

Sawun, 1207, Fussily; the ath Assar, 1207, Willaity; the 
4th Sawun, 1857, Sumbut, and the 19th Suffer, 1215, Higeree ; 
—LBut by his Lordship’s special order, bearing date on the 4th 
May, 1800, being the first anniversary of the glorious and 
decisive victory obtained by the British arms at Seringapatam, 
the capital of the Kingdom of Mysore, 


Whereas it hath pleased the Divine Providence to favour the 
counsels and arms of Great Britain in India with a continued 
course of prosperity and glory; and whereas, by the victorious 
issue of several successive wars, and by the happy result of a 
just, wise, and moderate system of policy, extensive territories in 
Hindostan, and -in the Deccan, have been subjected to the 
dominion of Great Britain, and under the government of the 
Honourable the English East India Company, in process of 
time a great and powerful empire has been founded, compre- 
hending many populous and opulent provinces, and various 
nations, differing in religious persuasions, in language, manners, 
and habits, and respectively accustomed to be governed accord- 
ing to peculiar usages, doctrines, and laws; and whereas the 
sacred duty, true interest, honour, and policy of the British 
nation require, that effectual provision should be made at all 
times for the good government of the British empire in India, 
and for the prosperity and happiness of the pcople inhabiting 
the same ; and many wise and salutary regulations have accord- 
ingly becn enacted from time to time by the Governor-General 
in Council with the benevolent intent and purpose of adminis- 
tering to the said people their own laws, usages, and customs, 
in the mild and benignant spirit of the British constitution ; and 
whereas it is indispensably necessary with a view to sccure the 
due execution and administration of the said wise, salutary, and 
benevolent regulations in all time to come, as well as of such 
regulations and laws as may hereafter be enacted by the 
Governor-General in Council, that the civil servants of the 
’ Honourable the English East India Company exercising high 
and important functions in the government of India, should 
be properly qualified to discharge the arduous duties of their 
respective offices and stations; should be sufficiently instructed 
in the gencral principles of literature and science; and should 
possess a competent knowlcdge, as well of the laws, govern- 
ment, and constitution of Great Britain, as of the several native 


748 ITS SERVANTS MUST BE PROPERLY EDUCATED IN INDIA. 


languages of Hindostan and the Deccan, and of the laws, usages, 
and customs of the provinces which the said civil servants 
respectively may be appointed to govern; and whereas the early 
interruption in Europe of the education and studies of the 
persons destined for the civil service of the Honourable the 
English East India Company precludes them from acquiring, 
previously to their arrival in India, a sufficient foundation in the 
general principles of literature and science, or a competent 
knowledge of the laws, government, and constitution of Great 
Britain; and many qualifications essential to the proper dis- 
charge of the arduous and important duties of the civil service 
in India, cannot be fully attained otherwise than by a regular 
course of education and study in India, conducted under the 
superintendence, direction, and control of the supreme authority 
of the government of these posscssions; and whereas no public 
institution now exists in India, under which the junior servants 
appointed at an early period of life to the civil service of the 
Honourable the English East India Company, can attain the 
necessary means of qualifying themselves for the high and 
arduous trusts to which they are respectively destined; and no 
system of discipline or education has been established in India 
for the purpose of directing and regulating the studics of the 
said junior servants, or of guiding their conduct upon their first 
arrival in India, or of forming, improving, or preserving their 
morals, or of encouraging them to maintain the honour of the 
British namg¢ in India by a regular and orderly course of 
industry, prudence, integrity, and religion; The most noble 
Richard Marquess Wellesley, Knight of the illustrious Order of 
Saint Patrick, &c. &c., Governor-General in Council, deeming 
the establishment of such an institution, and system of discipline, 
education, and study, to be requisite for the good government 
and stability of the British empire in India, and for the main- 
tenance of the interests and honour of the Honourable the 
English East India Company, his Lordship in Council hath 
therefore enacted as follows. 

II. A college is hereby founded at Fort William in Bengal ° 
for the better instruction of the junior civil servants of the 
Company, in such branches of literature, science, and knowledge, 
as may be decmed necessary to qualify them for the discharge 
of the duties of the different offices constituted for the adminis~- 
tration of the government of the British possessions in the East 
Indies. 


FORT WILLIAM COLLEGE FOUNDED. ITS OFFICERS. 749 


III. A suitable building shall be erected for the college, 
containing apartments for the superior officers, for the students, 
for a library, and for such other purposes as may be found 
necessary, 

IV. The Governor-General shall be the patron and visitor of 
the college. 

V. The members of the Supreme Council, and the judges of | 
the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, and of the Nizamut Adawlut, 
shall be the governors of the college. 

VI. The Governor-General in Council shall be trustee for 
the management of the funds of the college, and shall regularly 
submit his proceedings in that capacity to the Honourable the 
Court of Directors. 

VII. The Comptrolling Committee of Treasury shall be 
treasurers of the college. 

VIII. The Accountant-General, and the Civil Auditor, shall be 
respectively accountant, and auditor of accounts, of the college. 

IX. The Advocate-General, and the Honourable Company’s 
standing Counscl, shall be the law officers of the college. 

X. The immediate government of the college shall be vested 
in a Provost and Vice-Provost, and such other officers as the 
patron and visitor shall think proper to appoint, with such 
salarics as he shall deem expedient. The Provost, Vice-Provost, 
and all other officers of the college, shall be removable at the 
discretion of the patron and visitor. 

XI. The Provost shall always be a clergyman of the church 
of England, as established by law. 

XII. Every proceeding and act of the Patron and Visitor 
shall be submitted to the Honourable the Court of Directors, 
and shall be subjected to their pleasure. 

XIII. The primary dutics of the Provost shall be to reccive 
the junior civil servants on thcir first arrival at Fort William ; to 
supcrintend and regulate their gencral morals and conduct ; to 
assist them with his advice and admonition; and to instruct ‘ 
and confirm them in the principles of the Christian religion, 
according to the doctrine, discipline, and rites of the church of 
England, as established by law. 

XIV. The Patron and Visitor shall establish such profcssor-v 
Ships, with such endowments as shall be judged proper. 

XV. Professorships shall be established as soon as may be 
practicable, and regular courses of lectures commenced, in the 
following branches of literature, science, and knowledge ; 


750 CURRICULUM, PENSIONS, CLASSES OF STUDENTS, 


Languages——Arabic, Persian, Shanscrit, Hindoostanee, Ben- 
gal, Telinga, Mahratta, Tamul, Canara; Mahomedan law, Hindoo 
law, ethics, civil jurisprudence, and the law of nations; English 
law; the regulations and laws enacted by the Governor-General 
in Council, or by the Governors in Council at Fort St. George 
and Bombay respectively, for the civil government of the 
British territories in India; political ceconomy, and particularly 
the commercial institutions and interests of the East India 
Company; geography and mathematics; modern languages of 
Europe; Greek, Latin, and English classics; general history, 
antient and modern; the history and antiquities of Hindoostan 
and the Deccan; natural history; botany, chemistry, and 
astronomy. 

XVI. The Patron and Visitor may authorize the same pro- 
fessor to read lectures in more than one of the enumerated 
branches of study, and: may at any time unitc, or separate 
any of the said professorships, or may found additional pro- 
fessorships in such other branches of study as may appear 
necessary, 

XVII, The Provost and Vice-Provost, after having remained 
in the government of the college for the complete period of 
seven years, and any professor, after having read Iccturcs in the 
college for the complete period of seven years, or of twenty- 


- eight terms, and after having respectively received, under the 


hand and seal of the Patron and Visitor, a testimonial of good 
conduct during that period of time, shall be entitled to an annual 
pension for life,to be paid either in Europe or in India, according 
to the option of the party. The pension shall in no case be less 
than one-third of the annual salary received by such Provost 
or Vice-Provost respectively during his continuance in the 
government of the college, or by any such Professor, during 
the period of his regular lectures. The pension may in any case 
be increased at the discretion of the Patron and Visitor. 

XVIII. All the civil servants of the Company who may be 
hereafter appointed on the establishment of the Presidency of 
Bengal, shall be attached to the college for the first three years 
after their arrival in Bengal, and during that period of time, 
the prescribed studies in the college shall constitute their sole 
public duty. 

XIX, All the civil servants now on the establishment of the 
Presidency of Bengal, whose residence in Bengal shall not have 
exceeded the term of three years, shall be immediately attached 


we 


TERMS. VACATIONS, EXAMINATIONS. DEGREES. STATUTES. 751 


to the college for the term of three years from the date of this 
regulation. 

XX, Any of the junior civil servants of the Company in India, 
whether belonging to the establishment of this Presidency, or to 
that of Fort St. George, or of Bombay, may be admitted to the 
benefits of the institution by order of the Governor-General in 
Council, for such term, and under such regulations, as may be 
deemed advisable. 

XXI. Any of the junior military servants of the Company in 
India, whether belonging to the establishment of this Presidency, 
or to that of Fort St. George, or of Bombay, may be admitted 
to the benefits of the institution, by order of the Governor- 
General in Council, for such term, and under such regulations, 
as may be deemcd advisable. 

XXII. In the college at Fort William, four terms shall be 
observed in each year; the duration of each term shall be two 
months. Four vacations shall also be established in each year ; 
the duration of cach vacation shall be one month, 

XXIII. Two public examinations shall be holden annually, 
and prizes and honorary rewards shall be publicly distributed 
by the Provost, in the presence of the Patron and Governors, 
to such students as shall appear to merit them. 


i XXIV. Degrees shall be established, and shall be rendered 


requisite qualifications for certain offices in the civil governments 
of Bengal, Fort St. George and Bombay; and promotion in the 
civil service shall be the necessary result of merit publicly 
approved, according to the discipline and institutions of the 
college. 

XXV. Statutes shall be framed by the Provost of the college, 
under the superintendence of the Governors of the college, 
respecting the internal regulation, discipline, and government 
of the college; but no statute shall be enforced until it shall 
have been sanctioned by the Patron and Visitor. The statutes 
8o sanctioned shall be printed according to a form to be pre- 
scribed by the Patron and Visitor. 

XXVI. The Patron and Visitor shall be empowered, at all 
times of his sole and exclusive authority, to amend or abrogate 
any existing statute, or to enact any new statute for the regula- 
tion, discipline, and government of the college. 

XXVII. A regular statement of all salaries, appointments, or 
removals of the officers of the college, shall be submitted by the 
Patron and Visitor of the college at the expiration of cach term, 


75% CHEAP CHAPELS ALLOWED, SABBATH-BREAKING DENOUNCED. 


to the Governor-General in Council, and by the Governor- 
General in Council to the Honourable the Court of Directors; 
printed copies of all statutes enacted by the Patron and Visitor 
shall also be submitted to the Governor-General in Council, and 
to the Honourable the Court of Directors, at the same periods 
of time, and in the same manner. 


107. Extract from a public Letter from the Court of Directors 
of the East India Company to Bengal dated 25th May, 1798. 


An objurgation on the character and conduct of the servants 
of the Company. 


70. Conceiving it a duty incumbent upon us to afford our civil 
and military servants, and all Christians living under our pro- 
tection, professing the Protestant religion, the means of attend- 
ing Divine service, in which we trust, those in superior station 
will set the example, we most cheerfully acquiesce in your 
proposal for erecting chapels in the progressive manner pointed 
out in the 63d paragraph of the letter to which we are now 
replying, such edifices to be as plain and simple as possible, 
that all unnecessary expense may be avoided. 

71. Having thus, as far as depends upon us, provided for the 
due observance of public worship on the sabbath-day, we cannot 
avoid mentioning the information we have received, that at the 
military stations it is no uncommon thing for the solemnity of 
the day to be broke in upon by horse-racing, whilst Divine 
worship, (for which the sabbath is especially enjoined to be set 
apart) is never performed at any of those stations, though 
chaplains are allotted to them. And we have now before us a 
printed horse-racing account, by which it appears that not less 
than eight matches were run at Chinsurah in one day, and that 
on a Sunday. We are astonished and shocked at this wide 
deviation from one of the most distinguishing and universal 
institutions of Christianity. We must suppose it to have been 
so gradual, that transitions from one step to another have been 
little observed ; but the stage at which it is now arrived, if our 
information be true, must appear to every reasonable man, 
highly discreditable to our government, and totally incompatible 
with the religion we profess. 

72. To preserve the ascendancy which our national character 


POLITICAL AND SOCIAL USES OF CHRISTIANITY. 753: 


has acquired over the minds of the natives of India, must ever 
be of importance to the maintenance of the political power we 
possess in the East, and we are well persuaded that this end is 
not to be served either by a disregard of the external observ- 
ances of religion, or by any assimilation to Eastern manners 
and opinions, but rather by retaining all the distinctions of our 
national principles, character and usages. The events which 
have recently passed in Europe, point out that the present is 
least of all the time in which irreligion should be promoted 
or encouraged ; for with an attachment to the religion which 
we profess, is found to be intimately connected an attachment 
to our laws and constitution; besides which, it is calculated to 
produce the most beneficial effects in socicty; to maintain in it- 
the peace, the subordination, and all the principles and practices 
on which its stability and happiness depend. 

73. We therefore enjoin that all such profanations of the 
sabbath, as have been mentioned, be forbidden and prevented ; 
and that Divine service be regularly performed, as in England, 
every Sunday, at all the military stations; and all European 
officers and soldiers, unless hindered by sickness or actual duty, 
are to be required punctually to attend, for which such an hour 
is to be fixed as shall be most suitable to the climate. The 
chaplains are to be positivcly ordered to be regular and correct 
in the performance of their duty, and if any one of them neglect 
it, or by his conduct bring discredit on his profession, we direct 
that he be dismissed from our service. 

74. We rely on the ready obedience of the commanding 
officers at the different stations, in carrying this necessary 
regulation into execution, and particularly depend on the atten- 
tion of our Commander-in-Chicf, and of our Governor-General 
for giving it full effect. 

75. We arc here naturally led to remark, exclusive of what 
relates to the public institutions of religion, that the general 
tenor of the Indian newspapers, and periodical publications 
which come under our inspection, as well as the private infor- 
mations which reach this country, concur in exhibiting an 
increasing spirit of luxury and dissipation in our principal scttle- 
ments, and even at some of the subordinate stations, 

76. This suggests to us much matter of very serious concern 
and apprehension. It points to evils incalculable in their con- 
sequences. One inference immediately arising from it is, that 
either the general scale of allowances and emoluments in our 


3C¢ 


754 LUXURY AND FASHIONABLE AMUSEMENTS REPROBATED, 


service is too large, or that by an improvident use of them, a 
principle of new wants and new desires is kept in too much 
activity, and thus a tone given to the general manners most 
contrary to that regulated economy on which so much turns the 
welfare of governments, and the comfort, independance, and 
respectability of individuals. 

77. It is on the qualities of our servants that the safety of the 
British possessions in India essentially depends; on their virtue, 
their intelligence, their laborious application, their vigilance and 
public spirit. We have seen, and do still with pleasure see, 
honourable examples of all these; we are anxious to preserve 
and increase such examples, and therefore cannot contemplate 
without alarm, the excessive growth of fashionable amusements 
and shew, the tendency of which is to enervate the mind, and 
impair its nobler qualities, to introduce a hurtful emulation in 
expense, to set up false standards of merit, to confound the 
different orders in society, and to beget an aversion to serious 
occupations. 

78. This taste in a society which, with an exception of the 
article of commercial gains, a source by no means general, 
derives its whole income mediately or immediately from the 
State, is especially to be deprecated. The progressive wealth 
and prosperity of any country, do indeed too naturally increase 
luxury and its attendant evils; but where this order is inverted, 
and luxury increases, whilst the grand source that supplies it 
remains without proportionate augmentation, as is the case of 
the land revenue of Bengal, now unalterably fixed in its amount, 
the consequences must be eventually ruinous, unless a system so 
preposterous is effectually checked. 

79. Believing that the enjoyment of avowed, honourable allow- 
ances, would tend to promote, among other beneficial effects, a 
due regulation of expense, the Company have, from such con- 
siderations, strained their own means to put their servants on 
the most liberal footing; but whilst they feel themselves weighed 
down by the civil and military charges of their establishments, 
they are still frequently assailed in one way or another, by new 
applications for pecuniary concessions; and yet at the same 
time that we hear of straits and hardships resulting from 
inadequate allowances, we not only discern evident marks of 
increasing dissipation in ‘the general habits of European society 
in India, but in some of them a spirit of gaming publicly shewing 
itself in lotteries, and the keen pursuits of the turf. 


GOVERNOR-GENERAL TO EXERT PATERNAL DISCIPLINE, 755 


80. We must here mention the information we have received, 
_ that some individuals at, and under your Presidency, have lately 
introduced the pernicious practice of gaming to a very consider- 
able extent, which must be ultimately ruinous to many. As 
we consider such practices to be totally incompatible with the 
interest of the Company, we earnestly recommend it to our 
Governor-General, to endeavour to discover the names of those 
concerned therein; and if his admonitions should be unavailing 
in putting a stop thereto, we authorize him to make an example 
of the persea or persons who may be the principal promoters of 
such licentiousness, by removing them from office, and sending 
them to Europe. 

81. As in this general subject none of our Presidencies on the 
Continent of India is wholly unconcerned, it will behove our 
several governments there to bestow a very serious attention 
upon it, and to consider of the means of.which, in the way of 
regulation, influence, or retrenchment, the growing taste for 
expensive living, amusements, and display may be sepressed ; 
especially we recommend this interesting subject to the care of 
our Governor-General, to whom we are persuaded it will appear 
in its just importance, and from whose judgment and example 
we shall confidently hope for a co-operation with our views. 

82. Indeed we are disposed to believe, that many persons give 
into modes of expense less from inclination than the fear of 
being singular ; and we think it will be worthy of our servants 
who are honourably. distinguished by character, talents, or 
Situation, to be distinguished also for moderation and frugality 
in their habits of living. 


756 YOU OVERSTRAIN EVEN YOUR OWN IDEA OF DUTY, 


XI. THE FLEET. 


108. The Marquess Wellesley to His Excellency Vice-Admiral 
Rainier, &c. &c. &c. 


Propriety of the Fleet in the Indian Seas co-operating, without 
special orders from England, in expeditions projected by the 
Governor-General, and not deemed imprudent by the Admiral. 


(Extract.) Feb, 5, 1801. 
Sir, 

1. This letter will contain my reply to your Excellency’s 
despatch marked (most secret B,) of the 20th December, 1800. 

2. My sincere personal respect for your Excellency concurs 
with my sense of public duty, to render that despatch a subject 
of the deepest regret, and of the most severe disappointment to 
my mind. 

3. Your Excellency has signified to me in the first paragraph 
of that despatch, that your concurrence in the expedition which 
I had proposed against the Isle of France, is withholden, because 
in your decided opinion no such enterprize can with propriety 
be undertaken, unless by the express command of the King, 
signified in the usual official form to the British Government of 
India, and to the commanders of his Majesty’s land and sea 
forces, Admitting, for the present, that your Excellency is 
required to apply this rule to your own conduct, I cannot admit 
the force of any such rule to be so great, as to impose on 
your Excellency the duty of frustrating or impairing the use of 
such separate means and resources as the British Government 
in India may possess for the seasonable annoyance of the enemy, 
without reference to your co-operation, or to the principles by 
which your discretion may be governed. 

8 My experience of your Excellency’s uniform zeal and 
alacrity in the prosecution of the public service, since my arrival 


WE ARE BOUND TO DO OUR BEST AGAINST THE ENEMY, 757 


in India, precludes the possibility of my regarding your dissent 
from the proposed expedition in any other light than that in 
which you have stated it, as an intended act of duty towards his 
Majesty. And if your Excellency’s objections had been founded 
on the difficulty of the proposed plan of attack, either in the 
present, or in any future season, I should have received with 
respect and consideration the decision of a person whose judge- 
ment on that branch of the subject must necessarily be entitled 
to the utmost degree of attention. But your Excellency, ap- 
proving the general outlines of the plan of attack, as founded 
upon the respectable evidence and accurate information furnished 
by Mr. Stokes, has declared your decided opinion that no such 
enterprize can with propriety be undertaken, unless by the 
express command of the King, signified in the usual official 
manner to me, and to the commanders of his Majesty’s land 
and sea forces. 

9. Injurious to the public service as the operation of such a 
principle must be, even if limited to the present case, its general 
application appears to me to involve evils of much greater mag- 
nitude, and of more dangerous extent. 

10, If the ground of your Excellency’s dissent from the pro- 
posed expedition to the Isle of France, be admitted as a general 
rule to govern the conduct of the military and naval service 
in these distant possessions during the existence of war; I ap- 
prehend that the greatest advantage must result from thence 
to the cause of the enemy. (It is an established maxim of state, 
as well as an unqualified principle of public duty, that, in time 
of war, all public officers should employ their utmost endeavours 
to reduce the power and resources of the common enemy of the 
state, and should avail themselves of every advantage which 
circumstances may present for the advancement of the interests 
of their country, by the vigorous prosecution of hostilities. In 
remote possessions the exigency of this duty increascs in propor- 
tion to the distance from the parent state, and to the consequent 
difficulty of obtaining from home express and precise orders, 
applicable to the various cmergencics which must arise in the 
course of war. If no advantage can ever be taken of the tem- 
porary or accidental weakness of the enemy’s possessions in 
India, without express orders from England, signified through 
the usual official channels, not only to the Government of India, 
but to the commanders of his Majesty’s land and sea forces, it is 
evident that opportunitics of reducing the enemy’s power and 


758 A FEASIBLE ATTACK NEEDS NO ORDER FROM HOME, 


resources must frequently be lost without the hope of recovery, 
by reference for formal commands to the source of sovereign 
authority at home. In the present instance, an extraordinary 
and fortunate accident had disclosed to me the weak and almost 
defenceless state of the most important possessions remaining to 
France in this quarter of the globe. In my judgment, I should 
have failed in my duty towards my King and country, if I had 
waited for his Majesty’s express commands, or for his orders, 
signified through the official channels established by Parliament 
for the government of India, before I had proceeded to take the 
necessary steps for availing myself of the critical posture of the 
French interests within the reach of the force entrusted to my 
controul. The arduous powers vested in me by Parliament are 
sufficient to render my opinion in India a substitute for the 
occasional and unavoidable defect of precise and express com- 
mands from the sovereign authority of the British empire. 

(In the exercise of this discretion I am subject to a severe respon- 
sibility; but wherever it appears to me to be my duty to exercise 
my discretion, and to apply for the assistance of his Majesty’s 
naval force in the prosecution of my endeavours against the 
common enemy, I conceive that his Majesty’s naval commander 
is not only justified in complying with my application, but ab- 
solutely required to aid me, unless the condition of his ships 
shall preclude their co-operation, or unless, in his conscientious 
judgment, the attempt which I propose may appear to be im- 
practicable, or dangerous to the public service) The want of his 
Majesty’s express commands will never be received either by his 
Majesty, or by the public, as an admissible justification of the 
conduct of any public officer for declining to co-operate against 
the enemy in an attack which appears to be practicable, and 
which promises advantage to the general cause. 

a1, Of the rule which I assert, I have furnished an example in 
my own practice, and if the principle which your Excellency has 
adopted had governed my conduct, the conquest of Mysoor 
would not have been achieved. 

12. Your Excellency supposes that the express command of 
his Majesty is necessary to justify your co-operation on the 
present occasion, because his Majesty’s express command had 
been signified to the commanders of his naval forces on all similar 
occasions within the compass of your experience. 

13. It is undoubtedly the duty of his Majesty’s ministers, in 
time of war, to issue express commands in all cases which can 


PRACTICE OF MINISTERS NOT OPPOSED TO THIS COURSE. 759 


be foreseen, and to which such orders may be justly applicable. 
This practice will be more diligently pursued in proportion to 
the activity and ability of the administration actually in power. 
But however general such a practice may have been under the 
administration of his Majesty’s present ministers, during the 
course of this war, no argument of precedent can thence be 
derived to exempt public officers, stationed in distant possessions, 
from the indispensable duty of availing themsclves, with promp- 
titude and alacrity, of those invaluable occasions and oppor- 
tunities of reducing the enemy, which remote wisdom cannot 
foresee, and for which remote authority cannot provide. 

14. By issuing express commands for the annoyance of the 
enemy in India, in particular instances, the wisdom of his 
Majesty’s councils never proposed to render the receipt of his 
express previous commands in time of war, a necessary prelimi- 
nary of every important act of hostility, nor to forbid the com- 
mencement of any rational enterprize in this quarter of the globe, 
until the direct notification of his royal pleasure should arrive in 
an official form. In any case, such a limitation upon the genius 
and spirit of the public servants in India, could only tend to 
contract our sphere of action, and to impair the predominant 
strength of the British power. But in the present war, contend- 
ing against an enemy of indcfatigable activity, of inexhaustible 
resource, and of the most daring spirit of adventure, this confined 
policy would weaken all our means of mecting the characteristic 
advantages of our antagonist, and would Icave to him the un- 
disputed possession of the most extensive ficld for the free 
excercise of his formidable powers of enterprize, promptitude, and 
boldness. 

15. If this argument could require any additional illustration, 
it would be furnished by the extent of the injury which the trade 
and commerce of India have sustained from the activity and 
boldness with which the inhabitants of the isles of France and 
Bourbon have employed the limited resources of those islands in 
the prosccution of hostilitics during the present war, under every 
disadvantage of internal discord, and even of the occasional 
neglect, if not of the positive enmity of France. 

16. In the midst of all these difficultics and embarrassments, 
the naval force of the French islands has carried into Port Louis 
British property to the amount of above two millions of pounds 
Sterling, since the commencement of the present war. 

17, My intimate personal knowledge of the characters of his 


%60 THEIR VIEWS & CONDUCT FAVOUR A NECESSARY DISCRETION. 


Majesty’s present Ministers, as well as my experience of their 
public conduct, enable me te assure your Excellency, that they 
will never become the patrons of any system, which in any 
quarter of the globe shall be calculated to limit the energy of 
British talents, to discourage the ardour of British spisit, or to 
open new and secure channels to the enterprizing character of 
French adventure. 

18, Even in the instances ia which express orders have been 
dispatched to India from home in time of war, great latitude has 
always been afforded to the discretion of the Government on the 
spot ; and while I have had the honour to hold the arduous 
station in which I am now placed, I have uniformly claimed 
from his Majesty’s Ministers that degree of confidence which, 
during time of war, should admit of my sclecting, in concert with 
the commanders of the sea and land forces, the time and mode of 
attacking the possessions ef the enemy in India. Without this 
extent of confidence, it would be impossible for any person in 
my station to be responsible for the safety of his important 
charge. On the other hand, I am persuaded that his Majesty's 
Ministers rely on me, that no practicable opportunity of reducing 
the enemy’s power in India witt be neglected, and it shall be my 
earnest endeavour to justify their confidence in this respect. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 
(Signed) WELLESLEY. 


° 


APPENDIX. 


1. Lord Wellesley’s Oude Treaty. 


Treaty betucen the Honourable the Last India Company and his Excellency 
the Nawaub Vizter Ool Mumaulick, Pemeen oo Dowlah, Nazim ool Moolk, 
Saadut Alt Khan Bahauder, Mobaures Jung, for ceding to the Company, 
in perpetual sovereignty, cerlain portions of his E’xcellency's territorial 
possesstons, in commutation of the. subsidy now payable to the Company by 

the Viater, 


(Extract.) 


a. The subsidy, which by the second Article of the treaty of 1798, 
his Excellency engaged to pay to the Company (now that territory is 
assigned in Jieu thereof and of the expences of the additional troops) is 
to cease for ever; and his Excellency is released from the obligation of 
defraying the expences of any additional troops which at any time may 
be required for the protection of Oude and its dependencies, whether of 
the countries ceded to the Company, or the territories which shall remain 
in the possession of his Excellency the Vizier. 

3. The Honourable the East India Company hereby engage to 
defend the territories which will remain to his Excellency the Vizier 
against all foreign and domestic enemies ; provided always, that it be in 
the power of the Company’s Government to station the British troops 
in such parts of his Excellency’s dominions as shall appear to the said 
Government most expedient; and provided further, that his Excellency, 
retaining in his pay four battalions of infantry, one battalion of Nejeebs 
and Mewattics, two thousand horsemen, and to the number of 300 
Goolandauz, shall dismiss the remainder of his troops, excepting such 
number of armed Peons as shall be deemed necessary for the purpose 
of the collections, and a few horsemen and Nejeebs to attend the per- 
sons of the Aumils. 


762 EXTRACT FROM WELLESLEY’S OUDE TREATY. 


4. A detachment of the British troops, with a proportion of artillery, 
shall at all times be attached to his Excellency’s person. 

5. That the true intent and meaning of the first, second, third, and. 
fourth articles of the treaty may be clearly understood, it is hereby 
declared, that the territorial cessions being in lieu of the subsidy, and of 
all expences on account of the Company’s defensive engagements with 
his Excellency, no demand whatever shall be made upon the territory-of 
his Excellency on accoynt of expences which the Honourable Company 
may incur by assembling forces to repel the attack or menaced attack 
of a foreign enemy, on account of the detachment attached to his 
Excellency’s person, on account of troops which may occasionally be 
furnished for suppressing rebellions or disorders in his Excellency’s 
territories, on account of any future change of military station, or on 
account of failure in the resources of the ceded districts, arising from 
unfavourable seasons, the calamities of war, or any other cause what- 
soever. 

6. The territories ceded to the Honourable Company by the first 
article of this treaty, shall be subject to the exclusive management and 
control of the said Company and their officers; and the Honourable the 
East India Company hereby guarantee to his Excellency the Vizier, and 
to his heirs and successors, the possession of the territories which will 
remain to his Excellency after the territorial cession, together with the 
exercise of his and their authority within the said dominions. His 
Excellency engages that he will establish in his reserved dominions such 
a system of administration (to be carried into effect by his own officers) 
as shall be conducive to the prosperity of his subjects, and be calculated 
to secure the lives and property of the inhabitants; and his Excellency 
will always advise with, and act in conformity to the counsel of the 
officers of the said Honourable Company. 

g. All the articles of former treaties, for establishing and cementing 
the union and friendship subsisting between the two States, are to 
continue in full force ; and all the articles of the treaty concluded by the 
late Governor-General Sir John Shore, on the part of the Honourable 
the East India Company and his Excellency the Vizier in the year 1798, 
not annulled by this treaty, are to remain in force and continue binding 
upon both contracting parties. 


IS A BENGAL REINFORCEMENT INDISPENSABLE? 763 


SELECTIONS FROM THE WELLINGTON DESPATCHES. 


2. Reflections upon the plan for having the army in the 
Carnatic at all times in a state of preparation. 


Mobilization and reinforcement of the Madras army, agatnst Tippoo. 
26th Oct., 1798. 


The first question to be considered is, whether, with any preparation, 
the greatest army which it is possible for the Company to maintain in 
the Carnatic can, in co-operation with the army on the Malabar coast, 
take the field with any prospect of success without assistance in men 
from Bengal. The object which these armies must have is the siege of 
Seringapatam, and can they undertake it with any reasonable prospect of 
success, with the numbers which it is possible for them to bring into the 
field? 


Cavalry: 
Native . . . : . 1,600 
European ’ : . : 800 
—— 2,400 
Artillery . ; 4 . : 400 
Native infantry + . . . . 9,000 
Europeans . 5 ‘ . 5 3,500 
15,300 


These numbers are according to an enlarged calculation of General 
Harris, which provides for leaving in Fort St. George, and other neces- 
sary garrisons in the Carnatic, a sufficient number of troops to defend 
them. What the army from the Malabar side would be, it is impossible 
to say; but I will suppose it 5000 men, composed as usual of European 
and Native infantry, and of European artillery. Thus the army destined 
for the siege of Scringapatam would consist of 20,000 men, 

It is impossible to decide absolutely whether this army would be suffi- 
cient for the siege of Scringapatam without having been at that place, 
and knowing not only its former but its present situation, We must 
therefore have recourse to conjecture upon this subject, and must be led 
by probabilities founded upon the experience of the former war; and we 
must at the same time take into consideration’ the circumstances which 
bear upon the question, and which have occasioned an alteration in our 
situation since that time. When Lord Cornwallis made his attempt he had 
about 20,000 men. He had, it is true, a larger number of Europeans 
than the army would have at present, and a larger proportion of artillery; 
but I believe the total numbers of his army were not greater than what I 
have above stated that we should have under the arrangement proposed 
by General Harris. 


764 WE HAVE MILITARY ADVANTAGES OVER CORNWALLIS. 


There are some circumstances, however, in the relative situation of this 
army and Tippoo’s which are considerably advantageous to us. { The 
first of these is, that we have now a considerable body of regularly disci- 
plined cavalry: at that time we had none. Another is, that he had at 
that time the frontier: we have it now. He had parties which acted con- 
stantly in our rear, which obliged Lord Cornwallis occasionally to detach 
large bodies not only for the immediate protection of his convoys, but 
for the safety of the Carnatic, and probably that of his own army: as we 
have now that iron frontier, the fortresses of which we never had in our 
possession in the last war, there is no reason to expect that the same 
detachments which were then necessary will be equally so in any war 
that we may have in future.! 

Another consideration is, that in the former war the operations from 
unavoidable causes took two campaigns. One of these was the neces- 
sity of reducing Bangalore. At present Bangalore is destroyed; and 
although that may by some be reckoned a disadvantage, yet as it is not 
absolutely necessary to adhere to that route to Seringapatam, the dis- 
advantage of wanting the place as a depét is more than counterbalanced 
by the advantage of not being obliged to wait to take it. Either by the 
route of Cauveryporam or Ryacotta, the communication between Sering- 
apatam and one of our own fortresses is nearly as short as it is between 
that place and Bangalore; and there is this additional advantage by 
using one of these last routes, that there will be no necessity to take 
many of those large and strong hill forts to which Lord Cornwallis laid 
siege and took in the last war. This will save much time. 

Another circumstance of advantage in the destruction of Bangalore is, 
that, as probably the operations will not linger out to two campaigns, 
there will not be so much necessity for a junction with the Allies as there 
was in the last war, and time will not be lost in effecting the junction, 
and time and troops will be saved in taking the places of which it was 
necessary to have possession in order to insure their communication 
with their own country, and all the benefits which we must expect to 
derive from their co-operation. In every. future war the possession of 
our present frontier will enable us to commence our operations more 
from the southward, and the measures taken to secure a supply of grain 
upon the scene of action will enable us.to proceed without the immediate 
assistance of our Allies. 

Under these circumstances, then, it appears not only that the army 
would be as large as that which Lord Cornwallis had, and with which he 
succeeded, but that this country has many advantages at present which it 
had not at that time, and which would enable the Government to under- 
take the operation with a better prospect of success than it had formerly, 
and of success in a shorter period of time. 

Those, however, who know most upon this subject, at least whose 


MOBILIZATION OF THE CARNATIC ARMY, 765 


official situation enables them to be the best judges, say that this number 
of men is not sufficient, and that it is impossible to commence the opera- 
tions against Tippoo Sultaun without assistance in men from Bengal. It 
becomes therefore necessary to consider the question relating to the state 
of preparation of this army with a reference to that assertion, supposing 
it to be well grounded. 

The march of a detachment, say of six thousand men, from Bengal, 
may be supposed to take six months at least. Whether the number of 
men is six thousand or eight thousand, it is a matter of indifference ; but 
it is certain that, whatever the number may be, it cannot take less than 
six months, and probably it will take more, to bring them down by land. 

If then it will take six months to bring down that which will alone 
enable the Government to undertake anything effectual against the enemy, 
why may not the preparations be making during the time that the rein- 
forcement is on its march? Why should the Company be put to the 
expense of keeping up an immense army of 15,000 men constantly in a 
state of preparation for the ficld, when those who are in the command of 
it, and who propose that it should be kept up to that extent, are of 
opinion that even then it can do nothing? 

The question then is, is it advisable to incur this large expense under 
these circumstances? Those articles of preparation which will occasion 
expense are, rst, an establishment of bullocks for the train; andly, one 
for carriage ; 3rdly, a depdt of grain ; 4thly, an augmentation of the Native 
troops, in order to make the number of those in the centre division in 
readiness equal to 9,000; gthly, camp equipage for the officers. 

There is no doubt but that bullocks might be provided for the train 
during the time that the Bengal detachment would be coming down, if it 
is to come down by land; and therefore that it may be said that the 
expense of keeping up draught bullocks in time of peace, with a view to 
their use in war, would not be necessary. Ilowever, in answer thereto, 
it may be said, rst, that the measures which I shall propose presently 
may bring the Bengal detachment here in a shorter period than six 
months; andly, that the draught bullocks which will have been trained 
for a certain time, will be better than any which are provided just at the 
moment when they are wanted; 3rdly, not a military, but a political 
object will be gained by having some bullocks, as it will not be necessary 
that foreign powers should know the full extent of our preparations, and 
probably they may have the effect of preventing the execution of any 
hostile design. I therefore think that at all events it ig advisable to have 
always 1500 draught bullocks ready. 

andly. The carriage bullocks. 

I understand that these are to be had in any number by making 
advances to the bullock owners or maistrics in proportion to the number 
wanted; that two months will give any number that the army may want; 


766 HOW SHOULD THE BENGAL TROOPS BE PROVIDED? 


and that any permanent expense, however great (short of the expense of 
keeping at all times the entire number wanted), would not produce them 
in a shorter time. If this is the case, it is not advisable to incur any 
expense-under this head. ; 

grdly. The expense of a dep6t of grain is so trifling, it gives so much 
ease to all the first movements of the army, and renders its operations so 
certain, that it ought certainly to be incurred. 

4thly. The augmentation of the army. 

General Harris proposes that + regiments should be added to ils 
present numbers, even supposing that all the regiments were in the 
Carnatic, &c., and that other means of defence were found for Ceylon 
and the conquests to the eastward. According to his distribution, there 
would thenbe go0oo disposable Native infantry in the centre division, and 
all the garrisons would be amply provided for. Here will be the great 
expense ; and as even that number of men will not enable this Govern- 
ment to make a forward movement, and as a reinforcement from Bengal 
must still be waited for, I recommend that no part of it should be 
incurred. 

The number which I think sufficient is from 4000 to 5000 Natives in 
the centre division ; and the number of regiments which therefore ought 
to be struck off General Harris’s account is two. The manner in which 
I propose to provide the remainder of the men is, rst. To put the Bengal 
marine battalion upon the establishment, and make it a regiment of two 
battalions, or 2000 men, all to be raised at Chittagong. andly, To turn 
the Calcutta militia into another marine regiment of 2000 men. . 3rdly. 
If the Nawab-Vizier will consent to reduce his establishment of troops, 
and to take our troops in lieu of them, to raise at Chittagong and upon 
the sea coast all the regiments which must be added to the establishment 
in consequence thereof; but at all events to add a third marine regiment 
of 2000 men to the establishment, even if you should be obliged to 
reduce one of the high caste regiments at present in the service. These 
marine regiments should always be kept at Barrackpoor, Midnapoor, 
Burhampoor, &c. &c., in the neighbourhood of Calcutta: they would 
answer equally well with the others for doing the duty of those places; 
and they would not only enable the Supreme Government, in addition to 
volunteers, to send to this country a large body of troops in a short time 
at short notice, but they would be a body of troops which might be em- 
ployed in all parts of India, and would therefore add infinitely to the 
power of the Company, which is cramped by the prejudices and habits 
of the Bengal Native troops. 

If it should be necessary to add any regiments to this establishment in 
consequence of the arrangements with the Nizam, they ought to be 
raised here; as the sepoys of this country are cheaper, and I must say 


Sr el 


Blank in manuscript. Eo. 


ORDER OF MARCH OF GRAND AND NIZAM’S ARMIES. 767 


better, than any that can be got in Bengal. It may then be said, why 
not raise in this country any force which must be raised avowedly for the 
purposes of its defence? It must be observed, however, there will be no 
additional force, at least a very small one: it will be only an arrange- 
ment, making a battalion a regiment, turning militia into regulars, and 
making a high caste regiment one which will go to sea. 

s5thly. Camp equipage for the officers. 

What has been said upon the subject of carriage bullocks applies 
equally to the means of conveying camp equipage. It can always be got 
ready before the army is ready to take the field, but a sufficiency for a very 
large body of troops ought to be kept in the stores in the centre division. 

Having noticed those subjects which General Harris has mentioned, I 
come now lo the consideration of one of which he has taken no notice. 
It is the repair of the garrisons upon the frontier and in the Carnatic. 
Both require it, and it will cost some money immediately, as well as 
annually a certain sum. ARTHUR WELLESLEY. 


3. Draft of the Description of our March to “Major-General 
8&t. Leger. 


March of the Army to Seringapatam. 


The British grand army and the Nizam’s army had joined previous to 
our entering Mysore, and marched together, The former consisted of 
about 3000 excellent cavalry, five strong regiments of European infantry, 
all good, and eleven battalions of sepoys, with about fifty pieces of 
cannon. 

The Nizam’s army, under my command, consisted of the 33rd, six 
excellent battalions of the Company’s sepoys, four rapscallion battalions 
of the Nizam’s, which, however, behaved well, and really about 10,000 
(which they called 25,000) cavalry of all nations, some good and some 
bad, and twenty-six pieces of cannon. These armies marched in two 
columns parallel to each other; one from its right, the other from its 
left, at the distance of about three miles from each other. 

The British cavalry generally led the British column, about g00 of the 
best of the Nizam’s led that of the Nizam; these two generally closed 
towards each other. 

One regiment of British cavalry was generally in the rear of the 
British column, the whole of the cavalry of the Nizam in the rear of 
mine, and these rather closed to each other, so that the march of these 
two armies was almost in the form of a square or oblong, of which the 
front and rear were formed of cavalry, and about two or three miles in 
extent; the right and left (owing to the immense space taken up in the 
column by field-pieces drawn by bullocks) about six or seven miles, In 
this square went everything belonging to the army, and the whole space 


968 A MULTITUDE COVERING EIGHTEEN SQUARE MILES, 


was filled excepting what lay between the leading brigade of infantry of 
each column, which was left clear, lest it should become necessary to form. 

You will have some idea of what there was in that space when I state 
to you the number of bullocks that I know were in the public service, 
and in the employment of brinjarries or grain merchants, which did not 
compose one-half of the whole number that were with the army. There 
were in the department of the commissary of stores about 25,000, in 
that of the commissary of grain about 20,000, in that of the commissary 
of provisions about s000, in that of the camp equipage department 
about 5000, making in all in the service of the British grand army about 
60,000 bullocks, of which about 15,000 were draught, the others carried 
loads. 

The Company’s bullock department in the Nizam’s army had in it 
about 3000, divided among different departments. Besides these there 
were with the grand army about 20,000 bullocks loaded with grain 
belonging to the brinjarries, about 8000 loaded with gram for the 
cavalry horses belonging to the gram agents. The Nizam’s army (to 
my constant daily annoyance) had with it 25000 bullocks loaded with 
grain belonging to the brinjarries. Besides all these, the number of 
elephants, camels, bullocks, carts, coolies, plunderers, &c. &c., belonging 
to individuals in the army, particularly in that of the Nizam, was beyond 
calculation; but as upon one occasion I had an opportunity of seeing 
one wing of the British army, and the whole army of the Nizam, move 
light to attack the enemy, that is to say, without anything belonging to 
the public excepting what was necessary for the field train, and a few 
days’ provisions for the Europeans, I was able to form a judgment of 
the quantity of private baggage in the army, and I have no scruple in 
declaring that the number of cattle and people in the employment of 
, individuals was double that in the employment of the public. Yet on 
that day it is fair that I should mention to you the Nizam’s army 
marched above twenty miles. You may have some idea of the thing 
when I tell you that when all were together, there was a multitude in 
motion which covered about eighteen square miles. 

We brought forward from Madras to Seringapatam a battering train, 
and in fact a moving arsenal. The former consisted of 50 pieces of 
iron cannon, for each gun of which were brought forward 1200 rounds 
of shot and immense quantities of powder, and every kind of small stores 
which are used in an arsenal. 

Our march was usually as long as those made by large armies in 
Europe, from ten to twelve miles; we always started at six, and we 
arrived at our ground about twelve, sometimes later, if there were 
‘difficulties on the road. We encamped in two lines fronting different 
ways, and this heap of baggage between us. What is most extra- 
ordinary, by the order of march and encampment above described, we 


AMOUNT OF TIPPOO’S FORCE, WHEN WAR BEGAN, 769 


did not lose anything to signify during our whole march, notwithstand- 
ing the efforts of the enemy’s light troops who constantly attended us, 
and who are certainly the best troops of that kind that I have ever seen. 


WELLESLEY. 
4, To the Earl of Mornington. 
Battle of Mallavelly. 
(Extract.) Camp, 2 miles west of Seringapatam, 


5th April, 1799. 
My dear Mornington, 

In the action of the 27th of March, at Mallavelly, his troops behaved 
better than they have ever been known to behave. His infantry 
advanced, and almost stood the charge of bayonets of the 33rd, and his 
cavalry rode at General Baird’s European brigade. He did not support 
them as he ought, having drawn off his guns at the moment we made 
our attack, and even pushed forward these troops to cover the retreat 
of his guns. This is the cause of the total destruction of the troops he 
left behind him, without loss to us, and of the panic with which we 


1 Return of Tippoo Sullaun’s Army at the commencement of the campaign 


of 1799. 
Number 
Names. of Fighting] Monthly Expense. 
Men. 
be >, 

Meer Meerans (Generals) ar 26 pee Se 

Meer Suddoors (Officers in general superintending 
of Forts). is 9 750 0 0 
Buckshees, or Commanders of Brigades i. cbt lor 4840 0 © 
Stable Horse . F 31503 95.799 30 
Silladar Horse (a horse the property of the rider) 9.392 86, 800 °° 
Infantry, Regulars , : 23.483 | 132,884 9 2 
Geish (Armed Militia), * os ois 6,209 25,518 B o 
Ashéam (Matchlockmen and Peons) : : . 4:747 12,956 6 8 
Total Fighting Men . 47,470 292,349 6 10 


23,392 67,071 § 12 


Mootsuddies, Lascars, Pioneers, Artificers, E Establish- 
ments, &c. &&c. - . . . . - 


Total of every description of Persons 
attached to the Army : 69,862 | 360,321 4 6 
Out Garrisons, 27 Principal Forts. 5 wy 14.947 43.338 1 14 
in 113 Lesser Forts 2... : 14,981 14.955 1 14 
Total, . . «= . 29,828 58,293 3 12 


770 TIPPOO’S LIGHT HORSE. COL. WELLESLEY'S REPULSE. 


have reason to believe all his troops are now affected. His light cavalry, 
looties, and others, are the best of the kind in the world. They have 
hung upon us, night and day, from the moment we entered his country 
to this. Some of them have always had sight of us, and have been 
prepared to cut off any persons venturing out of the reach of our camp- 
guards. We came by a road so unfrequented that it was not possible 
to destroy all the forage, which would have distressed us much; but 
they did as much, even in that way, as could be expected from them. 
If Tippoo had had sense and spirit sufficient to use his cavalry and 
infantry as he might have done, I have no hesitation in saying that we 
should not now be here, and probably should not be out of the jungles 
near Bangalore. 
Believe me, &c., 
ARTHUR WELLESLEY. 


5. To the Earl of Mornington. 


Colonel Wellesley’s Repulse. 


(Extract.) Camp before Seringapatam, 
18th April, 1799. 
My dear Mornington, 


On the night of the 5th we made an attack upon the enemy’s out- 
posts, which, at least on my side, was not quite so successful as could 
have been wished. The fact was that the night was very dark, that the 
enemy expected us, and were strongly posted in an almost impenetrable 
jungle. We lost an officer killed, and others and some men wounded 
(of the 33rd); and at last, as I could not find out the post which it was 
desirable I should occupy, I was obliged to desist from the attack, the 
enemy also having retired from the post. In the morning they re- 
occupied it, and I attacked it again at daylight, and carried it with ease 
and little loss. In the course of the night of the 5th and the day of the 
6th the General was enabled to occupy a line of posts which gave 
complete security to his camp till the Bombay army joined, at the same 
time that they enabled him to commence his operations for the siege 
with advantage. 

I got a slight touch on the knee, from which I have felt no incon- 
venience, on the night of the gth; and I have come to a determination, 
when in my power, never to suffer an attack to be made by night upon 
an enemy who is prepared and strongly posted, and whose posts have 
not been reconnoitred by daylight. We remained in the posts which 
we occupied on the 6th till the Bombay army joined on the 14th, 

Believe me, &c., 
Arruur WELLESLEY. 


SERINGAPATAM PLUNDERED, OUDE FRONTIERS. 771 


6. To the Earl of Mornington. 


Plunder of Seringapatam, 
(Extract.) Seringapatam, 8th May, 1799- 
My dear Mornington, 

It was impossible to expect that after the labour which the troops had 
undergone in working up to the place, and the various successes they 
had had in six different affairs with Tippoo’s troops, in all of which they 
had come to the bayonet with them, they should not have looked to the 
plunder of this place. Nothing therefore can have exceeded what was 
done on the night of the 4th. Scarcely a house in the town was left 
unplundered, and I understand that in camp jewels of the greatest value, 
bars of gold, &c. &c , have been offered for sale in the bazaars of the 
army by our soldiers, sepoys, and followers. I came in to take the 
command on the morning of the 5th, and by the greatest exertion, by 
hanging, flogging, &c. &c., in the course of that day I restored order 
among the troops, and I hope I have gained the confidence of the 
people. They are returning to their houses and beginning again to 
follow their occupations, but the property of every one is gone. 

' Believe me, &c., 
ARTHUR WELLESLEY. 


7. Memorandum on Oude. 


The Company necessarily responsible for the defence and internal 
administration of Oude. 
(Undated.) 

The province of Oude is situated to the north-west of the provinces of 
Bengal and Bahar, which are under the Bengal government. It is 
bounded to the northward by impassable mountains, which separate it 
from the country of Thibet, the river Ganges forming its western 
boundary. As the Ganges and Jumna run through it, part of it is 
on the same side of the former as Bengal and Bahar. To the south- 
west are Corah, Allahabad, and the Jumna; and to the south the pro- 
vince of Bundelcund, which was possessed by a race of petty Rajahs, 

Rohilcund, which lies on the left or east of the Ganges, was not at 
that period in the possession of the Nabobs of Oude, nor were Corah 
and Allahabad, commonly called the Dooab, and lying between the 
Jumna and the Ganges. Benares, however, was tributary to Oude, 
which province is also situated east, or on the left of the Ganges. 
V Oude is a fertile country, was at that time well cultivated, and is 
peopled by a hardy race, who have for a great length of time supplied 
soldiers to all the states of India. 

3D2 


77% NO NATURAL BARRIER BETWEEN OUDE AND BEHAR. 


Zn this situation it is obvious that the government of Oude must 
always have been an object of jealousy to that power which possessed 
the provinces of Bahar and Bengal, which are situated lower down upon 
the Ganges. ( In fact, these provinces had no natural barrier against an 
invasion from Onde, and depended for their security upon their own 
artificial means of defence. 

This was the case not only in respect to the state of Oude itself, but 
in respect to the Rohillas; to the King,’ who was at that period of time 
in some degree of strength; and to the Mahrattas; each of which 
powers might have found an easy and convenient passage through Oude 
to an invasion of the Company’s provinces of Bahar and Bengal. 

‘\\On the other hand, by the possession of the provinces under the 
government of Oude, or an intimate union with the government, a 
barrier was immediately provided for the provinces under the Bengal 
government- Nothing remained on the left or east of the Ganges 
besides the Nabob of Oude and the Company excepting the Rohillas, 
and this river afforded a strong natural barrier against all invaders. 
Besides this object, the seat of war, in consequence of the alliance with 
Or possession of Oude, was removed from the Company’s provinces, the 
source of all the means of carrying on war, to those of the enemy, if it 
should have been practicable to carry on offensive war ; or at all events 
to those of the Nabob, if such supposed war should have been reduced 
to the defensive. 

By the first treaty with the Nabobs of Oude, the Company were bound 
to assist the Nabob with their troops, on the condition of receiving pay- 
ment for their expenses. The adoption of this system of alliance is 
always to be attributed to the weakness of the state which receives the 
assistance, and the remedy generally aggravates that evil. It is usually 
attended by a stipulation that the subsidy should be paid in equal 
monthly instalments; and as this subsidy is generally the whole or nearly 
the whole disposable resource of the state, it is not easy to produce it at 
the stipulated moment. The tributary government is then reduced to 
borrow at usurious interest, to grant tuncaws upon the land for repay- 
ment, to take advances from aumildars, to sell the office of aumildar, 
and to adopt all the measures which it may be supposed distress on the 
one hand and avarice and extortion on the other can invent to procure 
the money necessary to provide for the payment of the stipulated 
subsidies. 

As soon as such an alliance has been formed, it has invariably been 
discovered that the whole strength of the tributary government consisted 
in the aid afforded by its more powerful ally, or rather protector? and 
from that moment the respect, duty, and loyalty of its subjects have been 


1 j,e. The Emperor. Ep. 


SUBSIDIARY ALLIANCE LEADS TO CIVIL INTERFERENCE. 773 


weakened, and it has become more difficult to realize the resources of 
the state. To this evil must be added those of the same kind arising 
from oppression by aumildars, who have paid largely for their situations, 
and must remunerate themselves in the course of one year for what they: 
have advanced from those holding tuncaws and other claimants upon the 
soil on account of loans to government, and the result is an increasing 
deficiency in the regular resources of the state. 

But these financial difficulties, created by weakness and increased by 
oppression, and which are attended by a long train of disorders through- 
out the country, must attract the attention of the protecting government, 
and then these last are obliged to interfere in the internal administration 
in order to save the resources of the state and to preclude the necessity 
of employing the troops in quelling internal rebellion and disorder, which 


were intended to resist the foreign enemy.] 
ARTHUR WELLESLEY. 


8. Memorandum on Bengal. 


Influence of the Company's rule upon the resources and prosperity of Bengal, 
Private Trade Tribute. 


In the ‘ Remarks upon the Present State of the Husbandry and 

Commerce of Bengal,’ several circumstances are adduced in order to 
prove that that country loses by its connection with Great Britain, as 
that connection at present exists, through the medium of an exclusive 
commercial Company. 
+ The grievances principally complained of are the want of due 
encouragement to the cultivation of its valuable produce; the com- 
mercial monopoly of the Company, which, as it raises the price of 
freight, precludes the possibility of transporting that produce to a 
valuable market; and the proportion of the revenues of the country 
which is drawn from it as a tribute to the Company and to the British 
Government. ; 

Another circumstance of which complaint is made, but which is 
totally distinct from the abuses of the management of an exclusive 
Company, is the want of encouragement at home to the raw and to 
some of the manufactured produce of Bengal, such as sugar, tobacco, 
raw silk, &c., &c. I shall consider each of these with that impartiality 
which should always reign in discussions upon subjects of this nature, 

The productions of India are grain, indigo, raw silk, tobacco, sugar. 
It has often been a question whether the total rent which is paid by the 
inhabitants of Bengal is greater at present than it was during the dynasty 
of the Moguls or the subsequent government of the native princes; it 


774 DOES THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT DISCOURAGE AGRICULTURE? 


however seems now to be understood( that it is about equal to what it 
was at those times, and I shall take that for granted. ) 

The sum which is paid to the Government is about equal to that 
which was paid to the Government of the Moguls, and which appears 
to have been divided into two parts: the one was applied to pay the 
expenses of the government in Bengal, the other was sent to the 
treasury in Delhi. The expenses of the collection of those revenues 
were about equal to what they are at this moment, and therefore the 
zemindar or landholder, or under whatever title he might have been 
known, retained no more of the rent than he does at this moment under 
the British Government. If the profits of the zemindar are small now, 
they were equally so formerly, which, in addition to its being a proof 
that there were formerly no landlords in Bengal, or, in other words, that 
the zemindars were not proprietors, is a proof that the British Govern- 
ment gives as much encouragement to the cultivation and improvement 
of land as was given during the time of the best of the native governors. 

But the British Government not only have not taken more rent than 
the native governments, but they have made an engagement that they 
will not take more than they do at present, by making a permanent 
settlement and by giving to the zemindars the property of the soil. 

“Therefore, as far as security and permanency give encouragement to 
agriculture, more encouragement has been given by the British Govern- 
ment than by the natives, 

Cit seems, however, that there are certain articles which are produced 
in Bengal which require a superior cultivation and a greater expense, 
which neither the tenants nor the landholders are enabled to advance. 
Among these, indigo, sugar, tobacco, and silk are enumerated 

Cin order that these articles may receive the cultivation which they 
require, and in order that there may be a body of landholders capable 
of bearing the expense of giving it to them, it is proposed that Europeans 
should be allowed to purchase and to become proprietors in Tadia. 4 

The first question is, whether the cultivation would be mended by 
their interference. ( The husbandry in India is said to be very defective. 
The simplicity with which all its complex operations are performed is 
not supposed to be advantageous to it, and it is therefore imagined that 
superior ingenuity and management would give a larger product at a 
cheaper rate, and that, in time, the example set by skilful Europeans 
would be followed throughout the country) Notwithstanding the ob- 
jections which the Hindoos have to alter any institution which has been 
handed down to them by their ancestors, many of which are reckoned 
sacred, lit is believed that if the advantages of European or British 
management could,/be made clear to them, it would, in time, be 
universally adopted~’ It ig also true that the expense of clearing and 
stocking a farm as it ought to be cannot be borne excepting by an 


WHY IT DISCOURAGES COLONIZATION BY EUROPEANS, 775 


European, and therefore the Europeans ought to be allowed to pur- 
chase, if it is wished that the agriculture of the country should be much 
improved.} There are, however, objections to that measure, which arise 
partly from the character of the natives, and partly from the effect which 
the climate has upon European constitutions. The natives hold every 
European in the greatest awe, and therefore it is imagined that; if these 
were allowed to settle in such parts of the country as they might think 
fit, they might be induced to tyrannise over the former, who would fear 
to complain, and thus the British name and character would become 
an object of detestation to the Hindoos.) (However, regulations might 
be adopted to prevent this evil, of which the natives might be made 
acquainted ; and as they have had many opportunities of witnessing the 
rigour of British justice, even upon British subjects, when they deserve 
it, it is believed that they would not fear to complain in case of receiving 
an injury,) The climate is a great objection to suffering the uncon- 
strained resort of British subjects to India. Those who have not been 
in Bengal are not aware of the effects which its climate has upon the 
European constitution; but they are so great, and those who have been 
there for any length of time become so enervated, that it is doubted 
whether those benefits which are expected would result from their 
residence, (A European cannot with safety expose himself to the sun: 
how then can he Gr © superintend the various operations of hus- 
bandry with success JG is generation, even supposing him to be 
married to a Europeafi woman, dwindles and falls off to such a degree 
that the third generation from the original settler is but little removed, 
in manners and disposition, from the old inhabitants of the country ; 
and therefore, excepting by a constant drain from the mother country, 
the full benefits of this colonization cannot be apecisa? 

fThe policy of the Company’s Government has hitherto been to 
prevent, as much as possible, the residence of Europeans in India; and 
it has been grounded upon the necessity of (preserving in the minds of 
the natiyes a respect for the British name and character, which, it is 
feared, Gn unrestrained intercourse would tend to remove, as well as 
upon the danger which would result were they to become acquainted 
with the language and character of the natives in their territorics, and 
then to enter into the service of the native prince. If an unrestraine: 
intercourse hitherto would have produced either of these effects, it i 
equally dangerous at the present moment, even although every British 
subject should become a proprietor; and from some events which have 
taken place lately, from the language which has been held in th 
‘Remarks,’ it is more than ever necessary for the Company to preven 
the resort of Europeans to Bengal) The circumstance which tende 
most in the course of the last year to preserve the allegiance of the army 
ta the Company’s Government was the desire which every individual 


776 MEASURES REQUIRED TO PROMOTE AGRICULTURE. 


had to return to Great Britain, and the certainty that if the violent 
measures proposed were adopted, or that if encouragement were given 
to proceed to extremities, the door to his return was shut for ever. To 
this no individual, particularly none of those who have fortunes suf- 
ficiently large to maintain them, could make their minds up; and the 
consequence was that, at the moment when everything appeared most 
desperate, all subsided. If Europeans had been settled with their 
families in India ; if these men had, or could have had, their homes in 
that country, the Company would have lost it, and nothing could ever 
have regained it. 

By the violence of the language and of the sentiments which are held 
forth in the ‘ Remarks,’ by the bitter complaints which are made of the 
British Government and connection, the sentiments of the Company’s 
civil servants and of those who reside in India by the Company’s licence 
are very apparent: how much more violent would they be if they were 
proprietors of a soil for the commercial advantages of whose inhabitants 
they now so violently contend | is to be expected that they would 
likewise make India their home; and thus Great Britain would lose its 
strongest hold upon their allegiance, their desire to return to their 
native country) However desirable, therefore, it may be that the natives 
of India should obtain the advantage of British skill and management 
in agriculture, it is not advisable that the Company should suffer its 
servants, or those who reside in India by its licence, to become pro- 
prietors of land, 

There are other measures, which, although they might not be equally 
efficacious, might still tend considerably to the prosperity of Bengal, as 
far as that is connected with its agriculture.\ Markets might be estab- 
lished throughout the country, which would enable the cultivator at all 
times to sell his produce without the difficulty and expense attending 
upon a long carriage. These would likewise insure a uniformity in 
price, which, above all things, has been found in other countries the 
most favourable to agriculture; and by enabling one district to profit by 
the plenty of another, they would insure all parts of Bengal from that 

( worst of evils, with which it has been so frequently afflicted,—a famine. 
‘ Good roads should likewise be made at first from the principal place 
in each district to those in its neighbourhood) ‘These ought to be kept 
in repair. The inland navigation ought to be encouraged, and every 
measure ought to be adopted, which, by rendering its use more easy, 
will make more perfect the communication from one part of this country 
to the See 

If these measures were adopted, the agriculture of Bengal would not 

| require the assistance of Europeans, in order that it might be brought 
to a very sufficient state of perfection. 
{ The commerce of Bengal consists at present in an unrestrained inter- 


THE COMPANY LOSE BY THEIR TRADE WITH BENGAL. 77' 


course with all parts of India and the Eastern Seas; in the commerce 
carried on by the Company, and in its intercourse with Europe And 
America by means of foreign nations, and clandestine trade carried on 
by the persons resident in India under the Company’s licence and by 
Americans, and likewise the inland trade with the northern parts of 
India and the Deccan by the water-carriage, caravans, &c. &c. The 
amount of the whole is four millions and a half. 

(The freedom of the trade which is carried on with the different parts 
of India is highly to the honour of the Company; it has more than 
trebled since the peace of ’83.1_ It has suffered in some degree for want 
of naval protection in the course of this war; but a peace will re-establish 
it again upon its old footing, and it is probable that, with the same 
freedom, it will increase in a greater proportion than it has hitherto. 

(The commerce which the Company carries on with Bengal by means 
of its monopoly is so little productive, that were it not for the necessity 
of bringing home the surplus of the revenues through the medium of 
trade, lest Bengal should be entirely drained of the precious metals, it 
would be better for them as a commercial body to give up the trade 
entirely. However, that trade at present amounts to above a million 
sterling. It consists chiefly in piece goods and saltpetre, and some 
indigo; lbut the price of the Company’s freight is so high, that the 
other articles which are produced in India, and which are marketable 
in Europe, cannot be carried, as their bulk is too great in comparison 
with their value. Thus, then, the commerce which the Company carries 
on with Bengal is disadvantageous to itself, and does not tend so much . 
to the advantige of that country as it might were it differently managed, 
and did the price of freight come more nearly to what it is really worth. 

The price which it is fixed the private traders are to pay for the 
freight they occupy in the Company’s ships is g/. per ton out and 15/. 
per ton home, which is liable to an addition in time of war. The Com- 
pany aver, and, it is believed, with some truth, that their freight costs 
them more; but what article, besides the expense of insurance, can 
repay that price? It is certain that the Company have monopolized the 
exportation of the most valuable articles; but still they are losers; and 
how much greater must be the loss of the private traders to whom is 
left the trade in gross produce, and the raw materials of manufacture 
alone! A considerable trade has long been carried on with Europe from 
Bengal by American and forcign vessels, and some clandestine trade. 

The majority of these American and foreign vesscls have belonged 


* Tonnage of the shipping employed in the country trade in. ‘83 + + 44,865 
” ” ” ”» ot zs oI 751407 
Total number of ships in, . . _ . . - "83. 128 


Pi OB yy oF -5 BTS 


” ” 


778 EVIL OF HIGH PRICE OF FREIGHT TO BENGAL AND BRITAIN. 


7 ¢ 
to British subjects resident in India, who thus supply Europe with the 
produce of Bengal without submitting themselves to the control of the 
Company, and without paying any duties in London. The amount of 
this trade is supposed to be one million four hundred thousand pounds. 

In order that Government might obtain a control over this trade, that 
London might become its emporium, and that Great Britain might have 
the advantage of levying a duty upon the consumption of Europe of 
Indian articles, the Company were obliged to give 3000 tons, to be 
increased, when necessary, to the private trade; but the price fixed for 
that tonnage is very high, because the Company have retained the 
monopoly of those articles which by their value were most likely to pay 
the tonnage; and as shipping could be procured at a rate infinitely 
lower, the foreign or clandestine trade exists to as great a degree at 
present as it did at the time when the regulation was adopted that the 
Company should furnish a proportion of tonnage to private traders. 
These insist that tonnage might be procured at 3/. per ton out, and 3/, 
per ton home. However, it seems certain that tonnage can be procured 
at a much cheaper rate than that at which the Company supply it; and 
although it may still be necessary that the trade with Bengal should be 
carried on through the medium of an exclusive Company, there is no 
good reason why the people of Great Britain should pay the extravagant 
price of this tonnage for the Indian goods they consume, in addition 
to the price they pay for the mismanagement natural to an exclusive 
Company in all its commercial concerns. 

Bengal and Great Britain both suffer from the high price of this 
freight: Bengal, as it is deprived of the British market for much of its 
produce; and Great Britain, as it pays a high price for all the Indian 
commodities which it. consumes, and as it is deprived of much of the 
Bengal produce which would be useful in its manufactures, but which, 
on account of the high price of freight, cannot be transported with any 
reasonable prospect of profit. Therefore, as far as this high price of 
freight tends to deprive Bengal of a market for its produce, the inha- 
bitants have reason to complain of want of encouragement in their 
agriculture ; but they have not more reason to complain than the people 
of Great Britain, who, from the same arrangements, suffer both as 
consumers and as merchants and manufacturers. 

Without at present entering into the question whether it would be 
advisable or otherwise to lay open the trade entirely, or whether it would 
be advisable to suffer an unrestrained intercourse between Great Britain 
and India, it may be said that policy as well as justice requires that 


1 Number of ships about . ., 30 
Tonnage ” . . » 13,000 


COMPANY TO FIND CHEAP FREIGHT FOR PRIVATE TRADE. 7479 


- Shipping should be found at the lowest rate, in order that due encourage- 
ment may be given to the agriculture and commerce of Bengal, and that 
the private trade should be left as free as the nature of the Company's 
government at home and abroad will permit it. If measures are not 
adopted having these objects in view, it is not to be expected that the 
clandestine and the foreign trade will not increase; and thus Great 
Britain will lose not only the advantage of being the carriers of Indian 
produce for all Europe, but likewise the duties which she would be 
enabled to levy upon the consumption of Europe upon Indian articles 
in their transit. 

Measures having lowness of freight and freedom of trade in view may 
be adopted upon two principles: either the commerce with India may 
be laid open to all England from the port of London, and every man 
who pleases may adventure thither, or the Company may be the medium 
of export as well as import. Ifthe former be adopted, the unrestrained 
resort of British subjects to India must be the consequence, which in 
another part of this paper I have objected to, and therefore that 
measure ought to be laid aside ; if the latter be adopted, the Company 
ought to be obliged to find freight at the lowest rate to as great an 
extent as private merchants might think fit to call for it. These ought 
to be confined as to the time of calling for it, and they ought to pay 
for all they call for, even if it is not used. The exportation of British 
manufactures, excepting of military stores, ought to be free, and private 
Merchants ought to have it in their option to import whatever they 
might think fit (subject always to the British revenue laws), and all 
merchandise ought, as at present, to pay the Company’s duty, and be 
exposed to sale at the India House. These regulations would give 
perfect freedom to the private trade, with cheapness of freight, at the 
same time that the commerce of Great Britain and Bengal would be 
under the control of Government. The consequence would probably be 
the annihilation of the Company’s commerce; but as it has been already 
said that the Company lose by their connection with Bengal, considering 
it as a commercial concern, no great evil will arise from that circum- 
stance. The Company will be freed from a considerable expense of 
establishments both at home and abroad, which is incurred at present 
merely for their commercial concerns; but when the commerce falls 
into the hands of individuals, and nothing remains to the Company ex- 
cepting the government, the expenses of the former will be separate from 
those of the latter, and both will be better and more cheaply carried on. 

It has been already said that the Company neither receive more rent 
from the lands of Bengal, nor do the occupiers pay more under the 
Company’s Government, than the old Governments received, or than 
the occupiers then paid; but the Company’s Government, by taking 
into their own hands the monopolies of salt and of opium, have raised - 


480 AMOUNT OF SURPLUS REVENUE RAISED FROM BENGAL. 


the revenues upwards of a million sterling, and out of that arises the 
surplus by means of which the Government are enabled to bring any- 
thing home to Europe. 

In order to ascertain whether the natives of Bengal have any reason 
to complain that the surplus of the revenues over the expense is carried 
to a distant country, it is first necessary to ascertain what proportion is 
applied to purposes in India, in which Bengal has an immediate concern, 
and next what proportion goes home; and then the question will arise 
whether the withdrawing these sums from Bengal through the medium 
of commerce is unfavourable to that country. 


The amount of the revenue received under all heads is. . £5,033,000 
The charges in Bengal amount to . . 5 + 3,127,000 
Surplus. Z i ! + 1,906,000 


Tt cannot be contested but that the establishments at Madras and 
Bombay, Bencoolen and Prince of Wales Island, are essentially necessary 
to Bengal; and even if there were no connection between Great Britain 
and that country, they ought to be supported. The interest of the debts 
contracted at Madras and Bombay, as they must be supposed to have 
been contracted in wars in support of the chief establishment, it ought 
likewise to pay; and therefore the supplies to those settlements, and the 
interest of their debts, may be fairly chargeable to Bengal itself, and not 
to its connection with Great Britain. 


The surplus, as already stated, is. ‘ _ ‘ ‘ - £1,906,000 
Deduct supplies to Madras and Bombay . : . £350,000 
as Prince of Wales Island and Ben- 
coolen . : . : ‘ 50,000 
Interest of debts in India oe ee 561,923 
—— 961,923 
The surplus will then be reduced to . , . . . - £944,077 


But it appears that the gross amount of the revenue is made up of 
sums received upon, bills and certificates, and of sums received for sales 
of goods in Bengal, in addition to the land revenue, the customs, the 
opium, and salt monopolies. The former, as they may be fairly stated 
to be received for a value given, Ought to be deducted from the amount 
of the claim, and the account will stand as follows: 


Surplus as above . A pi . : s ‘ » £944,077 
Amount ofsales . . . 8.)  . £380,000 
Bills and certificates . 3 . « 126,464 

. Sn per 476,461 


—_—_— 


Remaining surplus, . ee £467,616 


APPLICATION OF REVENUE NO GRIEVANCE TO BENGAL. 781 


The amount of sales ought not to be deducted, as it is not included 
in the gross amount of the revenue: 


Surplus asstated . 6 «6 + «+ « £467,616 
Add amount of sales. é % ; + 350,000 


Actual surplus ‘ A ; F : . £817,616 


Thus then the sum which Great Britain draws from Bengal is 
817,6162., and this is drawn away in trade. 

If the question were, whether the people of Bengal would not be 
more happy and comfortable if they did not pay more revenue than is 
necessary to defray the expenses of their establishments, there could be 
no doubt upon the subject; and if their own comfort were alone to be 
considered, the surplus revenue ought to be remitted to them as soon as 
possible. But, as I shall show hereafter, Great Britain has a right to 
expect this tribute from them, it is impossible to devise means by which 
a revenue can be drawn from a people so little to their injury, as that 
which Great Britain draws is injurious to the natives of Bengal. 

If specie were not essentially necessary for all the purposes of com- 
merce, and if a drain to the amount of the surplus above stated would 
not be felt severely in all transactions of barter and exchange in the 
country, there would be no harm in sending this revenue home in 
money. The amount of the demand in Europe of Indian articles 
remaining the same, the exports from Bengal, the quantity of surplus 
produce for export, would be precisely equal to what they are at present; 
with this difference, that they would be paid for in the manufactures or 
money of Great Britain, instead of in the money raised from the country. 
As the case stands at present, there is a large revenue raised from this 
people: it is spent in the first instance in defending them, and in paying 
the usual expenses of government; in the next, in paying the expenses 
of their dependencies, which may be called their defence; in the third, 
in paying the interest of debts contracted for their defence and security; 
and in the fourth, in a tribute to Great Britain. The three last may be 
stated to be laid out in the country in encouragement of agriculture and 
manufactures. Supposing the sums laid out for the support of Madras, 
Bombay, &c., for the interest of debts, or for the tribute, were remitted 
in the revenue, and that the tenantry still continue to pay the same sums 
as at present, which is more than probable, it is doubted whether the 
proprietors of land, into whose hands they would go, would encourage 
the agriculture and manufactures of the country to the degree that they 
are at present encouraged by the present application of the revenue ; 
and in that case if the demand for the produce of Bengal, upon the 
coast, &c., and in England were to cease, the country would indeed be 
in a ruinous condition. 

Therefore, upon the whole, although the peasants may complain of 


982, BRITAIN ENTITLED TO EXACT TRIBUTE FROM BENGAL, 


the amount of what they pay, and that so little is left to them, they have 
no reason to complain of the manner in which what is taken from them 
is applied. There is another question upon this part of the subject 
which has been treated with a considerable degree of asperity in the 
‘Remarks ;:’ it is whether it is just or right for Great Britain to take 
any tribute whatever from Bengal? The first question ought to be, 
whether it is just or right for one country to conquer another? and 
when the circumstances under which the conquest of Bengal was 
made are considered, the rights of Great Britain to have made that 
conquest are very apparent. After a conquest has been made, and 
the Government is in the possession of the conqueror, it is said in 
the ‘Remarks’ he has no right to any advantage but the Government. 
That would be true in some instances, but otherwise in many others. 

Some nations when they have made a conquest gain a barrier to their 
former dominions, as the French did in their conquests of Alsace, &c., 
towards the Rhine, and there they have no right to claim any further 
advantages, Others gain a monopoly of commerce, as all nations in 
Europe do in the conquest of West India islands, and there likewise 
they have no right to tribute: others, again, gain the advantage of men 
and provisions for their armies and fleets, the advantage that the country 
in question is not connected with another power, such as Great Britain 
enjoys in her connection with Ireland, from which country, although 
she defends it, she has no claim to tribute: others get corn at a cheap 
rate, as Rome did from Egypt, from which country she received no 
other tribute. But I cannot perceive either a barrier, a useful or neces- 
sary monopoly in trade, a connection which gives Great Britain men 
or provisions for her fleets and armies, or grain at a cheap rate, 
in Bengal; and therefore I conclude that in return for the protection 
which that country undoubtedly receives, Great Britain has some right 
to expect remuneration. In fact, all conquered countries give the 
conquerors an advantage in some point of view; and Bengal gives none 
to Great Britain, excepting in tribute, which therefore the latter ought to 
take. 

In the ‘Remarks’ much is said upon the subject of sugars; great 
complaints are made that Great Britain, by the high duties she lays upon 
the importation of sugars from the East Indies, gives an undue pre- 
ference to the West Indies, to the injury of the former. If the question 
were abstractedly whether it is proper to pay dearer for a certain com- 
modity when you can get it cheaper, there would be no doubt upon this 
subject; and there is no doubt but that the preference given to the 
West India sugars raises a great tax upon the people of Great Britain, 
and is highly injurious to the natives of Bengal, who undoubtedly 
deserve every encouragement that can be given to them. But the 
subject involves questions of greater magnitude than the authors of the 


SHOULD WEST- BE PREFERRED TO EAST-INDIAN SUGARS? 783 


‘Remarks’ are aware of, and requires the cool and candid judgment of 
an unbiassed mind to decide upon it, instead of that of persons who 
may be fairly stated to be interested in the event. 

One leading fact is stated, upon which the whole question turns. It 
is this: that if the East Indian sugars were admitted at the same rate 
of duty as the West Indian, even at the present high rate of freight, 
they would undersell them; nay, it may be stated that, owing to the 
disastrous war which has desolated the West India Islands for the last 
1 years, the price of sugars has been raised so considerably, that 
the Company have found it expedient to import sugars from Bengal, 
paying the advanced duty and the high freight. 

These circumstances being considered, the avowed consequence of 
admitting Bengal sugars at an equal duty must be the annihilation of the 
West India Islands. 

Before any measures are taken which can have that effect, it will be 
wise to ascertain the nature and the quantity of property there is in those 
islands belonging to British subjects there residing, as well as to those 
who reside in England, all of whom or whose ancestors have purchased, 
or otherwise obtained and hold them, under the implied faith of the 
nation that they were to be supported in them at all times during war, 
and that the commercial policy of the nation in peace was likewise to be 
directed towards their support, 

It will likewise be wise to ascertain what quantity of property and 
what quantity of shipping are embarked in this trade under the same 
faith; and after these circumstances will have been nicely ascertained, 
and that the nation has determined to make good all reasonable losses 
which individuals may sustain by this change of its commercial policy, 
it may deliberate upon this question, whether it be more for the ad- 
vantage of Great Britain to pay this advanced price for the sugars it 
consumes, and that the natives of Bengal should wait their market for 
that article; or that it should make compensation to all individuals con- 
cerned in the West Indies or in the trade to the islands, for their losses. 

Combined with this question there will be others which will claim the 
consideration of those who are to decide upon the subject. Their 
attention will be claimed by the importance of the islands in the hands 
of other powers of Europe at enmity with Great Britain, the importance 
of the trade to them as a nursery for seamen, and a certain resource to 
the nation at the commencement of a war. In those points of view, 
even supposing that the pecuniary considerations were out of the 
question, they are of the utmost consequence. I have not materials to 
form a judgment of their political importance to Great Britain supposing 
them in the hands of other European powers, but as a nursery for 


seamen, a few facts will show their consequence. 


ETE Ens 
! Blank in manuscript. Eb. 


784 WEST INDIES, THE BETTER NURSERY OF OUR FLEET. 


It has been said that the climate of the West Indies is so unwhole- 
some that a residence in it is fatal to most of those who go there. 

Without disputing that fact, I may safely assert that it is not more 
unwholesome or unfavourable to European constitutions than the climate 
of Bengal. Generally speaking all tropical climates are equally so, and 
that alone which makes one preferable to another is the difference of the 
conveniences and luxuries which are in use by the inhabitants to render 
the climate more bearable. Bengal is more favourable to the higher 
class of Europeans than other climates, because it is the custom and the 
fashion there for them to take more care of themselves; but it is not 
more so to the lower orders of people than other places situated in the 
tropics, as they have not more means of taking care of themselves, more 
luxuries and conveniences there, than they have elsewhere. Therefore 
upon the whole it may be safely said that Great Britain does not lose 
more seamen in the one country than in the other, considering the 
proportion of the numbers employed in each. 

But the advantage which the West India trade has over that of the 
East is, that the seamen are a shorter time absent from their own 
country in the former than they are in the latter. A voyage to the 
West Indies may be stated at six months, during half of which time only 
can it be stated that the men are in a bad climate; whereas a voyage 
to the East Indies always lasts eighteen months, generally two years, and 
four-fifths of that time are spent in a climate avowedly unfavourable to 
European constitutions. Therefore supposing the numbers employed 
in each were the same, it may be concluded that the loss of lives would 
be greatest in that in which they remained longest. But there is another 
reason why the West India trade is a preferable employment for seamen. 
The voyage is so quickly performed that the nation has them always in 
her power; the fleets can be manned from them in a short space of 
time: whereas if the seamen from the East India fleet were the only or 
principal dependence for manning the navy, weeks and months might 
elapse after a declaration of war before the fleets could put to sea, and 
the disadvantages thereof might have the most fatal consequences. The 
seamen employed in the West India trade are generally more expert 
than those employed in the trade to the East Indies, They navigate 
seas in which there is a greater diversity of weather than there is in a 
voyage to the East Indies, during which, if it is commenced at the 
proper season, there will probably be no occasion to alter the sails once, 
however long it may be. 

Upon the whole, therefore, the West India trade may be stated to be 
the best school for seamen, and their importance to the welfare, even to 
the existence of Great Britain, should induce the Legislature to adopt 
with great caution any measure which can diminish the West India trade 
in order to give a preference to that with the East, 


SUMMARY OF GENERAL CONCLUSIONS. 785 


It is to be observed upon this part of the subject, that it has no 
telation to the existence of the Company’s exclusive privileges of com- 
Merce. It is a subject for the consideration of Parliament, entirely 
distinct from that of their monopoly. The other articles which are 
stated in the ‘ Remarks’ to labour under the same inconveniences, such 
as silk, tobacco, &c., as being loaded with high duties on their importa- 
tion from India, in order that they may not come in competition with 
similar articles the produce of foreign European nations or of America, 
must likewise be considered in the same point of view. The necessity 
of a naval defence for Great Britain causes the necessity of ehcouraging 
commerce with all parts of the globe, particularly with those parts which 
are most contiguous to it. If the commerce of Great Britain were 
confined to one quarter alone, its sources of wealth might be stopped; 
the efforts of its enemies, by being directed against that quarter, might 
at all events do the country the greatest injury in time of war, and in the 
event of success the country would be entirely ruined. As long as its 
commerce is directed to all quarters, it must flourish; one source may 
be cut off, but others will be found. 

Having considered the whole of this subject, I conclude, first, that 
agriculture is considerably encoutaged under the administration of the 
British Government in Bengal; that the measures recommended in the 
‘ Remarks,’ viz. to allow Europeans to become purchasers, are impolitic, 
and ought not to be adopted; but that other measures might be adopted 
which would give to agriculture all the encouragement it could require. 

2. I conclude that it is not advisable to throw open the trade, but 
that the Company ought to be obliged to furnish private traders with 
the quantity of tonnage they might require at the lowest rate at which it 
could be got. That the import of Bengal articles ought to be. as free 
for private traders as for the Company, and the export. of British 
produce (military stores excepted) ought to be the same. 

3. That the tribute is not so prejudicial to Bengal as it is stated, and 
that it is a matter of right, founded upon the policy usually adopted by 
modern and ancient nations in regard to conquered countries. 

4. I conclude that the protection given to West India sugars, and 
to other articles the produce of Europe and America, to the prejudice 
of the same produced in Bengal, is necessary on account of the want of 
seamen for the British navy. Artuur Wesiey. 


9. To Lieutenant-Colonel Munro. 


Answer to Munro's first criticism on the Batile of Assye. 
(Extract.) Camp at Cheosckair, 1st Nov., 1803. 
My dear Munro, 
As you are a judge of @ military operation, and as I am desirous of 
having your opinion on my side, Iam about to give you an account of the 


3E 


986 STEVENSON NOT DETACHED, ENEMY’S POST MISREPORTED. 


battle of Assye, in answer to your letter of the r9th' of Qctober, in which 
I think I shall solve all the doubts which must naturally occur to any man 
who looks at that transaction without a sufficient knowledge of the facts. 

Before you will receive this, you will most probably have seen my 
public letter to the Governor-General regarding the action, a copy of 
which was sent to General Campbell. That letter will give yon a general 
outline of the facts. Your principal objection to the action is, that I 
detached Colonel Stevenson. The fact is, I did not detach Colonel 
Stevenson. His was a separate corps, equally strong, if not stronger 
than mine. We were desirous to engage the enemy at the same time, 

nd settled a plan accordingly for an attack on the morning of the 24th 

eptember. We separated on the 22nd, he to march by the western, I 

y the eastern road, round the hills between Budnapoor and Jaulna: and 

have to observe, that this separation was necessary; first, because both 

orps could not pass through the same defiles in one day; secondly, 
because it was to be apprehended that, if we left open one of the roads 
through these hills, the enemy might have passed to the southward while 
we were going to the northward, and then the action would have been 
delayed, or, probably, avoided altogether. Colonel Stevenson and I were 
never more than twelve miles distant from each other; and when I moved 
forward to the action of the 23rd, we were not much more than eight 
miles apart. 

As usual, we depended for our intelligence of the enemy’s position on 
the common hircarrahs of the country. Their horse were so numerous 
that, without an army, their position could not be reconnoitred by an 
European officer; and even the hircarrahs in our own service, who are 
accustomed to examine and report positions, cannot be employed here, as, 
being natives of the Carnatic, they are as well known as an European, 

The hircarrahs reported the enemy to be at Bokerdun. Their right 
was at Bokerdun, which was the principal place in their position, and 
gave the name to the district in which they were encamped ; but their 
left, in which was their infantry, which I was to attack, was at Assye, 
about six or eight miles from Bokerdun. 

I directed my march so as to be within twelve or fourteen miles of 
their army at Bokerdun, as I thought, on the 23rd. ( But when I arrived 
at the ground of encampment, I found that I was not more than five or 
six miles from it. I was then informed that the cavalry had marched, 
and the infantry were about to follow, but were still of the ground: at 
all events, it was necessary to ascertain these points; and I could not 
venture to reconnoitre without my whole force. But I believed the 
report to be true, and I determined to attack the infantry, if they 
remained still upon the ground. “I apprised Colonel Stevenson of this 
ee 


1 The letter referred to will be found in Sir Thomas Munro's Life by Mr. Gleig, 
VoL IIL. pp-177-179. Itis there dated 14th Oct. 


REASONS FOR ATTACK. ‘SOME ONE HAD BLUNDERED, 487 


determination, and desired him to move forward. Upon marching on, I 
found not only their infantry, but their cavalry, encamped in a most for- 
midable position, which, by the by, it would have been impossible for me 
to attack, if, when the infantry changed their front, they had taken care 
to occupy the only passage there was across the Kaitna. 

When I found their whole army, and contemplated their position, of 
course I considered whether I should attack immediately or should delay 
till the following morning. I determined upon the immediate attack, 
because I saw clearly, that, if I attempted to return to my camp at 
Naulniah, I should have been followed thither by the whole of the 
encmy’s cavalry, and I might have suffered some loss; instead of attack- 
ing, I might have been attacked there in the morning; and, at all events, 
I should have found it very difficult to secure my baggage, as I did, in 
any place so near the enemy’s camp in which they should know it was: 
I therefore determined upon the attack immediately. It was certainly a 
most desperate one, but our guns were not silenced. Our bullocks, and 
the people who were employed to draw the guns, were shot, and they 
could not all be drawn on; but some were, and all continued to fire as 
long as the fire could be of any use. 4 

Desperate as the action was, our loss would not have exceeded one 
half of its actual amount if it had not been for a mistake in the officer 

(who led the piquets which were on the right of the first line) When 
the enemy changed their position, they threw their left to Assye, in which 
village they had some infantry, and it was surrounded by cannon. As 
soon as I saw that, I directed the officer commanding the piquets to 
keep out of shot from that village: instead of that, he led directly upon 
it: the 74th, which were on the right of the first line, followed the piquets, 
ie the great loss we sustained was in these two bodies. } 

Another evil which resulted from this mistake was the necessity of 
introducing the cavalry into the cannonade and the action long before it 
was time; by which the corps which I intended to bring forward in a 
close pursuit at the heel of the day, lost many men, and its union and 
efficiency. But it was necessary to bring forward the cavalry to save the 
remains of the 74th, and the piquets, which would otherwise have been 
destroyed. Another evil resulting from it was, that we had then no 
reserve left, and a parcel of stragglers cut up our wounded; and 
straggling infantry, who had pretended to be dead, turned their guns 
upon our backs. 

After all, notwithstanding this attack upon Assye by our right and the 
cavalry, no impression was made upon the corps collected there till I 
made a movement upon it with some troops taken from our left, after 
the enemy’s right had been defeated; and it would have been as well to 
have left it alone entirely till that movement was made. | However, I do 
not wish to cast any reflection upon the officer who led the piquets, 

3E2 


788 PURSUIT, WHY DELAYED. MONSON’S RETREAT. 


I lament the consequences of his mistake, but I must acknowledge that 
it was not possible for a man to lead a body into a hotter fire than he did 
the piquets on that day against Assye) 

After the action there was no pursuit, because our cavalry was not then 
in a state to pursue. It was near dark when the action was over, and we 
passed the night on the field of battle. 

Colonel Stevenson marched with part of his troops as soon as he 
heard that J was about to move forward, and he also moved upon 
Bokerdun. He did not receive my letter till evening. He got entangled 
in a nullah in the night, and arrived at Bokerdun, about eight miles from 
me to the westward, at eight in the morning of the 24th. 

The enemy passed the night of the 23rd at about twelve miles from 
the field of battle, twelve from the Adjuntee Ghaut, and eight from 
Bokerdun. As soon as they heard that Colonel Stevenson was advanc- 
ing to the latter place, they set off, and never stopped till they got down 
the Ghaut, where they arrived in the course of the night of the 24th. 
After his difficulties of the night of the 23rd, Colonel Stevenson was in 
no state to follow them, and did not do so until the 26th. The reason 
for which he was detained till that day was, that I might have the benefit 
of the assistance of his surgeons to dress my wounded soldiers, many of 
whom, after all, were not dressed for nearly a week, for want of the 
necessary number of medical men. 

I had also a long and difficult negotiation with the Nizam’s sirdars, to 
induce them to admit my wounded into any of the Nizam’s forts ; and I 
could not allow them to depart until I had settled that point. Besides, I 
knew that the enemy had passed the Ghaut, and that to pursue them a 
day sooner, or a day later, could make no difference. 

Believe me, &c., 
ARTHUR WELLESLEY. 


10. Extracts from Gen, Wellesley’s Correspondence. 
Monson's Reireat. 


a, Monson’s disasters are really the greatest and the most disgraceful to 
our military character of any that have ever occurred. The detachment 
had not two days’ provisions; was cut off from its resources by many 
rivers, on which we had neither bridge nor boat; and all measures to 
supply with provisions the enly fort (Rampoora) to which, in case of 
emergency, he might have recourse, were omitted. (To employ the 
detachment at all was an error; but the common modes of securing its 
safety have been omitted.) 


8. You will have heard of Colonel Monson’s*retreat, defeats, disgraces, 
and disasters. He is, however, at last arrived at Agra, he and his detach- 
ment woful examples of the risk to be incurred by advancing too far 


MONSON'S RETREAT. ASSAULTS ON BHURTPOOR. 789 


without competent supplies, and of the danger of attempting to retreat 
before such an army as Holkar’s is. He would have done much better 
to attack Holkar at once, and he would probably have put an end to the 
war. At all events, he might have made a better retreat. This is be- 
tween ourselves, as I am very unwilling to circulate my opinion of the 
late transactions to the northward. I only hope that they will not induce 
our late enemics to break out again. 


y. After Colonel Monson’s defeat I acknowledge that I considered the 
peace with the Mahrattas very precarious; and indeed if the success of 
Holkar had continued, I consider that we should have had to fight over 
again not only our battles with the Mahrattas, but those with all the other 
powers of India, whether considered as our dependants or our allies. I 
also believe that the Rajah of Berar in particular, and very possibly 
Scindiah, considered the advantages gained by Holkar to have been 
much greater than they really were; that they anticipated farther suc- 
cesses, and the former prepared to take advantage of them, 


Assaulls on Bhurtpoor, 


8. The 4th and sth failures before Bhurtpoor are disastrous events, of 
which I apprehend the worst consequences. They must have blundered 
that siege terribly, for it is certain that, with adequate means, every place 
can be taken; and —— -—~ having been so long before the place, 
adequate means must have been provided, or in his power. The fault 
lies therefore in the misapplication of them, or, most probably, in the 
omission to employ all those which were necessary to accomplish 
the object in view, either through the ignorance of the engineers, or 


the impetuosity of ——~ ———’s temper, which could not brook the 
necessary delay. 


SELECTIONS FROM SIR THOMAS MUNRO’S CORRESPONDENCE! 
li. Yo Goneral Wellesley. 


Criticism on the Battle of Assye. 


(Extract.) Cawderabad, 28th November, 1803. 
Dear General, 


T have received your letter of the rst instant, and have read with great 
pleasure and interest your clear and satisfactory account of the battle of 
Assaye. You say you wish to have my opinion on your side: if it can 
be of any use to you, you have it on your side, not only in that battle, 
but in the conduct of the campaign: the merit of this last is exclusively 
your own. The success of every battle must always be shared in some 


a re RRO AOR pate ernentaNe 


1 Given in his Life, by the Rev, G, R. Gleig. 


79° REASONS AGAINST AN IMMEDIATE ATTACK. 


degree, by the most skilful general with his troops. 1 must own, I have 
always been averse to the practice of carrying on war with too many 
scattered armies, and also of fighting battles by the combined attacks of 
separate divisions. When several armies invade a country on different 
sides, unless each of them is separately a match for the enemy’s whole 
army, there is always a danger of their being defeated one after another; 
because, having a shorter distance to march, he may draw his force 
together, and march upon a particular army, before it can be supported. 
When a great army is encamped in separate divisions, it must, of course, 
be attacked in separate columns. But Indian armies are usually crowded 
together on a spot, and will, I imagine, be easier routed by a single 
attack, than by two or three separate attacks by the same force. I see 
perfectly the necessity of your advancing by one route, and Colonel 
Stevenson by another, in order to get clear of the defiles in one day; 
I know, also, that you could not have reconnoitred the enemy’s position 
without carrying on your whole army; but I have still some doubts 
whether the immediate attack was, under all circumstances, the best 
measure you could have adopted. Your objections to delay are, that 
the enemy might have gone off and frustrated your design of bringing 
them to battle, or that you might have lost the advantage of attack, by 
their attacking you in the morning. The considerations which would 
have made me hesitate are, that you could hardly expect to defeat the 
enemy with less than half the loss you actually suffered; that after 
breaking their infantry, your cavalry, even when entire, was not sufficiently 
strong to pursue any distance, without which you could not have done 
so much execution among them as to counterbalance your own loss ; 
and lastly, that there was a possibility of your being repulsed ; in which 
case, the great superiority of the enemy’s cavalry, with some degree of 
spirit which they would have derived from success, might have rendered 
a retreat impracticable. Suppose that you had not advanced to the 
attack, but remained under arms, after reconnoitring at long-shot 
distance, I am convinced that the enemy would have decamped in the 
night, and as you could have instantly followed them, they would have 
been obliged to leave all or most of their guns behind. If they ventured 
to keep their position, which seems to me incredible, the result would 
still have been equally favourable: you might have attacked them in the 
course of the night ; their artillery would have been of little use in the dark ; 
it would have fallen into your hands, and their loss of men would very 
likely have been greater than yours. If they determined to attack you in 
the morning, as far as I can judge from the different reports that I have 
heard of the ground, I think it would have been the most desirable event 
that could have happened, for you would have had it in your power to 
attack them, either in the operation of passing the river, or after the 
whole had passed, but before they were completely formed. They must, 


. 


SCINDIA SACRIFICED HIS CAVALRY TO HIS BATTALIONS. 791% 


however, have known that Stevenson was approaching, and that he might 
possibly join you in the morning, and this circumstance alone would, I 
have no doubt, have induced them to retreat in the night. Your mode 
of attack, though it might not have been the safest, was undoubtedly the 
most decided and heroic ; it will have the effect of striking greater terror 
into the hostile armies than could have been done by any victory gained 
with the assistance of Colonel Stevenson’s division, and of raising the 
national military character, already high in India, still higher. 
Believe me, dear General, 
Yours most truly, 
Tuoaas Munro. 


12. To Colonel Read. 


Rationale of Mahratia defeats. a ale 
(Extract.) Punganoor, 6th March, 1804. 
Dear Read, 

Our constant succession of victories is chiefly to be attributed to the 
Bengal and Madras armies having had a much greater body of regular 
cavalry than in any former war, and to the conduct of Generals Lake and 
Wellesley(in availing themselves of this circumstance to make the 
campaign entirely offensive) 4o give the enemy no respite, and to push 
all their advantages to the utmost; but other causes also contributed 
greatly to favour our operations? (The Mahrattas in general were much 
weakened by their long dissensions, and Scindia in particular had 
suffered heavy losses in his war with Holkar) (The introduction of a 
great body of regular infantry, with a vast train of artillery, had made his 
armies unwieldy, and in order to keep up the foot, the cavalry were 
neglected, They were deficient in number and quality, and as they were 
considered as only a secondary corps to the infantry, they had lost alt 
their spirit of enterprisey They gave very little support to their infantry 
in the different battles that were fought, and they attempted nothing alone. 
They fell in during the campaign with several convoys, and though the 
escorts were but inconsiderable, they did not cut off one of them, I 
have heard much said of the excellence of Scindia’s battalions, and of 
the danger to which our power in this country would have been exposed, 
had he been permitted to go on much longer augmenting them. But my 
own opinion is the very reverse of this, for I think that he could have 
had no chance of success, except from his cavalry; and that as he must 
have reduced them in proportion as he increased his infantry, every 
addition to that part of his army would only have tended to weaken his 
real force. Had he been satisfied with Peons instead of battalions, and 
with a few Jong field-pieces instead of a cumbersome train of artillery, 
and had he applied the funds consumed by his infantry to the equipment 

* 


79% INFANTRY INEFFECTIVE. MARCHING POWER OF CAVALRY. 


of his cavalry, his army might not have been so able to meet us in battle, 
but it would have been much better calculated than it was to have carried 
on a protracted, harassing, and doubtful war. His infantry was regular 
enough, but it wanted steadiness, in which it must always be greatly 
inferior to ours, from the want ofa national spirit among its officers, and of 
the support and animating example of European regiments. At the 
battle of Assaye, the severest that took place in the course of the war, I 
do not recollect, among all our killed and wounded officers, one that 
suffered from a musket-ball or a bayonet, a convincing proof that the 
Mahratta infantry made very little serious opposition. Its discipline, its 
arms, and uniform clothing, I regard merely as the means of dressing it 
out for the sacrifice. Its numerous artillery prevents it from escaping 
by rapid marches; it is forced to fight, deserted by its cavalry, and 
slaughtered with very little loss on our side. Scindia, by abandoning the 
old system of Mahratta warfare, and placing his chief dependence on 
disciplined infantry, facilitated the conquest of the states of Polligars and 
Rajahs, whose forts and jungles might have secured them against his 
horse; but he at the same time disabled himself from maintaining a 
contest with us, for he reduced the war to a war of battles and sieges, 
instead of one of marches and convoys. As long as his battalions are 
not under French influence, by being commanded by officers of that 
nation, it is more our interest that he should keep them up than that he 
should disband them and raise horse. 
Yours truly, 


Tuomas Munro. 


13. To his Father. 


Same Subject, 


(Eextract.) ; (Undated.) 
Dear Sir, 


© Plundering horse are not fond of venturing without support into an 
enemy’s country, where they expect to meet with cavalry. They carry 
on their ravages boldly only when no resistance is looked for, or when 
they are followed by their main army, and can retire upon it in case of 
danger; but Scindia never was able to cross the Godaveri, and his 
irregulars therefore durst not pass into the rear of our armies. Scindia, 
without infantry, with his cavalry alone, made several attempts to pass 
that river, in order to carry the war into the Nizam’s and Company’s 
territories; but he was always obliged to relinquish his design by 
General Wellesley’s following him closely for several days, because his 
supplies woyld have been intercepted or overtaken. A great army of 
Mahratta horse cannot march so rapidly as is generally supposed; .it is 
encumbered by the tents and baggage, and often by the women of its 


THE COMPANY TO BECOME THE PUNDIT PURDHAM., 793 


chiefs, by elephants, camels, and servants, and even when all these are 
left behind, it must still have a great train of bullocks for the carriage of 
provisions. It is to no purpose that the cavalry can march thirty or 
forty miles a day, they cannot find subsistence in an enemy’s country, 
and must at last halt for their grain bullocks, which cannot march so fast 
as the army which pursues them. The open countries of the Deccan 
and Mysore, as soon as the harvest is gathered in, present nothing but a 
naked waste to an invader. The inhabitants are all armed ; the villages 
are all fortified, and cannot be taken without infantry. An army con- 
sisting merely of horse can raise very few contributions among them, it 
must therefore depend chiefly for its subsistence on supplies drawn from 
its own country. 
I am, dear Sir, your affectionate son, 


Tuomas Munro. 


14, To the Honourable M. Elphinstone. 


Expediency of the Company's assuming the office of Peishwah. 
Sj (Extract.) Camp at Naggurmurly, 23rd April, 1818. 
ir, 

The Jageerdars have now, I believe, no expectation of seeing Bajee 
Row, or any of his relations, at the head of a state; but their zeal for the 
continuance of the office of Peshwah, even though divested of all real 
power, is as strong asever. They retain their own possessions, and feel, 
therefore, in a much smaller degree the dissolution of the substance of 
the Mahratta empire than that of its forms. They derive whatever they 
possess from those forms; they have for gencrations been accustomed 
to respect and serve under them, and they regard it as disgraceful to 
abandon them for others. The easiest way of subduing these prejudices, 
and of rendering them useful feudatories, would be for the Company to 
take upon itself the office of Peshwah, and to issue all public acts as 
coming from the Pundit Purdhan, as under the late Government Inves- 
titure might be reccived, according to custom, from the Rajah of Sattarah, 
The Company, acting as the Pundit Purdhan, would hold an office 
which, as in the case of that of the Dewance in Bengal, would take 
from it none of its sovereign powers ; and its governing the country under 
this ancient title, would, I believe, reconcile the Jageerdars to the change 
of masters, and induce them to employ their troops willingly at the call 
of the Brifish Government. They testify at present great aversion to 
being summoned as its immediate servants, and propose that they should 
rather give up part of their Jageers, and hold the rest service free. This 
objection is possibly exaggerated; but if it can be removed merely by 
the maintenance of a form, and the substitution of a name, it ought 


794 COMPANY NOW TOO STRONG TO NEED MORE ALLIANCES. 


perhaps to be done, more particularly as the preservation of this ancient 
name would probably be likewise acceptable to Scindia and Holkar, as 
their ancestors obtained their possessions not from the Rajahs of Sattarah, 
but from the Pundit Purdhan. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 


Tuomas Munro. 


15. To his Excellency the Governor-General.’ 
\Y Ultimate tendency of the subsidiary alliance system. 


(Extract.) 
Darwar, rath August, 1817. 

_There is so little system or subordination in Native governments, that 
much more energy is required under them, than under the more regular 
governments of Europe, to give full effect to their resources. Scindiah 
was never formidable, even in the height of his power. The great means 
which he possessed were lost in his feeble hands. The exertions of 
Holkar against Lord Lake were still weaker than those of Scindiah. The 
power of Scindiah’s, as well as of Holkar’s government, has so much 
declined since that period, that it is scarcely credible that either Scindiah 
or Meer Khan would venture to oppose by force, any measure for the 
suppression of the Pindarries. But it is still possible that they might act 
otherwise; for there is sometimes a kind of infatuation about Indian 
chiefs who have lost a part of their dominions, which tempts them to risk 
the rest in a contest which they know to be hopeless. 

The situation of. the British Government with regard to the Native 
powers, is entirely changed within the last twenty years. It formerly 
brought very small armies into the field, with hardly any cavalry; and the 
issue of any war in which it engaged was extremely uncertain. It now 
brings armies into the field superior to those of the enemy, not only in 
infantry, but also in cavalry, both in quality and number. The supe- 
riority is so great, that the event of any struggle in which it may be en- 
gaged is no longer doubtful. It has only to bring forward its armics, 
and dictate what terms it pleases, either without war, or after a short and 
fruitless resistance. It may however be doubted whether, after the settle- 
ment of the Pindarries, it ought to avail itself of its predominant power, 
in order to extend the system of subsidiary alliances, by stationing a force 
in Bhopaul or in any other foreign territory. While the military power 
of Mysore and of the Mahratta chiefs was yet in its vigour, subsidiary 
alliances were in some degree necessary for its safety, but that time is 
now past; and when, therefore, the evils which a subsidiary force entails 


The Marquis of Hastings. 


SUBSIDIARY SYSTEM PROPS UP BAD GOVERNMENT. 795 


upon every country in which it is established are considered, it appears 
advisable that future security against the Pindarries should be sought by 
their reduction, and by compelling Scindiah, for his conduct in support- 
ing them to cede the districts restored to him in 1805-6, rather than by 
stationing a subsidiary force in Bhopaul. There are many weighty 
objections to the employment of a subsidiary force. It has a natural 
tendency to render the government of every country in which it exists, 
weak and oppressive; to extinguish all honourable spirit among*the 
higher classes of society, and to degrade and impoverish the whole 
people. The usual remedy of a bad government in India is a quiet 
revolution in the palace, or a violent one by rebellion, or foreign con- 
quests. But the presence of a British force cuts off every chance of 
remedy, by supporting the prince on the throne against every foreign 
and domestic enemy. It renders him indolent, by teaching him to trust 
to strangers for his security; and cruel and avaricious, by showing him 
that he has nothing to fear from the hatred of his subjects. Wherever 
the subsidiary system is introduced, unless the reigning prince be a man 
of great abilities, the country will soon bear the marks of it in decaying 
villages and decreasing population. This has long been observed in the 
dominions of the Peishwah and the Nizam, and is now beginning to be 
seen in Mysore. The talents of Purneah, while he acted as Dewan, 
saved that country from the usual effects of the system; but the Rajah is 
likely to let them have their full operation. He is indolent and prodigal, 
and has already, besides the current revenue, dissipated about sixty lacs 
of pagodas of the treasure laid up by the late Dewan., He is mean, 
artful, revengeful, and cruel. He does not take away life, but he inflicts 
the most disgraceful and inhuman punishments on men of every rank, at 
a distance from his capital, where he thinks it will remain unknown to 
Europeans; and though young, he is already detested by his subjects. 
, A subsidiary force would be a most useful establishment, if it could be 
directed solely to the support of our ascendency, without nourishing all 
the vices of a bad government; but this seems to be almost impossible. 
The only way in which this object has ever, in any degree, been attained, 
is by the appointment of a Dewan. This measure is, no doubt, liable to 
numerous objections ; but still it is the only one by which any amends 
can be made to the people of the country for the miseries brought upon 
them by the subsidiary force, in giving stability to a vicious government. 
The great difficulty is to prevent the prince from counteracting the 
Dewan, and the resident from meddling too much; but, when this is 
avoided, the Dewan may be made a most useful instrument of govern- 
ment, 

There is, however, another view under which the subsidiary system 
should be considered, mean that of its inevitable tendency to bring 
every Native state into which it is introduced, sooner or later, under the 


9796 LATER, IT DESTROYS THE NATIVE GOVERNMENT. 


exclusive dominion of the British Government? It has already done this 
completely in the case of the Nabob of the Carnatic. It has made some 
progress in that of the Peishwah and the Nizam; and the whole of the 
territory of these princes will, unquestionably, suffer the same fate as the 
Carnatic. The observation of Moro Dekshat, in speaking of the late’ 
treaty to Major Ford, ‘that no Native power could, from its habits, con- 
duct itself with such strict fidelity as we seemed to demand,’ is perfectly 
just. This very Peishwah will probably again commit a breach of the 
alliance. The Nizam will do the same; and the same consequence, a 
farther reduction of their power for our own safety, must again follow. 
Even if the prince himself were disposed to adhere rigidly to the alliance, 
there will always be some amongst his principal officers who will urge 
him to break it. As long as there remains in the country any high- 
minded independence, which seeks to throw off the control of strangers, 
such counsellors will be found. I have a better opinion of the natives of 
India than to think that this spirit will ever be completely extinguished ; 
and I can therefore have no doubt that the subsidiary system must every 
where run its full course, and destroy every government which it under- 
takes to protect. 

In this progress of things, the evil of a weak and oppressive govern- 
ment, supported by a subsidiary alliance, will at least be removed. But 
even if all India could be brought under the British dominion, it is very 
questionable whether such a change, either as it regards the natives or our- 
selves, ought to be desired. One effect of such a conquest would be, 
that the Indian army, having no longer any warlthe neighbours to 
combat, would gradually lose its military habits and discipline, and that 
the native troops would have leisure to feel their own strength, and, for 
want of other employment, to turn it against thetr European masters. 
But even if we could be secured against every internal convulsion, and 
could retain the country quietly in subjection, J doudt much if the con- 
dition of the people would be better than under thetr Native princes. The 
strength of the British Government enables it to put down every rebel- 
lion, to repel every foreign invasion, and to give to its subjects a degree 
of protection which those of no Native power enjoy. Its laws and insti- 
tutions also afford them a security from domestic oppression, unknown 
in those states ; but these advantages are dearly bought. They are pur- 
chased by the sacrifice of independence—of national character—and of 
whatever renders a people respectable. The natives of the British pro- 
vinces may without fear pursue their different occupations, as traders, 
meerassidars, or husbandmen, and enjoy the fruits of their labour in 
tranquillity; but none of them can aspire to any thing beyond this mere 
animal state of thriving in peace—none of them can look forward to any 


1 The Italics are the Editor's. 


WILL BRITISH RULE BE BETTER FOR THE PEOPLE ? 797 


share in the legislation, or civil or military government of their country. 
It is from men who either hold, or are eligible to public office, that 
natives take their character: where no such men exist, there can be no 
energy in any other class of the community. The effect of this state of 
b things is observable in all the British provinces, whose inhabitants are 
certainly the most abject race in India. No elevation of character can 
be expected among men who, in the military line, cannot attain to any 
rank above that of subahdar, where they are as much below an ensign as 
an ensign is below the commander-in-chief, and who, in the civil line, 
can hope for nothing beyond some petty, judicial, or revenue office, in 
which they may, by corrupt means, make up for their slender salary. 

The consequence, therefore, of the conquest of India by the British 
arms would be, in place of raising, to debase the whole people. There 
is perhaps no example of any conquest in which the natives have been 
so completely excluded from all share of the government of their country 
as in British India. 

Among all the disorders of the Native states, the field is open for 
every man to raise himself; and hence among them there is a spirit of 
emulation, of restless enterprize and independence, far preferable to the 
servility of our Indian subjects. The existence of independent Native 
states is also useful in drawing off the turbulent and disaffected among 
our native troops. Many of these men belonging to the Madras army, 
formerly sought service in Mysore. 

If the British Government is not favourable to the improvement of 
the Indian character, that of its control through a subsidiary force is still 
less so. 

Its power is now so great, that it has nothing to fear from any com- 
bination; and it is perfectly able to take satisfaction for any insult, 
without any extension of the subsidiary system being necessary. It will 
generally be found much more convenient to carry on war where it has 
not been introduced. This was the case in both the wars with Tippoo 
Sultan. The conquest was complete, because our operations were not 
perplexed by any subsidiary alliance with him, | The simple and direct 
mode of conquest,from without, is more creditable both to our armies 
and to our national character, than that of dismemberment from within 
by the aid of a subsidiary force. Dowever just the motives may be from 
which such force acts, yet the situation in which it is placed, renders its 
acting at all too like the movements of the Praetorian bands, It acts, it 
is true, only by the orders of its own Government, and only for public 
objects ; but still it is always ready in the neighbourhood of the capital, 
to dictate terms to, or to depose the prince whom it was stationed there 
to defend. e 


v 


798 STATE OF INDIA, WHEN WELLESLEY ASSUMED OFFICE, 


16. Anonymous. 
Lord Wellesley’s Policy. 
(Extract.) 


Could the power, and system of the Company continue fixed, when 
nothing around it was permanent? Could either remain stationary 
while other powers were rapidly encreasing their resources and _ their 
strength? 

* * * * * % x 

India, like Europe, has undergone changes which, there, as well as 
here, require a variation in our policy. 

Reviewing then our past, and reflecting on our present situation, it 
may reasonably be assumed that no line of policy could be more fatal to 
us .... than that of suffering any of the more powerful chieftains of 
India to swallow up the rest, which must be the case, if they are permitted, 
without restraint, to perfect their knowledge of the art of war, as prac- 
tised among the nations of Europe, and to direct the acquirement of it to 
the attack and destruction of their weaker neighbours, Yet this would 
be the consequence of acting on the notions of the opponents of Lord 
Wellesley, according to which it would be permitted to these powers, 
without interruption, to wage war against each other until one more 
successful than the rest subjugated the whole. To this point was the 
progress of Tippoo, and Scindiah, more immediately and rapidly tending. 
A few years more on this system, and India was inevitably lost to Great 
Britain, The alarming strides these powers were making to liberate the 
East from gur dominion ; the new French state, nominally dependent on 
Scindiah, rising on our weakest frontier; its powerful army and re- 
sources ; the strong holds in its possession ; the communication of its 
chief with Buonaparte; the danger of a junction of the principal native 
military forces co-operating in this one object of our expulsion; the 
interest they had in obtaining severally from France all those means of 
annoying us which could give effect to their views, and which she could 
pour in with such facility while the ports of Malabar, Guzerat, and 
Cuttack were open to her ships; the alluring motives she had for 
furnishing them, at their call, with these supplies—all presented the 
most fearful prospect.: The vigilance of our cruizers in time of war 
could not have been equal to the entire blockade of their shores (in 
peace it was out of the question); and such a combination of military 
force, with such means of assembling and guidifig it, in its growing im- 
provement, wiuld have proved in a few years, thus supported, utterly 
irresistible.) What is the general system of” these powers? War, in its 


NEUTRALITY, THE SUPPORT OF WAR IN ITS WORST FORM. 799 


vilest aspect. ... . War is their end. (Tt is the distinctive feature of 
the government, that the empire always considers itself in a state either 
of predatory or of vindictive hostility) ig 

.To us, war is a calamity, with the Marhattas it is a pursuit.) We raise 
armies to defend ourselves; they, to annoy others.’ In the difference of 
systems, let us not overlook the appropriate policy we are invited to 
observe in our wars and intercourse with a people whose peculiar customs, 
modes of thinking, and principles of government, bear no similitude with 
any of the more regular constitutions existing in Europe, but are hostile 
to all those bases on which the more civilized nations of the Christian 
world consider national prosperity, the rights of justice, and public 
happiness to rest. Empires thus constituted seem to be at variance with 
the justice of Providence, and when they fall, perhaps they yield to his 
decrees. The awful instance before us at this eventful crisis, too fatally 
shows whither an unbridled system of military government in the heart 
of a great continent may lead, if founded in the love of war, and military 
spoliage. It feeds upon nations; it preys on the independence of all: 
its existence is their scourge; its destruction is their hope. Such is the 
overwhelming march of France; and such have been the consuming 
strides of Marhatta, and Mysorean power. Predatory irruptions, foreign 
and internal oppressions and exaction, perfidy, domestic murders, public 
massacres, famine, depopulation, and wide-spreading misery; this is 
their system : these have been the volcanoes which too long have en- 
circled our possessions, and overflowed the plains of India. To ex- 
tinguish them is no more than justice to ourselves; to close their crater, 
the sublimest humanity to the suffering millions who have long been 
exposed to their ravages. This has been the policy our security 
demanded: this has been the course to which our glory pointed; 
and this has been the successful end to which the exertions of Lord 
Wellesley have tended. To uphold such a system as the one just 
described is to cherish insecurity ; to defend it, is to vindicate rapine and 
barbarity. 

Let us for the moment only look at the sorry policy which is pleaded 
in favour of the continuance of a system of power so fraught with misery 
to the human race, and which it is not denied, exposes the finest pro- 
vinces in India to perpetual convulsions, and the surrounding states to 
continual danger. . . . Leave these powers to their own intestine 
feuds—let us tranquilly behold the scene —their wars against each other 
are beneficial to the Company—the more sanguinary their battles, the 
more destructive to their power—they are effectually playing our game— 
every blow given on either side is a victory for us— these struggles 
enfceble them reciprocally —in their weakness is our strength—the 
miseries they spréad, and the blood they spill, cement nfore firmly the 
empire we possess. This is the course of reasoning pursued by those 


800 WELLESLEY’S POLICY BENEFICENT, AND REALLY PACIFIC, 


who arraign the conduct of Lord Wellesley; and a surrounding warfare 
is the sécurity to which they look for the preservation of the British 
power in India. This is their system; they see their safety where 
his Lordship perceives his danger, in the carnage of battle, the embers of 
desolation, and the smoking ruins of ravaged and depopulated districts. 
... . Such a proceeding resolves itself into the little sentiment of feeling 
nothing for others, but all for ourselves. . . . Is it nothing in the scale 
of charity to feel for suffering human nature? Is it nothing on the score 
of a generous and enlightened policy to limit those torrents of blood 
which so long have deluged the fertile plains of India, destroyed their 
population, and convulsed their industry? . . .. It is.a contradiction in 
terms to say that they are not the advocates of war, while they declare 
themselves friendly to the unfettered existence of a system of power 
which adopting war for its basis, has even blended it with its system 
of revenue, and embodied it as it were into the very spine of its 
constitution. 

How different from this limited view of the subject is the more 
expansive and benevolent survey of it by the comprehensive mind of 
Lord Wellesley! Ascending from individuals to universals, he sees, in 
disseminated peace, the springs of general happiness. ‘ In the tranquillity 
of the native states throughout the Deckan and Hindostan, he traces not 
merely a more solid security for the preservation of our own power; but 
in the advantages of peace to them he discerns fresh sources of prosperity 
to ourselves: the condition of society meliorated—our political relations 
improved—the industry of India reanimated : strife disarmed: jealousy 
restrained: new channels of commerce opened: the interchange of 
produce enlarged: the merchants of India journcying in security from 
one state to another: our home manufactures reaching countries where 
before they never entered: an improved revenue to the Company and 
the state: the vast peninsula of India reposing after the convulsion of 
centuries: its rest secured by judicious alliances, and well-poised power: 
the warlike tribes which cover it, restrained in their predatory habits, and 
gradually incited by the sweets of peace, to turn their attention to the 
happier pursuits of commerce and of agriculture, instead of moistening, as 
heretofore, their plains with the blood of each other; and lastly, the 
national character and honour exalted, by the sublime result of so generous 
and elevated a line of policy. These happy ends he traces as a con- 
sequence from the principle of establishing, through a system of well- 
distribtted power, a durable peace among the different states of India, 
and more immediately of those composing the Marhatta confederacy. 
In this way he sees, that individual benefit is general good) (that the 
misery of one state is not the happiness of another, but that the prosperity 
of each incredses the felicity of all.) This is the system of Lord Wellesley. 
It embraces peace, and repudiates war; it denics that partial misery is 


IT IS BEST FOR THE COMPANY, FOR INDIA, AND ENGLAND, 801 


public good: it disowns the principle that the blood of one nation is a 
desirable offering to the prosperity of another: it rejects the doctrine that, 
to foment their intestine divisions and arm them against each other, is a 
wise or a dignified line of conduct either morally or politically considered ; 
but it. admits, as it seeks to establish that, to resist their encroachments, 
to crush their exactions, to heal their differences, to stifle their wars, to 
curb the enlargement of their empire, to balance more justly their power, 
to uphold the authority of their Peishwah or chief magistrate, and through 
its stability, ta ameliorate equally the condition of the sovereign and the 
subject, are objects of an enlarged and rational policy; and that the 
surest way of increasing the prosperity of British India, of strengthening 
the affections of its inhabitants, and of ensuring to us the general good- 
will of the great masses composing the subjects of these different states, 
is, through the medium of a lasting peace guaranteed to them by a com- 
manding power, to make them participate in the tranquillity, security, and 
happiness, which the Company’s possessions enjoy. These are the views 
of Lord Wellesley, and this is the plan to the complication of which his 
attention has been directed. It is needless to comment on its quality ; its 
splendour is marked by the shade of its contrast. 
* * * * * * * * 

It remains only further to observe, that if experience acquired in the 
school of local knowledge; if an attentive study of the interests and 
suitable policy of the Company, facilitated by situations held for many 
years ine its service, where the sources of knowledge were immediately 
before the author’s view; if a life devoted to the consideration of these 
subjects,: combined with his interests as a proprietor, can entitle him, 
without presumption, to form some present opinion on the means best 
calculated to advance the prosperity of the East India Company, he may 
then be permitted to observe, that, considering our views of policy to 
have been at no former period either so comprehensive or so steady as 
the interests and safety of British India required, he has never till now 
thought that country avery secure possession. He thinks differently now. 
He has no apprehension. He sees, at last, the only system realized that 
can effectually give security to our empire there. (The system of Lord 
Wellesley is the system by which India has been saved. It is the system 
by which alone it can be preserved to future ages. It is a system which 
holds up security to the Company, happiness to India, and wealth to 
the parent state. It rests on humanity, poised by justice, and supported 
by power, ° 


' From A Vindication of the justice and policy of the late Wars carried on in Hindostan 
and the Deckan, by Marquis Wellesley. Anonymous, London, 1806, 4tu. Printed for 
John Stockdale, Piccadilly. The copy in the Library at the India Office has, in 
manuscript, 'L. D. Campbell (?).’ 


3F 


802 PREF UDICE AGAINST WELLESLEY, IN FAVOUR OF CORNWALLIS. 


17. Barchou de Penhoén, 
Retirement of Lord Wellesley. 


Cependant il arrivait dans le gouvernement un changement d’une 
grande importance. Dés le mois de décembre 1803, Lord Wellesley 
avait annoncé aux directéurs son intention de retourner en Europe. 
Les hostilités qui suivirent ’engagérent 4 différer Pexécution de cette 
résolution. Dans le mois de mars 1803, tout en exprimant 4 la cour des 
directeurs ses inquiétudes croissantes sur le mauvais état de sa santé, le 
besoin qu'il éprouvait de la refaire dans un climat plus doux et d’étre 
délivré des soins et des soucis du gouvernement, il énongait pourtant 
son intention de ne pas déserter son poste; il était résolu &,ne pas 
quitter |’Inde avant que la paix ne fGt assise sur des bases solides et per- 
manentes. Mais des mesures avaient été prises dés cette époque pour 
un changement d’administration dans l’Inde. Les directeurs et les 
ministres s’alarmaient depuis quelque temps de l'accroissement de la 
dette et des difficultés pécuniaires qui entouraient la Compagnie; on 
commengait 4 désirer la paix. L’opinion publique, toujours préte 4 
sen prendre aux hommes des nécessités politiques, voyait dans Lord 
Wellesley un ambitieux et prodigue administrateur. La plus grande 
partie de son administration s’était trouvée employée A la guerre, a la 
conquéte. On croyait que cela tenait au caracttre de l’homme; on 
s‘obstinait & croire qu'il avait fait naftre volontairement la guerre, bien 
qu’en définitive il se fQt seulement borné a en apercevoir de bonne 
heure Vimminente nécessité. Un grand nombre de gens arrivtrent & 
penser, 4 dire que les intéréts britanniques n’auraient jamais de sécurité 
tant que Lord Wellesley demeurerait 4 la téte des affaires. Or, un des 
prédécesseurs de ce dernier, Lord Cornwallis, s’était toujours montré 
modéré dans sa politique, opposé & la guerre et & tout accroissement de 
territoire ; l’opinion publique, par un de ces engouements qui lui sont 
familiers, se plaisait & en faire Thomme de la paix. On sait comme la 
fantaisie populaire est portée 4 personnificr les idées, En ce moment 
Lord Cornwallis parut le seul homme capable de faire reflcurir la paix 
dans l’Orient. Courbé sous les ans, glacé par l’4ge, gémissant sous le 
poids des infirmités, étranger depuis long-temps aux affaires de ce pays, 
Lord Cornwallis n’en sembla pas moins le reméde a tous les maux de 
YInde. Il fut nommé gouverneur-général, et arriva 4 Calcutta le 30 
juillet 1805." 


) Histoire de T Empire Anglais dans PInde, tome 5™°*, p. 134-336. 


‘THE GREAT GAME’ PLAYED OUT, AND MUST BE STOPPED. 803 


18. Marquis Cornwallis to the Right Hon. Lord Lake. 


The political sttuation, and the Governor-General’s intended policy, 
Near Caragola, Aug. 30, 1805. 
My dear Lord, 

I received yesterday with great satisfaction your very kind letter of the 
tith instant, and have no doubt that we shall act together with as perfect 
harmony as we ever have done on former occasions. 

You will easily imagine it was no slight cause that urged the Ministers 
at home to press me to return once more to this country, and that I 
would not, without seeing very great necessity, have engaged at my time 
of life in so difficult and, I may say, so rash an undertaking. 

The real circumstances are, that it is not the opinion only of Ministers, 
or of a party, but of all reflecting men of every description, that it is 
physically impracticable for Great Britain, in addition to all other embar- 
rassments, to maintain so vast and so unwieldy an empire in India, 
which annually calls for reinforcements of men and for remittances pf 
money, and which yields little other profit except brilliant Gazettes, Ct 
is in vain for us to conceal from ourselves that our finances are at the 
lowest ebb, and that we literally have not the means of carrying on the 
ordinary business of Government: 

If necessity should require it, the armies that are prepared must, at all 
hazards, be put in action; but I certainly would postpone that measure 
until the last extremity, as I sincerely believe that if all other necessary 
payments of Government were suspended, it would scarcely be possible 
for us to provide for their support. 

With regard to any movement of your own, I certainly do not wish 
that you should submit to any measure of insult or aggression, but I very 
much deprecate its taking place. The situation of Scindia and Holkar 
are in a very considerable degree different, and perhaps it would not be 
necessary to observe exactly the same conduct towards both of them. I 
cannot easily define, in the multiplicity of cessions and conquests, what 
may be considered actually, or what may be regarded virtually, as our. 
territory; but wherever our own government has been regularly estab- 
lished, 1 would promptly resist an invasion by either of them, 

From the reports I have received from our Residents, I am sorry {0 
find that the States who are most intimately connected with us, such as 
the Peshwa and the Nizam, are reduced to the most forlorn condition ; 
that these Powers possess no funds or troops on whom they can depend; 
that anarchy and disaffection prevail universally throughout their do- 
minions, and that unless the British Residents exercised a power and an 
ascendancy that they ought not to exert, those Governments would be 


immediately dissolved. 
3 PF 42 


804. YOU CRY PEACE! WHERE THERE IS NO PEACE. 


The Rajah of Berar, and other chiefs who have suffered great depri- 
vations, can certainly entertain no friendly disposition towards us, and 
unless a very great change can be effected in the minds of the natives of 
India, and in the ideas they must now harbour of our views, I confess 
that, under all these impressions, I cannot look forward with any san- 
guine hope to the establishment, by any means in our power, of that 
happy and permanent peace, which is so much to be desired, and of 
which you see so fair a prospect. 

I have been indisposed for some time, and the complaint has now 
fallen into my feet, which puts me to great pain; I cannot therefore, at 
present, without considerable inconvenience make more use of my own 
pen than by signing my name to any letters I have occasion to write. 

Tam, &c., 
Cornwatis. 


19. Mr. T, C, (later, Lord) Metcalfe. 


The Policy of Sir George Barlow, 
1806, 

Sir George Barlow has determined, from some motives which he 
designates ‘the fundamental principles of his administration,’ to with- 
draw from all connexion and alliance with the states situated west of the 
Jumna, and to get rid of all our possessions west of the same river, with 
the reservation of a strip of land along its western bank of a few miles’ 
breadth. This determination has been so powerful as to supersede 
every other consideration. The advantages of increased resources, the 
military strength of our frontier, and even our reputation, is sacrificed to 
it. To every argument that has been urged to dissuade the Governor- 
General from this determination, the same answer has always been 
given: ‘It is a fundamental principle of my administration, and to this 
all other considerations must yield,’ 

If the Jumna was a river of such depth as to form a boundary, some 
reason might be supposed for making a boundary of it. But the fact is, 
it is everywhere fordable in all months excepting those during which, in 
common with it, every rivulet swelled by the rains is impassable. The 
lands to the west are as fertile, the people under good government would 
be as quict, and the states with whom we have alliances are as good as 
elsewhere. What magic is it which shall make one bank of such a 
stream the object of dread and aversion, when the other is everything 
desirable? Why should an alliance on one side be useless, when.on 
the other it is salutary? Why should influence to the right be dangerous, 
if to the left’ it is power and safety? Sir George Barlow in his closet, 
looking at a map, sees a black line marking the course of a river; he 
draws his pencil along this line, and says, ‘ Thus far shalt thou go, and 


IMPOLICY OF GIVING UP ALLIES WEST OF JUMNA, 805 


no farther;’ and this forms a fundamental principle. I can fancy no 
other cause for his astonishing determination to keep nothing that he can 
get rid of on one side of the imaginary line. But he may as well set his 
chair on the sands of the sea, and order the waves to stop; for the 
influence of Britain will roll in spite of him beyond the Jumna, or else 
the Atlantic Ocean will be the Jumna which shall separate the states of 
India from the British Empire. This inflexible rule looks too much like 
a government of straight lines; it looks like a government which decides 
political questions by examining maps in a closet, without attention to 
the knowledge which is to be acquired by an extensive view of the whole 
field. 

Sir George's fundamental principle in this policy is, perhaps, part of 
that general principle at this moment in favor with our rulers, of with- 
drawing from all external connexions, and confining our views to the 
government of our own territorics., It is asserted that our force will thus 
be concentrated, our power compact, and our empire at peace. Would 
the human body be more vigorous by the application of an axe to its 
limbs? Would a skilful surgeon, in order to increase its strength, cut off 
an arm? It is as wise to throw away the power and influence which we 
actually possess west of the Jumna, That power and influence I believe 
to be an arm to the British Empire, which may be exercised with im- 
portant advantage. The treaty of peace with Holkar, bad as it is, has 
left us in possession of the acknowledged supremacy in Hindostan, and 
has liberated from Mahratta extortion and oppression those states which 
are under our protection’, The protection of these states against the 
Mahrattas (and there exists no other power against which we can be 
called to protect them) can be no encumbrance. The relinquishment of 
all claims upon them being acknowledged by the Mahrattas in treaties, 
they would certainly refrain from attacking them unless they were pre- 
pared to engage in war with us; and if they are willing to incur this 
risk, they may as soon make an incursion into our territories as upon our 
allics, or break any other article of the treaty. Nothing can be easier 
than to keep those states quict with each other; say but the word, and 
they will be still, Ofthis I have no doubt. Their confirmed habits of 
restraint and dependence make it certain. 

The assertion that these alliances are no benefit to us is not true. 
They form a large extent between the Mahrattas and us, Under our 
influence they are good neighbours. They make a good military frontier. 
In the event of war with the Mahrattas, hostilities are carried far from 
our territorics, and we still enjoy the advantages of a friendly country in 


1 The mischief of this treaty has been completed by the Governor-General's sub- 
sequent acts, by the gratuitons cession of Tonk Rampoora, &c.,"to Holkar, the 
abandonment of the Rajah of Boondee to Holkar's revenge, and the rupture of the 
Treaty of Jyepore. [Author's note.) 


806 AS IN EUROPE, TO LOSE INFLUENCE IS TO ABET RIVALS. 


our rear. These alliances afford us all the benefit which is derived from 
influence and supremacy. Weak as Holland is, surely France derives 
advantage from her influence over it. Hers is an influence by usurpa- 
tion; our influence over these petty states is one of their seeking, and 
one which they will not resign as long as they can keep it. A proof of 
this is that the government, in order to get rid of the alliance with Jye- 
poor, sets up a right, false, I think, and unjust, to dissolve it; and pro- 
poses to persuade the Rajahs of Bhurtpore and Macheree to resign their 
alliances with us by offering considerable territory to them. 

The most important advantage to us from these alliances is the 
preservation of these countries from the Mahrattas, and the consequent 
diminution of Mahratta power, influence, and resources. India contains 
no more than two great powers, British and Mahratta, and every other 
state acknowledges the influence of one or the other. Every inch that 
we recede will be occupied by them.. It is a new species of policy to 
increase our own strength by increasing the power of our rival and 
natural enemy. Suppose England to have an established influence over 
Holland, would Ministers glory in their wisdom if they withdrew that 
influence and threw Holland necessarily under the oppression of France? 
What is it that should make political wisdom in this country so opposite 
to what has been considered wisdom in Europe? I have occasionally 
heard something of a commercial policy belonging to the Company 
separate from its interests as a sovereign state. Without entering here into 
the question how far the Company may have benefited by becoming a 
potentate, and granting, without discussion, the full justice of all the 
lamentations which are uttered on this subject by many worthy directors 
and proprietors, I must be allowed to say that it cannot now be helped 
—the evil is done. Sovereigns you are, and as such must act if you do 
not mean to destroy the power of acting at all, to demolish your whole 
corporation, your trade, and your existence. Execrate the memorics of 
Clive and Watson, and those who first brought you from the state of 
merchants. Burn them in effigy, hang their statues, and blast with 
infamy those malefactors. Your progress since has been inevitable, and 
necessary to your existence. ‘To stop is dangerous, to recede is ruin,’ 
said Lord Clive at an carly stage of our power. We have arrived now 
at that pitch that we may stop without danger, but we cannot recede 
without serious consequences. We have been made so strong that the 
idea of ruin cannot enter into my mind, and we may lose considerable 
strength without immediately feeling the loss. This, however, does not 
make it wisdom wilfully and wantonly to incur that loss, and to impair 
that strength. This does not make it wisdom to give power and 
resources to chose who are our rivals, and will be again, if strength- 
ened, our enemies. I find that I have entered on a subject that 
is too extensive for the purpose with which I commenced these notes. 


SENTIMENT AND PETTY EXPEDIENCY OUT OF PLACE, 807 


I repeat, you are, in spite of yourselves, sovereigns, and must be 
guided by those rules which the wisdom of the world has applied to 
the government of empires. 

I have heard much of the vicious consequences of the spirit of 
ambition and aggrandisement which has sullied our character; I have 
heard, I say, much of this, but have seen nothing either of the vicious 
consequences, or imaginary causes. That our power, reputation, glory, 
have been aggrandised, I cannot deny. They have been proudly and 
nobly aggrandised. I have also heard much of a charming notion of 
keeping our place in India and our tranquillity by a new system of 
generosity, moderation, and innocence. 

This system, literally pursued, would be to give away as much as we 
can, to kcep as little as we can, and to be as weak as we can. This is 
nonsense. To trust for tranquillity not to our power and influence, but 
to our moderation and innocence, is pretty in theory, but would be very 
foolish in practice, particularly applied to Mahrattas. To meet their 
ambition and enterprise with the language of peace, would be to preach 
to the roaring ocean to be still, For our security, we must rest upon our 
strength. Leave us as we are, but do not, by false and new doctrines, 
diminish the strength which we possess. Let us not establish maxims 
which are condemned by the history of all ages. Our empire in India 
is vast, and must be managed in the way of other empires. We must 
exist as a great state. Without croaking, it may be observed that our 
government is upon a dangerous experiment, and we may have cause 
to repent of the operation of the new principles. They have done 
no good yet. The assertion that we have been immoderate and 
aggressive is very untrue, We have, I am sure, been more moderate 
than any state placed in the same circumstances ever was before. 
I will be content to have this question decided by the natives of this 
country. 

I do not like, in the existing policy, the inclination evident in the 
Governor-Genceral’s despatches to reduce every question to the con- 
sideration of mere expediency, and to give no weight to character and 
honor; to put out of view our proud pre-eminence, and to act as a petty, 
weak, temporising state. This is carried so far, and all objections are 
made so trifling when immediate convenience directs, as to amount in 
some instances (vide the despatches which assume the right to dissolve 
our alliances with the Rana of Gohud and the Rajah of Jyepore, without 
the consent of those allies), in my opinion, to a positive breach of faith. 
This policy, at least, operates to the injury of our reputation. The 
native powers of India understand the law of nations on a broad 
scale, though they may not adhere to it; but they are not acquainted 
with the nice quirks upon which our finished casuists would draw up a 
paper to establish political rights. 


808 WE ARE NOT STRONGER FOR NATIVE QUARRELS. 


Our name is high, but these acts must lower it. And a natural 
consequence is, that we shall not again be trusted with confidence. 

I would wish to see our government feelingly alive to points of honor, 
and less tenacious of questions of argumentative right. I would wish it 
to act in cases, such as the two mentioned, more according to the expec- 
tations which the native states are authorized to form, than to the letter 
of our own law. We may find a justification on such questions in 
some corner of our own books, but for the important purpose of reputa- 
tion it is requisite that we should be justified in the mind of India. In 
the cases, however, which I have mentioned, we are justified, I think, 
nowhere. The arguments adduced are false (particularly on the Gohud 
question), and it would not be difficult to overthrow them by a plain 
statement of fact. 

The Governor-General, in some of his despatches, distinctly says that 
he contemplates in the discord of the native powers an additional source 
of strength, and, if I am not mistaken, some of his plans go directly, 
and are designed to foment discord among those states. To foment dis- 
cord seems to me barbarous, unwarrantable, and monstrous; and even 
to contemplate in it any source of strength is unworthy of our pre- 
eminent station. Such a policy at best can only be suited to petty 
estates. Applied to our empire in India it is extremely filthy’. Lord 
Wellesley’s desire was to unite the tranquillity of all the powers of India 
with our own. How fair, how beautiful, how virtuous, does this system 
seem ; how tenfold fair, beautiful, and virtuous when compared with the 
other ugly, nasty, abominable one. 

But I can contemplate no source of strength in the discord of con- 
tiguous powers. {It appears to me that in our advanced state of power 
no great contentions can arise which will not soon reach and entangle 
us. It is impossible completely to insulate ourselves, and we must be 
subject to the same chances which work upon states situated as we are. 
It is matter of astonishment that any person can think that it is in our 
power to draw in our arms and separate ourselves entirely from the 
affairs of India—that we can exist, great as we are, without dependent 
friend or foe—that wars are to kindle and rage on every part of our 
extensive frontier, and that we shall not be moved by them. This is a 
new and, I think, mistaken notion. It is our interest, I am sure 
(leaving out the question of morality and virtue, things not always 
admitted into politics), to promote the general peace. It is the only 
sure way of preserving tranquillity to ourselves. The acts of the last 
six months not only deprive us of the power of preserving peace in 
India, but must operate to cause and encourage dissension. I am very 
sorry for it. 


' Lord Wellesley has censured this by anticipation. Vide his elegant reply to the 
Calcutta address in 1804, [Author's note.] 


EXTENDED RULE SAFER THAN A PENURIOUS SPIRIT. 809 


Our present motion is retrograde; I shall be happy when our governors 
will halt. This study to decrease our influence is funny. I cannot 
understand it. For my part, I wish to have our influence increased. It 
is generally sought for, and I am certain in its operation it gives the 
most real and essential benefit to all chiefs and states, and to the sub- 
jects of all chiefs and states over which it is exercised. There is a loud 
cry that we are in danger from extended dominion. For my part I can 
contemplate universal dominion in India without much fear. 

I do not like the determined spirit of penury which is evident in this 
administration. Economy ina government is one of the greatest political 
virtues, but let the directors think what they will there may be too much 
of it if it is too parsimonious. It ceases then to be a virtue, and becomes 
one of the most absurd political follies, and one of the worst political 
vices. There is, I think, too much of it when it appears to, be the ruling 
and sole principle of government; when it is displayed in every public 
advertisement and introduced into every secret despatch; when deduc- 
tions of pence and farthings are considered more important than the fate 
of empires; in a word, when the government entirely discards liberality. 

‘Mere parsimony is not economy; it is separable in theory from it, 
and in facf it may, or it may not, be a part of economy, according to 
circumstances. Expense, and great expense, may be an essential part 
in true economy. If parsimony were to be considered as one of the 
kinds of that virtue, there is, however, another and a higher economy. 

Economy is a distributive virtue, and consists not in saving but in selec- 
tion. Parsimony requires no providence, no sagacity, no powers of com- 
bination, no comparison, no judgment. Mere instinct, and that not an 
instinct of the noblest kind, may produce this false economy in perfection. 
The other economy has larger views.’ 

In a service like this, which is pursued for an independence, and to 
which the wealthy never have recourse, and in which services cannot be 
rewarded with honors, merit must be rewarded by situations uniting 
credit with emolument. It is in the nature of the human character to 
look to a reward, Without this hope there would be much less of zeal 
and public spirit than there now is. Sclf-love plays its part in our most 
disinterested acts. Every government of the world has instituted rewards 
as well as punishment for the encouragement of public virtue among its 
citizens; and when a government loses sight of this principle, it will 
soon Jose the power of rewarding any public virtue, for all virtue will be 
extinguished. When a man’s conscience tells him that he has worked 
hard and merited well, he expects reward. 

IT look on the consideration of public service or public ornament to be 
real and very justice; and I ever held a scanty and penuffous justice to 
partake of the nature of a wrong. I hold it to be in its consequences the 
worst economy in the world. In saving money I soon can count up all 


810 BARLOW’S COLDNESS: WELLESLEY’S PATRIOTIC FIRE. 


the good I do; but when, by a cold penury, I blast the abilities of a 
nation, the ill I may do is beyond all calculation. 

Indeed, no man knows, when he cuts off the incitements to a virtuous 
ambition, and the just rewards of public service, what infinite mischief 
he may do his country through all generations. Such saving to the 
public may prove the worst mode of robbing it. 

Individuals may repeatedly be disappointed, as in all states some must 
be, without any extensive injury to the public interests, because the hope 
which is the incitement remains for all; but when to withhold reward 
and distinction comes to be a system of administration, then the public 
interests will suffer injury, incalculable injury. There is reason to think 
that this is the case, from the apparent system of this administration. Its 
inflexible adherence to its principles of parsimony, and its boasting dis- 
play of them, leads us to believe that liberality is excluded from its 
vocabulary, i 

If this is the case, we may take the liberty of observing, that the 
present government will not excite zeal, will not encourage ability, and is 
no friend to enterprise, but a sure check to all public energies and spirit, 
and the consequences must be bad. 

Distinct from the faults of parsimony, but operating with the same 
effect, is the coldness and want of feeling of the government. It does 
nothing with warmth and heart. This may appear to be a foolish objec- 
tion, but will not prove to be so. Something more than cold approbation 
is required to foster great minds—the approbation should be hearty. 
Men who perform great actions want to be admired, and are not content 
with being approved. Men may serve under such a government cor- 
rectly, but the good of the state requires that they should serve zealously. 
Men will not serve zealously unless their government is zealous to do 
them honor. I venture to pronounce that this administration will be 
coldly served. Lord Wellesley, from the fire of patriotism which blazed 
in his own breast, emitted sparks which animated the breasts of all who 
came within the reach of his notice. 

Our present Governor is too cold in his own character to give any 
warmth to others; and this characteristic of his private life seems to be 
a feature of his public administration. If the case could be supposed of 
a state in which public spirit and the whole train of public virtues should 
be persecuted, condemned, and punished, it is not difficult to conceive 
that public virtues would, in that state, cease to exist. And by the same 
rule it appears that if these virtues are slighted and neglected, they will 
not flourish with the strength and beauty which is given to them by 
culture and attention. . 

There are “iruly great patriots, who, under any circumstances, will 
zealously labor for the interests of their country; but some uncommon 
greatness is required to keep them in their righteous course under such 


WELLESLEY’S SYSTEM GIVEN UP 3UST TOO SOON. 811 


obstacles as have been alluded to. Such, then, there are; but general 
arguments are applied to the generality, and these do certainly require 
the stimulants of Hope and Ambition. 

These loose, unconnected notes may serve to convey to my father, 
some of my ideas on the present administration. The subject is so 
extensive, that if I continued my observations, I should swell my paper to 
an enormous size. I am too lazy to put what I have said into any 
decent form; and after all, my thoughts can be of no importance. 

I respect Sir George Barlow, and wish him well ; but I cannot approve 
the principles which he professes and acts upon. 

Lord Wellesley’s system was abandoned at an unfortunate period, 
when its success was nearly completed. If that system had been carried 
into complete operation, permanent peace and consequent wealth would 
have been in our hands. The abandonment of that system, in an un- 
lucky moment, throws India back into its former state of confusion and 
uncertainty. Our tranquillity will again depend upon the will of either 
Sindhiah, Holkar, or Bhoonsla; and our only hope of the continuance 
of it rests upon the notion that those chiefs, singly or united, will never 
dare to risk a war with us. I hope, as much as any man can, that the 
dread of our valor will always operate upon them ; but I am convinced that 
an increase of their strength and influence, and a diminution of our own, 
are not the best means of keeping alive their consciousness of our 
superiority *. 


20. The same Writer. 


Lalension of Territory, and its Results. 


\y 
(Extract.) December, 1814. 


According to the system prescribed for our conduct in India, we are 
bound to be horror-struck at the bare idea of an increase of territory. 
Yet, unless we can raise additional resources in our present dominions, it 
is only by an extension of territory that we can obtain an increase of 
revenue for the support of our necessary expenses. 

It may be objected to an increase of territory, that it is often attended 
with an extension of embarrassments, leading to an increase of expense 
beyond the amount of the additional revenue. It is sometimes so, and 
sometimes otherwise, according to circumstances.‘ If by the extension 
of territory a State extend its frontiers, and come in contact with warlike 
powers with whom it never clashed before, then an increase of territory 
may become a source of such expense as will absorb more than the 
additional revenue derived from the addition of territory.\° 


ee ea 
1 Selections from the Papers of Lord Metcalfe, by John William Kaye, pp. I-11, 


812 EXTENSION OF TERRITORY. WELLESLEY’S TASK ; 


But if the extension of territory improve the frontier—that is, render 
it more defensible—if it make dominions Jess divided and more com- 
pact—if it unite distant parts of territories and relations, and establish 
communications between points before unconnected—if it make the 
whole of the forces and resources of a State more available and more 
easily to be brought together to any given point, then an increase of 
territory, so far from being attended necessarily with an increase of ex- 
pense, might enable a State to reduce its former expenses, and would, at 
all events, give an accession of strength, and afford payment for an 
addition of military force, without bringing on any concomitant source 
of weakness. 

The preceding observations apply retrospectively and prospectively to 
our situation in India. We have made acquisitions of territory, such as 
those described under the first supposition, as the present extent of our 
frontier, combined with the multiplicity and perplexity of our forcign 
relations, will show. 


21. Colonel George Chesney. 
Result of Lord Wellesley’s administratian. 


rhe administration of Lord Wellesley may be regarded as the third 
great epoch in the formation of the British Indian Empiré, 1 The acqui- 
sition of Bengal, Behar, and Orissa was in a great measure accidental. 
The managers of the Company’s affairs at that time, both in England 
and India, would have been quite satisfied with maintaining the state of 
things under which the Nawab had the appearance, and thcy the reality, of 
power. That he should be driven to try conclusions with them was quite 
unexpected, and Clive, opportunely returning to India, discerned the 
advantage of the acquisition offered) The era of Lord Cornwallis was 
marked chiefly by administrative reforms, the territorial extension effected 
by him having been comparatively small; while; as has been already 
observed, his foreign policy was directed to maintain the s/afus guo he 
found existing in India, and espccially' to cultivate friendly relations with 
the Mahrattas. (Lord Wellesley was the first to perccive that in India 
@ potitical equilibrium was impossible; that peace was only to be en- 
sured by establishing the preponderance of British power; and that the 
task of breaking down the Mahratta Confederacy was as practicable as, 
sooner or later, it must have been necessary to be undertaken. The 
result of the contest was never for a moment doubtful, and from this time 
the Company became beyond all question the paramount power in India, 
even the state§ which remained independent submitting to receive a super- 
vising British agent at their courts, and a subsidiary garrison of British 
troops. ) Henceforward the only country which could measure swords 


RESUMED AND COMPLETED BY LORD HASTINGS, 813 


against it with any chance of success lay beyond the Sutlej; and from 
this time it may be said that the duties of territorial government took 
the place of buying and selling as the leading pursuit of the Company’s 
servants in India. 

His policy reversed by successors. 


‘This policy was worked out by Lord Wellesley, not under the guidance 
of, but in direct opposition to, the wishes of his masters in England. The 
Directors, although they had from the first carried on their trade at a loss, 
still clung to trade as the only means of squaring their balance-sheet, and 
regarded with distrust every addition of territory, as productive of debt 
and financial embarrassment. Very much the same view appears to have 
been held by the English ministry; while the question has been much 
debated, whether Lord Wellesley’s measures were not so far voluntary, 
rather than forced upon him by circumstances, as to constitute an in- 
fraction of the Acts of Parliament of 1784 and 1793, which enjoined 
a defensive and neutral policy, and distinctly prohibited territorial ag- 
grandisement. Flowever that may have been, the course pursued by 
Lord Wellesley, once entered on, could not be retraced; but the Court 
notwithstanding vainly desired to return to the former state of non-inter- 
vention and political equality with the Mahratta powers ; and the influence 
of their sentiments so far affected the policy of Lord Wellesley’s imme- 
diate successors, that the complete pacification of Central India, contem- 
plated by him, was suspended on the eve of its accomplishment, and 
deferred till twelve years later. The Mahratta war of 1817-18 was the 
fruit of the timid policy of non-intervention pursued from 180g until that 
time, and was forced on Lord Hastings’ administration by the state of 
lawlessness which had grown up in Central India.! * 


1 Indian Polity, pp. 32-33, tst edition. 


aS of 


the Labve a ¥ 
SRINGAPATAM. 


va <a -. 
| Sitchin 


in 
pen nnn nee ee 


m4 - Aor — 
Wea] (0 .ace ORC RAN race bisnercuss,) 
A — 


‘ -, »- ec \ 
Pd x tt. i Gi WH, a ) 
if Abe CUOUEMAD ie 4m sane. 
e 
4 
tee 


EEO ITEP aC Ees ie 


a 


is 

x, 

) ae, \ 
sae, a 
“hh 2h % | 
! onan : \ 


ue 
eo 


i 


x 


MY S000 eaiees ADJACENT COUNTIES 


Le ae ee TE ae 


00086749 


Digitized with financial assistance from 


i NSDL 


Technology, Trust & Reach 


on 11 March, 2020 


