nu 0 


Tend 
ev Memory of the laty 
Ma BZ lecrviichois Zenayeh y Seen 
lo 


Bimlay Branch Royal Neiales ocealeg 


Town Hail, -Bombay, 


FORE LGR RBREGL ISAS Sa snomensal 


Digitized with financial assistance from the 
Government of Maharashtra 
on 02 January, 2016 


an 


THE 


DESPATCHES, 


MINUTES, AND CORRESPONDENCE, 


OF THE 


MARQUESS WELLESLEY, K. G. 


DURING HIS ADMINISTRATION IN 


INDIA. 


' ; ot 
EDITED BY 


MR. MONTGOMERY MARTIN. 


VOL. I. 


LONDON: 


JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET. 


MDCCCXXXVI. 


ap JUL 1908 
10 Le 


Tn mM) | 


a TE 


—— 


LONDON: PRENTRD BY 4. NICOL, 51, PALL MALL. 


_——— 


MAP or INDIA 


H 
th 
jin 


etancagedd 


; 


DEDICATION. 


TO THE KING’S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY. 


Sirg,: 

The deep solicitude which your Majesty has, on all occa- 
sions, evinced for the welfare of that important portion of the 
empire denominated British India,—the countenance and 
favour bestowed from the throne on those who may have 

‘contributed either to acquire or to retain a dominion which, 
with justice, may be considered the brightest gem in the 
English diadem,—and the personal regard with which it 
has pleased your Majesty to honour the nobleman whose 
administration the following despatches and correspondence 
fully illustrate, will, I hope, acquit me of any charge of vanity 
for soliciting the distinguished honour of dedicating the ac- 
companying work to a Sovereign whose comprehensive mind 
has been long directed to the weal of our transmarine pos- 
sessions, and which, at an earlier period of life, and in an 
hostile age, he had so nobly endeavoured to preserve and to 
extend. 

It must at all times, Sire, be grateful for the Monarch of a 
free people to contemplate the arduous and heroic efforts of 
his subjects in a distant country, under an enervating clime, 
and amidst an adverse race, struggling to maintain, in all its’ 
puissance, the proud pre-eminence of their native land; and 


iv DEDICATION. 


Sire, it must be equally grateful for those subjects to know 

and to feel that, whether their efforts be crowned with suc- 

cess or otherwise, they are certain to receive a protection, 

encouragement and reward, proportioned to their deserts, 

which neither faction nor envy can withhold, and the con- 

ferring of which forms one of the purest sources of enjoyment . 
of a patriot King. _ 

But, Sire, high and great as are the sentiments of loyalty 
and patriotism which prompted and sustained the efforts of 
the British Nation, for the acquisition and maintenance of 
dominion in the East, there are yet higher and holier feelings 
connected with this important subject. No lust of power, no 
ambitious thirst, no mercenary thoughts, have led to the con- 
quests which these pages record ;—adn unseen, yet ever pre- - 
sent, Providence has given to a small island. in the western 
Atlantic supremacy over millions of our fellow creatures in 
another hemisphere; myriads of brave and intelligent men 
have been rescued from ‘the ignominious bondage of ages; 
the clang of arms has changed into the busy hum of industry ;, 
the arts of peace have followed in the track of our footsteps ; 
science and literature are every where expanding; and the 
barbarous rites of fanaticism and superstition are yielding 
‘to the mild and humanizing influence of Christianity. 

Sire, it was the hope of accomplishing these truly great 
objects that guided the Councils of Anglo-Indian policy, and 
nerved our gallant countrymen to deeds of unwonted hero- 
ism; and that Omnipotence which presides over man in_his 
collective, as well as indiffdual capacity, gave fortitude and 
wisdom to our statesmen, and strength and humanity to our 
soldiery. 

To place on irrefutable record the noble deeds of Britons, 
while many are'yet living who can attest their accuracy, is the 


DEDICATION, ; v 


main object of the present work, so that when the impartial 
historian shall ponder in amazement on the Anglo-Indian ter- 
ritories, he may be enabled to judge with correctness, and to 
declare with truth, the motives for our acquisition of these 
territories, and the means by which they were acquired. 

Let me also, Sire, be permitted to express a wish that 
the bright example which these pages hold forth may not 
be without its effect on the rising generation; that the 
remembrance of the past may operate as a stimulus to 
future exertions for the honour and glory of the British 
crown, for upholding in its integrity this vast and unparal- 
leled maritime empire, and for diffusing the incalculable ad- 
vantages of order and of peace, of freedom and of happiness, 
throughout the most distant regions of the earth, 

With an ardent hope that our constitutional monarchy, 
which has been productive of so many and such beneficial 
results, may long continue in its purity and strength; and 
with a sincere prayer, that He who governeth the hearts of 
kings, and sways the destinies of nations, may vouchsafe to 
your Majesty a full enjoyment of all the blessings derivable 
from a conscientious exercise of the exalted power, which 
your Majesty so mercifully wields,—I have the distinguished 
honour and gratification to subscribe myself, 


Sire, 
Your Majesty’s dutiful subject, 


Rozert Montoomery Mantin. 


London, March 17th, 1836 


INTRODUCTION. 


Tue publication of the official despatches and correspondence 
of the Marquess Wellesley, during his administration in India, 
originated in the suggestion contained in a letter from Mr. 
Montgomery Martin to his Lordship, of which the following 


is an extract :— 
London, 8th Sept. 1835. 


“In preparing the second Edition of my ‘ History of the 
British Colonies, (Vol. 1, Asia,) I have been more strongly 
than ever impressed with the importance of your Lordship’s 
eventful career, as Governor-General of British India, while re- 
gretting that the public are so much in error as to the events of 
that momentous period. Several friends of India have ex- 
pressed their regret that your Lordship’s despatches have 
never been made public; I am, therefore, desirous of ascer- 
taining whether your Lordship would aid me with copies of 
your despatches and official correspondence, which, combined 
with those obtainable from the East India House, Board 
of Controul, &c., would, I think, form an important portion of 
the history of the British empire.” 

Lord Wellesley's assent to this proposal is contained in a 
letter to Mr. Martin, of which the following is an extract :— 

“< Fulham, 13th Sept. 1835. 

“Tt is perfectly true, that the public has received erro- 
neous impressions of the system of policy, which I pursued 
in India. 

“ T have neither had leisure nor inclination to rectify those 


INTRODUCTION. vii 


errors ; although I certainly must agree with you, that it is 
highly proper to clear such important transactions from 
misunderstanding. I shall be happy to furnish you with any 
materials within my reach for this laudable purpose.” 

The collection of official and other documents in Lord 
Wellesley’s possession relative to India, was ascertained to 
be very great, and of the highest importance, since it sup- 
plies information which could not be obtained, with equal , 
advantage, from any other source. 

In order to preserve the spirit of the correspondence, it 
was deemed preferable to give the documents chronologically 
rather than according to the events to which they refer ; for 
by this means the reader is better enabled to judge of the 
motives which prompted various actions ; and the nature of 
the policy pursued is rendered more apparent than by the 
perusal of letters written after the completion of the transac- 
tions to which they advert, and necessarily receiving some 
colouring from the success or failure of the undertaking. 

The work commences with the Governor-General’s corres- 
pondence from the Cape of Good Hope*, while on his voyage 
to India, and the first volume terminates with the fall of Se- 
ringapatam ; thus embracing the origin and conclusion of the 
war in Mysore.} 


* Lord Mornington was appointed Governor-General of India on the 
4th, and sworn in on thé 6th, October, 1797; sailed from England on the 
7th Nevember following ; arrived at the Cape of Good Hope in February, 
1798; at Fort St.George on the 26th April, 1798; sailed from thence on 
the 9th May, and arrived at Fort William on the 17th May, 1798. 

+ The Editor has much pleasure in acknowledging the attentions and 
kind assistance with which he has been favoured by the Earl of Powis, 
Lord Viscount Melville, the Chairman, Deputy Chairman, and Secretary 
of the East India Company, N. B. Edmonstone, Esq., Lieutenant-Colonel 
Meyrick Shaw, Sir Robert Campbell, Bart., Sir Charles Forbes, Bart., 
the Right Honourable S. R. Lushington, M. P., T. Cockburn, Esq., and 
by several other distinguished individuals, whose names will be more par- 
ticularly acknowledged in the subsequent volumes. 


Vili 


INTRODUCTION. 


As the following documents are connected with almost every part 
of this volume,* they are bere inserted. 


Proclamation at the Isle of France. 


Liberté. Egalité. 
REPUBLIQUE FRANCAISE, 
Une & indivisible. 

Ba 


PROCLAMATION. 


Anne Joseph Hyppolite Malartic, Gene- 
ral en Chef, Governeur-general des 
Isles de France & de la Reunion, & 
Commandant-general des Etablisse- 
ments Francais, a VEst du Cap de 
Bonne Esperance. 


CiToyENs, 


Connaissant depuis plusieurs 
années votre zéle & votre attach- 
ment pour les interéts & la gloire 
de notre République, nous som- 
mes tres empressés & nous nous 
faisons un devoir de vous donner 
comnaissance de toutes les propo- 
sitions que nous fait Tippoo Sul- 
taun, par deux ambassadeurs qu'il 
nous a dépéchés. 

Ce prince a écrit des lettres 
particuliéres 4 ! Assemblée Colo- 
niale 4 tous les Généraux qui 
sont employés dans ce gouverne- 
ment, & nous a addressé un pa- 
quet pour le Directoire Executif. 

J°. Il demandé 4 faire une al- 
liance offensive et défensive avec 
les Frangais, en proposant d’en- 


Liberty. 
THE FRENCH REPUBLIC, 
One and indivisible. 


——— 


PROCLAMATION. 


Equality. 


Anne Joseph Hyppolite Malartic, Com- 
mander in Chiefand Governor-General 
of the Isles of France and Reunion, and 
of all the French estublishments to the 
eastward of the Cape of Good Hope. 


CitTIzENs, 


Having for several years known 
your zeal and your attachment 
to the interests, and to the glory 
of our Republic, we are very 
anxious, and we feel it a duty to 
make you acquainted with all 
the propositions which have been 
made to us by Tippoo Sultaun, 
through two ambassadors whom 
he has despatched to us. 

This prince has written parti- 
cular letters to the Colonial As- 
sembly ; to all the generals em- 
ployed under this government; 
and has addressed to us a packet 
for the Executive Directory. 

1. He desires to form an of- 
fensive and defensive alliance 
with the French, and proposes 


* See Governor-General’s Minute of the 12th August, 1798. 


INTRODUCTION. xi 


tretenir A ses frais, tant que la 
guerre durera dans J]’Inde, les 
troupes qu’on pourra lui envoyer. 

2°. Il promet de fournir toutes 
les choses necessaires pour faire 
cette guerre, excepté le Vin & 
YPEau de Vie, dont il se trouve 
absolument dénué. 

3°. Tl assure que tous les pré- 
paratifs sont faits pour recgevoir 
les secours qu’on lui donnera, & 
qu’a larrivée des troupes, les 
Chefs & Officiers trouveront 
toutesles choses necessaires pour 
faire une guerre a laquelle les 
Européens sont peu accoutumés. 


4°. Enfin il n’attend plus que 
le moment ou les Frangais vien- 
dront a son secours, pour dé- 
clarer la guerre au Anglais, de- 
sirant avec ardeur pouvoir les 
chasser de UInde. 

Comme il nous est impossible 
de diminuer le nombre des sol- 
dats des 107e. & 108e. regimens, 


& de la garde soldée du Port de — 


la Fraternité, a cause des secours 
que nous avons envoyés 4 nos al- 
liés les Hollandais ; nous invitons 
tous les citoyens de bonne vo- 
lonté, a se faire inscrire dans 
leurs municipalités respectives, 
pour aller servir sous les dra- 
peaux de Tippoo. 

Ce prince desire aussi avoir 
des citoyens de couleur, libres, 


to maintain at his charge, as long 
as the war shall last in India, the 
troops which may be sent to him. 

2. He promises to furnish eve- 
ry necessary for carrying on the 


‘war, wine and brandy excepted, 


with which he is wholly unpro- 
vided. 

3. He declares that he has 
made every preparation to re- 
ceive the succours which may be 
sent to him, and that on the ar- 
rival of the troops, the command- 
ers and officers will find every 
thing necessary for making a 
war, to which Europeans are but 
little accustomed. 

4. Ina word he only waits the 


‘moment when the French shall 


come to his assistance, to declare 
war against the English, whom 


he ardently desires to expel from 


India. 

As it is impossible for us to 
reduce the number of soldiers of 
the 107th and 108th regiments, 
and of the regular guard of Port 
Fraternité, on account of the 
succours which we have fur- 
nished to our allies the Dutch ; 
we invite the citizens, who may be 
disposed to enter as volunteers, to 
enrol themselves in their respec- 
tive municipalities, and to serve 
under the banners of Tippoo. 

This prince desires also to be 
assisted by the free citizens of 


x INTRODUCTION. 


& nous invitons tous. ceux qui 
voudront aller servir sous ses 
drapeaux, a se faire aussi in- 
scrire. 

Nous pouvons assurer tous les 
citoyens qui se feront inscrire, 
que Tippoo leur fera des traite- 
ments avantageux qui seront 
fixés avec ses ambassadeurs qui 
s’engageront en outre, au nom 
de leur souverain, a ce que les 
Frangais qui auront pris parti 
dans ses armées, ne puissent ja- 
mais y etre retenus quand ils 
voudront rentrer dans leur patrie. 


Fait au Port Nord-Ouest, le 10 
Pluviose, Pan six de la Répub- 
lique Frangaise, une & indivi- 
sible. 


(Signé) Ma artic. 


colour, we therefore invite all 
such who are willing to serve un- 


‘der his flag, to enrpl themselves. 


We can assure all the citizens 
who shall enrol themselves, that 
Tippoo will allow them .an ad- 
vantageous rate of pay, the terms 
of which will be fixed with his 
ambassadors, who will further 
engage in the name of their so- 
vereign, that all Frenchmen who 
shall enter into his armies, shall 
never be detained after they 
shall have expressed a wish to 


return to their own country. 


Done at Port North West, 
the 30th January, 1798. 


(Signed) Matartic. 


Tippoo Sultaun to Sir John Shore. 


Received at Fort William, 26th April, 1798.* 


“J have been favoured with your letter, notifying your in- 
tention of returning to Europe, and the nomination of Lord 
Mornington, who is of rank to the office of Governor-General, 
in whom the same disposition would be manifested with your- 
self to cultivate and improve the friendship and good under- 


& 


+e 


* N. B—On the 26th of April, 1798, (the day on which this letter was 
received at Calcutta) Tippoo Sultaun’s Ambassadors landed at Mangalore, 
accompanied by the French force, levied under the above proclamation :— 
The Earl of Mornington landed at Fort St. George from England, on the 


same day—the 26th April, 1798. 


INTRODUCTION. xi 


standing subsisting between the two states, and an inviola- 
ble adherence to the engagements by which they are con- 
nected. It is very well; you must impress Lord Mornington 
with a sense of the: friendship and unanimity so firmly 
subsisting between us, and constantly favour me with letters 
communicating your health and welfare.” : 
[In another letter from Tippoo Sultaun received also at 
Fort William on the 26th of April, 1798, and relating solely 
to Wynaad, Tippoo thus concludes. ] 
_ “Believing my friendly heart disposed to pay every regard 
to truth and justice, and to strengthen the foundations of 
harmony and concord established between the two states, I 
hope you will always gratify me by letters notifying your 
welfare.” : 


ERRATA. 


Page 8, 1, 19, for enemy, read army. 

31, L 10, for J conceive, read I consider. 

$2, 1, 13, for can be imagined, read it would afford, 

37, 1. 8, 9, and 16, for Omdal, read Onadat; Zulfatéer, Zulfiker; Tung, Jung; and 

Surdan, Surdar. 

39, 1. 15, after ** Memorandum Fort St. George,” read “ by the Governor.General.” 
41, after “ Miaute by Governor-General on Tanjore,” read * Fort William.” 

43, 1. 11 from bottom, for Residency, read Presidency. 

53, 1. 9 from bottom, for murthered, read murdered. 

59, 1. 6, for Kauntamunghe and Coloorbojce, read Kautnamungile and Coloorbajee. 
61, note, for Sept. 1798, read 16th Oct. 1798. 

76, 1.11 from bottom, for Guguihelés, read Gugulhelédy. 

80, 1. 6, for impudence, read imprudence, 
129, 1. 6, for “* Peishwa,’”’ read “ Nizam.” 

172, 1, 23, for or, read and act of war, 

176,1. 11 from bottem, for practical, read practicable, 

178, note, for see Appendix, read see page, 214. 

187, 1, 12 and 22 from bottom, for Makda Row, read Madhoo Row. 

208, at the end, “I am, &c.” tu be expunged. 

214, in the address of the Letter from Fort St. George, for K. B. read K. P. 

266, 12 lines from bottom, for Nussuz, read Nussur. 

272, 6 lines from tbhottom, for Yah, read Jah. 

333, 1. 16 from bottom, for Stewart, read Stezast. 

343, 1. 8 from bottom, for when you will recollect, ‘‘ when you recollect.” 

383, 1. 6, a full stop at ‘* understoood.” 

sgl, 1. 17, for Governor, General, read Governor in Council. 

404, 1,19 from bottom, for Delphi, read Deihi. 

484 1, 3 from bottom, for surety, read secrecy. 

487 1. 2, before endanger, read not, 

541, 1. 14 from bottom, for Jaghurs, read Jaghires. 

646 last line, for sensation, read sensations. 

547, end of 1,2 and 8 sections of paragraph 34, read pagodas ; also inparagraph 45, p. 650 
554, 1, 21 and 283, for sterling, read star. 

567, 1. 23, for this, read his. 

569, 1, 2 from bottom, (in note), for his, read its. 

592, next page, for 698, read 593. 

599, 1. 22, for CCIV. read CCXIV. 
621, 1. 14, omit own before acquaintance. 
655, 1. 21, for Nemdydroog, read Nundydroog. 


ERRATA, APPENDIX. 
Page 667, L. 4, far Motta Falou, read Motee Talou. 


1. 16, for Kerkarab, read Hirkarah, 
2 U sheet, for page 667, read 657, atid sv on. 


CONTENTS OF VOL. I. 


From 
Addington, Hon. Henry 
Anstruther, Sir John, 

Chief Justice. 

Do. 


Baird, Major-Gen. 

Bombay Jnhabitants Ad- 
dress (with Reply) 

Calcutta Inhabitants Ad- 
dress (with Reply) 


Clarke, Lt.-Gen. Sir ‘Alured 


Do. 


10. 
Clive, Lord 
Do. 


0. 
Commons, House of, 

Thanks of 
Cornwallis, Marquis 

Do. 

Do. 


Do. i 
Craig, Maj.-Gen.Sir J. H. . 
0. 


Directors, Secret Com- 
mittee of the Court of 
ary 10.8 
Duncan, Hon. Jonathan 
De. 


‘ Do. 


Te 


Oo 
- Earl of Mornington =. 


Date. 


5th Oct.1799 . 632 

: do. . 27 Mar. — 506 

. do. - 17 May — 589 

. do. . 27 June — . 598 

. do. - 3Aug. — . 624 

do. . 21 Aug. — 627 

do. 5 Mar. — 481 

- do. . 8 Mar. — 482 

E do. .17May — 590 

. Earl of Mornington . 22 Aug. — 222 

- Rt. Hon. Henry Dundas. 8 Sept. — 251 

. Earl of Mornington . 1) Sept. — 255 

do. . 22 Sept. — . 267 

. do. . 240ct. — . 309 

. do. . 29 Oct. — 317 

do. . 29 Nov. — 361 

(Memorandum) . 28Nov. — . 361 

do. .17 Dec. — . 380 

. do. . 31 Dec. — 389 

. Secret Committee of the 17 April — . 566 
Court of Directors. 

. Rt. Hon, Henry Dundas 11 May — _ . 576 

. Court of Directors .16May — . 588 

: do. . 40ct. — . 633 

. Nabob of Arcot . 17 Oct. 1797 . 36 

. Earlof Mornington . 18 Mar. — . 493 

. do. . 20 Sept. — . 598 

do. . 2 Mar. 1800 . 630 

do. . 26 Sept. — . 269 

do. . 6Oct. — 278 

do. - 13 Oct. — 299 

. do. . 13 Oct. — 304 

; do. . 15 Nov. — 345 

: do. . 15 Nov. — 346 

: do . 13 Dec. — . 365 

do. . 12 Jan. 1799 . 403 

do. .24May — . 593 

do. .18dJune — 61 

do. -18June — . 614 

do. . 23 May 1798 . 39 

do. - 2Aug. — 150 

. do. . 31 Oct, — 320 

‘ do. . 25 May — 595 

do. . 20Nov. — 348 

2 . do. -13Aug. — . 599 

P do. . 27 Nov. — 601 


216 Dundas, Rt. Hon. Henry 
217 Do. 
174 Floyd, Major-General 
Note. . 10. 
7 George Ill. 
Note. Govr.Genl. in Council, 
Fort William. 


Do. Govr. in Council, Fort 
St. George. 

Do. Gov. Genl. in Council, 
Fort William. 

Do. Do. 

Do. Gov. in Council, Fort 
St. George. 

57 Gov. Gen. in Council 
118 Governor in Council 
130 Gov. Gen. in Council 
140 | Do. 

202 Do. 
209 | Do. 

18 Harris, Lieut.-Gencral 

20 Do. 

23 Do. 

33 Do. 
38 Do. 
40 Do. 
Note. | Do. 
45 Do. 
88 Do. 

131 Do. 

146 Do. 

163 Do. 

168 Do. 

170 Do. 

172 Do. 

179 Do. 

186 Do. 

187 _ Do. 

193 “Do. 

194 Do. 

196 Do. 

200 Do. 

Note Do. 
1 Mornington, Earl of 
2 Do. 
3 7 Do. 
4 ; Do. 
8 2 Do. 
10 _ Do. 

13 _ Do. 

M4 _ Do 

15 Do. 

17 Do: 

19 _ Do. 

22 Do. 

25 Do. 

26 Do. 

27 Do. 

28 Do. 

30 Do. 


. Earl of Mornington 
a do. 


CONTENTS. 


. 18 Mar. — 
do.. . 10 April — 
do. . 26 Aug. — 

. . Nabob of Arcot Oct. 1797 


. Gov. in Council, Fort 


St. George.. 

. Earl of Mornington . 10 July 
. Goy. of Fort St.George . 13 July 
0. . 20 July 

. Earl of Mornington 3 Aug. 

. Lieut.-Gen. Harris - 10 Aug. 
: (Proclamation) 2 Jan. 

< (General Orders) . 2 Feb. 

+ (Declaration of War) . 22 Feb. 

+ (General Orders) . 15 May 

a 24 May 


ot (do.) 
. Earl of Mornington 


do... - 6IJuy — 
do. 6July — 
. _ do. -idduly — 
oe . 22duly — 
29 July — 
eit Minute, Pe St. George) 3lduly — 
. Earl of Mornington 7 Aug. — 
. lo. . 2990ct. — 
3 do.. . 2 Feb. 1799 
do. . 25 Feb, — 
do. . 27 Mar. =— 
, do.. 5 April — 
do. - 7 April — 
. do.. 9 April — 
. do. 22 April — 
do 27 April — 
do. 28 April — 
do. 4May — 
» do. 7May — 
do. 9May — 
do. 13 May — 
do. 27 dune — 
+ Re. Hon. Hen. Dundas . 23 Feb. 1798 . 
. Secret Committee of the 
Court of Directors. 25 Feb, — 
. Rt.Hon Hen. Dundas . 28 Feb. 
. The Nabob of Arcot. 27 April — 
- (Memdm. on Carnatic 
Affairs.) _-8May — 
+ (Minute on Tanjore). 31 May — 
. Lieut.-Gen. Harris - 9June — 
. (Minute, Financial)  .12June — 
- Tippoo Sultann -M4Jdune — 
. Lieut.-Gen. Harris - 20 June — 
. do. - 26Jane — 
: Re. Hon. Hen. Dundas . 6 July — 
. Capt. J. A. Kirkpatrick. SJulp — 
- Hon. Jon. Duncan 8 July _ 
. Lieut.-Col. Wm. Palmer = 8 July — 
. ; do.. 8 July eer 
. Lieut.-Gen. Stuart 44 July — 


1799 


. 29 Dec. 1798 . 


"90 June 1798 . 2 


. 23 June 1798 . 


oe + wo we 


Mornington, East of 
t 


CONTENTS, 


« Lieut.-Col. Wm. Palmer 14 July 
. Captain Kirkpatrick . 14 July 
. Lieut.-Gen. Harris . 15 July 
« Lieut.-Col.Wm. Palmer 18 July 
. Lieut.-Gen. Harris . 18 July 
. Captain Kirkpatrick . 18 July 
- (Min. in Cncil, Ft. Wm.) 20 July 
. Colondl William Palmer 25 July 
. Lord Clive . 29 July 
. Resident at Lucknow 6 Aug. 
. Tippoo Sultaun - 7 Aug. 
« Lieut.-Col. W. Palmer . 9 Aug. 
. Captain Kirkpatrick . 1] Aug. 
. (Minute in the Secret 
Department.)’ 12 Aug. 

. Captain Kirkpatrick  . 14 Aug. 
. Lieut.-Gen. Harris . 16 Aug. 
. do. . 19 Aug. 
. Lieut.-Col.Wm. Palmer 19 Aug. 
. Captain Kirkpatrick  . 20 Aug. 
. Hon. Crt. of Directors . 23 Aug. 
. Govt, of Fort St. George 29 Aug. 
. Rear-Admiral Rainier . 29 Aug. 
. Captain Kirkpatrick  . 31 Aug. 
. Lieut.Col. Wm. Palmer. 9 Sept. 
. Lieut.-Col. J. Collins . 15 Sept. 
. Maj.-Gen. Sir J. Creig . 16 Sept. 
. Captain Malcolm - 20 Sept. 
. Lord Clive - 20 Sept. 
. Resident at Lucknow . 21 Sept. 
. Lord Clive . 24 Sept. 
» Chairman of E.I.Comp. — Oct. 
. Secret Committee 1 Oct. 
- Hon. J. Duncan . 8 Oct. 
. Resident at Lucknow . 10 Oct. 
. Rt. Hon. Hen. Dundas . 11 Oct. 
. Resident at Lucknow . 18 Oct. 
. Hon. Jonathan Duncan . 24 Oct. 

. Lieut.-Col. John Collins 26 Oct. 
. Maj.-Gen. Sir J.H.Craig 27 Oct. 
- Robert Brooke, Esq. . 30 Oct. 
. Captain Kirkpatrick 2 Nov. 
. Tippoo Sultaun 4 Nov. 
. Lord Clive 5 Nov. 
. Tippoo Sultaun 8 Nov. 

. Captain Kirkpatrick 9 Nov. 
. Resident at Poonah . 10 Nov. 
. Rt. Hon. Hen. Dundas . 12 Nov. 

. Lord Clive . 14 Nov. 
. Hon. Court of Directors 21 Nov. 
. Tippoo Sultaun . 10 Dee. 
« Lord Clive . 10 Dec. 

. Rear-Admiral Rainier . 13 Dec. 

. (Minute in the Secret 

Department) - 14 Dec. 

. do. - 22 Dec. 

. J. Lumsden, Esq. . 23 Dec. 
. Hon. Court of Directors 2 Jan. 1 
. Tippoo Sultaun - 9 Jan. 

. Resident at Poonah - 11 Jan. 

. Hon. Court of Directors 13 Jan. 

. Major Bannerman - 16 Jan, 


LEE OE esi So Mar bri pha 


1798 . 129 


Plas CAE heed | 


xy 
¢ 
© 


iid | 


. lag 
». 132 
’ 134 
» 135 
- 143 
. 241 
. 147 
« 223 
. 163 
. 4 
- 157 
- 158 


. 159 
. 209 
. 211 
. 217 
. 219 
. 221 
. 233 
. 234 
. 248 
. 249 
52 
. 257 
. 261 
. 264 
. 265 
. 266 
. 268 
. 274 
. 275 
. 285 
. 287 
. 288 
- 305 


oo Oo 69 OS 
Qe sS 
CORED 


. $21 


Oo 
wv 
AN 


. 328 
. 337 
. 339 
. 344 
. 351 


&9 & 
Dn 
BB 


« 368 


» 371 
. 384 
. 386 
. 391 
. 394 
. 406 
. 407 
« 412 


126 Morhingtoh, Earl of 
127 Do. 


128 Do. 
129 Do. 
132 Do. 
133 Do. 
134 Do. 
135 Do. 
137 Do. 
138 Do. 
139 Do. 
M1 Do. 
142 Do. 
143 Do. 
144 Do. 
145 Do. 
147 Do. 
148 Do. 
149 Do. 
150 Do. 
Vl Do. 
155 Do. 
157 Do. 
158 Do. 
160 Do. 
161 Do. 
162 Do. 
165 Do. 
166 Do. 
167 Do. 
169 Do. 
171 Do. 
173 . Do. 
175 Do. 
176 Do. 
77 Do. 
178 Do. 
180 Do. 
Note. Do. 
181 Do. 
182 - Da. 
183 Do. 
184 Do. 
185 Do. 
188 Do. 
189 Do. 
190 Do. 
191 Do. 
195 Do. 
198 Do, 
199 Do. 
201 Do. 
203 Do. 
207 Do. 
211 Do. 
219 Do. 


220 Madras Inhabitants Ad- 
dress (with Reply) 
Intrd. ‘Matartic, General 
71 Nizam, The 
ll North, Hon, Frederick 


CONTENTS, xv 
. Tippoo Sultaun - 16 Jan: 1799 . 413 
. Resident at Hyderabad. 2lJan. -— . 418 
. Rear Admiral Rainier . 21 Jan. — . 420 
. Resident at Hyderabad . 22 Jan. -—- . 422 
. Lieut.-Gen. Harris 3Feb. — 426 
. Hon. Jonathan Duncan . 5 Feb. — . 428 
. Hon. Court of Directors 12 Feb. — . 429 
. Hon. Jonathan Duncan . 13 Feb. — 432 
. Hon. Court of Directors 13 Feb. — 434 
. Resident at Poonah -19Feb. — . 439 
. Lieut.-Gen, Harris . 22 Feb, — 442 
. ‘tippoo Sultaun .22Feb. — . 453 
. Lieut.-Gen. Harris °. 22Feb. — . 454 
2 do. . BFeb. — 465 
. The Peishwa | 24Feb, — . 466 
. Lieut.-Gen. Stuart . 24 Feb. — 469 
. Lieut.-Gen. Harris . 25Feb, — . 472 
. Earl of Macartney . 26Feb, — . 473 
. Colonel Wm, Palmer 3Mar. — .°475 
. Captain Kirkpatrick / 3Mat. — . 477 
. _H. Colebrook, Esq. . 3Mar, — 479 
. Lt.-Gen.Sir AluredClarke 8 Mar, — . 487 
. Haujee Khulleel - 15 Mar, — . 492 
. Rear-Admital Rainier . 16Mar, — 492 
. Resident at Poonah .19Mar, — . 494 
. Hon. Court of Directors 20 May. — . 495 
. Lieut. Gen. Stuart . 21 Mar, — . 504 
. R. Liston, Esq. 1April — . 509 
. Colonel Palmer 3 April — . 509 
. Ligut.-Gen. Harvis 3 April — . 518 
. Colonel Wm, Palmer 7Aprii — . 517 
. Hon. Jonathan Duncan . 7 April — . 518 
- , Commrs. of Malabar . JOApril — . 523 
. Lieut.-Gen. Harris . WApil — 527 
. Sir Alured Clarke 17 April — . 528 
- , Court of Directors . 20April — . 528 
. Secret Committee of the 22 April —~ . 535 
Hon. Crt. of Directors. 
. Lieut.-Gen. Harris . 23 April — . 538 
. General Harris . BApril — 581 
. Nabob of the Carnatic . 24April — . 541 
. Hon. Jonathan Duncan. 24 Apri! — . 555 
. Colonel Palmer . 2 Apyd — . 556 
. ‘Major Bannerman . 2 April — . 558 
- , Lieut.~Gen: Harris © . 26Aprit — . 558 
F do. . 2Aprit — . 561 
. Hoh. Jonathan Dancan . 30 April — . 562 
. Lieut.-Gen. Harris . 30April — . 565 
. Lt.-Gen.SirAluredClarke 30 April — 565 
. Hon. Jonathan Duncan . ‘ay — . 574 
. Hon. Court of Directors 11 May — . 577 
. hieut.-Gen: Harris .12May — 578 
: do. .15May — , 584 
. Right Hon. H. Dundas . 16 May — | 587 
. Seert. Com. Ct. Dirctrs. I9May — | 591 
. Hon.Court of Directors. 6 June — 596 
. Rt. Hon. H. Dundas June — , 616 
. Earl of Mornington . 26June — 621 
. (Proclam., Mauritius). epee 
: Earl of Mornington . 27 Sept. — . 270 
do. 3June 1798 50 


XVI CONTENTS. 


12 North,Hon. Frederick . Earl of Mornington 4» SJune 1798. 51 
24 Do. ‘ do. . 7Iuy — 93 
89 Do. : do. .290ct. — . 319 
156 Read, Lieut.-Col. s do. . 12 Mar. 1799 . 491 
Note. Selim Sultaun | . Tippoo Sultaun , 20 Sept. — 44 
Note. Shore, Sir John — . Earlof Mornington . 7 Mar.1798 . 602 
95 Smith, Spencer : do. . Nov. — . 324 
154 Stuart, Lieut.-General do. . 8 Mar. 1799 . 483 
29 “Tippoo, Sultaun . do. . recd.10 July 1728 . 127 
- Do. ; do. rey erie’ pet Mg 
72° Do. ‘ do. : duted: a 8ene te. 273 
84 Do. : do. . 24Oct. 1798 . 310 
103 Do. . Governor-General -15Dec. — . 347 
14 Do. . Earlof Mornington .18Dec. — . 381 
120 Do. : do. - 2Jan. 1799 . 393 
136 Do. 2 do. -13Feb. — . 433 
_ Do. . Sir John Shore : 
Intrd. Do. . French Directory : 
5 Wales, Prince of . Nabob of Arcot - 14 Oct. 1797 . 35 
21 Webbe, Mr. Josias . Lt.-General Harris . 6 July 1798 . 72 
APPENDIX. 


A.—Major Kirkpatrick’s Answers to Lord Mornington’s Queries. 

B.—Létter from J. Bosanquet, Esq. to the Hon. J. Duncan, a 1 | Sane 
‘1798 ; 

C.— Captain Malcolm’ 8 present state of Tippoo Sultaun 5 ; 

D,—Letter from Zemaun Shah to Sir John Shore, received 3 June 1798—~ 
from Zéemaun Shah to Mr. Lumsden, received 27 May 1798 

E,—-Memoir, with Observations onthe probable invasion of Zemaun Shah, 
by Major-General Sir James Craig 

F,*—-Hyderabad Treaty, 1 September 1798 

F.—Memorandum relative to the late French comps in the Deccan, by 
‘Captain Malcolm © a 

G.—Buonaparte’s Letter to Tippoo Sultaun 

H.—Proctamation du Generali Buonaparte, at Cairo-—Mr. Waney to Lord 
Grenville—Mr. Secretary Dundas to do.—Secret Intelligence from 
Frankfort—Importance of Egypt to the French—Earl of Morning- 
‘ton to Scirdiah—Militia Orders, Fort William, Dec. 21, 1798— 
Right Hon. H. Dundas to the Governor General . 

I.—Major-General Baird to Lieutenant General Harris 

K.—Statement of the force composing the ost army wader Lieutenant- 
‘General Harris 

-L.—General return of the troops belonging to the Presidency of Bombay 

M.~—General return of killed and wounded near Sedaseer, March 6, 1799 

N.—General return of killed and wounded near Mallavilly, March, 27, 
1799 c 

O.—Abstract of the returns of the army under. Lieutenant-General Harris 

P,—Géneral return of killed and wounded before ain tie am 

Q.— Abstract of ordnance, &c. in Seringapatam 

R.—Memorandum respecting prize property captured at Seringapatam 

8.—The Sirear Coudadad to the Executive Directory—Note of the 

‘Proposals of the Ambassadors to the Executive Directory 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


“Portrait to face Title-page.——Map of India to face Dedication .—— 


Plan of Seringapatam to face First page. 


= L_ 


Pt) Gee a, 
WSxylination. = 


—— — 


Me = 
Qos! or THe attack ) 
won the 


 sNerth wart Angle 
( ver nanal oy Ff y 


DESPATCHES, 
MINUTES, AND CORRESPONDENCE, 


&e. &e. &e. 
INDIA. 


No. I. 
To the Right Hon. Henry Dundas, President of the Board of Control, &c. 


My Dear Sir, : Cape of Good Hope, 23 Feb. 1798. 


Among the subjects which you recommended to my early 
consideration upon my arrival in India, you particularly 
urged the necessity of my attending with the utmost de- 
gree of vigilance to the system, now pursued almost uni- 
versally by the native princes, of retaining in their service 
numbers of European or American officers, under whom the 
native troops are trained and disciplined in imitation of the 
corps of sepoys in the British service. By accident I found 
at this place, on account of his health, Major Kirkpatrick 
lately Resident at the Court of Hyderabad, and formerly at 
that of Scindiah, and I have endeavoured during the period 
of my detention here to collect from him whatever informa- 
tion he could furnish respecting the European or American 
officers and the corps commanded by them in the service of 
the Nizam. For this purpose after several conversations on 
the subject; I requested Major Kirkpatrick to return detailed 
answers in writing to several questions which I drew with the 
intention of bringing under your observation not only the 
actual strength but the original object of this part of the 
Nizam’s military establishment, its rapid increase, the con- 
sequences to be expected from its continuance or further 
growth, as well as the means which either had been or might 
be suggested for averting any danger which those conse- 
quences might threaten to our interests in India. I transmit 

VOL. I. B 


2 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO 23 Feb. 


with this Letter a copy of my questions and of Major Kirk- 
patrick’s answers,* and although I am aware that the sub- 
stance of both must be familiar to you, yet imagining that it 
may hitherto have come under your notice only incidentally 
in detached despatches and advices from India, I think it 
may be useful to lay before you in a more regular and con- 
nected form a view of this most material and (in my judg- 
ment) formidable branch of the system to which you have 
directed my attention. In this Letter, I shall endeavour 
to recapitulate the most. important- facts stated by Major 
Kirkpatrick, adding such observations as have occurred to 
me upon them, in the hope of receiving from you at an early 
period, your instructions upon such points as the materials 
before you can enable you to determine. 

_It appears that. the Nizam had recently at different periods 
retained in his service, exclusive of our detachment, three 
distinct corps of sepoys under the command of European 
or American officers: one commanded by a Frenchman of 
the name of Raymond, another by an American of the name 
of Boyd, and a third by an Irishman of the name of Finglass, 
for some time a Quarter-Master in the 19th Regiment of 
Dragoons. 

The corps of Boyd and Finglass were taken into the service 
of the Nizam during the residence of Azim ul Omra at 
Poonah, at the suggestion of our Resident at that Court, 
acting under the sanction of the Government of Bengal. 
This measure was taken by our Resident and by that Govern- 
ment principally with a view of forming a counterpoise to the 
corps of Raymond. Boyd’s corps consisted of about 1800 
men, it is no longer in the service of the Nizam, and has 
probably passed into that of the Mahrattas. Finglass’s 
corps still remains at Hyderabad, but consists of only one 
battalion of about 800 men. Both these corps appeared to 
be well affected to our interests, as may be judged by their 
willingness to assist our detachment in repelling an expected 
attack from the corps of Raymond. The corps of Raymond 
had been in. the service of the Nizam before the last war 
with Tippoo Sultaun, and in 1792 its strength was not more 
than 1500 men at the highest estimation, at the battle of 


— 


* See Appendix A, 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 3 


Khurdlah in 1795 its strength amounted to no less than 
11,000 men, it now consists of 10,000 men, and the order has 
actually been given for augmenting it to the number of 14,000 
men. Attached to this corps is a train of artillery of about 
30 field pieces, and a troop of 80 native dragoons. The 
discipline of the corps does not appear to be by any means 
good, and accordingly it has never yet rendered any distin- 
guished service in the field. 

The pay of the corps is now secured by the assignment of 
a large district of country, part of which borders the Carnatic; 
at this particular station is a fortified post, and constant com- 
munication is maintained between it and the port of Narpilly, 
as well as with Ongole and other parts of the territories of 
the Company and of the Nabob of Arcot. The corps is re- 
cruited in the proportion of one-third of its total numbers, 
from our territories and from those of the Nabob of Arcot, 
and partly from deserters abandoning our service. The chief 
officers are Frenchmen of the most virulent and notorious 
principles of jacobinism; and the whole corps constitutes an 
armed French party of great zeal, diligence and activity. The 
efforts of this party are continually directed to the object of 
magnifying the power, resources, and success of France in 
the eyes of the Court of Hyderabad, and of depreciating the 
character, force and credit of Great Britain by every possible 
means. 

The detachment of this corps stationed on our frontier has 
been very assiduous with great success in seducing from their 
duty our sepoys quartered in the neighbourhood—a consider- 
able desertion lately took place in one of our native regiments 
on its march from Masulipatam to the southward, and many 
of the deserters on that occasion are to be found in Raymond’s 
corps. No positive proof has yet appeared of a direct cor- 
respondence between the leaders of this corps and the French 
Government, but it seems to be unquestionably certain that 
they communicate with Tippoo Sultaun and with the French 
corps in his service. Whatever may be the discipline or 
military skill of this corps, it now forms by far the most con- 
siderable part of the Nizam’s military establishment. In this 
corps consists the main strength of the army of our ally; and 
it possesses the influence'which usually belongs to an army in 
the councils of the native princes of India. This influence 


4 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO 23 Feb. 


_seems to have alarmed Azim ul Omra the first minister of the 
Nizam; neither the origin nor the subsequent augmentations 
of this corps appear to have been at all connected with any 
hostile disposition in the Court of Hyderabad towards the 
British interests. The institution of the corps proceeded 
from an admiration of the. successful policy of Mahdajee 
Scindiah and the subsequent augmentation was directed prin- 
cipally if not solely against the Mahrattas. There is reason 
to believe that the orders lately given for a further increase 
of the corps to the number of 14,000 men arose from a desire 
in the mind of Azim ul Omra of drawing us into a more inti- 
mate connection with the Nizam, by exciting our jealousy of 
the growing influence of the French party at Hyderabad. 

Such is the state of the leading facts communicated by 
Major Kirkpatrick. The result in my mind is a decided 
opinion, that the continuance, and still more the further 
growth of the corps of Raymond ought to be prevented by 
every means within our power, consistent with the respect 
due to the Court of Hyderabad, and with the general prin- 
ciples of moderation and justice, which ought to form the rule 
of our conduct in India. The dangers to be apprehended 
from the existence of this corps are not to be estimated by a 
consideration of its actual state of discipline, or even of its 
actual numbers, or degree of present influence over the coun- 
cils of the Nizam. I consider it as the basis of a French 
party in India, on which, according to the opportunities of 
fortune and the variation of events, the activity of the enemy 
may found a strength of the most formidable kind either in 
peace or war. If we are to look to the settlement of peace; 
can it be possible to provide a more ready channel for the 
intrigues of France, than would be offered by the existence 
of a body of 10,000 men, united by military discipline, and 
stationed in the dominions of one of our principal allies, and 
on the borders of our own? If the war is to continue in 
Europe without extending to the continent of India in the 
first instance, the danger of French intrigue acting with such 
an instrument as I have described, would be greatly aggra- 
vated. But if the war should extend to the continent of 
India, and if we should be under the necessity of calling forth 
the strength of our allies to assist us in any contest with 
Tippoo, what assistance could we expect from the Nizam, the 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 5 


main body of whose army would be officered by Frenchmen, | 
or by the agents of France, and the correspondents of Tippoo 

himself.* Jn such a situation it would be difficult to deter- 

mine whether our danger would be greater from an entire 

desertion of our cause by the Court of Hyderabad, or from 

our acceptance of the only species of support which its mili- 

tary force could offer us in the field. But I confess I carry 

my opinion upon this subject still farther. I have no doubt 

that the natural effect of the unchecked and rapid growth of 
such a party at the court of one of our principal allies must 

be in a very short period to detach that Court entirely from 

our interests, and finally to fix it in those of our enemies, to 

subject its councils to their control, and its military establish- 
ments to their direction. However despicable the corps of 
Raymond may now be in point of discipline or effect in the 
field, would it be wise to leave such a large body of men in 
readiness to receive whatever improvements the ability, assi- 
duity and zeal of French officers, sent from Europe for that 
express purpose, might introduce into the constitution of a. 
corps, so prepared by correspondent principles and objects 
to meet the most sanguine expectations of their new leaders. 
Under these circumstances, the corps, which perhaps now 
has little more efficiency than that of a political party, might 
soon become in the hands of our enemy as efficient a military 
force, as it is now in that view wholly useless either to the 
Nizam or to us. 

I desire to add one more consideration; must not the con- 
tinuance of such a corps in the service of our ally tend to 
raise the hopes of Tippoo, and in the same proportion to dis- 
parage us in the eyes of all the native princes of India? That 
it has tended to encourage Tippoo, I have no doubt, and his 
correspondence with the leaders of the corps will sufficiently 
shew in what light he views them. Perhaps I have dwelt too 
long on this part of the subject, where the proof of the weak 
policy of suffering such an evil, as I have described, to in- 
crease without check or disturbance seems to require no la- 
bour of argument. 

A more interesting and difficult consideration will be to 


* The correspondence of M. Raymond with Tippoo was subsequently 
proved by means of a letter found in the palace of Seringapatam among 
the other papers, after the death of Tippoo. 


6 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO 23 Feb. 


devise for remedying this evil some means which shall not 
expose our interest to as great a danger as that which we 
wish to avoid. In the paper transmitted with this letter four 
distinct measures are proposed for consideration with a view 
to the desirable object of subverting the French party at the 
Court of the Nizam. The first is to introduce British sub- 
jects, or others (being the subjects of friendly powers) into 
the military service of the Nizam for the purpose of forming 
a balance against Raymond’s corps. ‘This measure has al- 
ready been partially attempted by the introduction of the 
corps of Boyd and Finglass at Hyderabad, but it has failed 
of success in the case of Boyd, who upon some quarrel with 
the Court has left the service of the Nizam. I do not think 
this measure likely to be effectual to any good purpose, and 
- it might even aggravate the evil which it is proposed to re- 
move. A party so consolidated and united as that of Ray- 
mond’s, which has been strengthening itself for a period of 
several years at Hyderabad, and has established the means 
of recruiting and augmenting its members will not be coun- 
teracted by the irregular and desultory ‘opposition of such 
adventurers as might be induced by our encouragement to . 
seek employment in the service of the Nizam; persons of this 
description (and we cannot expect that any other will engage 
in such an undertaking) would want the system and concert 
necessary to give vigor to their operations. 

It is also difficult to suppose that the Nizam would at once 
retain in his service such a number of these persons, as could 
in any degree enter into competition with the numerous corps 
of Raymond and his adherents. But even if these objections 
did not exist against the introduction of a crowd of European 
adventurers at Hyderabad, there would remain a difficulty 
which appears to me insuperable. The impossibility of finding 
a sufficient number of such adventurers on whose principles 
any reliance could be placed; in such circumstances, our at- 
tempt to subvert the French party at Hyderabad might only 
serve to furnish it with additional recruits of other nations ; 
and I much fear that many British subjects might be found 
in India whose spirit of adventure would rather direct them 
to seek a new order of things, than to contribute to the main- 
tenance of our power. Lord Hobart has declared his objec- 
tion to this measure, but as well as I recollect his letter, his 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. q 


principal ground is the danger of improving the military dis- 
cipline of the armies of the Native Princes by furnishing them 
with European officers: unfortunately this objection now 
comes too late; the system which Lord Hobart very justly 
dreads, has been suffered gradually to gain such a strength, 
that there is scarcely a native court in India without its esta- 
blishment of European officers. 

The second measure proposed in the annexed paper, is 
nothing more, than that we should endeavour by representa- 
tion and demand to induce the Nizam to disband Raymond’s 
corps; I recommend Major Kirkpatrick’s observations on this 
head, to your particular attention. Certainly no representa- 
tion from one friendly state to another could ever be more 
solidly founded than ours might be to the Nizam in the case 
before us. But besides that Major Kirkpatrick expects no 
benefit from representation and demand unconnected with 
the offer of some advantage to the Nizam; I doubt whether 
our manifesting in the first instance the extent of our anxiety 
for the dismission of Raymond's corps, might not embarrass 
us in the progress of the most effectual measures for that 
desirable end; at present the Court of Hyderabad seems 
willing to purchase a closer connection with us by great sacri- 
fices, and if that connection should not appear objectionable 
on other grounds, it may probably take place on much more 
advantageous terms to us, if we grant it as a matter of favour 
to the solicitation of the Nizam, than if we commence the 
negociation by demanding the dismission of any part.of the 
Nizam’s military establishment. This observation will be 
better understood, when I come to take notice of the fourth 
measure proposed by Major Kirkpatrick. Before I leave 
this article I must however remark that I. should not be 
satisfied by obtaining the modification ‘hinted by Major 
Kirkpatrick, namely, that the French officers or other Euro- 
peans in Raymond’s corps should be dismissed, and their 
places filled by British subjects nominated by us. This 
modification would leave the corps precisely in its present 
form with the exception of the European officers only: 
although the European officers are certainly the most objec- 
tionable part of the establishment, it may be doubted whether 
the habits and dispositions of the native officers and sepoys 
formed under their French leaders would be at once broken 


8 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO 23 Feb. 


by a mere change in the command, while every other circum- 
stance of the corps remained the same; seeing then no pros- 
pect of success from official representation or demand alone, 
and thinking it imprudent to anticipate the expected applica- 
tion of the Court of Hyderabad for a more intimate connec- 
tion with us by urging to them at this period any proposition 
the concession of which they might deem a favour, I proceed 
to examine Major Kirkpatrick’s third suggestion. This he 
states to be of a nature justifiable only by the case of an 
actual rupture with the Nizam, or of open violence on the 
part of Raymond against us; the measure is no other than 
to induce Raymond’s officers by pecuniary compensation to 
abandon the corps, on this measure it is unnecessary to say 
anything, because the cases alone to which it is meant to 
apply, neither have existed nor are now likely to happen, 
Town that I should never think it worth while, even in the 
cases supposed of a rupture with the Nizam, or of an-attack 
from Raymond, to repel the aggression by corrupting the 
officers of the hostile enemy; I trust that in either case, we 
should soon find a more certain as well as a more honourable 
mode of effectually destroying this French party and its 
adherents. 

The fourth proposition contained in Major Kirkpatrick’s 
paper, is that to which I wish to call your most particular 
attention. 

The desire of the Court of Hyderabad to obtain from us 
an increase of our detachment now serving the Nizam, and 
also an extension of the power of employing the force fur- 
nished by us, has appeared on several occasions, and you 
will find allusions to this disposition in the last secret des- 
patches from Bengal. There seems to be no objection to 
the first part of this. proposition provided our consent to it 
shall secure to us equivalent concessions on the part of the 
Nizam. In another Letter which I shall forward to you on 
the general subject of the political state of India in the pre- 
sent moment, you will find my reasons for entertaining an 
opinion that it would be a wise policy for us to check by 
timely aid the rapid declension of the Nizam’s weight among 
the powers of Hindostan; this could be done in no manner 
so effectual or unobjectionable as by furnishing him with a 
large increase of our force now in his pay; the pay of the 


1798, THB RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. -9 


augmented force to be secured in the manner best calculated 
to prevent future discussion and embarrassment. In granting 
this force to the Nizam, we ought not only to stipulate for 
the disbanding of Raymond’s corps, but we ought to take 
care that the officers should be immediately sent out of 
India. There are perhaps other points which on this occa- 
sion might be obtained from the Court of Hyderabad. The 
great difficulty which would obstruct such an arrangement 
would be, that the Nizam would probably be unwilling to part 
with Raymond’s corps, which he has the power of employing 
against any enemy, unless he could obtain powers equally ex- 
tensive with respect to the employment of any force furnished 
by us. You are aware that the British detachment now in the 
pay of the Nizam is not only restricted from acting against the 
Mahrattas in any possible case, but also from acting against 
certain Polygars tributary both to the Mahrattas and to 
the Nizam, and even from passing, without a formal permis- 
sion, certain parts of the Mahratta Territory which are in- 
termixed with the dominions of the Nizam. The object of 
.the Court of Hyderabad would of course be to obtain our 
guarantee of, its possession generally, against the Mahrattas, 
accompanied with the assistance of a large force, to be 
employed with the same extensive powers as now apply to 
the corps of Raymond. For this object I have little doubt 
that the Nizam would sacrifice the whole French party at his 
court, and even the peiscush now’ paid by us on account 
of the northern circars. But such an alteration of our con- 
nection with the Nizam would naturally raise the jealousy of 
the Mahratta powers, and might involve us in discussions 
of a very disagreeable nature if not in a war with them. 
The result therefore of this view of the subject would lead 
us to enquire, whether some arrangement might not be 
framed, founded on a modification of the views of the Court 
of Hyderabad, and comprehending certain favourite objects 
of the Mahratta States, which while it secured for us the 
destruction of the French party at Hyderabad, should tend 
to restore to the Nizam his due weight among the Indian 
powers, without exciting the animosity of the Mahrattas 
against the British Government. 
It appears to me that the only effectual mode of eradicating 
the French party at Hyderabad would be to furnish‘to the 


10 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO 23 Feb. 


Nizam such a force as'should be a just equivalent to Ray- 
mond’s corps; considering the superior discipline of our 
sepoys, I believe that 3,000 men under British command, 
not only would be, but would be deemed by the Court of 
Hyderabad, a force fully equal to that of Raymond in its 
present state. 

The instruction by which our detachment is prevented 
from acting as the troops of the Mahrattas and of the 
Nizam now act against the Polygars who pay joint tribute 
to the two powers might probably be removed by a full 
previous explanation with the Mahrattas; as that restric- 
tion does not appear to be founded on any solid principle, 
‘ nor could the removal of it open the way to any real incon- 
venience or danger to the interests of the Mahratta State. 

The power of mutually passing their intermixed boun- 
daries is now constantly exercised by the troops both of the 
Mahrattas and of the Nizam; and there is no reason to 
suppose that a formal permission would have been refused 
‘to our detachment for the same purpose, had it ever been 
demanded. But the Nizam never would allow any applica-. 
tion to be made for a permission to do that, which he held 
to be his right, and which was constantly done without 
question both by his own army and by that of Poonah. It 
is very improbable that we should find great difficulty in 
engaging the Mahrattas to place our detachment in this 
respect ona footing with the other branches of the Nizam’s 
military force, and with their own; nor can I foresee any 
tenable ground of argument on which this point could. be 
maintained against us. 

The settlement of these two points only, would, I under- 
stand, be considered as a great acquisition by the Nizam, 
and would go a great way towards inducing him to substitute 
a British force in the room of Raymond’s corps. 

The third point is of much more importance and of much 
greater delicacy and danger, I speak of the desire of the Court 
of Hyderabad to obtain our guarantee of their possessions 
against the Mahrattas: as well as against Tippoo, together 
with a right of employing defensively the troops furnished 
by us against the former as well as against the latter of these 
powers. This point. perhaps might be reconciled with the 
interests of the Mahrattas, if it were thought prudent ‘to 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. ee! 


enter into similar engagements with them, or in other words, 
to guarantee their possessions against any attack from the 
Nizam. The effect of such an engagement with both powers 
would be to place us in the situation of arbitrators between 
them; and perhaps their mutual apprehensions of our inter- 
position in the case of any aggression on either side might 
tend to restrain the resentment and ambition of both. In this 
view such a system of treaty with the Mahrattas and with 
the Nizam, so far from being liable to the objection of an 
undue interference in the disputes of the native powers of 
India, or of that description of officiousness and intriguing 
spirit which tends to foment divisions, and to occasion war, 
might be deemed the best security for the maintenance of 
the peace of India, as well as the strongest pledge of our 
disposition to preserve it from disturbance. It would also 
tend to preserve unimpaired the strength and resources of 
the two powers, on whose cooperation we must depend for 
assistance against any future attempt on the part of Tippoo: 
it cannot be a wise policy to suffer the Nizam and the Mah- 
rattas to weaken themselves by repeated contests, while 
Tippoo remains at rest; and any measure deserves attention, 
the tendency of which is to restore to the Mahrattas and 
to the Nizam their relative consideration and power as they 
stood at the conclusion of the treaty of Seringapatam. You 
will find by the last secret despatches from India,* that some 
opening has been given for our arbitration in settling the dis- 
putes between the several Mahratta chiefs, and that the 
Government of Bengal has agreed to undertake the mediation 
proposed, under the condition of a previous formal agreement 
signed by all the parties, binding themselves to accept our 
award as final and conclusive upon their respective claims. 
If any such proceeding should take place, it will give a na- 
tural opening to such further engagements as may appear 
advisable. 

The same despatches will inform you of the anxiety of the 
Mahrattas to obtain our agreement to a general defensive 
treaty against Zemaun Shah. The Government of Bengal 
have postponed the consideration of this: proposition to a 


* The opening of these Despatches is explained in Letters, Nos. II. 
and ITI. 


12 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO 23 Feb. 


period of time, which I confess I should think the most un- 
favourable for the examination of this difficult question, and 
still more unseasonable for the negociation of a treaty with 
such a power as the Mahratta states; this period of time is 
no other, than the moment when Zemaun Shah shall again 
approach the frontiers of Hindostan. Without giving any 
decisive opinion on the wisdom of entering into the treaty 
proposed, I shall certainly think it my duty upon my arrival 
in India to proceed without the delay of one moment to the 
examination and decision of the proposal made by the Muh- 
rattas: if it should appear expedient to engage with them 
in a defensive system against the threatened invasion of Ze- 
maun Shah, there is no doubt that such a measure would 
tend greatly to reconcile to them any propositions, which we 
might wish to offer with respect to the arrangements at the 
Court of Hyderabad. 

The inclination of my opinion at present rather leads me to 
’ think, that a general defensive alliance between all the existing 
powers of Hindostan (Tippoo perhaps alone excepted) against 
the expected invasion of Zemaun Shah, would not only be 
the best security against the success of such an invasion, if 
attempted, but might have the effect of deterring that Prince 
from an undertaking which must end in his own disappoint- 
ment and ruin, if our Government in India, and our allies 
do not neglect to make seasonable preparations of defence. 
If a treaty can be formed at an early period so as to unite the 
Mahratta powers with us in a cordial and systematic plan of 
vigorous opposition to the supposed projects of Zemaun Shah, 
without binding us to advance farther from our own frontiers, 
than the real exigency of the case may appear to demand 
upon his approach, I should think such a treaty a solid ac- 
quisition of strength in the present critical situation of India, 
you will observe from this detail, that I consider the fourth 
measure suggested by Major Kirkpatrick to be the only one, 
from which it is reasonable to hope that the effectual destruc- 
tion of the French army at Hyderabad can be accomplished, 
but that I view that measure as connected with considerations 
of the most serious nature, and involving consequences of the 
utmost delicacy and importance. I have laid before you the 
whole train of my thoughts on this subject, as I shall think 
it my duty to do on every question affecting those interests, 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 13 


which I know to be not only highly valuable in your estima- 
tion, but the most particular and anxious objects of your un- 
remitting solicitude and care. I will conclude this long letter 
by stating the precise questions on which I wish to receive 
your instructions, and by submitting to you the plan of mea- 
sures which I propose to pursue with relation to this subject, 
in the interval which must elapse, before I can receive your 
opinion. 

In the first place I wish to be informed whether you think 
a closer connection than at present subsists between us and 
the Nizam advisable for our interests on general grounds, 
provided such a change of our engagements with the Nizam 
can be rendered acceptable to the Mahrattas. 

Secondly, whether you would approve of our entering into 
treaties with both the Mahrattas and the Nizam guaranteeing 
the dominions of each power respectively against the aggres- 
sion of the other. 

Thirdly, whether you would approve of our taking mea- 
sures for acting in concert with Azim ul Omra in support of 
the succession of Secunder Jah, the eldest son of the Nizam? 
whether we should endeavour to obtain the cooperation of 
the Mahrattas in securing this succession? and what should 
be our conduct, if the Mahrattas should differ from us in 
the choice of the successor to the Nizam? 

Fourthly, whether you would approve of a general defensive 
treaty against any invasion from Zemaun Shah, and what 
limitations would you propose to the powers which the other 
allies might require of employing our troops beyond our own 
frontiers ? 

You will observe that the determination of all these ques- 
tions is necessary, in my view of the subject, in order to en- 
able me to carry into effect the only measure which I can rely 
upon as a suflicient check to the growth of the French interest 
at the Court of Hyderabad and as a permanent barrier against 
any future revival of that interest in the same quarter. 

But I am aware that I cannot receive your opinions for a 
long time. In that interval circumstances may compel me to — 
decide some of these important questions upon my own judg- 
ment; my wish however is to reserve them all for yours, and 
with this view, I propose to pursue a system of measures, 
which, while it shall leave all the most delicate parts of the 


14 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO 23 Feb. 


situation of affairs in India open to your decision, shall tend 
to check in some degree the progress of the French party at 
Hyderabad, and to furnish me with such materials as shall 
enable me to form a competent opinion of the effects to be 
expected from any decision of the points reserved for your 
judgment. 

I propose to direct the Resident at Hyderabad to suffer no 
augmentation of Raymond’s corps to take place, if it can be 
prevented by the strongest and most pointed representations. 
This step may probably check the increase of the corps, al- 
though from this step alone I cannot hope for its final annihi- 
lation. 

I mean also to direct that any proposals from the Nizam's 
ministers for an increase of our detachment shall be favourably 
, received; and I shall increase the detachment accordingly on 
the first practicable occasion; but I shall stipulate that for 
every man we grant, there shall be a proportional reduction 
made in Raymond’s corps. This proportion shall be calcu- 
lated upon the relative estimation of our sepoys (in the opinion 
of the ministers of the Nizam themselves) when compared with 
Raymond's corps; and I believe that on this ground, I shall 
not find it difficult to contend that a reduction of 3,000 men 
should be made for every 1,000 men granted by us. In re- 
ducing the army of Raymond, I shall endeavour in the first 
instance to disband the most obnoxious and dangerous officers 
with their corps. I have reason to believe that I may be able 
to effect this species of partial reduction of Raymond's corps, 
without entering upon any of the difficult points involved in 
the general questions stated in the letter. In the meanwhile 
however I shall direct the Resident, at Poonah and with Scin- 
diah, to ascertain as speedily as possible the views and dispo- 
sitions of those powers with respect to the same points and 
especially with respect to any alteration of our connection 
with the Nizam, to his eventual successor, and to the proposed 
defensive engagements against Zemaun Shah. 

In submitting the whole of this extensive subject to your 
consideration I have been obliged to leave many parts of it 
open to, doubt, for want of the information which may be 
expected from the residents with Scindiah, and at Poonah; I 
believe however that it will not be difficult for you to answer 
the questions which I have proposed, framing your answers 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS, 15 


in such a manner as may admit of any variation of opinion, 
which the information from those Courts may require. 

The state of the military establishment of the Mahratta 
powers did not properly come under Major Kirkpatrick’s view, 
and I propose to transmit to the residents at Poonah and with 
Scindiah a copy of my queStions to Major Kirkpatrick with 
such alterations as the several cases may require, in order to 
obtain for you a full statement of the corps disciplined by 
Europeans or Americans in the service of the Mahrattas. 
I am at present able to give you no fuller information on this 
part of the subject, than that Scindiah employs about 20,000 
sepoys disciplined by Europeans or Americans. The com- 
mander is named Perron, a Frenchman; most of the officers 
are British subjects. The discipline of this corps is said to 
be superior to that of Raymond’s, but the disposition. of its . 
officers to be much more favorable to the British than to the | 
French interests. This was De Boigne’s corps, whose history 
you probably know: De Boigne was lately in London, if he 
should not have left it, he can give you the fullest information 
of the state of Scindiah’s army. There was a small corps of 
about 2,000 men commanded by European officers in the ser- 
vice of the Peishwah, and another of about the same number 
in that of Tuckagee Holkar; they are both inconsiderable,; 
if they still exist, and the dissentions which have broken out 
between Holkar’s two sons since the death of their father, 
have left that branch of the Mahratta power in a situation 
from which little danger is to be apprehended. There is a 
fourth corps commanded by a Frenchman of the name of 
D’ Agincourt in the service of Azim ul Dowlah at Hyderabad. 
This corps is paid by the state. It consists of 1,500 men. 
The commander is a determined jacobin. 

The Rajah of Berar is said to have a corps in his service 
commanded by British officers, it is said to consist of above 

2,000 men. 


I am, my dear Sir, &c. 
Morninaron. 


16 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO 25 Feb, 


No. I. 
To the Secret Committee of the Court of Directors. 
Honovuras_eE Sirs, Cape of Good Hope, Feb. 25th, 1793. 


In my letter dated the 19th instant, addressed to the 
Honourable the Court of Directors,* I have stated the cir- 
eumstances which induced me to open the secret packet 
addressed to your Honourable Committee, on board the ship 
Houghton. 

In addition to the circumstances stated to the Honourable 
Court of Directors, I think it necessary to submit to you that 
I had learnt, by vague reports, the outline of the important 
events which have happened in Oude, the apprehensions 
entertained of the return of Zemaun Shah towards the fron- 
tiers of that province, the several movements of Tippoo 
Sultaun, and the sudden suspension of the expedition em- 
barked for the attack of Manilla. 

It appeared to me on every ground to be an indispensable 
article of my duty to obtain, as speedily as possible, the most 
authentic account of events so deeply affecting the interests 
committed to my charge, and of which any false impression 
might render me less equal to the execution of my public 
trust. 

. But whatever may have been my view of my duty, or my 
conception of the propriety and necessity of the step which I 
took in opening the several despatches and packets, I shall 
not be satisfied with my conduct until it shall have received 
the sanction of your approbation, as well as that of the Ho- 
nourable the Court of Directors. To both, in your joint 
and several capacities, it will always be my desire to pay every 
mark of deference and respect. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 
MorNINnGTON. 


* The Letter here adverted to does not require insertion, the observa- 
tions being similar to those contained in the present Letter. 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 17 


No. HI. 


To the Right Honourable Henry Dundas. 


My Dear Sir, Cape of Good Hope, Feb. 28th, 1798. 

During my detention at this place the ships, of which I 
enclose a list, arrived with despatches from Bengal. My 
anxious desire to learn the actual state of affairs in India 
from the most authentic sources induced me to open the public 
and secret packets, the contents of which I have examined 
with great attention and care. I flatter myself that this step, 
proceeding from a wish to enable myself to do justice to their 
service, will meet with the approbation of the Court of Direc- 
tors, and that they will be satisfied with the reasons which I 
have offered in my letter to them on this subject. 

The contents of these despatches have led me to a very 
serious review of the opinions which I had formed under your 
direction with regard to the relative situations of the several 
native powers of India, and the system to be pursued with 
respect to their interests by the government committed to my 
charge. 

The leading principle of your instructions to me as appli- 
cable to our external policy in India, was, that I should en- 
deavour, as nearly as possible, to preserve the balance of 
power between the native princes upon the same footing on 
which it was placed by the Treaty of Seringapatam. 

It would be a waste of your time to state, at any length, 
the precise nature of the relative conditions of those states 
whose interests were affected, and whose power was ascer- 
tained by the operation of that treaty. It will be sufficient to 
remark, that one part of the policy of the treaty was, by 
strengthening the Mahrattas and the Nizam to the extent and 
in the manner provided by the articles of the treaty, to esta- 
blish an efficient check upon the future ambition or resent- 
ment of Tippoo, and to secure to us an efficient support 
against him whenever we might have an occasion to call 
for it. 

The plain question, to which my attention has been di- 
rected by the inspection of the late despatches, is this: —Are 
the Mahrattas and the Nizam now in the same condition in 

VOL. I. c 


b 


18 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO 28 Feb. 


which the Treaty of Seringapatam léft them; and can we 
now look to both, or to either of those powers, for that degree 
of support against Tippoo which it was the intention of that 
treaty to provide? I am afraid that a very short examination 
of the present position of the Mahrattas and of the Nizam 
will furnish ample proof that neither of those powers remain 
in the same state in which they stood in 1793, either with 
relation to each other or to the general balance of power in 
India; and above all, that their means of assisting us against 
Tippoo are considerably diminished. 

Since the conclusion of the peace of Seringapatam the 
credit and resources of the Court of Hyderabad have been 
constantly declining. The disgrace which fell upon the 
Nizam’s army in the unfortunate contest with the Mahrattas 
at Khurdlah, reduced the military character of the Court of 
Hyderabad to the lowest point of degradation. The treaty 
in which that defeat terminated completed the humiliation of 
the Nizam: you will remember that he was compelled to sa- 
crifice a large portion of territory, to engage to pay a fine of 
three crores of rupees, and to submit to the captivity of his 
minister Azim ul Omra, who was carried a prisoner to 
Poonah. Azim ul Omra resided at Poonah during the late 
convulsions in the Mahratta governments, and bore a very 
distinguished part in supporting Nana through the various 
revolutions which followed the sudden death of the Peishwa 
Mahda Row. For these services Nana had agreed to sacri- 
fice all the benefits acquired for the Mahratta state against 
the Nizam by the Treaty of Khurdlah. But the event has 
been, that after the recovery of his own power, Nana has 
insisted on the cession of one-fourth part of the territory, and 
on the payment of one-fourth part of the fine stipulated by 
that treaty. So that the final result is a considerable dimi- 
nution of the territory and resources of the Nizam, added to 
all the effects which might naturally be expected to be pro- 
duced, upon his domestic peace and foreign consideration by 
sod heavy a loss both of power and honour. The two rebel- 
digns of the Nizam’s son Ali Jah, and of the son of Dara Jah, 
are stated to have arisen from the contempt into which the 
Nizam’s authority had fallen at home; and although those 
rebellions have been quelled, the collections of the revenue 
have been so severely affected, as well by them as by the 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 19 


detention of Azim ul Omra at Poonah, that the resources of 
the country are not likely to recover the shock for some time. 

The effect of these causes has been very much to lower 
the value of the Nizam’s power in the scale of the neighbour- 
ing states. He has been obliged to submit implicitly to the 
will of the government of Poonah; the Rajah of Berar has 
exacted large contributions from a part of his territory, and 
Tippoo (although endeavouring to gain him as an ally,) has 
omitted no occasion of expressing the utmost contempt for 
his abject situation. 

But the most striking feature of change in the state of 
the Nizam’s affairs since 1793 is the alteration which has 
taken place in his military establishment. This, at first view, 
might appear an improvement of his political strength; but 
whatever may be your judgment on that question in a general 
view of it, you will, I am persuaded, concur with me in opi- 
nion, that the alteration which has taken place in the Nizam’s 
military establishment, since the peace of Seringapatam, has 
nearly disqualified him from co-operating with us as an ally 
in the cases for which that treaty meant to provide. 

The Nizam since the peace has greatly reduced his cavalry 
and other troops, and in the meanwhile has considerably aug- 
mented the corps of Raymond, of the nature and principles 
of which I have given a description in my Letter No.1. The 
corps of Raymond now forms the great force of the Nizam’s 
army; and although very deficient in point of discipline and 
skill when compared with our troops, is stated to be more 
capable of performing useful service in the field than the 
whole army furnished to us by his Highness in the late war 
with Tippoo. On the other hand, perhaps the existence of 
this corps, united as it is in the cause of France, connected 
with Tippoo, and animated by that spirit of intrigue which 
would lead it to mix in every distraction of the state, if not to 
disturb the internal peace of the country by originating the 
causes of confusion, may be considered as a circumstance of 
positive weakness in the frame of the Nizam’s government. 
Azim ul Omra certainly has felt the force of this argument, 
and by consenting to the introduction of the corps of Boyd and 
Finglass, appeared to be aware that the corps of Raymond 
might eventually gain the ascendancy, which it might be 
difficult to reduce within any bounds of moderation, and 


20 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO 28 Feb, 
LJ 


which might hereafter overthrow the power of a minister, or 
dictate the succession to the throne itself. 

But with respect to our alliance, and to the value of the 
guarantee under the treaty of Paangul, the altered state of 
the Nizam’s army places him in a condition worse than that 
of absolute inefficiency. In a war with Tippoo, or in the still 
more aggravated case of a war with him and France, the 
forces of the Nizam must become useless (if not dangerous) 
to us, precisely in proportion to the exigency of the case in 
which our cause should demand the aid of our allies. IJ have 
stated this argument already in my Letter No. I., to which I 
refer you; with this additional observation, that I cannot 
conceive the case in which we could take the Nizam’s French 
troops with us into the field, without the utmost hazard of 
treachery, nor the case in which we could leave them beliind 
us, without providing an equal force to watch their move- 
ments. Recollecting that this corps is the only military force 
of any kind of efficiency which we can expect from the Nizam 
in the event of a war with Tippoo and France, you will 
judge without difficulty what answer should be given to 
the question which I have proposed upon this part of the 
subject. 

I have already observed how much the posture of the 
Nizam’s affairs is altered with relation to the balance of 
power between him and the Mahratta states, and how much 
he has been weakened and degraded by the Treaty of 
Khurdlah, and by the manner in which it has been carried 
into execution. In this view it has been a favourable circum- 
“stance to the Nizam, (and is perhaps that cause to which 
alone he is indebted for the preservation of any degree of 
strength, or even of his throne,) that the distractions of the 
Mahratta empire have so shaken the power of the Peishwa, 
and disturbed the unity of the confederation of the principal 
chiefs, as to have very much impaired their means of carrying 
on any considerable joint military operation. Notwithstand- 
ing this circumstance, I still consider the Nizam to be ina 
much weaker state, even with relation to the Mahrattas, 
divided and broken as their power now is, than he was at 
the conclusion of the peace of ,Seringapatam. 

This leads me to submit to your consideration my ideas on 
the actual condition of the Mahratta empire. I am aware 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 21 
2 


that some opinions have been thrown out from very respect- 
able quarters, the tendency of which appears to lead towards 
a sentiment approaching to satisfaction in the dissentions and 
divisions which have lately taken place among the Mahrattas, 
I always considered the precise situation in which the Mah- 
ratta empire stood, after the peace of Seringapatam, as the 
most favourable to our interests. The powers of the different 
co-estates were then sufficiently balanced amongst each other 
to prevent any danger of that degree of union which could 
at any time bring the whole of their force to operate in one 
consolidated mass against the British possessions. On the 
other hand, the influence of the Peishwa, or head df ‘the 
co-estates, and of his minister Nana, was such as to enable 
them to bring into the field a respectable force, whenever 
their engagements with us might require such an effort. This 
appears to me to be the position in which we ought to endea- 
vour to maintain the Mahratta states; in which neither the 
government of Poonah, nor any branch of the empire, should 
obtain such an ascendancy as might enable it to concenter 
the formidable strength of the whole against us, while the 
head of this great body should still preserve such a degree 
of power over several of the leading chiefs, as to become a 
respectable ally to us in the moment of necessity. The pre- 
sent posture of the Mahratta power is directly the reverse in 
one respect of that which I have described. Fortunately no 
one of the co-estates, nor the head of the empire, has yet 
acquired the means of wielding the united force of the whole 
body; but while some of the chiefs have made great and 
valuable acquisitions of dominion, and considerably increased 
their military strength, the authority and influence of the 
Peishwa has rapidly declined; and it could not now be ex- 
pected that any respectable body of chiefs would be disposed 
to prosecute, under his direction, any common view or joint 
operation with any degree of zeal or vigour. This has been 
the effect produced by the late series of revolutions at 
Poonah. Looking to the most important question for our 
consideration—namely, the extent of the assistance which we 
may expect from the Mahrattas, if we should have occasion 
to call for their aid under the engagement subsisting between 
us, I have viewed those revolutions with regret, and I cannot 
now see their consequences in any more favourable light, as 


22 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO 28 Feb. 
° 


far as they regard us, than that of a positive diminution of 
the strength of those barriers which it was the policy of the 
Treaty of Seringapatam to raise against the power of Tippoo. 
I have avoided entering into a detailed account of the respec- 
tive positions of each of the great Mahratta chiefs, wishing 
to call your attention to the more essential and pressing part 
of the subject. But I believe you will find the circumstances 
of each branch of the Mahratta power to have varied 
since the year 1793 nearly according to the following state- 
ment :— 

Scindiah has made large acquisitions of territory, and im- 
proved. the discipline of his troops; he has also acquired 
great influence at Poonah, but it may be doubted whether 
the death of Mahdajee Scindiah has not been a greater loss to 
the power of this branch of the empire than will be compen- 
sated by any of these advantages. The character of Dowlut 
Row Scindiah and of his ministers is such as to render the 
power of this branch much less formidable than it was in the 
lifetime of Mahdajee Scindiah. 

The Rajah of Berar has made some progress in power 
since the peace of Seringapatam, at the expense of the 

{Peishwa, of the Nizam, and of some Patan princes in Malwa. 
His strength and consideration are said to be upon the 
increase. 

Tuccojee Holkar's power was on the decline even before 
his death, since that period the political weight of this family 
has been greatly diminished by intestine divisions between 
the successors of Tuccojee. 

The chiefship of Purseram Bhow is extinct, and that of 
Hurry Pundit has lost the greater part of its credit and 
power. 

Ihave already spoken of the Peishwa; the events which 
have reduced his importance are familiar to you. I will only 
add this remark, that the jealousy which must naturally sub- 
sist between the present Peishwa and his minister Nana (who 
at one period of the late revolutions at Poonah supported 
Chimna Appa, the younger son of Bajerow, the present 
Peishwa) is a circumstance likely to present additional obsta- 
cles to any vigorous exertion of the force of the government 
of Poonah, if it does not produce some new convulsians in its 
frame. I believe it may justly be said, that since the founda- 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 23 


tion of the government the power of the Peishwa never was 
so inconsiderable in the general scale of the Mahratta states 
as it is at this moment. 

Having thus stated to you my reasons for apprehending 
that the efficiency of both the allies on whom we are to 
depend for aid in any future contest with Tippoo is so much 
impaired since the year 1793, that we could not look to them 
at this juncture for the same degree of assistance (whatever 
that may have been) which Lord Cornwallis derived from 
their cooperation. in the late war with that prince. I now 
beg leave to call your attention to certain circumstances in 
our situation, intimately connected with our political weight 
in India, and with our means of encountering again, at any 
early period, the pressure of war. 

The despatches which accompany this letter will inform 
you of the death of the Nabob Vizier Azoph ul Dowla, and 
of the very extraordinary scenes which have passed in Oude 
since that event. The event itself I should have considered 
in the abstract as highly favourable to our interests, being 
persuaded that under the reign of Azoph ul Dowla it would 
ever have been impracticable to have carried into permanent 
effect any reform in the disordered finances and undisciplined 
army of that prince. With the assistance of Tofuzul Hussein 
Khan, the new minister of Oude, it might have been hoped 
that the succession of a new prince might have opened more 
favourable prospects. But the strange and unfortunate cir- 
cumstances, attending the succession of Vizier Ali seem to 
lead to a situation of affairs in Oude which, for some time, 
must impair the strength of that frontier, and render the 
country more open to the impression of a foreign enemy. 
Almas Ali is said to be ready to take the field with a very 
respectable force ; and the Rohilla chiefs, of whose persever- 
ing spirit we have had a recent experience, are also men- 
tioned as being upon the point of an insurrection: the whole 
country is represented to be in a state to require the presence 
of a large military force, for the maintenance of internal peace 
and good order. This state of our affairs in Oude must be 
deemed a positive diminution of our disposable force; I trust 
that the activity (perhaps even the mere presence of our 
troops), may reduce the insurgents to submission. But while 
any ambiguity remains respecting the permanency of the set- 


24 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO 28 Feb. 


tlement made in favour of Vizier Ali—while the same turbu- 
lent spirit shall exist among the Rohillas, and the military 
power of Almas Ali continues undiminished, it can never be 
safe to withdraw our troops; and it must be remarked that 
the danger of withdrawing them would be increased exactly 
in proportion to the pressure of the necessity of employing 
them against any foreign enemy. You will find that the 
Governor-General states his conviction, without reserve, that 
the approach of Zemaun Shah towards the frontier of Oude 
would become the signal of general revolt and plunder in 
that province. In the meanwhile I cannot consider the call 
for the employment of our troops in quelling the spirit of in- 
surrection in another quarter to be yet so little urgent as to 
leave us free tq act against an enemy on that side without 
apprehension of our own subjects. I allude to the present 
state of the coast of Malabar. I find that a treaty has been 
signed with the Pyche Rajah; but as far as I can collect from 
the despatches, it does not appear to me that his submission 
has been so complete, or his power so broken, as to warrant 
a sentiment of security either in his weakness or in his sin- 
cerity. This circumstance again must operate as a diversion 
of our force in the event of war. With respect to our 
financial resources I refer you to the same despatches for an 
account of the general embarrassment both of public and 
private credit, and the difficulty of raising money for public 
credit, even at the exorbitant interest of 12 per cent., with 
the combined advantage of a remittance. The great expense 
of the long intehded and suddenly relinquished expedition 
to Manilla, must of necessity increase both the difficulty and 
the exigency of raising further loans. 

To this view of our situation must be added the state of 
our dependencies of Arcot and Tanjore, as represented by 
the Madras government, both with respect to the disaffection 
and refractory spirit of the Nabob and Rajah, and to the 

:decline of the permanent sources of public revenue. I hope 
I shall not be suspected of wishing to draw a gloomy or exag- 
gerated picture of the altered aspect of our affairs since the 
peace of Seringapatam ; my only wish is to fix-your attention, 
as I have fixed my own, on the true points of our weakness, 
for the purpose of considering the speediest means of reco- 
vering our strength. I know that the fortunate events of 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 25 


this most glorious war have given us an ascendancy over every 
European nation in India, such as we never before possessed ; 
but I cannot shut my eyes to the diminution which our weight 
in the scale of the country powers has suffered, and is 
likely to suffer still more, if the means of checking the pro- 
gress of tha evil be much longer neglected. Nor can I 
refuse my assent to the truth of a proposition which I now 
think it my duty to urge to you with great earnestness, that 
unless effectual and vigorous measures be taken for quelling 
the disturbances in our own provinces and in those of our 
dependencies, I do not see how we can again be prepared to 
meet an enemy of any respectable force in the field. To the 
distress of our finances I am persuaded your most anxious 
attention will be given without delay, and you may rely on 
receiving from me the most ample communications on that 
subject upon my arrival in India. 

In reviewing our political situation in India, particularly 
with regard to our comparative power of curbing the attempts 
of Tippoo, I ought not to omit the consideration of the rela- 
tive strength of that. prince as it exists in the present mo- 
ment, and as it stood at the conclusion of the peace of 
Seringapatam. 

Since that period of time he has enjoyed perfect internal 
tranquillity: While our allies all around him have been dis- 
tracted and exhausted by domestic rebellions, successive 
revolutions, and mutual wars, he has been employed in re- 
cruiting the sources of his strength, improving his revenues, 
and invigorating the discipline of his armies. It is true that 
he must now have nearly lost all hope of assistance* from 
France, or from any other European power; but that hope 
was long cherished by him, and it encouraged him to the 
great exertions which have unquestionably added to his mili- 
tary strength. He has been very active for some time past in 
his applications to the Courts of the Native Powers, endeavour- 
ing to stir them up against us. He certainly applied for that 
purpose to the Nizam, and (during the absence of Azim ul 


* It is true there were no French Troops disposable at the Mauritius, 
and France seemed at that time too much engaged in Europe to spare 
troops for the East; but ‘Tippoo was not aware of these circumstances, 
and had sent Ambassadors to the Mauritius at this very period, of which 
Lord Mornington could not then be apprised: ~ + 


26 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO 28 Feb. 


Omra at Poonah) he made a very strong impression upon 
the politics of the Court of Hyderabad, where he now has a 
Vakeel, and where he certainly has many partizans, as well 
in the corps of Raymond as in the service of Umijid ud 
Dowla, a chief of a considerable faction called the Paungah 
party, and in that of Imtiaz ud Dowlah, nephew to the 
Nizam. Tippoo has also sent Vakeels to Poonah, with the 
same object of raising a spirit of hostility against us. His 
success, I believe, has not answered his wishes in that 
quarter, 

But the most remarkable step which Tippoo has lately 
taken, is his communication with Zemaun Shah. The de- 
clared projects of Zemaun Shah, added to the attempts 
which he has recently made towards carrying them into 
execution, must, in their general impression and effect, 
be considered as an accession of strength to the cause of 
Tippoo. If an invasion of Hindostan should ever seriously 
be attempted by Zemaun Shah, the diversion of our force, 
which would be occasioned by such an event, would offer the 
most favourable opportunity to an attack from Tippoo on our 
possessions in the Peninsula. No mode of carrying on war 
against us could be more vexatious or more distressing to our 
resources than a combined attack upon Oude and the Car- 
natic. It is not impossible that the late intercourse between 
Tippoo and Zemaun Shah had for its object, on the part of 
the former at least, some such plan of joint operation. I 
know that it is the fashion to treat the projects of Zemaun 
Shah very lightly. In the despatches you will see an account 
of his force, and you will find a detail’of all the intelligence 
obtained respecting his future intentions, as well as of the 
causes likely to obstruct their execution. The result of an 
examination of these materials upon my mind is a conviction 
that Zemaun Shah has not abandoned his project of invading 
Hindostan, and that the safest means of rendering that pro- 
ject. abortive will be to consider it as practicable, and to take 
the best precautions against it which the advantages of our 
situation and the interval of time can furnish. The fact is 
that Zemaun Shah was able to advance to Lahore without 
opposition from the Seiks: whatever circumstances recalled 
him into his own dominions, the above-mentioned fact well 
deserves attention, because it contradicts all the conjectures 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 27 


and opinions which had been so confidently formed with 
‘respect to the obstacles which Zemaun Shah would meet in 
his passage from his own dominions to ours. The nation of 
the Seiks was said to be the first barrier against him, and it 
was asserted this barrier alone would be insuperable. He 
contrived, hewever, to pass through the country of the Seiks 
unmolested, and, if I am rightly informed, he has since endea- 
voured, not without success, to negociate a treaty with some 
of the leaders of the various factions which distract that 
nation. Should he succeed in establishing an.amicable inter- 
course with any large body of the Seiks, it would greatly 
facilitate the success of his supposed project of invasion. 
Between the country of the Seiks and the frontier of Oude 
no obstacle remains but the Mahratta Power. Itis perfectly 
well known that when Zemaun Shah reached Lahore the 
Mahrattas were by no means in a condition to check his pro- 
gress. They had no army in that quarter which could have 
been opposed to him in the field. Scindiah was at that time 
at Poonah with the greater part of his force deeply engaged 
in the intrigues and revolutions of which that place has been 
so long the scene. If Zemaun Shah had not been recalled 
by some domestic cause (of which the true nature does not 
seem yet to be thoroughly understood), there cannot be a 
doubt that he might have penetrated through the possessions 
of Scindiah, in the neighbourhood of Delhi and Agra, with- 
out difficulty, if not without opposition. From the accounts 
which I have received of the military force of Scindiah, I do 
not believe that he alone would he able to cope with the army 
of Zemaun Shah, and therefore I do not feel that we should be 
secure at any time if we relied on his single efforts to check 
the approach of the invading force. With the experience 
of this critical state of affairs in my mind, I cannot consider 
the idea of an invasion from Cabul as a mere visionary dan- 
ger. It does not appear to have been so considered by the 
present Government of Bengal, who have stated it as one of 
the leading circumstances which called for an augmentation 
of their native infantry. 

To recur, therefore, to the view of the political balance of 
power in India, which I was endeavouring to submit to you, I 
think myself compelled to estimate the force of Tippoo with 
reference to the projects of Zemaun Shah, and to the possi- 


28 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO 28 Feb. 


bility of their (at least limited) success; and on this ground I 
must conclude that Tippoo’s consideration has received addi- 
tional weight since the year 1793. 

Ifthe facts be true which I have stated on both sides of 
this enumeration of the comparative circumstances of our 
situation in India, and of those which affect the situation of 
Tippoo, it must be admitted that he has rather gained than 
lost weight in the period of time described, and that the con- 

\Aistency, unity, and efficiency of our side of the balance has 
suffered no inconsiderable degree of diminution. In my 
Letter No. I., from this place, I have opened to you some 
parts of the general outline of those measures which appear 
to me to be best calculated to restore the Native Powers of 
India and ourselves to the same position in which we stood 
in 1793, as far as the change of times and circumstances will 
admit. So far from viewing any plan tending to this object, 
as an innovation upon our system of Indian government, I 
feel it to be my duty to state such a plan, in conformity to the 
instructions which J had received from you at the time of my 
departure, and to every principle which I have at any time 
imbibed from you on this interesting subject. The balance 
of power in India no longer exists upon the same footing on 
which it was placed by the peace of Seringapatam. The 
question therefore must arise, how it may best be brought 
back again to that state, in which you have directed me to 
maintain it. 

My present view of the subject is, that the wisest course 
would be to strengthen the Mahrattas and the Nizam, by 
entering into a defensive alliance with the former against 
Zemaun Shah, and by affording to the latter an addition of 
military strength, and the means of extricating himself from 
the control of the French party at Hyderabad. 

In framing a treaty of defensive alliance against Zemaun 
Shah, the object to be sought would be the securing an effi- 
cient force to be in the field in due time to check the progress 
of Zemaun Shah in the Mahratta territory of Dethi, or at 
least of Agra: the danger to be avoided would be the draw- 
ing our troops farther beyond the line of the frontier of Oude 
than might be necessary for securing the fair common objects 
of the alliance.- To this treaty I would make the Nizam a 
party. The treaty should not contain a hostile word against 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 99 


Zemaun Shah, excepting only with reference to the single 
case of his projects of invasion; and it should be communi- 
cated to him with assurances of our determination never to 
molest him in his own dominions, nor to suffer him to ap- 
proach ours. I have sufficiently stated all that relates to the 
Nizam in my Letter No. I., to which I refer you also for my 
opinion of the possibility of removing the grounds of jealousy 
between him and the Mahrattas, or at least of checking 
the hostile attempts of either party upon the power of the 
other. 

You will perceive that the course of my opinions would 
also lead me to take every step consistent with the rules of 
caution and moderation for restoring to the Peishwa such a 
degree of power as might render him able to fulfil the sub- 
sisting engagements between us and the Mahratta empire. 

The most pressing part of the whole subject seems to be 
the state of Oude, of the coast of Malabar, of the Carnatic, 
and of Tanjore. With respect to the disturbances in Oude 
I trust that the exertions of Lord Teignmouth and of Sir 
Alured Clarke will have done a great deal before my arrival. 
I think this the occasion to remark to you, that I have met no 
person who does not complain of the insufficiency of our force 
in cavalry in Bengal and Oude. Our new native regiments 
are yet scarcely formed, and there is but one regiment of 
European dragoons in that quarter, which also is nearly inefli- 
cient, from having been imprudently and unnecessarily ex- 
posed to the violence of the heat. There is a very good and 
more than complete regiment of dragoons here (the 8th), 
which, having been here for near two years, is well seasoned 
for the Indian service. It would be a very acceptable guest 
in Bengal, and might become very useful, not only in the 
event of any attempt of Zemaun Shah, but also in quelling 


the disturbances in Oude, and in serving as a model to our. 


newly-raised native cavalry. I confess, that under all the 
present circumstances of India, I should be glad to see one or 
two more King’s regiments of infantry in Bengal. There is 
avery fine regiment nowhere (the 84th), which has been 
thoroughly seasoned, and is extremely strong in point of num- 
bers. At all events I hope you will reinforce our cavalry 
without delay, and at the same time send us some good 
cavalry officer to form the new corps. 


V 


30 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO 28 Feb. 


With respect to the coast of Malabar I shall never think 
our affairs safe in that quarter until the whole tribe of pecu- 
lators and plunderers has been severely punished, and until 
the Pyche Rajah has been reduced to unconditional submis- 
sion. Our possessions on the coast of Malabar will become 
an incumbrance to us if they are not speedily brought into 
some condition of order. A more active and vigorous con- 
trol is necessary. I cannot speak of Arcot and Tanjore 

rs until I have been upon the spot. You will find by the 
despatches, that in consequence of a failure in the pay- 
ment of his kists, a part of the Rajah’s country is fallen into 
our hands. The present state of India does not perhaps, on 
the whole, offer the most favourable occasion for the new 
settlement of the Musnud of Tanjore. IfI should see cause 
for delay I shall not hesitate to postpone the deposition of 
the present Rajah to a more convenient time, according to 
the discretionary powers vested in me by the orders of the 
Secret Committee. 

The only point which remains for consideration is the con- 
duct to be observed towards Tippoo. You will find in the 
despatches that the Supreme Government still retain their 
opinion respecting our right to the district of Wynaad; but 
as they have directed that an amicable inquiry should take 
place on that caer the execution of your orders will be- 
come more easy.* 

I have adverted in this Letter to the increased assiduity 
with which Tippoo has endeavoured to raise animosities 
against us among the Native Powers, and to his intercourse 
with Zemaun Shah, I wish to know from you, whether we 
ought to suffer, without animadversion and spirited represen- 
tation, such open acts of hostility on the part of Tippoo? 
My ideas on this subject are, that as on the one hand we 
ought never to use any high language towards Tippoo, nor 
ever attempt to deny him the smallest point of his just rights, 
so on the other, where we have distinct proofs of his machin- 
ations against us, we ought to let him know that his treachery 
does not escape our observation, and to make him feel that he 


* Mr. Dundas’s verbal orders to Lord Mornington (given at Walmer 
Castle, in presence of Mr. Pitt, in October 1797) were to restore Wynaad 
to Tippoo without requiring any equivalent. 


1798. THE RIGHT HON, HENRY DUNDAS. 3l 


is within the reach of our vigilance. At present it appears to 
me that he is permitted to excite ill will against us wherever 
he pleases, without the least attempt on our part to -repre- 
hend either him for the suggestion, or the Court, to whom he 
applies, for listening to it. 

This examination of the political state of India leads me to “ 
look at the situation in which we should find ourselves in 
that quarter in the event of the speedy conclusion of a peace 
with France. 

The best peace we can expect will restore to the French 
all, and to the Dutch (whom I conceive as French under 
another name) a great part of their former possessions in 
India, The condition of the several Native Powers, both 
with relation to each other and to our interests, is more fa- 
vourable to the success of French intrigue than it has been 
at any period since the peace of Seringapatam. We must 
therefore expect to be assailed on all sides by the combined / 
operations of every species of instrument which can be set to 
work for the purpose of undermining the foundations of our 
credit, character, and power. You can best judge whether 
it may be possible to introduce into the Treaty-of Peace any 
restrictions which shall tend to check, in any degree, the vio- 
lence of this evil. But if there be truth in the views which I 
take of the state of India, and of the probable conduct of the 
French whenever they shall again obtain even their former 
footing in that country, how powerful an argument arises 
against permitting them to receive any addition of strength 
which might render them more respectable in the general 
scale of Indian power. I am persuaded that the possession 
of Ceylon, either in the hands of France or of her bond-slave 
Holland, would enable the French interests in India to rise, 
within a very short period, to a degree of formidable strength 
never before possessed by them. On this subject I find no 
difference of opinion in the minds of any person acquainted 
with India. The possession of Ceylon is universally held to 
be indispensable to the preservation both of our power on the 
Continent and of our commerce on the seas of India. 

I am led by this observation to add a very few words with 
relation to this place :— 

Before my arrival here I had formed very high ideas of the 
intrinsic value of the Cape as a colony, but I had not esti- 


82 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO 28 Feb. 


mated so highly its value with reference to the defence of our 
trade to the East, and of our territories in India. 

You will have received from Lord Macartney such ample 
details with respect to the real value of this colony in point 
of revenue, and of every species of resource, that I shall say 
no more than that 1 am convinced it would require along 
tract of time to render the Cape an object of any considera- 
tion in this view. You must consider it as a possession which 
cannot furnish the means of maintaining its own expense, and 
you must look for its value in the positive advantages it would 
afford to the enemy as a military and naval station for offensive 
purposes against you, and in the relative advantages which 
can be imagined to a power compelled to maintain a large 
European force in India. The climate is remarkably healthy, 
so much so that the appearance both of the officers and sol- 
diers stationed here bears striking testimony to the fact; you 
will hardly see regiments in England of so healthy an appear- 
ance as those which have been here for any time. The heat 
is however frequently very severe, so that a soldier who has 
been here for a year or two is well accustomed to be exposed 
to a very ardent sun, and receives a sort of preparation for 
the climate of India. The advantage of this circumstance has 
lately been proved in India, where the regiments which had 
passed through the seasoning of this climate have arrived and 
continued in much better health than those which proceeded 
thither directly from Europe, or which remained here but for 
a very short period of time. As a depot, therefore, for the 
maintenance of a military force in India, the Cape is invalu- 
able; and to the enemy, in this view, it would furnish easy 
means of pouring in troops either upon the coast of Coro- 
mandel or of Malabar, in such a state of health as to be able 
to encounter at once all the inconveniences of an Indian cli- 
mate. With this opinion you may judge with what serious 
apprehension I should see this place in the hands of the 
enemy, to whose political consideration in India such a pos- 
session would always be a powerful accession, but at no time 
so formidable as in the present disturbed state of the Native 
Powers. 

As a naval station I look upon the Cape to be still more 
important. Many ships in the Indian and China trade make 
the land upon the outward, and all upon the homeward- 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 33 


bound, passage. The course of those even which keep 
_ farthest to the southward never is more distant from the Cape 
than two or three degrees of latitude. An enemy’s squadron 
stationed at the Cape, could not fail to intercept the greater 
part of our trade to and from the East, without being under 
the necessity of making any very distant cruizes. We should 
find it impossible to check the operations of such a squadron, 
unless we could continue to send out with every trading fleet 
from Europe a convoy of such considerable force as must 
compel us greatly to increase our present naval establish- 
ments. The expense of fitting out such large fleets of ships 
of war, victualled and stored for the whole voyage to India or 
China, would be enormous; and here, in my opinion, is the 
point of the question upon which the whole argument must 
turn—which would be the heavier expense? to retain the Cape, 
keeping up a large naval and military establishment here, and 
using it as an outpost to your Indian empire, or to leave the 
Cape in the hands of the enemy, and by so doing incur the 
necessity of increasing to a vast amount the protecting naval 
force requisite for the defence of your Indian and China 
trade? The expense of the Cape in our hands, however 
large, must not be estimated at so much positive loss. There 
are two points of view in which that loss may be considered 
to be compensated by a proportional diminution of expense 
in other establishments. The army stationed at the Cape 
might always be looked upon as a part of the Indian force, 
and a correspondent saving ought to be made in the expense 
of your European army in India. Your Indian and China 
ships might, under proper regulations, be victualled at the 
Cape at a much cheaper rate than in Europe; consequently, 
their valuable cargoes both outward and homeward might be 
increased in proportion to the smaller quantity of tonnage oc- 
cupied by their provisions. Instead of taking six months’ 
provisions from Asia or Europe, they need not take more 
than three, and the vacant tonnage might serve for an aug- 
mentation of their cargoes of merchandize. In this view a 
great advantage would result to the East India Company 
from the possession of the Cape. The whole of this com- 
parative statement might be reduced to calculation, and it 
would not be difficult for you at once to estimate the several 
articles of expense which must be incurred by the public in 
VOL. I. D 


ob THE EAKL OF MORNINGTON, TO 28 Feb, 


either event, of retaining the Cape or of abandoning it to 
France, 

But I doubt whether, with the Cape in the hands of the 
enemy, it would be possible for you to maintain your Indian 
trade or empire, unless you could acquire some other settle. 
ment on the southern continent of Africa. This I know to 
be Lord Macartney’s opinion; and if this opinion be just, the 
question of the expense of maintaining the Cape will be ma 
terially varied. 

‘ To bring back this discussion to the pot from which it 
proceeded, I trust you will bear in mind the state of the 
Native Powers in India at this moment; and recollecting that 
the greatest advantage which we now possess in the present 
deranged condition of those interests, which had been so 
wisely and judiciously balanced by the Treaty of Seringapz- 
tam, is the utter exclusion of any preponderant European 
Power from the scale of Indian politics, you will contend 
strenuously against any concession in the peace with France 
which may place the security of our Eastern trade and em- 
pire at her mercy. 

Believe me, dear Sir, &c. &c. 


Mornineron, 


P. S. On reading over my letter I find that I have omitted 
to state one consideration relating to the value of the Cape as 
a military station. I believe the necessity of retaining Cey- 
lon is now admitted universally. With the Cape in the hands 
of an enemy, would it be possible to retain Ceylon for any 
long period of time? 


1798. THE NABOB OF ARCOT. 35 


No. IV. 
Lord Mornington to the Nabob of Arcot. 
April 27th, 1798. 
May iT PLEASE Your Hicuness, 

It has given me great satisfaction to learn from General 
Harris that your Highness enjoys a good state of health. My 
first enquiries upon my arrival at Fort St. George were 
respecting your Highness’s welfare. 

I return your Highness many thanks for the several oblig- 
ing messages which I have had the honor to receive from 
you. 

I am very anxious to take the earliest opportunity of pay- 
ing you my respects in person, and of presenting td you 
several letters which I am charged to deliver to you from his 
Majesty the King of Great Britain, from H. R. H. the Prince 
of Wales, H.R. H. the Duke of York, and the Marquess 
Cornwallis. 

I will wait upon your Highness with great pleasure at any 
hour that you will be pleased to appoint on to-morrow, or 
any day that may be agreeable to you. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 
MornineTon. 


' I date this letter from one of your Highness’s houses in 
which Gen. Harris has placed me. 


No, V. 
The Prince of Wales to the Nabob of Arcot. 
Carlton House, October 14, 1797. 

The Nobleman who will deliver this Letter to your High- 
ness, it is with the greatest satisfaction I inform you, is a par- 
ticular friend of my own—he is justly celebrated for his great 
talents ; and his private character being that of honour, mo- 
deration and mildness, must necessarily recommend him to 

the confidence and good opinion of your Highness. 
I could say much more upon this subject, but when I ac- 
quaint you, that his Majesty had previously bestowed upon 
him the most eminent marks of royal favour, I am sure it must 


36 MARQUESS CORNWALLIS Oct. 


be deemed useless to suggest any other proof how acceptable 
such a nomination must be to the interests of your Highness. 
I shall conclude with expressing a hope that your Highness 
may long continue to enjoy that health and prosperity to 
wwhich your exalted rank and character entitles you. 
I am your affectionate Friend, 


G. P. W. 


No. VI. 


+ ‘Marquess Cornwallis to the Nabob of Arcot. 


Whitehall, 17th October, 1797. 

This letter will be delivered to your Highness by Lord 
Mornington, who is appointed Governor General, and who 
will pass some days at Madras on his way to Bengal. 

Lord Mornington is my friend, and as I know that he en- 
tertains the same sentiments with myself respecting the affairs 
of India, I can venture to promise that he will behave towards 
you with kindness, and endeavour to promote your welfare 
and happiness. 

Your Highness must remember the many conversations 
that we had on the situation of your father and your family, 
and the condition of your country, and how strongly I repre- 
sented to you the distresses which your father had brought 
upon himself by listening to the advice of those Europeans 
who flattered him only to serve their own purposes, instead 
of trusting to the friendship and honor of the Company’s 
Government. 

I have frequently heard you confess that no European ever 

“ came to Chepauk House, but with an intention to take your 
father’s money, and you gave me reason to believe that when 
you succeeded to the sovereignty of the country, you would 
endeavour to secure yourself from the attempts of a similar 
nature by removing to a greater distance from the scene of 
intrigue and corruption. 

Whatever your present determination may be, I recommend 
to you to speak your mind openly and freely to Lord Mor- 
nington, whom you may safely trust, and who has no object 
in view but your interest and that of the Company, which in 


1797, TO THE NABOB OF ARCOT. 37 


the opinion of all men who wish well to both parties, must ‘~ 
ever be inseparable. 
Iam your Highness’s sincere Friend, 
CorNWALLIS. 


No. VIL. 
George III. to the Nabob of Arcot. 


George the Third, by the Grace of God King of Great 
Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Christian Faith, @ 
Duke of Brunswick and Lunenburgh, Arch Treasurer and 


‘Prince Elector of the Holy Roman Empire, &c:,—To his 


Highness the Nawaub Omdal-ul Omrah Mayeen ul Mulk, 
Assad-ud Dowlah, Hussein Ally Cawn Bahawder Zulfattar 
Tung Sepah Surdan, Sovereign of the Carnatic, Payenghaut, 
and Ballanghaut. 

Your Highness’s letter of the 19th of March, .1796, has 
been safely delivered to us by our faithful servant Admiral 
Sir George Keith Elphinstone, and we are convinced your 
Highness will learn with pleasure that, in order to give this 
excellent officer a proof of our entire satisfaction with the 
services he had rendered to our Crown, to your Highness, 
and to the Fast India Company during his command in India, 
we have conferred upon him a mark of our Royal favor by V 
raising him to the dignity of the peerage in our kingdom of 
Treland. 

The happiness we at all times derive from your Highness’s 
friendly correspondence has been on this occasion deeply 
affected on observing the differences which appear to exist 
between your Highness and our faithful servant Lord Hobart, 
who, whatever momentary inconvenience your Highness may 
have experienced from his conduct, we are confident could be */ 
actuated by no other motive than an anxious desire to ensure 
the permanent welfare and honor of your Highness, and the 
happiness and prosperity of your people. 

These important considerations we well know to be also 
the grounds of your Highness’s conduct, and we earnestly 
recommend to you to be assured that the Counsels of our Mi- 
nisters at home, and the wishes of the East India Company 
and its Servants, are ever directed to these objects. 


38 . GEORGE Ill. TO Oct. 


The East India Company has appointed our right trusty 
and right well beloved Cousin and Councillor, Richard, Earl 
of Mornington, in our kingdom of Ireland, Baron Wellesley 
in our kingdom of Great Britain, and Knight of the most 
Illustrious Order of Saint Patrick, to be Governor General 
in India. 

Our experience of his Eonciliatory temper, and many emi- 
nent virtues and abilities in various offices he has held for 
many years under our Crown, induced us to recommend him 
to this high and important station. These distinguished 
qualities are so many pledges to us, that the exercise of the 
power vested in him will be such as to conciliate your High- 
ness’s entire confidence and esteem, and that your Highness 
will endeavour on all occasions to cultivate his friendship and 
good will, by co-operating with him in all his salutary views 
for the happiness of your Highness, and of your subjects, and 
for strengthening and confirming the engagements of amity 
and union subsisting between your Highness and the East 
India Company. 

From our experience of thé‘felicity derived from our con- 
stant paternal love and care of all our subjects, we are per- 
suaded your Highness will best promote your individual hap- 
piness and tranquillity, by shewing yourself on all occasions 
just, benevolent and merciful to all those whom the Almighty 
has placed under your protection, by calling to His presence 
your august Father, His former servant. 

This line of conduct, an inviolable fidelity in all your en- 
gagements, and an unreserved confidence in, and support of, 
the measures the wisdom of the Earl of Mornington may sug- 
gest, cannot fail to ensure to your Highness the continuance 
of the most sincere friendship on the part of the East India 
Company, and of our alliance and protection. 

We embrace this opportunity of informing your Highness 
that, on the 11th of this month, one of our fleets obtained a 
most brilliant and decisive victory over the grand fleet of 
Holland, of which more than one half was taken and is 
brought into our ports. An event so glorious to our arms, 
and of such importance to the security of all our possessions, 
and of India in particular, will, we are persuaded, afford your 
Highness great satisfaction. 

We have only further to assure you of the lively interest 


1797. THE NABOB OF ARCOT. 39 


we take in every thing that concerns your Highness, and the 
happiness we at all times feel when your Highness’s friendly 
letters are delivered into our hands. 

And so we bid you farewell. 


No. VIII. 
Memorandum at Fort St. George. 


Fort St. George, May 8, 1798. 

His Highness the Nabob of the Carnatic, having expressed 
his desire, that a new arrangement should take place with 
respect to the Polygars, and to several other points, commu- 
nicated by his Highness in conversation and in writing to 
Lord Mornington, and his Highness having also complained, 
that under the present arrangement of his monthly payments, 
he was compelled at a particular period of every year to raise 
money upon assignments of the revenues of the country, 
which forms the security for the payment of the Company’s 
military subsidy, Lord Mornington declared his cordial dis- 
position to enter upon the consideration of his Highnesses 
propositions, provided his Highness would consent to permit 
the servants of the Company, to become the managers of the 
several districts in the Carnatic mortgage for the payment of 
the annual military subsidy. This condition Lord Morning- 
ton proposed, as the only effectual remedy which could be 
applied to the injurious system of anticipating the revenues 
of the mortgaged districts by loans and Tunkhwahs, or other 
modes of assignment; a system, which the Honorable the 
Court of Directors has declared to be contrary to the letter, 
and subversive of the spirit of the treaty of 1792. 


No. IX. 
From Governor Duncan. 
My Lorp, Bombay, 23rd May, 1798. 


I beg leave, on the occasion of this first communication, to 
assure your lordship that it’s not having been earlier has cer- 


40 GOVERNOR DUNCAN To Oct. 


tainly proceeded from no other motive than a reluctance to 

\/appear forwardly intrusive on your lordship's time, having 
otherwise little else to impart than what will have much sooner 
reached you through the correspondence of the Commission- 
ers in Malabar and of the Board here, with the Government 
of Fort St. George, and with the acting Governor-General ; 
nor have our lastest advices from the coast tended hitherto to 
throw any satisfactory light on what may be the Sultan’s in- 
tentions, but should he have been induced to more peaceable 
councils, so fortunate a change must, no doubt, have been 
the happy effect of the influence of your lordship’s opportune 
arrival, and of its consequences. 

Being still, however, uncertain here as to the event, I 
think your lordship may consider as meriting some degree of 
attention, the following memoranda, collected from such 
information as could be furnished by Captain Smedley and 
the officers of the Raymond, from the opportunities they had 
whilst in company with their captors of deriving insight into 
the views of the French as connected with Tippoo; all which 
seems but too corroborative of the other indications on the 
same subject, which were such as to have induced us very 
earnestly to convey all the knowledge we possessed on the 
subject to the Admiral, with the hope of thereby frustrating 
the arrival of succours to Tippoo by the way of Mangalore, 
as might, no doubt, have been ensured but for the early de- 
parture of the Suffolk and Arrogant to the other coast, 
which was immediately followed by the surprise and capture 
of our Indiamen, the loss from which to the Company will 
not, including the Amelia destroyed by fire, exceed four 
lacks and thirty thousand rupees, instead of the very large 
amount which by the newspapers it appears to have been un- 
derstood to amount to on the other side of India, and we have 
taken measures to provide against the recurrence of such a 
misfortune by fixing the seat of the commercial residency at 
Cannanore, under the guns of which fortress several India- 
men may at atime, or separately, find effectual protection 
from any enemy. 

With the best wishes for the success and honour of your 
lordship’s administration, and the sincerest desire to contri- 

\, ‘bute towards it by every exertion that in my station I can 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 41 


make, as well as thence to merit and enjoy the gratification 
of your lordship’s correspondence and advice. 
I have the honor to be, 
My Lord, 
Your Lordship’s very obedient humble servant, 
The Rt. Hon. the Earl of Morninaton, K. P. JouN Duncan. 
&c. &c. &e., Bengal. 


(The Memoranda gives the evidence of some English pri- 
soners on board La Preneuse French frigate, as to a copy of 
the proceedings at the Isle of France, in reference to Tippoo 
Sultaun’s embassy having been hung up in the state’ cabin of 
La Preneuse, whose officers repeatedly inquired whether 
Tippoo had not already declared war against the East India 
Company. ] 


No. X. 
Minute of the Governor-General on Tanjore. 31st of May, 1798.’ 


I take this early opportunity of communicating to the Board 
the annexed Letter, delivered to me by the Secret Committee 
of the Honourable the Court of Directors, containing the 
final judgment of the Government at home upon the impor- 
tant question of the succession to the Musnud of Tanjore ; 
together with the orders to the Government of Fort St. 
George, and to myself for executing that judgment. Upon 
my arrival at Fort St. George I had the satisfaction to learn 
that the general state of India in relation to the internal si- 
tuation of our possessions, as well as to external politics, was 
such as would admit of the immediate execution of the orders 
of the Secret Committee, but other material considerations 
occurred to my mind which led me to conclude that some mo- 
dification in the manner of carrying those orders into effect 
was necessary, for the purpose of securing the attainment of 
the substantial ends of justice, to which the views of the 
Secret Committee were principally directed. 

By the annexed despatch the appointment of a Commission 
to examine and report the real state of the country of Tan- 
jore is ordered, as a step preparatory to the ultimate measure 
of placing Serfogee upon the Musnud, 


42 MINUTE OF THE GOVERNOR- 31 May. 


From the best information which I could collect during my 
stay at Madras, I am convinced that while a large portion of 
the country shall remain in the hands of the present Rajah, 
and while his authority shall be acknowledged to be lawful, 
the inquiries of such a Commission would be embarrassed in 

vevery shape, and frustrated in the end; and that the final 
result would prove equally prejudicial to the interests of Ser- 
fogee, and highly injurious to the prosperity and happiness 
of the people of Tanjore. 

To enable the Commission to prosecute their inquiries with 
any prospect of success, it would be necessary that they 
should have access to all the accounts of the Palace, and that 
they should have powers to require the attendance of all 
persons whom they might deem capable of furnishing them 
with information respecting the real state of the country. 

It could not be expected that the present Rajah would wil- 
lingly give his consent to an inquiry which must terminate in 
exposing his evil administration, or that, if he could be pre- 
vailed upon to acquiesce in such a measure, he would not 
oppose to its progress obstacles which no diligence or ac- 
tivity could overcome, and which must render the whole in- 
vestigation abortive. 

The report of a Commission so embarrassed must have 

/proved insufficient to answer the views entertained by the 
Secret Committee of founding upon it the basis of a new set- 
tlement for the country of Tanjore. 

In addition to this consideration, it would have been impossi- 
ble to expect that a Commission under such circumstances could 
have produced a report within any short period of time. The 
information which I received at Madras convinced me that no 
report could be made by such a Commission within a shorter 

- space of time than ten or twelve months; a degree of delay 
as contrary to the spirit of the orders of the Secret Committee 
as to the substantial purposes of justice. 

It could never have been in the contemplation of the 
Government at home, after the solemn adjudication of the 
Musnud to Serfogee, to postpone to so distant a day, by 
an act of their own, his final restoration to his acknowledged 
rights. 

For so long a period of time it would not have been pos- 
sible, by any degree of vigilance, to have concealed the real 


1798. GENERAL ON TANJORE. 43 


object of the inquiry from the auoiouy mind of the present 
possessor of the Musnud of Tanjore. 

Under such circumstances Amer Sing would no longer have 
felt any interest in the welfare of the country, or in fulfilling 
the stipulations of the Treaty of 1792 with regard to his 
payments to the Company; and it cannot be doubted that he 
and his adherents would have endeavoured, by every means 
in their power, to protract the investigation, in order to avail 
themselves of the interval for the purposes of extortion and 
embezzlement. 

The consequences to the interests of Serfogee, to those of 
the Company, and to the welfare of the people of Tanjore, 
are evident. 

To have appointed a Commission without the consent of 
the present Rajah, and to have empowered them to act inde- 
pendently of his authority, would have been considered by 
him, as well as by the other powers of India, as a violation of 
the Treaty of 1792, to which we are bound to adhere so 
long as we continue to recognize him as the lawful Prince of 
Tanjore. 

To obviate these difficulties, I determined previously to my 
departure from Fort St. George to place Serfogee upon the 
Musnud with all practicable dispatch, and to direct that the 
necessary inquiries into the state of the country should be 
made after his accession; when I have no doubt that they 
may be prosecuted with facility, and may furnish materials 
for a final arrangement of the affairs of Tanjore conformable 
to the orders of the Secret Committee, and equally beneficial 
to all parties. 

The inquiry into the relative rights of Serfogee and Amer 
Sing having been prosecuted principally at this residency, 
and it being necessary for the honour and reputation of the 
British name to accompany the deposition of the latter with a 
full explanation of the grounds on which so important a mea- 
sure was determined, I did not think it advisable to issue my 
final orders to the Government of Fort St. George until I 
had been enabled, by a reference to those who had been em- 
ployed in the conduct of the inquiry in Bengal, to frame a 

distinct statement of its nature and object. 

Accordingly I have postponed my ultimate instructions to 
the Government of Fort St. George until the present mo- 


44 MINUTE OF THE GOVERNOR- 31 May. 


ment; it is now my intention to direct that Government to 
place Serfogee upon the Musnud of Tanjore without further 
delay. 

I propose to leave it to that Government to make such ar- 
‘rangements as they may deem advisable for carrying this 
measure into execution in the most expeditious manner, and 
for guarding against any disturbance or insult to the Rajah, 
Amer Sing, or his family. I trust, however, there are no 
reasons to apprehend any such event. 

It will be proper, notwithstanding, before the present 
Rajah is apprised of the intentions of Government, that pre- 
cautions should be taken for preventing the removal of any 
of the public treasure, jewels, or papers from the Palace; 
and I think it advisable that the resident, the commanding 
officer of the troops, and any other persons whom the Go- 
verninent of Fort St. George may direct to accompany the 
Resident for that purpose, should be ordered to fix their 
seals on the apartments in which such papers or effects are 
lodged, until Serfogee shall be established on the Musnud. 

No time should be lost in removing Amer Sing from Tan- 
jore to whatever place the Government of Fort St. George 
may think proper, and a suitable guard should be stationed 
with him for his protection: his future place of residence will 
be determined by circumstances. 

I have prepared for the Rajah, Amer Sing, to be delivered 
to him on announcing the decision of the Company, a letter, 
communicating the grounds of the judgment in favour of the 
right of Serfogee, and assuring him that his person shall be 
protected; and that whatever shall be adjudged to be his 
private property, and not to belong to the Sircar, shall be se- 
cured to him, together with a suitable provision for his main- 
tenance so long as he shall conduct himself in all respects to 

7 the satisfaction of the Government of Fort St. George. 

Immediately after Serfogee shall have been placed upon 
the Musnud, it will be proper to cause a proclamation (of 
which I now lay a copy before the Board), with translations 
in all the country languages, and copies of all the questions 
stated to the Pundits regarding the succession both here and 
at Fort St. George, to be fixed up in the most public places 
in Tanjore. 

_A letter has also been prepared, to be delivered to Ser- 


1798. GENERAL ON TANJORE. 45 


fogee on communicating to him the decision in favour of his 
right to the Musnud; and the Government of Fort St. George 
shall be instructed to require, at the same time, his assent to 
the following stipulations, which, however they may be au- 
thorized to modify in case any circumstance of which I may 
not at present be apprised, should render such modification 
necessary :— 

First, That he will acquiesce in the appointment of a Com- 
mission, to consist of Company’s servants, for the purpose of 
inquiring into the present state and resources of Tanjore. 

Secondly, That he will allow the Commission to have access 
to all the public accounts and records of the country, whether 
deposited in the Palace or elsewhere. 

Thirdly, That he will cause the attendance of all persons 
whom the Commission may require to appear before them for 
the purposes of their inquiry; and that he will afford them 
every assistance in his power for the speedy and successful 
accomplishment of it. 

Fourthly, That until the Commission shall have closed the 
proposed inquiry, and until the arrangements which may be 
agreed upon in consequence shall have been carried into 
effect, the Treaty of 1793 shall continue in full force, in the 
same manner as if no change had taken place in the succes-' 
sion, and consequently the servants of the Company shall 
retain the management of the Soubahs, which have been as- 
sumed in consequence of the failure of Amer Sing in the pay- 
ment of his kists. ' 

Fifthly, That whenever the Commission shall have ter- 
minated the proposed inquiry, he will consent to such ar- 
rangements as the Government of Fort St. George, with the 
sanction of the Governor-General in Council, may deem expe- 
dient for the better management of his country, and particu- 
larly for the due administration of justice; and also for secur- 
ing to the Company the more regular discharge of their ex- 
isting and future demands on Tanjore. 

Sixthly, That he, jointly with the Government of Fort St. 
George, will engage to afford full protection to the persons of 
Amer Sing and his family, and that he will secure to Amer 
Sing such property as that Government may determine not to 
belong to the Sircar; and also that he will pay to Amer Sing 

punctually, through the Government of Fort St. George, such 


46 MINUTE OF THE GOVERNOR- 31 May. 


sum for his maintenance as that Government may think rea- 
sonable, so long as Amer Sing shall conduct himself in every 
respect to their satisfaction. 

Considering the disorders that have prevailed in Tanjore 
since the accession of Amer Sing, the little experience which 
Serfogee can be supposed to possess with respect to the ma- 
nagement of his affairs, and his want of proper officers for 
the conduct of business, added to the heavy demands which 
he must discharge immediately upon his accession, I am con- 
vinced that it would be equally conducive to his interests, 
and to those of the Company, that in addition to the several 
stipulations which I have now detailed, Serfogee should con- 
sent to transfer the entire charge of the country of Tanjore to 
the Government of Fort St. George for a period of one or more 
years after his accession, that Government engaging to be 
accountable to him for whatever should be collected from the 
country beyond the amount of the annual sum due to the 
Company under the Treaty of 1792, and also affording him 
a sufficient allowance for the maintenance of his rank. 

I do not however think it proper to direct the Government 
of Fort St. George to make any proposition to him to this 
effect. The Secret Committee have most justly remarked, 
that as it is our duty to interfere in the settlement of the suc- 
cession to the Musnud of Tanjore, for the purpose of reme- 
dying that injustice which originated in our former interfer- 
ence, so it would afford just cause of reproach against us, if, 
after such a lapse of time, the Native Powers of India were to 
observe us interfering in the present instance in order to carry 
into effect any forfeiture in our own favour. I deemit of the 

greatest importance to the national honour, that no grounds 
should be afforded for suspicion, that the change in the suc- 
cession had been dictated by a desire to extend our influence 
in the country, or by any other motives than those of a strict 
regard to justice. 

Should, however, the Rajah be sensible of his inability to 
enter on the immediate arrangement of the country, and ex- 
press a desire to the Government of Fort St. George that 
they should for that reason assume the temporary charge of 
it, that Government will have my sanction to acquiesce in his 
wishes on the terms I have already stated. 

Should the Rajah determine to undertake the charge of the 


1798. GENERAL ON TANJORE. 47 


part of the country which has not been assumed under the 
Treaty of 1792, I am of opinion that every indulgence ought 
to be shown to him with regard to his first payments, and 
that the provisions of the Treaty of 1792, for cases of failure, 
should not be put in force against him until he has had ade- 
quate time to effect his payments from the resources of the 
country. Vv 

To this indulgence, however, I think it will be proper to 
annex a condition, that the Rajah shall pay due attention to 
the recommendation of the Commission in the selection of his 
ministers, and of his other principal officers, as the only 
means of convincing us that the indulgence will not be 
abused. 

I am also of opinion that, if it should be found necessary, 
the Government of Fort St. George should assist the new 

Rajah, by guaranteeing to the Soucars the repayment of 
such pecuniary advances as they should make to him for the 
cultivation of the country, provided that the amount of such 
advances be limited and applied by the advice and under the 
superintendance of the Commission. The Commission,should 
also be empowered to require from the Rajah such security 
as they may deem sufficient to preclude the difficulties that 
might arise from the failure of the Rajah in the repayment of 
any sum advanced to him by the Soucars upon the credit of 
the Company. 

I recommend that the Commission should consist of three 
persons; and as] am satisfied that the Government of Fort 
St. George are equally sensible with myself how deeply the 
honour of the Company and of the British nation is con- 
cerned in repairing the injuries which the country of Tanjore 
and its lawful prince have sustained by the usurpation of 
Amer Sing, and how much the attainment of this important 
object must depend on the conduct of the Commission, I 
have the fullest confidence that they will select for it those 
servants of their establishment who are best qualified to dis- 
charge so sacred a trust. 

The Government of Fort St. George will furnish the Com- 
mission with such detailed instructions as they may think 
proper. I recommend to their particular attention the follow- 

ing points, which appear to me of essential importance, but 
which I would authorise that Government to adopt, with 


48 MINUTE OF THE GOVERNOR- 31 May. 


such alterations as they may think the circumstances re- 
quire. 

Besides obtaining the most exact information of the state 
and resources of the country, the attention of the Commis- 
sioners should be directed to lay a foundation for its future 
improvement. 

For this purpose they should endeavour to recall the inha- 
bitants, who are said to have emigrated from Tanjore during 
the administration of Amer Sing, by offers of pecuniary aid 
or by such other measures as they may deem most likely to 
prove effectual; but above all their attention should be di- 
rected to the repair of the mounds and water-courses, and 
other works of a similar nature. 

/ All oppressive taxes and exactions, and other abuses which 
may have been introduced under the administration of Amer 
Sing should be abolished, and such arrangements as local cir- 
cumstances will admit, should be made for defining, as far as 
may be practicable, the rights of the cultivators of the lands, 
and of all other persons, from whom the revenues of the coun- 
try of whatever nature may be collected. 

I trust that little difficulty will arise in introducing these 
arrangements into the districts already under the charge of 
the servants of the Company, or in obtaining the Rajah’s 
consent to the extension of them to the Soubahs which have 
not been assumed, should the Rajah retain those Soubahs 
under his charge. 

With a view of securing to the people the benefit of those 
arrangements, and the advantages of effectual protection in 
their persons and properties, the attention of the Commission 
should be directed by the instructions of the Government of 
Fort St. George to the speedy establishment of Courts for 
the Administration of Justice in civil and criminal cases. 
Upon this subject, which I deem to be one of the most im- 
portant branches of the powers to be delegated to the Com- 
mission, it does not appear to me at present proper, or indeed 
practicable, to give any detailed orders; but I shall take the 
earliest opportunity, after the receipt of the report of the 
commission, to lay before the Board such a system for the 
better administration of justice in Tanjore as shall appear 
suitable to the circumstances of that country, and to the 
manners and customs of the inhabitants. 


1798. ON TANJORE. 49 


With regard to the nature of the further security which it 
may be proper to require from the Rajah for the more regu- 
lar discharge of his payments, I am not at present prepared 
to offer any decided opinion on this important subject until I 
shall have received the report of the Commission to be ap- 
pointed for ascertaining the real extent and nature of the re- 
sources of Tanjore. This subject must, however, form one 
of the early objects of the attention of the Commission, and I 
shall be anxious to receive their sentiments, with the opinion 
of the Government of Fort St. George, respecting it. 

My inquiries during my continuance at Fort St. George 
were directed through every channel of information which I 
could discover, to ascertain how far the expectations of the 
Secret Committee with respect to the improvement of the 
revenues of Tanjore, and to the consequent augmentation of 
the Rajah’s annual payments to the Company, were likely to 
be fulfilled. The result of this investigation, which, how- 
ever, was necessarily incomplete, leads me to apprehend that 
the Secret Committee have formed rather too sanguine a cal- 
culation of the expected produce of the revenues of Tanjore. 
The amount of those revenues depends entirely upon the 
annual price of grain, which fluctuates every year, according 
to the state of the crops in Tanjore, and to the necessities of 
other countries. In 1793, the year upon which the Com- 
mittee found their calculation, the effects of war, and famine 
in the neighbouring countries, had caused an extraordinary 
demand for the exportation of grain, which necessarily raised 

the price in Tanjore far beyond the usual average. What- 
ever increase may be expected from future improvements in 
the management of the country, I cannot found, upon the 
produce of the year 1793, an expectation ofa permanent aug- 
mentation of revenue to the extent supposed by the Secret 
Committee. 

I think it my duty to suggest these doubts with respect to 
the probability of any considerable increase of receipts from 
the Rajah of Tanjore, for the purpose of calling the attention 
of the Board to a subject which has anxiously engaged that 
of the Secret Committee, and which will demand the most 
ample investigation whenever the report of the Commission 
shall have furnished sufficient information to enable me to 
pursue it with effect. MorninGTon. 

VOL, I. E 


50 THE HON. FREDERICK NORTH June, 


No. XI. 


To the Earl of Mornington. 
My pear tLorp, Bombay, 3d June, 1798. 


As I left England on the 18th of February, this letter, and 
those which accompany it, will probably give you the first 
information of my intended nomination to the Government 
of Ceylon. I can call it as yet no more than intended, as I 
received orders from Mr. Dundas to take my departure on 
board of the first fleet that should sail; and to wait for my 
commission and instructions at Bombay. What that com- 
mission and those instructions may be, I cannot positively 
say; I am pretty well assured that Mr. Dundas’s intention 
is to avoid, as much as possible, the inconvenience of giving 
up the island at present to the Company, and the very great 
one of rendering it entirely independent of the Company’s 
Government; but in what manner these ends will be accom- 
plished, I cannot pretend to guess. By a debate in the India 
House, which your Lordship will read in the papers, and 
which took place since I left London, it seems as if Mr. 
' Dundas had given a promise, that in case the island should 
be preserved at the peace, the Crown would resign it to the 
Company; but for this supposition I have no authority but 
the newspapers, and my private opinion of the propriety of 
the measure. All that I know is, that when I left London, 
three weeks before my embarkation Mr. Dundas had decided 
that my nomination and that of the other political and mili- 
tary servants of the Government should derive from the 
Crown; but that at the same time I should be put under the 
direction and controul of the Governor General. The reve- 
nues of the island were to be given immediately to the Com- 
pany, so that in respect to the administration of them, I 
should be precisely in the situation of the Presidents of Mad- 
ras and Bombay, but without a Council. Such being (as I 
hope it will) the spirit of my instructions, the words of my 
commission can signify very little. For I am so perfectly 
convinced of the necessity of all the parts of the Great Indo- 
British Empire being actuated by one spirit, that I shall con- 
sider myself exactly in the same situation with the Govern- 


1798. TO THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 51 


ments of Madras and Bombay, not only in effect, but even in 
form, as far as the consciences of the Crown lawyers, and the 
King’s Ministers will allow. In all probability (whether we 
keep the island or no), I shall be the last King’s Governor of 
it; and as I hope to remain all that time under your direc- 
tion, I trust that the anomalous nature of my situation will 
not occasion any inconvenience to either of us. 

I have the honour in the meantime to remain, with the 
greatest respect and regard, 

My dear Lord, 
Your most obedient and faithful Servant, 
Freperic Nortu. 


No. XII. 


To the Earl of Mornington. 


My pear Lorp, Bombay, 5th June, 1798. 

I have written another private letter to the Governor Ge- 
neral, who, I suppose, will wish to account for the arrival in 
India of a person unhouseled, unappointed, unannealed as I 
am; with seven or eight more of his Majesty’s Servants in 
embryo, who, like myself, have as yet no security for their 
employment but the word of Ministers; a sea voyage of four 
months, and the expense of necessary preparations. Froma 
conversation which I had with you last summer, I should 
imagine that my appointment to the government of Ceylon 
would not surprise you. Mr. Dundas, however, did not com- 
municate his intentions on that subject to me till very late in 
November. Too favourable an idea of the resources of that 
island had at that time made him resolve on keeping it en- 
tirely in the King’s hands; of which system, however, more 
mature reflection made him see the inexpediency and, as it 
was thought impossible to treat about a possession already 
ceded to the Company, he at length determined to retain the 
government and the sovereignty for the Crown, but he gave 
up to the Company the entire administration and disposal 
of the revenue, instructing at the same time the future Go- 
vernor to consider himself as under the direction of the 
Governor General. [low this was to be accomplished was 
taken ad referendum; but the unfortunate person destined 


52 4“1HE HON. FREDERICK NOwt. June, 


to that employment, together with the Secretary to the Go- 
vernment, and the Clerks in the office, was obliged to set out 
from London in January, and from the Isle of Wight in 
February, under the assurance of finding commissions and 
instructions at Bombay. As our passage has been rather a 
short one, I am not surprised at the non-arrival of those very 
necessary papers; and as, in the short time of my service, I 
have had many proofs of the spirit of patience and long suf- 
fering with which the public officers are blessed, from the 
chiefs to the lowest clerks, in respect to the expedition of 
instruments, which vulgar minds would have prepared, writ- 
ten, and dispatched in half an hour; I cannot say that I shall 
be much astonished if I do not receive them these three 
months. What I am more anxious about is the substance 
and nature of them. There are so many objections to be 
made to every arrangement hitherto proposed, and such con- 
siderable changes appear to have taken place in the inten- 
tions of Government, (if one may judge from the speeches of 
their friends in the India House) since I left London, that I 
am perfectly uncertain how the business will be settled. At 
the samé time I have the satisfaction of knowing that I have 
taken every step in my power to render every possible arrange- 
ment easy and simple. My appointments are to be ten thou- 
sand a-year, commencing from the day of my embarkation, 
which was the thirty-first of January. Those of Mr. Cleg- 
horn three thousand, and those of the other gentlemen em- 
ployed, altogether fourteen hundred and fifty. The Com- 
mander-in-Chief is, I hope, to be Lieutenant Governor; but 
that is not quite certain. I own that I think the sending out 
more Europeans than necessary to a Government so little 
likely to remain with the Crown, may occasion much incon- 
venience, and I took care in my recommendations to avoid, as 
much as possible, any incumbrance to the Crown or the Com- 
pany on that head. 

Lord Clive was expected to leave England in March or 
April. I am glad to find that India has so many charms be- 
sides the beaux yeux de la cassetia, that men with sixteen 
thousand a-year in possession, and two and twenty thousand 
in expectancy are enamoured of her; and I am very glad that 
those charms were not discovered sooner lest my poor little 
island of cinnamon should have been carried off by some more 


1798. TO THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 53 


powerful suitor than an indigent younger brother. But 
what really gives me great pleasure is that Lord Clive is a 
very good-natured, right-headed, sensible man, and exactly 
the person we could wish for—you, as a tributary Prince, I 
as a neighbouring Potentate. 

I have little public news to tell you, and that little by no 
means comfortable ; every body engaged in abusing the as- 
sessed taxes or the modifications in them. Threats of inva- 
sion on rafts of half a mile long by a quarter broad, which all 
but sailors think impossible; the first peer of the realm toast- 
ing the sovereignty of the people at a Jacobin meeting, and a 
great depression of spirits (God knows why) throughout the 
country, are what I left in England, Since that a Portu- 
guese ship we spoke with near the Canaries, informed us that 
the Spanish fleet was at sea, and Lord St. Vincent’s gone 
after it. 

Your dear country, Ireland, is as troublesome as ever; 
though the new Commander-in-Chief seems to be liked both 
by castle and country. It is reported that the Chancellor 
and the Government there are no longer very cordial, but I 
do not absolutely know the truth of that report. 

In France a new Fructidor was every moment expected, in 
which Barras and Frangois de Neufchateau, the new Mo- 
deratists, would probably be sent to Guiana. Switzerland 
had been invaded, made peace with, and invaded again, and 
Rome was on the point of being devoured by an irruption of 
Cispadanes, and France, on a pretence of a riot at Rome 
executed by themselves, in which a French General was mur- 
thered; the fate of the German Empire was uncertain; so 
was the disposition of the new King of Prussia. At first it 
thad a favourable appearance, but politics are so profligate at 
present, that a share of plunder may overturn the wisest and ° 
honestest determinations. > 

Believe me ever with the sincerest regard, 
My dear Lord, 
Your most obedient faithful Servant, 
Freperic Norti. 


54 FINANCIAL MINUTE OF June, 


No. XIII. 
To General Harris. 


My Dear Sir, Fort William, 9th June, 1798, 

Although I imagine that the enclosed Proclamation must 
have reached you, I think it most advisable to transmit a copy 
of it to you. There seems to be so little doubt that the Pro- 
clamation really was published at the Mauritius, that it must 
become a matter of serious discussion between this Govern- 
ment and Tippoo. How such a discussion may terminate it 
is utterly impossible to say. Perhaps the result of it may be 
to prove that M. Malartic has exaggerated, or wholly misre- 
presented the intentions of Tippoo; but on the other hand, 
if Tippoo should choose to avow the objects of his embassy 
to have been such as are described in the Proclamation, the 
consequences may be very serious, and may ultimately involve 
us in the calaniity of war. I wish you to be apprised of my 
‘apprehensions on this subject, and to prepare your mind for 
the possible event. You will, therefore, turn your attention 
to the means of collecting a force, if necessity should unfor- 
tunately require it; but it is not my desire that you should 
proceed to take any public steps towards the assembling of 
the army before you receive some further intimation from me. 

I have the honour, &c. 
MorninecTon. 


No. XIV. 
Extract from a Minute of the Gov. General, { Financial] 12th June, 1798.4 


In urging the necessity of attempting the reduction of our 
expences, I do not mean to recommend that species of impro- 
vident economy which in this country, above all others, would 
ultimately prove real profusion, and the source of every abuse. 
I do not mean to deprive persons holding laborious and res- 
ponsible stations of the liberal reward to which they are justly 
entitled, and which ought upon every ground, both of policy 

“! and justice, to furnish them with the means of acquiring a com- 
petent fortune, and of returning to their native country within 
a moderate period of service. This principle in my opinion is 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 55 


the foundation of the present system of government in India ; 
and it should always be held sacred and inviolable in every 
attempt to revise the Indian establishments. On the other 
hand, it is difficult to believe, that establishments of such 
magnitude and intricacy as those of the British Empire in 
India, should not in the course of time require frequent re- 
vision. 

Without therefore pledging myself to the amount of any 
saving which may ultimately appear practicable, I propose 
immediately to commence a general revision of all public 
establishments of Bengal, and to direct the adoption of a 
similar measure at Madras and Bombay, as well as at all our 
subordinate settlements, and in all our recent acquisitions 
from the enemy. 

My intention is that the revision of the Civil Establish- 
ment of Bengal, should be made under my own immediate 
superintendence, with the assistance of the acting President 
of the Board of Revenue, Mr. Bebb, one of the Members of 
the Board of Trade, and the Accountant General, &c. 
Mr. Tucker sub-secretary in the Judicial and Revenue De- 
partment, 

These gentlemen, I propose to appoint to be a committee 
for the purpose already mentioned; Mr. Tucker to act as Se- 
cretary to the Committee. 

The proceedings of the Committee may be laid before the 
Board, either when the enquiry shall be completed, or occa- 
sionally, as circumstances may require. 

No better principles can I think be prescribed for the con- 
duct of the proposed measure, than those laid down in the 
minute of Lord Cornwallis, recorded on the proceedings (v. No. 
+13.) in the secret and separate department of the 31st January, 
1788, when the last general revision of the Establishments - 
under this Presidency took place. , 

I recommend, therefore, that the Committee shall be 
furnished with such parts of those proceedings as relate to 
the Civil Establishments, together with copies of all papers 
relating to the alterations which have been subsequently 
made on them; in order that the Committee may know the 
grounds on which all the existing Establishments have been 
formed, and consequently may be able to judge, how far 

change of circumstances or any other cause, may have ren- 


56 FINANCIAL MINUTE OF June, 


dered any alteration necessary, either in the constitution of 
any Department of Government, or in the allowances annexed 
to any existing office. Any relief in the Military branch of 
our expences, must arise either from reductions in the effec- 
tive strength of the Army, or in the number of Troops on 
field allowances, or from the reform of any Offices or Official 
Establishments, which may be found superfluous. 
A reduction of our ‘effective strength, attended with any 
\Alegree of danger to the public safety, would frustrate its own 
object. On the other hand, whenever it shall appear, that 
the circumstances which led to the late augmentation of our 
Military Establishments no longer exist, and that no new 
causes have arisen to require the maintenance of so large a 
force, it will be our duty to relieve the finances of this Go- 
vernment from that part of our heavy Military charge. 
_ It will be my care to watch with the utmost degree of 
anxiety, the favourable moment when this desirable measure 
may be adopted, without incurring that risk, which might 
defeat its expected effects. 

Without entering into any minute detail of the actual state 
of the Political system of India, it will be sufficient to observe, 
that, although I perceive no circumstance either in the pre- 
sent disposition, or in the actual strength and condition of 
the Native Powers, which should afford reason to apprehend 
the approach of hostilities from any quarter, I do not think 

Vit consistent with prudence to reduce our Army, until we 
shall have been enabled to ascertain with more accuracy the 
designs of Tippoo Sultan, and of Zemaun Shah, and until the 
settlement of the Province of Oude shall have acquired more 
vigour and consistency. In the mean while, however, I re- 
quest that the Commander in Chief, will undertake on the 
principles prescribed by Lord Cornwallis in the minute of the 
31st January, 1788, the revision of such parts of the Mili- 
tary Establishments as are neither connected with the effec- 
tive strength of the Army, nor with the pay and allowances 
of the different Ranks fixed by the Honorable the Court of 
Directors, and by this Government. 

At present, I shall propose to reduce merely two articles of 
our Military Charges, which rest on grounds entirely distinct 
from any to which I have adverted. 

The first, the regiment of Hindostannee cavalry, purchased 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. “BT 
for two lacs of rupees from Mr. De Boigne, in February, 
1796; which I propose to transfer to the Nabob Vizier on 
the same terms. 

I am aware that it is desirable to reduce rather than to aug- 
ment the force of the Vizier. Whatever troops, however, it 
may be thought advisable for him to maintain, should be 
capable of effective service, this regiment may be substituted 
in the room of any other corps that he may be induced to 
disband. ; 

The troops now quartered in the Fort of Allahabad, are 
I understand at present upon the Vizier's allowances, and the 
Commander in Chief has stated to me sufficient reasons, for 
continuing that indulgence to them until the Ist August next, 
but from that period I think it would be advisable (and I 
have the satisfaction to state the concurrent opinion of the 
Commander-in-Chief, as will appear by his minute upon this 
subject), that those allowances should cease, and that in 
future the garrison of Allahabad, should receive the same 
allowances with that of Chunar. Quarters will of course be 
provided for the European troops at Allahabad, and no rea- 
son can exist against placing them in every respect on the 
same footing with those attached to the garrison of Chunar. 

The revision of the several branches of our revenue may 
very properly be referred to the same Committee appointed 

to revise our Civil Establishments under my inspection. It is 
not possible to form any accurate estimate of the improve- 
ment of our resources which may be the result of such an in- 
quiry; Iam aware that the demand of Government on the 
landholders is fixed in perpetuity, and consequeutly that no 
addition can be made to the land revenue. Even under dif- 
ferent circumstances, I would not recommend any additional 
assessment, considering the land to be already taxed as highly 
as is consistent with the interests of the Company and theN 
prosperity of the country. Perhaps, however, regulations for 
accelerating the recovery of outstanding balances might be 
devised, without injury or oppression to the landholders, or 
to the cultivators of the soil. 

The customs, the stamp duties and the tax on spirituous 
liquors, may admit of considerable improvements either in the 
mode of collection, or by the variation of the rates, and other 

e 


58 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON June, 


sources of revenue may be devised without injury to the 
country. 

In directing the extension of these measures to the Presi- 
dencies of Fort St. George and Bombay, I shall propose the 
regulations of their civil and military establishments on the 
same principles of justice and liberality which constitute the 
rules of this Government. It will also be a leading object of 
my propositions on this part of the subject to connect with 
the reform of the Civil Establishments of Fort St. George 
and Bombay, and of our territories upon the coast of Mala- 
bar, the introduction of the system of internal administra- 
tion of justice and collection of revenue established in Bengal 
*with so much advantage to the Government and to the people. 

The extension of this system to our possessions upon the 
coast is an object of great anxiety to the authorities in 
England. 

Under all the circumstances of the present moment, I do 
‘not think it would be advisable to propose the reduction of 
any part of the effective strength of our armies on the Coast 
of Coromandel or Malabar. 

The Governments of Fort St. George and of Bombay 
should be directed to revise the several branches of their 
‘revenue in the same manner as shall be adopted at this Pre- 
sidency; I trust that I shall find in the Governments of Fort 
St. George and of Bombay, as well as in their Servants se- 
lected for the execution of these’ important measures, the 
same degree of zeal for the public interests and of alacrity in 
promoting their improvement, which I have had the satisfac- 
tion to observe in every department of the Company’s Service 
in Bengal. The situation of our affairs, although happily 
‘exempt from any immediate danger of the calamity of war, 

demands the most spirited exertions of every upright Ser- 
vant of the Company, as well as the cordial co-operation of 
of every sincere friend to the prosperity of the British in- 


terests in India. * 
, MorninGron. 


1798. TO TIPPOO SULTAUN. 59 


No. XV. 
To Tippoo Sultaun.—Written the 14th June, 1798. 


Immediately on my arrival in Bengal Sir Alured Clarke 
communicated to me your friendly letter to him, stating that 
some people of the Coorgah country, having descended from 
the woods and mountains, had fixed their residence in the 
villages of Kauntamunghe and Coloorbogee, &c. 

[Recapitulate the contents of the letter.] 

Sir Alured Clarke has also communicated to me your 
answer to the letter from the late Governor-General, Sir 
John Shore, respecting the claims of the Company and of yout 
Highness to the district of Wynaad, bordering on Tamber- 
cherry. Being anxious to afford you every proof in my 
power of my sincere desire to maintain the good understand- 
ing which had so long subsisted between your Highness and 
the Company, I made it one of the first objects of my atten- 
tion to examine all the papers existing on the Company’s re- 
cords, as well respecting Wynaad as the glistrict of Sauleah, 
in which it appears that Kauntamungle and Coloorbajee are 
situated. From these papers I find that not only the right to 
the districts of Wynaad and Sauleah has remained in 
doubt, but also to the district of Amerah, and Ersawaraseemy, 
and to some other considerable territories on the side of 
Malabar. Your Highness is well aware that it is a maxim 
among states who are sincerely disposed to maintain the rela-| 
tions of amity and peace, to bring all contested points of this 
nature to a speedy determination. A seasonable and tem- 
perate discussion of those differences of opinion, which must 
occasionally arise between Powers of the most pacific disposi- 
tion, tends to prevent quarrels between their subordinate 
officers, and to obviate the misrepresentations which each 
party is apt in such cases to make to the respective Govern- 
ments. This is the most friendly as well as the most prudent 
course, and will always defeat the views of interested and v 
designing persons, who may wish to foment jealousy, and to 
disturb the blessing of peace. For this object Lord Corn- 
wallis, the Nawab Nizam Ali Khaun, and the Peishwa Pun- 
dit Perd’haun wisely provided in the treaty of peace con- 
cluded with your Highness at Seringapatam, by establishing 


60 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON June, 
» 


a regular mode of bringing to an amicable adjustment, with 
the knowledge and approbation of all parties, any questions 
which might hereafter arise between your Highness and any 
of the allies respecting the boundaries of your adjacent terri- 
tories. I am persuaded that it is your Highness’s disposition 
to maintain faithfully your public engagements with the Com- 
pany. On my part you will always meet with a religious ad- 
herence to every article of the treaties subsisting between us. 
On this occasion, therefore, it is my intention to depute a 
respectable and discreet person to meet, upon your frontier, 
such of your officers as your Highness may please to name, 
for the purpose of conferring together, of discussing the 
grounds of the respective claims, and of satisfying each other 
on all points respecting which any doubts may be entertained 
on either side. 

It would not be consistent with your Highness’s high re- 
putation for justice and good faith to refuse to énter into this 
candid investigation; I therefore entertain no doubt that as 
soon as you shall have fully understood the nature of this 
representation youywill afford every facility to the conduct of 
the necessary inquiries, and will use your endeavours to 
bring them to a speedy determination; and for this purpose 
that you will, without delay, direct your officers at Koual 
Bunder (or Mangalore) to enter into conference with those 
deputed by the managers of the Honourable Company's 
affairs on the coast of Malabar. The result of the confer- 
ences will be communicated to me by the Government of 
Bombay with all practicable dispatch; and you may rely 
upon it, that after regular discussion shall have taken place, 
according to the established law of nations, and to the prac- 
tice uniformly observed on every occasion of disputed boun- 
dary which has arisen between your Highness and the allies 
since the conclusion of the Treaty of Seringapatam, I will 
not suspend for one moment the full acknowledgment of 
whatever shall appear to be your just right. 

In the meantime, as the districts of Amerah and Souleah 
have been in the possession of the Coorgah Rajah for several 
years, your Highness will no doubt see the propriety and 
justice of recalling the troops sent into the neighbourhood of 
Souleah. Your Highness must be sensible that uutil I have 
been satisfied of the justice of your claims in a regular and 


1798. TO TIPPOO SULTAUN. 61 


amicable manner, I will never suffer any of the Company’s 
allies or dependants, whose country and interests I consider 
to be in every respect the same as those of the Company, to 
be forcibly deprived of territories of which they have so long 
held possession. With the most cordial disposition to main- 
tain the intercourse of friendship with your Highness, I trust 
that I shall always meet an equal return on your part; and 
therefore I cannot but lament that your Highness did not 
immediately resort to the established channels of peaceable 
negociation, in place of stationing a military force upon the 
frontiers of the territory possessed by an ally of the Com- 
pany. Confident, however, that your Highness, upon a full 
review of all the circumstances of the case, will be equally 
inclined with myself to conform to the dictates of justice, I 
am satisfied that after our respective officers shall have con- 
ferred together, and explained to each other all matters that 
remain in doubt, we shall have no difficulty in terminating 
these long depending questions to our mutual satisfaction. 
(A true copy) MornincTon. 
N. B. Epmonstone, Persian Translator to Gow. 


No. XVI. 


Extract of Letter from the Secret Committee of the Court of Directors, to 
the Governor-General in Council of Bengal, dated \8th June, 1798.* 


“‘ We take the earliest opportunity of acquainting you that 
we have received information from His Majesty's ministers 
that a very large armament of ships, troops, military stores, 
&c. has been lately fitted out at Toulon, and that it sailed 
from thence on the 1th ult, Although the ultimate object 
of this armament has not been ascertained, it is not impro- 
bable, from many circumstances that have transpired, and 
from the spirit of daring adventure by which the French 
have been actuated during the present war, that its destina- 
tion may be for India, either (having first taken possession of 
[Lgypt) by way of the Red Sea, or by Bussora. His Majesty’s 
ministers have therefore informed us, that immediate measures 


* Received by the Governor General in Sept. 1798, 


62 SECRET COMMITTEE TO June, 


will be taken for a considerable augmentation of the European 
force in the East Indies; you may therefore expect that not 
less than 4,000 seasoned and disciplined troops, and perhaps 
a larger number may be sent to the Company’s settlements 
with all possible expedition, part of which will, we trust, 
reach India not many months after the receipt of this des- 
patch. Should the expedition, notwithstanding the measures 
taken by His Majesty's Government to intercept and defeat 
it in the Mediterranean, reach Egypt, and be destined for 
India by either of the routes we have mentioned, a part of 
His Majesty’s fleet, consisting of two men of war and pro- 
bably asloop, now under dispatch for India, will be ordered 
to be stationed in the Straits of Babelmandel, and in the 
Gulph of Persia, for the purpose of intercepting any force 
that may be proceeding to India that way. 

** A copy of a Proclamation, issued at the Mauritius in the 
month of March last, has been transmitted to our several 
presidencies by Mr. Pringle, the Company’s agent at the Cape 
of Good Hope. We are unable to judge whether this Pro- 
clamation be in reality what its import declares it to be, and 
Tippoo has really conceived any hostile designs against the 
British empire in India, or intended merely as a feint, with a 

¥ view to embroil us with that prince. Our respective Govern- 
ments will, of course, have taken such precautionary measures 
in consequence as appeared to them necessary and applicable 
to existing circumstances. 

“ Our empire in the East has ever been an object of jea- 
lousy to the French, and we know that their former Govern- 
ment entertained sanguine hopes of being able to reach India 
by a shorter passage than round the Cape of Good Hope, 
and we have no doubt that the present Government would 
risk a great deal, and even adopt measures of a most enter- 
prising and uncommon nature, for the chance of reducing, if 
not annihilating, the British power and consequence in that 
quarter of the world. To effect this, without the aid and 
previous concert of one of the Indian Powers, seems almost 
impossible, and would scarcely be attempted. In the present 
situation of India, Tippoo appears to be the fittest instru- 
ment to be employed in the furtherance of such ambitious 
projects. 

“ Jt is highly improbable that Tippoo should have entered 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 63 


into any league with the French without some apparent pre- 
paration on his part of an hostile nature in furtherance of 
their designs. If such, therefore, shall have been the case, it 
would be neither prudent nor politic to wait for actual hosti- V 
lities on his part. We therefore recommend, that if you shall | 
not have adopted the necessary measures for bringing Tippoo 
to a satisfactory explanation before the receipt of this des- 
patch, that you should immediately take the proper steps for 
so doing, accompanying this inquiry with such a disposition 
of your force as may give effect to it; and ‘should you judge, 
either from his answers, or from the steps he is taking, that 
his designs are such as the French Proclamation represents, 
and that he is making preparations to act hostilely against us, 
we think it will be more advisable not to wait for such an 
attack, but to take the most immediate and most decisive 
measures to carry our arms into our enemy’s country, not 
failing at the same time to make known to the Powers in alli- 
ance with us the necessity of such measure, and that we have 
not in view a wanton attack upon our inveterate enemy with a 
design to augment our own power, but anecessary and justifi- 
able défence of our own possessions, and calling upon them 
for the assistance they are under engagements to furnish us. 
* But although we have thus recommended energy, firm- 
ness, and decision in your conduct towards Tippoo, we rely 
upon your using the latitude allowed you in the preceding para- 
graph with the utmost discretion, that we may not be involved 
in a war in India without the most inevitable necessity, of 
which necessity we leave you to be the sole judges. And as 
it is impossible for us to conjecture, should either the Pro- 
clamation circulated at the Mauritius be founded, or the force 
now in the Mediterranean be really destined for India, what 
measures the implacable revenge and rash enterprise of the 
French may induce them to undertake against the British 
power in India; we can only exhort our several Governments 
to be constantly upon their guard, and watchful against sur- 
prise, by not only keeping the troops in perfect order for 
action, and our forts and garrisons in constant preparations of 
defence, but if it shall appear necessary, by encouraging mi- 
litary associations amongst our civil servants and others, as in 
this country, which may be prepared to act on any emergency; 
and in carefully keeping in view every channel through which 


64 EARL OF MORNINGTON To June, 


it may be possible for France to get an European force out to 
India, and taking precautionary measures to prevent it. 

‘“* We have transmitted copies of this despatch to our Go- 
vernments of Madras and Bombay.” 


No. XVII. 


To General Harris. 


My Dear Sir, Fort William, June 20, 1798. 

You have before this time received my letter inclosing 
M. Malartic’s Proclamation, and advising you of the probabi- 
lity of my being under the necessity of making a serious 
representation to Tippoo Sultaun on that subject. I now 
take the earliest opportunity of acquainting you with my 
final determination. I mean to call upon the allies without 
delay, and to assemble the army upon the coast with all pos- 
sible expedition. You will receive my public instructions in 
the course of a few days. Until you have received them it 
will not be proper to take any public steps for the assembling 

\of the army, but whatever can be done without a disclosure 
of the ultimate object, I authorise you to do immediately, in- 
tending to apprise you by this letter that it is my positive 
resolution to assemble the army upon the coast. I wish to 
receive from you, by express, a state of the force which 
you can put in motion immediately, and within what time you 
can make any large additions to it. 

By the same express you will also have the goodness to in- 
form me what station you deem the best for assembling a 
force with a view of marching directly to Seringapatam, and 
at what period the army must move for that purpose, so as to 
reach Seringapatam before the coast of Malabar shall become 
safe for the approach of any naval force. I will send you, as 
soon as possible, the largest supply in specie which I can 
procure. If you could dispatch your answers to my ques- 
tions by any fast-sailing vessel, and could send with your 
answers any intelligent officer, who might be capable of 
entering into all the details of your force; of the seasons, and 
all other circumstances connected with the object of striking 
a sudden blow against Tippoo before he can receive any fo- 


1798. TO GENERAL HARRIS. 65 


reign aid, you would greatly assist me in the arrangement of 
my measures upon this serious occasion. 

You may rely upon my unremitting attention to whatever 
communications you may make to me, and upon my most cor- 
dial support in all your exertions. 

You will of course feel the absolute necessity of keeping 
the contents of this letter secret. 

MorwnincTon. 


No. XVIII. 
From General Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Dear Lorp, Madras, 23rd June, 1798. 

Your lordship’s favour of the 9th is just received. 

Sir Hugh Christian sent the Proclamation to this Govern- 
ment by the same opportunity as to yours, and we had the 
honour to forward your lordship our answer to Sir Hugh 
the 7th instant. 

For my own part I have no doubt (as matters now stand 
with the French) but Tippoo will explain away our just 
grounds of complaints, although I am convinced he has com- 
mitted himself to the full extent of the Proclamation. 

His inveteracy to us will only end with his life, and he will 
always seize any opportunity that offers to annoy us; but, 
notwithstanding this, and that the political circumstances of 
India are now much in our favour, it perhaps still remains a 
matter of serious consideration whether, in our very great 
want of cash, and the effect our being engaged in war in this 
country may have on the affairs in Europe, it would not be 
better that he should be allowed to make the amende honor- 
able if he be so inclined, than that we should avail ourselves 
of the error he has run into, and endeavour to punish him 
for his insolence. On my part your lordship may depend on 
my following your instructions most implicitly. In respect of 
my secrecy on the point, and until I hear further from you 
I shall only quietly move a battalion or two towards the point 
of assembly, and one of which was predetermined for the 
place it now will go to. The 36th might move from Pondi- 
cherry to Arnee, as we have in the latter unoccupied bar- 

VOL. I. F 


66 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON June, 


racks for Europeans; but for this J must wait Sir Alured 
Clarke’s final determination .on that corps. A supply of 
grain to our garrisons is actually in forwardness according to 
regulation, and it will be very easy to make additions where 
necessary, without any suspicions arising. 

It was very pleasing to hear that your lordship has some 
cash to send us; but it is necessary you should understand, 
that the whole mentioned will not more than make up our 
known deficiency to the end of September, and our debts are 
so injurious to our credit, that until something is done in 
liquidation of them, we cannot expect to raise a rupee by 
loan. 

With the greatest respect and esteem, &c. &c. 
GeorcE Harris. 


No. XIX. 
The Eari of Mornington to General Harris. 
My Dear Sir, Fort William, 26th June, 1798. 


You will have received my public and private letters re- 
specting the late conduct of Tippoo Sultaun, and the steps 
to be taken in consequence. I wish you would furnish to 
me, without delay, any intelligence which you may have re- 
ceived respecting the publication of the Proclamation at 

* the Mauritius, or the conduct of the ambassadors of Tippoo 
during their residence in that island. I also wish to receive 
your latest advices respecting the state of Tippoo’s force, and 
of his actual preparations for war. JI am sorry that your 
Government should have addressed to Admiral Rainier a 

x letter which my public duty compels me to disapprove. You 
know the sincerity of my wish to support the authority and 
dignity of the Government of Fort St. George, which I con- 
sider to be intimately and inseparably connected with my 
own. But the general protection of India belongs to me, 
‘and forms one of the most material branches of my arduous 
responsibility. In the discharge of this duty I shall always 
expect to be assisted by the co-operation of the other presi- 
dencies ; but if they offer opinions to the commanders of His 
Majesty’s squadrons with respect to the distributions of the 
naval force for the general purposes of defence, without re- 


1798. TO GENERAL HARRIS. 67 


ference to me, or any previous knowledge of my intentions, 
the utmost degree of confusion must be the result, and my 
views for the public safety must be wholly defeated. The 
public letter which I have sent to you in Council upon this 
occasion is intended as a general rule for the conduct of the 
Government of Fort St. George on all similar occasions, and 
I trust that you will have the goodness to recommend the 
observance of this rule both to your Council and your suc- 
cessor, Without full previous communication on all points 
of this ‘nature, there can be no hope of our serving the public 
with advantage or credit. Nothing could have given me\” 
more pain than the necessity of authorising a word in any 
of my public letters which might bear the appearance of a 
sentiment of disapprobation of the conduct of the Govern- 
ment of Fort St. George, under your administration; but I 
felt it the more necessary, by a public expression of my 
opinion, to prevent the measure to which I have adverted, 
from becoming a precedent. You will not suppose that such a 
feeling of public duty can be at all connected with any dimi- \, 
nution of my respect and esteem for you; sentiments which I 
shall’always retain, and which I am happy on every occasion 
to avow. 


Mornineron. 
No. XX. 
General Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 
My bear Lorp, Madras, 6th July, 1798. 


I received your Lordship’s favour of 20th ult. late on 
Tuesday evening, the $d inst., and I must confess that the 
momentous importance and magnitude of the subject created 
reflections which for a time totally absorbed every other con- 
sideration. Adverting, however, to your Lordship’s wish of 
speedy communication, and really myself thinking it of infinite 
consequence, my first step was to countermand the Bombay 
frigate, on the eve of sailing as convoy to a transport with 
stores for the fleet, and which the Victorious took charge of. 

I then directed my thoughts to find such a description of 
person as your Lordship was desirous should accompany my 
answer, and did not hesitate in fixing on Major Beatson as 


68 GENERAL HARRIS July, 


particularly qualified to give your Lordship the fullest satis- 
faction on every point: that you may refer to his judgment. 
Revolving the subject of the 20th June in my mind most 
part of the night, the magnitude of the difficulties to be 
encountered. in an attempt to strike a sudden blow before he 
can receive any foreign aid, by the cessation of the monsoon, 
on the other coast, occurred to me so forcibly, and have by 
subsequent reflection become so deeply impressed upon my 
mind, that I should think myself culpable if I did not men- 
tion my thoughts on the subject, even though your Lordship 
had not requested information from me. Although the same 
points have unquestionably occurred to your Lordship, yet 
the practical experience of them may readily be supposed to 
have made stronger impressions on my mind than any idea 
of them that could have been conveyed by a different way to 
your Lordship. 

The dilatoriness, indecision, and cowardice of our allies 
are beyond belief to those who have not been eye-witness 
to these qualities in them, and there is a moral assurance 
’ that not one of them will take the field, or be of the least use 
to us, even admitting that their own situation presented no 
obstacle to their joining us at any period, until we have 
secured a position to cover their advance, or gained a de- 
cided advantage over Tippoo. Thus they acted with Lord 
Cornwallis, and as that conduct was governed by principles 
which have undergone no change, a repetition of it must be 
expected. 

From these data it is to be argued that any sudden blow 
must proceed entirely from ourselves; and this cannot, I con- 
ceive, be attempted without a very large reinforcement from 
Bengal, aided by the Bombay army. When the reinforce- 
ment from your Presidency could join us I need not speak 
of, but the Bombay army could not begin to assemble until 
the cessation of the monsoon on the other coast, the period 
at which I understand that your Lordship had hoped the 
important object in view would be in an advanced state of 
accomplishment. The last is a difficulty that might perhaps 
be rendered of less importance by your Lordship’s exertion 
in despatching a more ample force from Bengal; but the 
difficulties which press here are, I fear, insuperable: 
Draft and carriage cattle, even for the defensive army, in 


1798. TO THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 69 


Statement, No.1, cannot be collected, to enable us to do 
more than merely reach the Baramahal before the monsoon 
in October, or to repel the incursion of an enemy. No. 2, 
from Mr. Cockburn, the best informed man, perhaps, in India 
on this subject, fixes nearly fhe same period for the equip- - 
ment of the defensive army; but such a force as should be 
capable of undertaking the siege of Seringapatam with a 
reasonable prospect of success, could not in all probability 
reach the place before the Ist of February. 

The last point I have to observe on is certainly the most 
material,—the feeding the army when it has arrived at the 
point we wish. This difficulty obliged Lord Cornwallis to 
relinquish the idea of besieging Seringapatam the first time 
he marched against it, and but for the almost despaired of 
co-operation of the Mahrattas, it would have been doubtful 
whether he would ever have been able to return to it again. 

These considerations, the little dependence to be placed 
on our allies, and the facility of communication with the 
Bombay army by Puligautchery, with the importance of 
possessing the Coimbatore country, incline me at present to 
be of opinion, that when we engage in this momentous un- 
dertaking, it will be advisable to do it to the southward, 
by attempting the Cauveryporam Pass; but this point, and 
the seasons for the junction of the armies of the different 
coasts, and for the final enterprize to be undertaken ;—how 
far the aid of the Nizam and Mahrattas, or one or other, 
may be essential. to our success in the attack ?—whether it 
may be practicable to subsist an army during the siege with- 
out any assistance from those Native Powers ?—what posts 
should be selected for magazines, so as to have the shortest | 
and most secure line of communication by which to receive 
supplies?—and the grand subject of Brinjaries, whether the 
Native Powers assist us or not?—are considerations on which 
there is not now any time for me to enlarge further, but on 
which I can with confidence refer your Lordship to Major 
Beatson for solid information. Your Lordship will also find 
great assistance from Lieut.-Colonel Scott; and on the sub- 
ject of feeding and carriage, I know no one who can give 
more correct information than Captain Sandys, or on whom 
more dependence can be placed for honest execution of 
orders in that line. Nothwithstanding, however, the short- 


70 GENERAL HARRIS July, 


ness of time, and the aid your Lordship will otherwise have 
from the practical knowledge of the three gentlemen I have 
named, I should have felt it incumbent on me to have stated 
my sentiments in a more detailed and connected manner, on 
a subject of such moment to the national interests, if your 
Lordship had not the advantage of Sir Alured’s complete 
knowledge of this army, and the resources of the Carnatic. 
Upon the latter subject your Lordship is also perfectly in- 
formed, from the pressing representations of this Govern- 
ment and the letter I had before the pleasure to write to you, 
and both must have convinced you that the whole expense of 
the war must be borne by your Presidency. Your Lordship 
may perhaps be inclined to send the Bombay back imme- 
diately with treasure; if not, I think it necessary to mention 
that we had intended to send her for Bombay when the 
season for making a favourable passage should arrive, in con- 
sequence of a communication from Mr. Duncan, representing 
how much they required her assistance on that coast. Now, 
my Lord, having taken such a range of the subject as I trust 
you will not be displeased with receiving, I have only to 
assure you that, however I may think it right to point out 
difficulties, there can be none in such of your orders as it 
may be my part to perform, which I shall not cheerfully and 
zealously attempt to overcome. I should not, however, close 
this letter without informing your Lordship that I have 
apprized Admiral Rainier of the importance of preventing 
any communication of the French with the Malabar coast. 
The various subjects which press upon my mind in deli- 
berating upon this serious undertaking, and the urgent 
necessity of a prompt communication, render it far from im- 
probable but that some points may have been imperfectly 
stated; if however, upon more mature consideration, any 
inaccuracy shall appear to have crept in, your Lordship may 
depend that I shall have candour immediately to acknowledge 
and correct the error. 


Be assured, my dear Lord, 
I am with esteem, 
Your Lordship’s faithful and obedient Servant, 
Geo. Harris. 


1798. TO THE EARL'QF MORNINGTON, 71 


P.S.—For your Lordship’s further information I send 
Colonel Close’s answer to the questions I put to him con- 
nected with this subject, to which I have subjoined such 
observations as have appeared to me necessary.* 

I also send a memorandum I have just received from 
Mr. Webbe, in consequence of my request that he would 
state his sentiments in writing upon the possible event of a: 
war with the Sultan, owing to the Mauritius Proclamation, 
and upon the practicability of striking a sudden blow against 
him before he could receive any foreign aid. From the hur- 
ried perusal which I have made of it, I observe that he has 
taken too partial a view of a question of too great a magni- 
tude to be decided by our present limited means of know- 
ledge. That he has assumed as a fact that the choice of 
peace for some time to come, or war at the present period, 
rests with us, not adverting to the probability if Azim ul 
Omra be really disaffected towards us, of his hereafter join- 
ing Tippoo and the French, and the equal chance of the 
Mahrattas being induced, when they are able, to unite in the 
league against us, scarcely noticing the strong circumstance 
that the Islands can now afford him no farther aid; passing 
over the immense benefits that will be secured by success, 
and the advantage with which we shall enter upon a war 
having a perfect knowledge of his country, and possessing a 
strong chain of posts on our frontiers, with a faithful country 
in the rear; and, lastly, that the French, at the conclusion of 
a peace, will possess the desire they now feel of subverting 
our Indian Empire, and that the Sultan will at that period 
be fully prepared to assist thelr purposes, if he should not be 
now arrested in his progress. These, however, are consi-\ 
derations which belong to your Lordship’s better judgment 
to decide, and I should not have troubled you with the 
memorandum if J did not feel an anxiety that you should be 
prepared to meet all the arguments which will be stated with 
so much virulence by the opposition at home against the 
author of the war, if unfortunately we should be compelled 
to that calamity. 


* See Appendix. 


72 MR. JOSIAS WEBBE’S MEMORANDUM July, 


No. XXI. 


From Mr. Josias Webbe, Secretary to the Government of Madras. 
6th July, 1798. 
Memorandum for General Harris, in consequence of his late 
conversation upon the possibility of an early rupture with 
Tippoo Sultaun. 


That M. Malartic’s Proclamation is genuine I have no 
doubt, because it is a termination perfectly consistent with 
an intrigue which, from respectable intelligence at the time, 
there was reason to believe on foot previous to the departure 
of his ambassadors for the Mauritius; but whether we 
should take measures at this period for punishing or prevent- 
ing the effect of this negociation, is the most momentous 
question which can be proposed in this place. Upon this 
question it is certainly my duty to state my ideas; but the 
shortness of time does not admit of any arrangement. 

As all questions of national war should, I suppose, be de- 
termined by the national interest, it is natural to advert to 
the state in which India was placed by the Treaty of Sering- 
apatam, because that state was considered at the time we had 
the means of changing it, as most advantageous to the Bri- 
tish interests. The principle of our policy then was, the pre- 
servation of Tippoo as a Power of India, and the balance 
between him, the Mahrattas, and the Nizam by our superior 
influence and force. Whether this principle has been super- 
seded by other notions in Europe I know not; but whether 
any attempt can now be made to introduce a new order of 
things without a greater danger of evil than a chance of good, 
I doubt. 

Tippoo, if he has not advanced in actual strength, has 
certainly the vantage ground: the three other Powers have 
certainly receded from the condition they were in at the 
Treaty of Seringapatam. The shock which the balance be- 
tween the Nizam and the Mahrattas sustained from the war- 
fare that was allowed to terminate in the Treaty of Kurdlah 
has driven him from his position, and the distractions which 
have since prevailed at Poonah, incapacitate them from hold- 
ing their ordinary sphere, while the force of the English is 
checked and retarded by the pressure of the French war. 


1798. TO GENERAL HARRIS. 13 


In the discussions which took place upon the political state 
of India, when the expedition against Manilla was under con- 
templation, it was, I believe, acknowledged that the confusion 
at that time in the Mahratta empire was such as to render 
any exertion of their strength improbable, or at least not 
formidable. The subsequent confinement of Nana Furnavees, 
the eccentric irregularity of young Scindia, and the want of 


/ 


power in the Peishwa, certainly corroborated that notion, -“ 


which, if it then left us little to apprehend from their enmity, 
can now give us little to expect from their friendship. The 
only respectable part of the Nizam’s force is under the un- 
controlled command of the French party: that influence has 
increased, and whether our inertion during the contest be- 
tween his Highness and the Mahrattas may have alienated 
the disposition which his ministers once manifested towards 
ours, whether it is the natural consequence of a prevailing 
interest inimical to us, we have much reason, from Captain 
Kirkpatrick’s late correspondence, to apprehend that our 
weight at Hyderabad is not great. The Nizam’s irregular 
troops proved, during the last war, one of our serious impe- 
diments: his efficient force could hardly be employed, cer- 
tainly not trusted, under the command of Perron. In respect 
to ourselves, a very large proportion of the coast army is 
detached, our means of resource curtailed by the war in 


Europe, and our credit in this country, at least upon this y 


coast, bankrupt. If, therefore, with all the advantages we 
possessed in the year 1790, with the hearty and effectual 
co-operation of the Mahrattas, and with the friendship of the 
Nizam, our operations against Tippoo were not made suc- 
cessful without the greatest difficulty, 1 am fearful that, 
under the general change of circumstances which I have men- 
tioned, and which I believe to be correct, an attack upon him 
now is more likely to end in discomfiture than victory. 

But let us descend to more particular considerations. Al- 
though we have every reason to be satisfied that Tippoo’s 
army has been kept in a state efficient and prepared to meet 
the events, which there might be reason to expect from the 
general appearance of convulsion throughout India, yet in 
the same discussions on the subject of the Manilla expedi- 
tion, both Sir J. Shore and Lord Hobart were of opinion 
that he was not likely to hazard a rupture without a very 


74 MR. JOSLAS WEBBE'S MEMORANDUM July, 


large reinforcement from the French. Whatever may be the 
object of Tippoo’s embassy to the Mauritius, or whatever 
may be the event of it in Europe, the late intelligence from 
the islands, which leaves us no room to doubt that the mili- 
tary have been sent to France, and the French marine dis- 
persed, satisfies me that no immediate co-operation can take 
place; and consequently, that no rupture is to be appre- 
hended but by our own provocation. 

This argument I urge in the perfect conviction that during 
this unprecedented contest in Europe, peace in India is in- 
dispensably necessary, and that it ought not to be risked 
without the prospect of positive advantage. If, however, it 
should be argued, that this very conjunction of circumstances 
which I have mentioned, should impel us to make an imme- 
diate effort against Tippoo, I answer that all our former 
united and unexampled exertions were made against Tippoo 
single, and unsupported by the French; but, single and un- 
supported as he was, except by the natural obstacles which 
oppose our progress, the exertions of the allies were only 
successful. For this I refer to the chance by which Banga- 
lore fell, to the condition of Lord Cornwallis’s army before 
the junction of the Mahrattas, in May 1791, to the difficulty 
with which the battering train was advanced to Seringapatam 
in the second campaign, to the condition of the Bombay 
army, and to the state in which our own army returned after 
the conclusion of peace. With the war well advanced, with 
our preparations and arrangements on foot for twelve months 
before, and with such a combined alliance as may be now 
despaired of, it still cost Lord Cornwallis two campaigns 
before he could besiege Seringapatam. 

From the intrigues at Seringapatam, and the consequent 
embassy to the Isle of France, I have no doubt that the 
French emissaries were employed in persuading Tippoo to 
hostilities with us, under promises of immediate assistance. 

, This the Sultan appears to have considered insufficient 
ground to provoke a war; but if he should be provoked to 
war by us, I conceive there would be a material difference of 
circumstances; for though the French might find great dif- 
ficulty in persuading him to war, from the great difficulty of 
furnishing the force he requires, yet if he should be abso- 
lutely plunged into a war, they would find it easily practicable 


1798. TO GENERAL HARRIS. v6) 


to foment and keep it alive. Hostility with Tippoo, if it 
should be known before the conclusion of peace, would ine- 
vitably tend te protract the war in Europe, or even to revive 
it if peace should have been made. The French, despairing 
perhaps of any successful attempt upon England itself, would 
leave nothing unattempted to subvert, or at least curtail, our 
Indian empire. This argument is of the more force, because 
a very small increase of French soldiers is a very material 
addition to Tippoo’s strength. 

In the event of hostility, I take it for granted the object will 
be to make it a war of alliance against Tippoo. I doubt that 
it is practicable to obtain the assistance of the Mahrattas: 
the present disunion of the chiefs renders a hearty co-opera- 
tion impossible. The assistance of any party, if even it could 
be persuaded to risk the danger of absence from its own 
territories, might have the natural effect of throwing its ad- 
versaries into the opposite scale. If such an event should 
take place, the Mahrattas would remain, as they now are, 
balanced against each other, while Tippoo, freed from the 
apprehension of their united force, would be at liberty to 
employ his whole cavalry against us. It is known to every 
officer in the field, that during the last war the Nizam’s 
cavalry were a heavy incumbrance to us; and if, notwith- 
standing the apparent change in Azim ul Omrah’s disposi- 
tions towards us, we should be disposed to rely on the fidelity 
of his Royal Highness’s infantry under the command of 
M. Perron, it is not extravagant to anticipate an event which 
has already happened, that marching into the Mysore 
country with his Highness in alliance, we were compelled to 
march back again with his Highness in alliance against us. 
In respect both to the Mahrattas and the Nizam, I think 
there is no reasonable ground to expect effectual assistance 
from either until we should strike some signal blow. Neither 
of them were hearty in the cause during the last war before 
the fall of Bangalore. 

Not to dwell upon the possible predicament in which we 
should be placed by a refusal of the allies to execute their 
engagements, let us look to our own means of equipping a 
force sufficient to support a remonstrance to Tippoo upon his 
embassy to M. Malartic. It must never be forgotten that 


76 MR. JOSIAS WEBBE’S MEMORANDUM July, 


the army under General Medows in the month of November, 
1790, consisted of about 5,500 European and 18,400 native 
seasoned men, and that even this army was augmented by 
troops from Bengal before it marched against Bangalore. By 
the returns you have now received, a body of about 14,000 
men can be drawn together, including Lascars and pioneers; 
a force so inadequate to an offensive war, that you could not 
venture to quit the Carnatic. From Ceylon you could draw 
no reinforcements ; but, on the contrary, might be called upon 
to increase the force on that island in the event of our army 
invading the Mysore country. The whole reinforcement must 
be sent from Bengal; of what extent it could be we have no 
means of judging, but it is bbvious that it must be so large 
as to place its arrival here at a very remote distance. The 
superiority of Tippoo in cavalry, and the greater rapidity 
with which he moves, would render it impracticable to 
proceed to the attack of Seringapatam without establishing 
a systematic chain of posts for depéts of stores and provi- 
sions. That he has endeavoured to frustrate this is evident 
from his policy in the destruction of Ossoor and Bangalore, 
and in making Seringapatam his only or principal fortification. 
By the former it is his intention to increase the difficulty of 
our approach by lengthening the line of our operation, and 
by the latter to oppose such impediments as to make the cap- 
ture of Seringapatam impracticable in the course of one cam- 
paign. The Cauveryporam pass is yet unexplored; but I un- 
derstand that the route from thence to Seringapatam lies 
through a barren country, so much interspersed with jungle 
as to be extremely adverse to the march of an army. The 
Gugulhelts pass is no longer thought of. As nothing there- 
fore short of the capture of Seringapatam can justly be con- 
sidered as striking an effectual blow against Tippoo, the 
achievement of any immediate success appears to me to be 
utterly impracticable. 

» This idea, then, of striking an immediate blow being aban- 
doned, let us look to the slow and regular equipment of an 
army for the invasion of Mysore. The different corps could, 
I believe, be assembled at Walajahbad in about two months 
from the time of their being ordered to march. The equip- 
ment of bullocks for the army, with ‘its train of field artillery, 


1798. TO GENERAL HARRIS. 77 


could not, according to my estimation, be accomplished before 
the month of January; but in respect to a train of battering 
guns, sufficient for the siege of Seringapatam, I can form no 
notion; nor do I believe Mr. Cockburn can, of the time when 
it could be furnished with cattle. This period of the season 
(January) is, by the experience of Lord Cornwallis’s cam- 
paign, too late for the establishment of a depdt at Bangalore 
and the siege of Seringapatam in the same season; for 
though we should be able to put Bangalore in a state to admit 
of its becoming a depét, we could not avoid being overtaken 
at Seringapatam by the monsoon, which sets in in May. 
Hence the necessity of a second season, and probably of a 
second equipment of bullocks, before an efficient army could 
invest Seringapatam. Supposing it however there, and 
joined by the Bombay army (the difficulty of which it is here 
unnecessary to consider), I doubt whether there are any well- 
grounded expectations that they could feed themselves. The 
experience of Lord Cornwallis’s army proves that we were 
unable to supply ourselves, or to open our rear for the 
admission of Brinjaries until we had been joined by the 
Mahratta army, and the whole country embraced. 

At present there is no grain at Arnee or Vellor, and I be- 
lieve no considerable quantity could be stored in the forts of 
the Bara-Mahal before the harvests of November. The 
vessels which bring grain from the northern ports and from 
Bengal do not arrive here before the months of September 
and October. 

Upon the whole there are sufficient grounds for concluding 
that the whole of the coast army which could be assembled 
would be incapable of offensive operations, and that they 
could not be put in motion before the month of January. 
How far, and at what period, they may be in a condition to 
make a serious attack upon Tippoo, must depend upon the 
extent and time of reinforcements from Bengal; and as 
nothing of consequence could be undertaken without them, 
the time of our making any serious impression must be pro- 
portionably delayed. 

Meanwhile the movement of our troops and military pre- 
parations could not escape the vigilance of Tippoo: his re+ 
sources are always more prompt than our own; and, as great 


78 MR. JOSIAS WEBBE'S MEMORANDUM July, 


part of his army is said to be in a state of field equipment, 
our attempt to strike a blow at him is likely to produce an 
invasion of the Carnatic before we are in a situation to resist 
him; for, as Tippoo can, in my opinion, have nothing to 
apprehend from the Mahrattas, his whole attention will be 
directed to us. A comparison between his own and his 
father’s wars, with the late experience of his own misfortunes, 
has taught him that our strength depends upon our supplies. 

he crops of the Bara-Mahal would be his first object; and 
the consequences of such a policy, which he has manifested 
by the demolition of Bangalore and Ossoor, might fix the 
war in the Carnatic, until by the consumption of our sup- 
plies, and the failure of our resources, we should be com- 
pelled to accept his terms of peace. 

When the war of 1790 begun, the funded debt of this 
Presidency was 17 lacks of pagodas, the Company’s credit 
high, and the rate of interest low. Very large subscriptions 
were in consequence made within the course of a few days to 
a 12 per cent. loan; large supplies of dollars brought hither in 
the Canton ships, and intended for the China investment, were 
converted to the purposes of the war, and immense remit- 
tances were made from Bengal, as well in specie as by bills. 
At present the funded debt of this Presidency is 51 lacks of 
pagodas; the Company’s credit so low, that their eight per 
cent, paper bears a discount of 18 and 20 per cent. ; and the 
scarcity of money so great, that their 12 per cent. bonds do 
not pass but at a discount of 4 per cent. Every mode has 
been tried without effect to raise money at this Presidency : 
our only means of supply is from Bengal. The bills which 
we have in consequence been long compelled to substitute 
for ready money payments have overstocked the market, and 
consequently pass at a discount. After repeated and urgent 
applications for money, we have been disappointed for want 
of funds in Bengal; and at this very moment, when the ex- 
penses of the military establishment for the ensuing months 
cannot be provided for without specie from thence, the only 
sum which we can confidently expect is, as I understand, 
immaterial in comparison with our wants. 

The deficit in the present resources of thjs government is 
at least 18 lacks of pagodas; the expense of an army of 


1798. TO GENERAL HARRIS. 19 


14,000 men in the field is, pag* * , and the expense of 
providing carriage for them, pag* 34,700 per month. 

Nothing can be more urgent than our representations to 
Bengal upon the state of our finances, except the necessities 
which produced them. It is a fact, that without assistance 
in money from thence, our military expenses, upon the peace 
establishment, cannot be provided for beyond the month of 
September. I am afraid, therefore, that far from being in a 
state to equip an army for the field, we shall scarcely have 
the means of marching the different corps to Walajahbad, 
while the state of the treasury renders it utterly impracticable 
to make any suitable advance for draft and’carriage cattle. 

I have not studied to exaggerate any part of this memo- 
randum; but seeing that our resources have, by the mere 
operation of the war in Europe, been reduced to a state of 
the greatest embarrassment, and having no hope of effectual 
relief but in peace, I can anticipate none but the most baneful 
consequences from a war with Tippoo. If this war is to be 
a vindication of our national rights, it is clear that we cannot 
undertake it in less than six months; and this delay, with a 
reference to our national interests, may probably admit of its - 
being postponed till we attain sufficient strength to prosecute 
it with vigour. But if war is inevitable, and the present are 
judged the most advantageous circumstances under which it 
can commence, I fear, that our situation is bad beyond the 
hope of remedy. 

This memorandum only reaches to that period at which 
your military inquiries commence, they will require no less 
serious reflection, and must occupy the thoughts of those 
who are to direct as well as of those who are to execute the 
operations of the war. For myself, I ought to apologize for | 
the freedom of these opinions, but the desultory manner in 
which they are‘’stated, will acquit me of all premeditated 
intention to give offence, and time does not admit of any 
amendment. 


J. WEBBE, 


* Blank in the original. 


80 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON TO July, 


No. XXII. 
The Earl of Mornington to the Right. Hon. Henry Dundus, &c. &. §c. 
My pear Sir, Fort William, July 6, 1798. 

With my Letter, No. 5, dispatched overland, I transmitted 
to you.a copy of the Proclamation issued by the Governor of 
the Isle of France, so long ago as the month of February 
last.* The first appearance of this Proclamation at Calcutta 
was in a newspaper of the 8th June, and the apparent im- 
pudence and rashness of divulging to the world the matter 
which the Proclamation contains, induced me to doubt its 
authenticity, until within a few days of the date of my last 
«despatch to you, when I received authentic copies of the 
Proclamation from Lord Macartney and from Sir Hugh 
Christian at the Cape. Even in the state of uncertainty 
which preceded the receipt of the despatch from the Cape, 
I thought it advisable, by a private letter, dated 9th June, 
to call the attention of the Governor of Fort St. George to 
the possibility of my being compelled to assemble the army 
upon the coast at an early period. 

Since that time I have received information, the correct- 
ness of which being corroborated from various quarters, ena- 
bles me to state the nature and circumstances of Tippoo’s 
late conduct in a connected form. — - 

Tippoo dispatched two Ambassadors to the Isle of France, 
who arrived at that island at the close of the month of 
January, hoisted Tippoo’s colours upon entering the harbour 
of Port Nord Ouest, were received publicly by the French 
Government with every mark of distinction, and entertained 
at the public expense during their continuance in the island. 
Previous to their arrival, no idea existed in the island of the 
probability of a war between Tippoo and the Company, nor 
the least rumour of an intended levy of men to be made for 
Tippoo in that quarter. 

The Proclamation issued two days after the arrival of the 
Ambassadors, was assiduously circulated through the town of 
Port Nord Ouest, and publicly distributed at the house 
inhabited by the Ambassadors. One of the Ambassadors 
spoke the French language, and they were accompanied by 
a person in the Turkish dress who spoke‘French and English 


* See Appendix. 


1798. THE RIGHT HON, HENRY DUNDAS, 81 


with uncommon correctness and fluency, and also appeared ' 
to be master of most of the country languages. This person 
had been known at Bussorah under the name of Abdoolah, 
at Surat under that of Dervish, and at the Mauritius passed 
under that of Talamas: he appeared to answer the descrip-~ 
tion of one of the Agents of France mentioned by Mr. Wick~ 
ham. The Ambassadors openly and on every public occa- 
sion avowed the propositions contained in the Proclamation ; 
and Talamas’s conversation, though with more appearance of 
caution and mystery, corresponded in substance with theirs. 

An universal belief prevailed in the Isle of France, subse- 
quent to the arrival of the Ambassadors, that Tippoo would 
make an immediate attack on the British possessions in India, 
but the temerity of his design was the subject of general 
ridicule. 

You will observe in the Proclamation a direct reference 
made to the powers of the Ambassadors with respect to 
settling the pay and final discharge of the recruits to be 
raised. The Ambassadors publicly acted under this refer- 
ence, and concluded engagements with the recruits in the 
name of Tippoo. Propositions were also made to a large 
body of the regular troops of France to enter into the service 
of Tippoo. This was rejected, and these troops some time 
afterwards were embarked for France,* in consequence of the 
disturbances which prevailed in the island. But notwith- 
standing the rejection of the proposition made to the main 
body of the French force in the island, one hundred officers 
(few of much experience or skill) and fifty privates of the 
lowest class of the democratic rabble of the island, were 
actually inlisted under the Proclamation. With this force 
the Ambassadors embarked on the 7th March, under every 
public honour from the Government, on board the French 
frigate, La Preneuse, declaring an intention of proceeding to 
the Island of Bourbon for the purpose of obtaining addi- 
tional levies of men. The force so raised has since been 
landed at Mangalore, about the middle of April. Accounts 
vary with respect to their number, but the most probable 
intelligence is, that it does not exceed two hundred. What- 
ever may be its amount, the whole force has been received 


* Batavia was their subsequent destination. 
VOL. I. @ 


82 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


into Tippoo’s service with public marks of favour and 
honour. 

But whatever construction may be put upon the policy of 

‘\M. Malartic in this extraordinary measure, the intentions of 
[Tippoo Sultan admit of no question. He has entered into 
offensive and defensive engagements with the French, col- 
lected a force under those engagements, suffered that force 
to land in his country, admitted it into his service, and 
declared publicly through his Ambassadors that his pre- 
parations of war are complete, and that their object is the 
entire subversion of the British empire in India. 

That he has not yet obtained a force equal to the magni- 
tude of his design is a fortunate circumstance for our interests, 
but no justification of his aggression. The rashness, imbe- 

\_- tility, and consequent ill success of his councils can never be 
admitted to palliate the unqualified hostility of his actions; 
and on every principle of public faith, and of the law of 
nations, it cannot be denied that he has violated the subsist- 
ing treaties between him and the Company, and that his pro- 
ceedings have been equivalent to a declaration of war. 

Under such circumstances it became not only my right 
but my duty to take advantage of the moment of his actual 
weakness, and to strike an immediate blow against his pos- 
sessions, for the purpose of frustrating his preparations for 
war before he could receive the succours which it appears 
by the Proclamation he had demanded from the Executive 
Directory of France, as well as from the Government of 
Mauritius. 

The objects which appeared to me the most desirable, as 
well as the most easily attainable, were, first, to seize the 
whole maritime territory remaining in his possession below 
the Ghauts, on the coast of Malabar, in order to preclude 
him from all further communication by sea with his French 
allies. Secondly, by marching the army from the coast 
directly upon his capital, to compel him to purchase peace 
by a formal cession of the territory’ seized on the coast of 
Malabar. 

Thirdly, to compel him to defray our whole expense in the 
war, and thus to secure the double advantage of indemnify- 
ing us for the expense occasioned by his aggression, and of 
reducing his resources, with a view to our future security. 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 83 


Fourthly, to compel him to admit permanent.residents -at 
his court from us and from our allies, a measure which would 
enable us at all times to check his operations, and to coun- 
teract the intricacies of his treachery. 

Fifthly, to make the expulsion of all the natives of France 
now in his service, and the perpetual exclusion of all French- 
men, both from his army and from his dominions, conditions 
of any treaty of peace with him. 

Every motive of justice and policy appeared, and still 
appears, to me to demand the adoption of this or of some 
similar plan for reducing the power of Tippoo to such a 
condition as shall render him unable to avail himself of the 
solicited assistance of France, or of any other collateral aid 
which the course of future circumstances may offer to him, 
for the prosecution of his declared design of expelling the 
British nation from India.* The measure is not less neces- 
sary for the purpose of applying a seasonable check to the 
rising influence of France in India. 

The present state of our army in the opinion of all military 
men, leaves no doubt of the ultimate success of the plan 
which I have stated; and if its speedy accomplishment had 
appeared to me as certain as its ultimate success, I should 
not have hesitated one moment in ordering the movement of 
the troops for that purpose. But upon consulting the per- 
sons most conversant with military details, I found that the 
actual state of the frontier fortifications of the Carnatic, of 
the train of artillery, and of the stores of grain and other 
provisions, was such, as not to admit of any sudden move- 
ment of a large force, although it appeared certain that such 
a force might be collected within a very short space of time. 
I also found that the expense of making the necessary pre- 
parations would be very heavy, and that the result was likely 
to lead to a protracted and expensive, although, according to 
every opinion, a successful war. 

' The present reduced state of the courts at Poonah and 
Hyderabad admitted né hope of immediate assistance from 
either of those powers, and the embarrassment of our finances, 
which had so lately engaged my most serious attention, now + 
pressed with accumulated weight upon my mind. Under 


* This was the language of Tippoo’s circular to the Princes of India. 


J 


84: THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


all these circumstances, I felt with the utmost degree of pain 

“and regret, that the moment was unfavourable to the adop- 
tion of the only measure which promises effectual and per- 
manent security to the territories committed to my charge, 
and that such a step was absolutely impracticable without a 
considerable reduction of the commercial investment, attended 
by all the destructive consequences which such a blow must 
produce upon the trade of the Company, upon their pecu- 
niary affairs at home, upon the welfare of their subjects in 
India, and finally, upon the general situation of the public 
revenue and credit of Great Britain. I was also aware of the 
evil effects which the mere fact of a war breaking out in this 
quarter might produce in England, under all the anxiety and 
pressure of the present moment. 

These reflections led me to the determination of relin- 
quishing the idea of making an immediate attack upon the 
possessions of Tippoo; but I still felt that our reputation 
and honour, as well as our future security, demanded that I 
should not suffer his late proceedings to pass without notice ; 
and I am persuaded that you will agree with me, that our 
tacit submission, under an insult and injury of so offensive 
and aggravated a nature, would greatly elevate the credit 
and hopes of Tippoo and of France, and occasion a propor- 
tionate depression of our influence and consideration in the 
eyes of our allies, and of all the Native Powers of India, 
On the other hand, the result of his embassy having only 
served to expose his treachery, and the weakness of the 
enemy in this part of the world, a remonstrance of a firm but 
temperate spirit will be sufficient to satisfy our honour, and 
to convince the Native Powers that our moderation alone 
induces us to abstain from that more rigorous course of 
which his conduct would furnish the ample justification, and 
of which our strength insures the certain success. I have 
therefore called upon Tippoo to make a public disavowal of 
the proceedings of his Ambassadors; to declare distinctly 
the nature of his intentions towards us and our allies, and 
particularly to explain, without disguise, the destination of 
the force raised in the Isle of France, and lately landed at 
Mangalore. 

Ihave communicated the Proclamation in question, toge- 
ther with a statement of all the circumstances attending the 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 85 


transaction, to the courts of Poonah and Hyderabad; and I 
have claimed their concurrence in the representation to be 
made to Tippoo, and the co-operation of their respective forces 
in the event of Tippoo’s refusing to listen to the joint remon- 
strance of the allies, and of his compelling us to resort to 
arms. 

The experience of Tippoo’s recent conduct evidently proves 
that we may be deceived, if we found our calculation of his 
movements upon the ordinary principles of prudence and 
discretion. It is therefore possible that he may reject our 
moderate requisition, and suddenly involve us in a war. 
T have therefore thought it prudent to direct the army to be 
assembled upon the coast of Coromandel, and similar mea- 
sures of preparation to be taken at Bombay, but with no 
intention of employing any part of the force in active opera- 
‘tions, unless Tippoo should either refuse to make the required 
explanation, or should at once commence war against our 
possessions. The nature of the present crisis appears, how- 
ever, both to demand and to favour the execution of further 
measures of precaution, which will afford additional security 
to us in the event of war, and which may contribute to avert 
that calamity. 

In my Letters, Nos. 1 & 2, dispatched by Admiral Pringle 
from the Cape of Good Hope, I submitted to you my appre- 
hensions with respect to the declining state of our alliances 
in India, to the unfavourable change which had taken place 
in the relative situations of the several states of India with 
reference to our interests; and above all, I warned you of 
the growing influence of France in the armies and councils of 
the Native Powers. I now feel the full weight of the evil 
which I then anticipated. With a due confidence in the 
single strength of our own arms, we must acknowledge that, 
without the co-operation of the Mahrattas and the Nizam, 
and particularly of the latter, at least to the extent of faci- 
litating our convoys of provisions and stores, a protracted 
campaign in Mysoor would be attended with great difficulty, 
if not with danger. The situation of the courts of Poonah 
and Hyderabad is become much more alarming than I stated 
it to be in my letters from the Cape. If Tippoo were to 

attack us in the present moment, we could derive no assist- 
ance whatever, either from the Nizam or from the Peishwa; 


VJ 


86 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


both those powers, in their actual condition, being utterly 
disqualified from fulfilling their defensive engagements with 
us. Scindiah, who, with the greater part of his army, has 
been for along time in the neighbourhood of Poonah, has 
imprisoned Nana Furnavese, has usurped the whole autho- 
rity of the Peishwa, leaving however his person at liberty, 
and at the same time has threatened the dominions of the 
Nizam. 

-In the meanwhile the French army at Hyderabad has been 
augmented to the number of 14,000 men; and although the 
death of M. Raymond, and the resumption of the Jaghire 
granted for the maintenance of the army, have to a certain 
degree reduced the political power of this faction, yet the 
command having been conferred on another Frenchman, and 
the number of the corps greatly increased and its discipline 
considerable improved, the French party at Hyderabad can? 
not be said to be in any degree less formidable to the inde- 
pendance of the Nizam, or to our interests, than I represented 
it to be in my letters from the Cape; and I learn by letters 
received this day from the Resident at Hyderabad, that since 
M. Perron has taken the command, numbers of French 
officers have been added to it, and more are expected, al- 
though the routes by which they are introduced into the 
Deccan are as yet unknown. The danger to be apprehended 
from this party is much aggravated by two circumstances 
which have recently happened; the one that Scindiah has 
placed the corps lately commanded by M. De Boigne in the 
hands of a Frenchman; the other, that Tippoo Sultan (who 
was supposed to have been apprenhensive of the growth of 
a French faction at Seringapatam) has manifested a disposi- 
tion to admit French officers and privates to an unlimited 
extent into his service. It is probable the expectation of 
crushing the Nizam and the Peishwa, by a co-operation with 
the French officers in the armies of the Nizam and Scindiah, 
as well as the hope of founding upon the ruins of the Courts 
of Poonah and Hyderabad an influence which might rival if 
not destroy the British power, may have reconciled Tippoo 
to the perilous experiment of cultivating French principles in 
an Asiatic court. Azim ul Omra, the Nizam's minister, is 
fully aware of the present danger of the Nizam’s dominions: 
exposed to the attack of Scindiah on the one side, and to 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 87 


the intrigues of the French faction on the other, and he has 
repeatedly applied for an increase of the British detachment 
serving with the Nizam, promising that our agreement to that 
increase shall be immediately followed by the dismission of “ 
the whole of Perron’s corps. A common apprehension of the 
designs of Scindiah has produced an union of interests be- 
tween the Courts of Hyderabad and Poonah; and negotiations 
have been in agitation, with a view to their mutual security 
against that danger which threatens equal destructien to 
both. On the other hand, the Peishwa has expressed his 
desire to enter into new engagements with us, and the Resi- 
dent at Poonah has declared that if, under the circumstances 
of Tippoo’s preparations, it were thought advisable to send 
a British detachment to Poonah, Scindiah could not on any 
just ground object to such a movement, and that the mere 
presence of a British force would effectually restore the power \ 
and authority of the Peishwa. ‘There can be no doubt that 
the inefficient state of our alliances has been one main ground 
of Tippoo’s late proceedings; and this circumstance may ac- 
count in some degree for the audacious and confident spirit 
which marks the character of those measures. In the pre- 
sent posture of affairs, the position of Scindiah’s army ; 
operates as an effectual check upon the motions of both our 
Allies, and prevents either from affording us the assistance to 
which we are entitled by treaty. Thus Scindiah in reality 
renders the most useful service to Tippoo, and frustrates the 
whole object offour defensive alliance; in the meanwhile dis- 
sensions have broken out in the army of Scindiah, whose 
violence, impetuosity, and injustice have disgusted all the 
ancient connections of his family. His dominions upon the 
north-western frontier of India are in a state approaching to V 
general revolt; and, although in the present weakness of the 
internal governments of the Nizam and the Peishwa, Scin- 
diah is viewed with terror by both, there is no doubt that he 
is not in a condition to oppose any measures which we might 
think necessary to take for restoring the consideration and 
strength of either; and it is more than probable that the 
result of such measures would be to restrain his projects of 
aggrandizement and ambition, and to induce him to return 
peaceably into his own dominions. In this conjuncture, there- 
fore, neither the Nizam nor the Peishwa are likely to view 


4 


88 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO duly, 


with any jealousy the assistance which we might chuse to 
afford to either, while any opposition to such an arrangement 
on the part of Scindiah would be wholly unjustifiable and 
ineffectual. The enlargement of our subsidiary arrangements 
with the Nizam, and the conclusion of similar engagements 
with the Peishwa under similar restrictions, confined to the 
case of defence against Tippoo, would have been justifiable 
measures under any circumstances, but the aggression of 
Tippoo places the arrangement on the most impregnable 
grounds of justice with respect to Scindiah or any other 
Power, while the accidental coincidence of the interests of the 
Peishwa and of the Nizam affords a reasonable expectation 
of success. 

Under all these circumstances, I have thought it advisable 
to give to the Residents at Poonah and Hyderabad a power 
of requiring a body of troops from Bombay and from Madras, 
directing that the dismission of the French army at Hydera- 
bad should be a necessary condition of the increase of the 
British detachment at the Nizam’s court, and connecting the 
whole arrangement with various advantages which we may 
hope to secure by a new system of treaty, both with the 
Nizam and with the Peishwa. And I have further ordered 
that no step towards a new arrangement should be taken at 
either Court without the previous consent and approbation 
of the other, and without their mutual acceptance of my 
arbitration for the final adjustment of all subsisting dif- 
ferences between them. - 

It was necessary on this occasion to instruct the Resident 
at Hyderabad, with respect to the succession to the Nizam’s 
throne in the event of his death. As the Nizam has lately 
admitted Secunder Jah, his eldest son, to the personal exer- 
cise of certain acts of sovereignty, which admission is deemed 
at that Court a virtual nomination to the succession, as 
Secunder Jah is a friend to the British interests, and as none 
of the younger sons can reach the throne by any other means 
than by the assistance of the French and Tippoo (with whom 
they are intimately connected,) and by the total destruction 
of our influence, I have directed the Resident to support the 
right of Secunder Jah. The detail of the principles of this 

decision will be forwarded to you by the next despatch. 

Overtures of the most friendly nature have been made to 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 89 


this Government by the Rajah of Berar, who has entered 
into engagements with the Nizam for the purpose of restrain- 
ing the ambition of Scindiah; without deciding at present how 
far it may be advisable to cultivate a closer connection with 
the Rajah of Berar, it is my intention to send an Ambassador 
to his Court, with the double view of ascertaining his pre- 
cise objects, and of checking the motions of Scindiah, who 
will take alarm whenever the news shall reach him of any 
intercourse being established between this Government and 
the Rajah of Berar. 

I have lately received a letter from Zemaun Shah, contain- 
ing a declaration of his intention to invade Hindostan, and a 
peremptory demand of the assistance of the Nabob Vizier 
and of mine, for the purpose of delivering Shah Aulum 
from the hands of the Mahrattas, of restoring him to the 
throne of Delhi, and of expelling the Mahrattas from their 
acquisitions on the north-western frontier of India. It is 
very difficult to form a conjecture with respect to the proba- 
bility of Zemaun Shah's being able to execute his romantic 
design: That he entertains such a design is unquestionable ; 
and whatever may be the result, it is prudent to be on our 
guard, and in the meanwhile to derive every collateral advan- 
tage from his declaration. I have therefore transmitted the 
Shah’s letter to Scindiah through the Resident at Poonah, 
with the view of suggesting to Scindiah the possible danger 
of his hereditary dominions; and I have’expressed my entire 
disapprobation of the ambitious projects of Zemaun Shah, 
and my disposition to enter into defensive engagements with 
Scindiah, for the purpose of frustrating the threatened inva- 
sion, declaring to Scindiah that, whenever he shall return 
into his own dominions, he will find the British Resident at 
his durbar prepared to conclude such a defensive treaty, in 
which it is my wish to include all the Allies of the British 
Government. 

I have also signified to Scindiah, in the most amicable 
terms, my desire to witness his prosperity within the limits of 
his own dominions. As Scindiah must be perfectly aware of 
the disturbed state of his dominions, and must know that we 
hold his fate in our hands, I have every reason to hope that 

my endeavours to restore our Allies to the power of fulfilling 


90 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


their engagements with us, will not be delayed by any oppo- 
sition from him. But feeling the great importance of pre- 
venting the destruction of the power of the Peishwa and of 
the Nizam, whose dominions, in the event of Scindiah’s 
success, would immediately be divided between Scindiah, 
Tippoo, and the French, and whose ruin would furnish the 
most solid foundation for the power of the latter, I have 
directed the Resident at Poonah, if pacific representations 
should be rejected by Scindiah, to inform him that the 
British force will be employed for the protection and support 
of the authority of the Peishwa, and if necessity should 
demand, the employment of the force for those purposes, I 
have authorized that measure, provided, in the opinion of the 
commanding officer of the detachment, the force should be 
deemed adequate to the service required. I trust, however, 
that no such necessity will occur, and that Scindiah’s sense 
of his perilous situation and real interest, added to the state 
of his army and of his dominions, will induce him to abandon 
his project of annihilating our allies; and I therefore hope 
that, in the course of a few months, I shall have the satis- 
faction to find, that the result of these arrangements will 
have produced a considerable check to the growing influence 
ofthe French in India, will have effected the re-establishment 
of our allies in some degree of credit and efficiency, and will 
have restored the general balance of power upon the founda- 
tions on which it stood at the conclusion of the Treaty of 
Seringapatam. In any view, the effect of such a change in 
the face of affairs must be favourable to us, it may induce 
Tippoo to postpone the execution of his comprehensive plans 
of vengeance, or if not, it will enable us to frustrate them 
with more facility and dispatch. 

A full detail of my communication with Tippoo, with 
Scindiah, and with the Courts of Hyderabad and Poonah, 
together with a more particular statement of the principles 
upon which the whole arrangement is founded, will be dis- 
patched overland by express to the Secret Committee in the 
course of a few days; in the meanwhile I thought it would 
afford you satisfaction to receive, by the earliest opportunity, 
the general outline of the system which I have deemed it my 
duty to pursue. 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 91 


While Tippoo shall possess the means of a ready inter- 
course with the French by sea, our possessions in India must 
for ever be exposed to alarm and danger, unless we are 
always careful to maintain our preparations for war in such 
an advanced state, as will at any time afford us the facility 
of sudden and rapid movements of our military force; I have 
therefore directed the government of Fort St. George to take 
immediate measures for placing in a respectable posture of 
defence such of the frontier fortresses as Lord Cornwallis 
directed to be maintained; and I have ordered that a provi- 
sion of grain, sufficient for a large army in the field for three 
months, be constantly stored in these fortresses, and that 
monthly returns of their state be forwarded to me. I have 
also ordered that a large train of artillery be immediately 
provided, and constantly kept in readiness for use in the 
field, either at Arnee or Vellore, and that periodical reports 
of the condition of this train of artillery be made to me. 
I propose that these two regulations, although they must be 
the source of considerable expense, should be permanent, 
until some material alteration shall take place, either in the 
appearance of affairs in Europe or in India. 

Having thus submitted to you the general view of the steps 
which I have taken for providing against the event of a war 
with Tippoo, I should think myself guilty of a breach, both 
of public duty and of private friendship, if I withheld my 
conscientious opinion, that the interests of the Company in 
India can never be secure while Tippoo Sultaun shall retain 
the ready means of intercourse by sea with the French 
Government. His remaining territory on the coast of Malabar 
is his most powerful instrument of war; and in my decided 
judgment, it would be the most economical policy which 
could be adopted to seize the first just occasion of depriving 
him of so formidable an engine of hostility, even at the 
sacrifice of a temporary suspension of the investment, and of 
a considerable present expense. Upon this important sub- 
ject I wish to receive your instructions without delay. If the 
war should continue in Europe, there is little doubt that the 
impetuosity of Tippoo will afford frequent justifiable oppor- 
tunities to this Government of reducing his power. My wish 

is to know distinctly whether the Company be prepared to 
encounter the temporary inconvenience which must be en- 


92 GENERAL HARRIS, TO July, 


dured before they can obtain permanent security for their 
possessions in India. 

The orders of the Court of Directors, and the opinions of 
this Government, have uniformly concurred in declaring, that 
“the landing of any considerable French force in Tippoo's 
country must be the signal for an attack upon him.” 

I wish to know exactly, whether the term “ considerable,” 
which I observe is constantly used, is to be construed as a 
limitation of my discretion. It appears to me that the land- 
‘ing of any French force in Tippoo’s country is a sufficient 
ground of war, upon every principle both of justice and of 
policy; but more especially, after the public declaration 
which he has made of his designs against our possessions. 
Any other construction will compel this Government to re- 
main an inactive spectator of his preparations for war in 
conjunction with France; provided only that these prepara- 
tions be made gradually, and that the French force be in- 
troduced into his country in small detachments. 

The systematic introduction of French officers into the 
service of all the Native Powers of India, which Mr.Wickham 
describes as the fixed policy of France, has been pursued 
with unremitting assiduity and extensive success; if Tippoo 
should at any time be enabled to derive succour from France, 
his movements might be seconded by the general co-operation 
of large bodies of French adveuturers, who are known to 
maintain a concert in all parts of India. 
tay Lhe destruction of the French army at Hyderabad would 
certainly operate as a considerable check to the growth of 
this formidable evil: the corps of Perron being the mainspring 
of all the designs of the French party in India. But the only 
effectual barrier against the irruption of France into India 
would be our possession of the whole of Tippoo’s maritime 


territory. Iam, &c. 
MorNINGTON. 
No. XXHI. 
: General Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 
My Lorp, 6th July, 6 o’Clock, p.m. 


At the instant of our closing the packet, a letter is arrived 
from Mr. Torin, saying that the Rajah agrees to the treaty 


1798. THE FARL OF MORNINGTON. 93 


of 1792, and to such other arrangements as may be mutually 
agreed upon for the honour and interest of both parties. 

After this the Rajah adverted to his youth and inex- 
perience, to the difficulties he should have to encounter, and 
expressed a wish for assistance for a time from the Honour- 
able Company. 

Mr. Torin informed the Rajah, that upon that subject, as 
no interference could take place but what was formally and 
explicitly specified by himself, he, Mr. Torin would post- 
pone the subject for a few days, as the Company would wish 
this application to spring from his full convictien of the 
benefit to be derived from it. 

Yours, faithfully, 
Geo. Harris. 


No. XXIV. 


Hon. Frederie North to the Earl of Mornington. 
My Dear Lorp, Bombay, 7th July, 1798. 


Ihave not as yet received any letters from England, at 
which I am more angry and afflicted than surprized; as I 
know, and you will find, that business in our offices at home 
loses its importance in proportion to its distance. I am, how- 
ever, much less uneasy than I could imagine I should be in 
a state at once so uncertain, so embarrassed, and so ridi- 
culous. Governor Duncan keeps me most hospitably in his 
house, and I find many objects of amusement in the languages 
and customs of the people here. How much more interest- 
ing must they be in your great capital, where so many men 
of learning and genius are employed in elucidating them. 
Mr. Duncan tells me that the celebrated Captain Willford, 
now at Benares, has prepared for the press a long and very 
learned dissertation on the knowledge which the Hindoos 
had of geography, and that he proves from the Puranas that 
they had an intimate acquaintance with Britestan or Britain, 
with the rivers Thames and Severn, and with the history of the 
Island as given by Geoffery of Monmouth. As Captain Will- 
ford is extremely modest, and wants encouragement to pro- 
duce the fruits of his labours, Mr. Duncan is afraid that the 
departure of Lord Teignmouth, who was his declared patron, 
may have reduced him to silence, but I took the liberty of 


94: THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


assuring him that such a man as Captain Willford, and sucha 
production as his, will certainly be encouraged and protected 
by your Lordship. 
Your most faithful and obedient humble Servant, 
Freperic Nortu. 


No. XXV. 


The Earl of Mornington to J. A. Kirkpatrick, Esq. Acting Resident 

at Hyderabad. 
(Secret.) 
Str, Fort William, 8th July 1798. 

I transmit to you an authentic copy of a Proclamation 
published by the Governor General of the Isle of France, 
during the residence of two Ambassadors from Tippoo Sul- 
taun on that Island. The Proclamation purports to be a de- 
claration of certain propositions communicated to the French 
Government, in the name of Tippoo Sultaun, by his Ambas- 
sadors, then on the spot. 

It enumerates those propositions with a particularity of 
detail which would not have been hazarded in the presence 
of the Ambassadors, had it not corresponded with the sub- 
stance of the communications made by them to the French 
Government. 

In addition to the arguments founded in the nature of 
the Proclamation, and in the facts of its publication under 
the eyes of the Ambassadors, I am in possession of evidence 
which leaves no doubt upon my mind of the concurrence of 
the Ambassadors in every part of the Proclamation; and I 
cannot suppose that they would have ventured to exceed the 
limits of their instructions from Tippoo Sultaun in a matter 
of such serious importance as the conclusion of offensive and 
defensive engagements with the French Government, Under 
this Proclamation, 150 officers and privates were actually 
raised in the Isle of France for the service of Tippoo, and 
for the purposes avowed in the Proclamation; and that force 
has since been landed at Mangalore, and received into Tip- 
poo’s army with peculiar marks of honour and distinction. 

4, This circumstance is sufficient to prove that the pro- 
ceedings of the Ambassadors have obtained the sanction of 
their Sovereign, who has thus confirmed and avowed the pro- 


1798. J. A. KIRKPATRICK, ESQ. 95 


positions made through them to thg enemy, by a solemn, 
public, and personal act. Having thus entered into an offen- 
sive and defensive alliance with the French Government; 
having collected, in conjunction with that Government, a force 
openly destined to act against the British possessions; having 
avowed, through his public Ambassadors, that he has actually 
made preparations of war for the express purpose of attempt-\/ 
ing the subversion of the British power in India; and having 
declared that he only waits the effectual assistance of France 

‘to prosecute his design, Tippoo Sultaun has violated the 
treaties of peace and friendship subsisting between him and 
the Allies, and has committed a direct act of hostility against 
the British Government in India. 

That he has yet obtained no formidable assistance from 
the enemy, is undoubtedly a fortunate circumstance for the 
British mterests, but the temerity and consequent ill success 
of his councils, in no degree palliates the offensive nature of 
an aggression so unprovoked, and of a violation of faith so 
public and undisguised. It is not improbable, that he may 
still expect to receive a more effectual succour from France; 
but there is every reason to hope, that any attempt to furnish 
him with assistance from that quarter, would be frustrated by 
the vigilance and superior power of his Majesty’s fleets. 

It is, however, difficult to ascertain the precise motives 
which may stimulate the violence of his temper to action; 
and his late embassy to the Isle of France is a sufficient | 
proof, that revenge against the British Nation in India, is an / 
object which he is capable of pursuing with more zeal than 
discretion. 

Under such circumstances, it is prudent to be prepared 
to repel the attack which he has openly menaced, and as our 
future security, our reputation, and our honor, demand that 
he should be reduced to the alternative, either of makin§ 
such satisfaction to the allies, as they may hereafter require 
for the injury which he has committed, or of risking another 
contest with the British power, it is advisable to arm for the 
purpose of supporting whatever requisition we may deem 
it necessary to make to him, when our respective prepara- 
tions shall be sufficiently advanced to enable us to act with 
effect. i 

The 10th and 13th. articles of treaties of alliance be- 


96 TILE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


tween the Company, the Nizam, and the Peishwa, provide 
that “if Tippoo should molest or attack either of the con- 
tracting parties, the others shall join to punish him, the 
modes and conditions of which, shall be hereafter settled by 
the three contracting parties.” 

I desire that you will immediately communicate to Azim 
ul Omra in a formal manner the accompanying proclamation, 
and explain to him the nature of the propositions which it 
contains; you will also notify to him the landing of the 
French force at Mangalore, and declare to him in my name, 
that I consider the whole transaction as a violation of treaty, 
and a direct act of hostility on the part of Tippoo; and that 
I claim the assistance and co-operation of the Nizam under 
the 10th Article of the Treaty of Paungul. You will, how- 
ever, add, that although I should feel myself completely justi- 
fied in making an immediate attack upon the territory of 
Tippoo, my disposition to preserve the tranquillity of India, 

\Vinduces me in the first instance to afford him an opportunity 
of restraining the excess of his violence, before it shall have 
involved him in the calamity of war. 

With this view you will apply to Azim ul Omra to sig- 
nify to the Nizam my wish that he should now express his 
disposition to concur with the Peishwa, and with me, in mak- 
ing a demand of satisfaction from Tippoo Sultaun. The na- 
ture and extent of the demand, as well as the time of making 
it, to be hereafter concerted between the allies. You will 
inform Azim ul Omra that a similar application has been 
made to the Peishwa: the Resident at Poonah will be di- 
rected to communicate to you the progress of his proceedings 
at that court under the instructions which he will have received 
from me. As soon as you shall have received from Poonah 
the notification of the Peishwa’s concurrence in the proposi- 
tions made to him on this part of the subject, you will send 
me immediate advice of it. og 

If Tippoo Sultaun, in the career of his ungovernable 
passions, should refuse to make the satisfaction which shall 
be demanded of him by the allies, hostilities will become in- 
evitable; and you will signify to Azim ul Omra that I have 
already taken the necessary precaution of assembling the 

] forces of the Company with a view to that event, entertaining 
no doubt that in such a contingency, the Nizam will be ready 


1798. J. A. KIRKPATRICK, ESQ. 97 


to afford to the common cause of the allies, the effectual co- 
operation of his force. 

Although I have thought it expedient to communicate 
my instructions to you in the foregoing order, I am sensible 
that their effectual execution will be impracticable, unless 
some previous measures be taken for restoring the indepen- 
dence of the Nizam’s government, by delivering it from the 
influence of the French party, and from the hostilities menaced 
by Scindiah, as well as from the danger of future attacks on 
the part of the Mahrattas. 

The present crisis demands a serious and dispassionate 
review of the relative interests of the powers united by treaty 
for the purpose of securing an effectual barrier against the 
inordinate ambition and implacable revenge of Tippoo Sultaun. 

It has been painful to observe that since the conclusion 
of the Treaty of Seringapatam, two great branches of the 
triple Alliance have been engaged in mutual contests, of 
which the result has terminated in their mutual weakness; 
whilst the common enemy has remained at rest, improved his 
resources, and increased his strength. The unfortunate ani- 
mosity between the Courts of Poonah and Hyderabad, while 
it has tended to foment and aggravate the distractions in the 
former Court has contributed to reduce the latter to the lowest 
degree of weakness and humiliation. In the meanwhile the 
French faction at the Court at Hyderabad has grown to such 
a formidable degree of power, as to control on many serious 
occasions the councils of that state, and to menace an ascen- 
dant influence in the eventual succession to the throne of the 
Nizam. 

Although the death of Mons. Raymond, and the re- 
sumption of the Jaghire which had been granted to him, have 
in some degree reduced the political influence of the French 
army at. Flyderabad, it now forms the only efficient part of 
the Nizam’'s military strength; its numbers have been lately / 
increased ; its discipline considerably improved: and it pos- f 
sesses sufficient activity and power to attempt and accomplish 
objects of the most prejudicial nature to the independence of 
the Court of Hyderabad, to the common interests of the Ni- 
zam and of the Peishwa, as well as to those of the British 
nation in India. In the event of a war with Mysore, there 
can be no doubt that the wishes and interests of this part of 
VOL. I. H 


98 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


the Nizam’s army must be favorable to the cause of Tippoo 
Sultaun, more especially under the actual circumstances of 
his having concluded an alliance with France, and having ad- 
mitted a body of French troops into his service. If the 
French troops of the Nizam did not afford Tippoo open 
assistance, at least they could not be brought into the field 
against him without the utmost danger to the cause of the 
allies; nor could they be suffered to remain in the Deccan 
during the continuance of the contest, unless checked by the 
presence of an equally powerful force, which must in that 
case be diverted from the common objects of the war, and 
must operate as a positive diminution of our effective strength 
in the field. 

It appears, however, nearly certain, that in the present 
weak state of the Nizam’s government, the French corps in 
his service would openly join Tippoo Sultaun, and by a sud- 
den blow endeavour to seize the Nizam’s territories, and to 
secure them to the dominion of France, under an alliance 
offensive and defensive with Tippoo Sultaun. 

It is scarcely necessary to observe that the success of 
such a design must be highly injurious to the interests of the 
Court of Poonah, especially when it is considered that it must 
be the interest and inclination of Scindiah (who entertains a 
large body of infantry in his service, under the command of a 
French officer), to engage with Tippoo Sultaun and the French 
upon conditions fatal to the existence of the Peishwa’s au- 
thority, and even of his office. The junction which might 
thus be effected between the French officers with their seve- 
ral corps in the respective services of the Nizam, of Scindiah, 
and of Tippoo, might establish the power of France and India 
upon the ruin of the states of Poonah and of the Deccan. 
The Court of Hyderabad, therefore, in its present condition, is 
more likely to prove the source of additional strength to the 
common enemy of the Nizam, of the Peishwa, and of the 
Company, than to afford useful assistance to any branch of 
the triple alliance. 

From my letter to the Resident at Poonah, of which I 
enclose you a copy, you will observe that I have instructed 
him to state to the Peishwa, the arguments of prudence and 
policy which should induce him to view the restoration of the 
Nizam to a just degree of consideration and power, as an ob- 


1798. J. A. KIRKPATRICK, ESQ. 99 


ject intimately connected with the Peishwa’s own emancipa- 
tion from the undue influence by which he is now oppressed, 
as well as with his future security against the violence of 
Tippoo Sultaun, and of Scindiah. 

J refer you to the same letter for the particulars of my 
instructions to Colonel Palmer, and of the measures which I 
have authorised him to pursue for enabling the Peishwa to 
fulfil his engagements under the triple alliance. 

I am persuaded that the Azim ul Omra will at once 
perceive the advantages which must result to the interest of 
the Nizam from the restoration of the due authority of the. 
Peishwa, accompanied by the arrangements which I have 
proposed. Under those arrangements the power of the 
Peishwa would operate as a constant restraint upon the mo- 
tions of Scindiah, of Tippoo, and of the French, who are 
equally the enemies of the Peishwa and of the Nizam, and 
who menace equal danger to the tranquillity and indepen- 
dence of both. 

Immediately upon receiving this despatch you will com- 
municate to Azim ul Omra the whole of the proposed arrange- 
ments with respect to the Courts of Hyderabad and Poonah, as 
detailed in this letter, and in that addressed to Colonel 
Palmer; and you will explain to him fully the principles upon 
which the arrangement is founded, the various objects which 
it embraces, the means by-which it is to be carried into effect, 
and the ends which it is intended to accomplish, with relation , 
to the interests of all the parties concerned. 

You will at the same time apprise him without disguise, 
that the execution of the whole and of every part of the plan 
must depend upon the mutual consent of the Nizam and of 
the Peishwa. You will further express to Azim ul Omra 
that although I have viewed with great concern and anxiety 
the progress of the calamities which have disturbed the tran- 
quillity of the two courts, it is now a matter of cordial satis- 
faction to me to perceive that the result of those misfortunes 
promises an union of sentiment between the Nizam and the 
Peishwa, and affords a prospect of re-establishing the triple 
alliance on its original basis. You will also urge to Azim ul 
Omra the credit and honor which it would reflect on his ad- 
ministration, if through his means the Nizam and the Peish- 
wa should be enabled to derive reciprocal advantage and 


100 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


permanent security from a state of confusion which appeared 
to threaten their common ruin. 

Irely upon your ability and zeal for the public service 
to state the details of these important measures to Azim ul 
Orma with every circumstance of advantage. Your commu- 
nication should be unequivocal and unreserved; no part 
either of the principles or details of the arrangement requires 
any degree of concealment, my object being to unite all parties 
on the firm ground of their genuine interests. 

You will at the same time declare to Azim ul Omra, 
that the recent conduct of Tippoo Sultaun having rendered 
it my right and duty, in conformity with the laws of my 
country, to take effectual measures in concert with the allies 
for the mutual defence of our respective possessions; I am 
now at liberty to express my sincere disposition to attend to 
the propositions which he has so frequently made for the ex- 
tension of our subsidiary engagements with his Highness ; and 
you will signify my anxious desire to interpose the friendly 
mediation of the Company for the adjustment of the unfortu- 
nate differences which have so long subsisted between the 
Courts of Poonah and Hyderabad and Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 

You will further state, that I have authorised you to 
enter into an immediate negotiation with Azim ul Omra for 
increasing our present detachment with his Highness to the 
number of six thousand men, including those now serving 
with his Highness; under the following conditions :— 

i. That the services of the increased detachment, be 
subject to the same conditions of limitation and restriction as 
the present detachment, unless the Peishwa, at the instance 
of the British Government, should hereafter consent to any 
variations in those conditions. 

ii. That satisfactory and effectual provision be made for 
the regular payment of the detachment, and that the arrears of 
the Peishwa on the part of the Company be regularly balanced 
against the arrears of Subsidy on the part of his Highness, 

iii, That the whole corps officered by Frenchmen, and 
which was named the corps of Raymond, and is now com- 
manded by Monsieur Piron, be immediately disbanded. The 
French officers and privates to be conveyed to Icurope at the 
expense of the Company, in ships to be provided for that 
purpose by the Government of Fort St. George, at a con- 


1798. J. A. KIRKPATRICK, ESQ, 101 


venient port, to be named by that Government. For this 
purpose the officers and privates are to procecd to the place 
appointed by that Government, which will stipulate to treat 
them with every degree of consideration due to their rank : 
they will not be subject to any further restraint than such as 
is absolutely necessary for effecting the purpose of conveying 
them to Europe. A stipulation to be entered into by the 
Resident in my name, that the officers and privates so em- 
barked shall be sent to France as soon as possible after their 
arrival in any port in Great Britain, and not be detained for 
any cartel or exchange of prisoners, nor be considered as pri- 
soners to any other effect than the security of their return to 
their native country. Such of the native officers and privates 
as the Nizam may wish to retain in his service to be drafted 
into the corps of Mr. Finglass, or into any other corps in his 
Highness’s service under the command of British, or of officers 
of any country but France. The European and native de- 
serters from the Company’s army on the coast to be excepted 
from this part of the arrangement, and to be delivered up to 
the Government of Fort St. George. 

iv. His Highness to stipulate for himself, his heirs and 
successors, that the natives of France, shall be for ever ex- 
cluded from his armies and dominions. 

You will urge to Azim ul Omra in the strongest terms, 
the necessity of his taking every precaution to prevent the 
propositions for the dismission of the French party from 
transpiring ; and you will suggest to him, the propriety of . 
dispersing the corps in small parties, for the purpose of facili- 
tating its final reduction, and of preventing the officers and 
privates from passing into the service of Tippoo or of Scindiah. 
If the French officers should obtain information of the 
measures in agitation with respect to them, and should be 
allowed to unite themselves into one body, there is every 
reason to appfehend, that they would endeavour to excite 
commotion, or that they would attempt to retire with their 
corps into the service of the enemies of the Nizam. 

You will consider the Nizam’s acceptance of my arbi- 
tration, between the Courts of Poonah and Hyderabad, and 
Scindiah, upon the principles stated in my letter to Colonel 
Palmer, as well as his Highness’s consent:to the proposed 
arrangements at Poonah, and to the several tonditions stated 


740R oO 


102 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


in paragraph No. 24, of his despatch, to be necessary preli- 
minaries to the measures, which I have authorized you to 
take for delivering the Nizam from the power of the French 
faction established in his dominions. Should Azim ul Omra 
consent in the name of the Nizam, to the proposed condi- 
tions, you will then require the march of the troops from 
Fort St. George, or from such station as the Government of 
that Presidency shall have appointed for the detachment, 
with a view to its speedy march to Hyderabad. 

It would be useful to me to learn your sentiments, with 
respect to a new treaty of general defence with the Nizam: 
and to any new objects which it might embrace with relation 
to our interests at the Court of Hyderabad; to this treaty I 
should wish the Peishwa to be a party. 

You will inform Azim ul Omra, that under the circum- 
stances of Tippoo’s preparations of war against us, and 
of the hostilities with which Scindiah menaces the dominions 
of the Nizam, the British detachment at Hyderabad, will 
have orders to protect his Highness’s person; and to support 
his authority against any atttack which Scindiah may make 
upon either, as well as against any attempts of the French 
party; and you will understand it to be my intention, to vest 
you with full powers to direct the employment of the troops 
in both cases, in such manner as circumstances may sender 
advisable, provided that in the opinion of the commanding 
officer, the strength of the detachment shall be deemed ade- 
quate to the performance of the service required. You will 
however apprize Azim ul Omra, that it is my wish to mediate 
between Scindiah, and the Courts of Poonah and Hyderabad, 
under the condition detailed in my letter to Colonel Palmer, 
and you will consider the ‘provisional agreement of the Nizam 
to this offer of mediation, between his Highness and Scin- 
diah, as another necessary preliminary to the increase of the 
British detachment at Hyderabad. . 

The whole scope of my views, is to re-establish our means 
of defence against the avowed designs of Tippoo, by restor- 
ing to our allies that degree of consideration and strength, 
which they possessed at the conclusion of the treaty of Serin- 
gapatam, and which it was the object of that treaty to secure 
on solid and permanent foundations; an object inseparably 
connected withthe securitwof the British possessions in India. 


1798. J. A. KIRKPATRICK, ESQ. 103 


Since the conclusion of the peace of Seringapatam, a ma- 
terial change has taken place in the situation of almost all 
the states of India, both with relation to each other, and to 
the interests of the British Government. The revolutions 
at Poonah, have impaired the influence of the constitutional 
head of the Mahratta empire, and deranged the whole 
system of the balanced powers and interests of the several 
confederate Mahratta states. 

Both the Peishwa and the Nizam, whose respective 
power it was the object of the treaty of Seringapatam to 
strengthen and uphold, are now depressed and weakened ; 
the former by the intrusion of Scindiah, and the latter by the 
threatened hostilities of the same chieftain, and by the esta- 
blishment of a French faction in the center of the Deccan. 
The co-operation of these two members of the triple alli- 
ance has been rendered impracticable by the progress of 
their mutual contention and intrigues, while the internal con- 
vulsions of each state have diminished the resources of both. 

In this scene of general confusion, the power of Tippoo 
Sultaun alone (to restrain which, was the policy of all our 
alliances and treaties) has remained undisturbed and un~- 
impaired, if it has not been augmented and improved. Vv 

The final result to the British Government, is the 
entire Joss of the benefit of the treaty of triple alliance 
against Tippoo Sultaun, and the establishment of a French 
army of fourteen thousand men, in the dominion of one of 
our allies, in the vicinity of the territories of Tippoo Sultaun, 
and on the confines of the Carnatic, and of the Northern 
Circars. 

It is now become an urgent duty to make an effort for 
the arrangement of a system, the disorder of which already 
menaces our safety, by exposing us to the hazard of a war 
without the aid of an Ally; while on the other hand the in- 
fluence of France acquires daily strength in every quarter of 
India, under the progressive system of introducing French 
officers into the armies of all the Native Powers. The prin- | 
ciples of justice, good faith, and moderation, enjoined by 
Parliament and by the orders of the Honourable the Court of 
Directors, must form the basis of those comprehensive mea- 
sures, the execution of which is demanded by the exigency 
of our present situation, and is favoured by the peculiar cir- 


104 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


cumstances of the moment. Pursuing no schemes of conquest 
or extension of dominion, and entertaining no projects of 
ambition or aggrandizement, either for ourselves or for our 
Allies, it is both our right and our duty to give vigour and 
effect to our subsisting alliances and treaties, by restoring to 
our Allies the power of fulfilling their defensive engagements 
with us. Through the means of moderate and pacific repre- 
sentations, confirmed by the force of our own example, it 
must also be our policy to convince the several powers of 
India that their real interest consists in respecting the rights 
of their neighbours, and in cultivating their own resources 
within the limits of their several territories. To these efforts 
we must add a firm resistance against the intrusion of any 

e. foreign power which shall endeavour (to the prejudice of our 
alliances and interests) to acquire a preponderant influence in 
the scale of Indian politics, either by force or intrigue; but 
the primary object of all our vigilance and care must be the 
destruction of every seed of the French party, already grown 
to so dangerous a height, and still increasing in the armies 
and councils of the Nizam, of Scindiah, and of Tippoo. The 
exclusion of the influence of France from the dominions of 
the native states, is not more necessary to the preservation of 
our own power, than to the happiness and prosperity of this 
part of the world. 

In this first communication with you, I have thought it 
advisable to apprize you of the leading principles which will 
regulate my conduct towards the native powers; and I have 
taken a general view of the actual state of our political rela- 
tions, in order to enable you to act with more confidence and 
dispatch upon such questions of detail, as may occasionally 
call for the exercise of yeur judgement, in promoting the ob- 
jects of your mission. 

In pursuing the various topics connected with the sub- 
ject of this despatch, I shall add my instructions, with regard 
to the conduct to be observed by the British detachment, in 
the event of the death of the Nizam. 

If the question involved nothing more than the perform- 
ance of our obligations under our subsidiary engagements 
with the Nizam, it would be sufficient to direct that the de- 
tachment should remain neuter until the succession should 
be finally decided, and that it should then be placed under 


1798. J. A. KIRKPATRICK, ESQ.° 105 


the orders of the Prince who might establish himself on the 
musnud. 

But in the present state of India, our interests and 
those of our allies, are materially concerned in the prin- 
ciples and connections of the person upon whom: the succes- 
sion to his Highness may devolve, and consequently no time 
should be lost in determining the part which we shall take 
on the occasion of the Nizam’s decease. 

The cases for which it is necessary to provide, may be 
reduced to four. 

i. The formal nomination of Secunder Jah to the succes- 
sion. 

ii. The death of the Nizam without any formal nomina- 
tion of a successor. 

iii. An attempt (in either of the preceding cases) of one 
of his Highness’s younger sons, or of any other competitor to 
usurp the musnud in exclusion of Secunder Jah. d 

iv. An actual or asserted nomination of any of his High- 
ness’s younger sons to the exclusion of Secunder Jah. 

In the first, second, and third cases, the right of Se- 
cunder Jah, would be indisputable. 

From the natural right of Secunder Jah, founded on the 
priority of his birth, added to his having been admitted 
by the Nizam to the personal exercise of a portion of the sove- 
reign authority, under circumstances equivalent to a virtual 
nomination, I trust there is little appprehension of a nomina- 
tion, of any of the younger sons, whilst his Highness shall 
retain the full possession of his faculties. 

It is far from improbable, however, that the enemies of 
Secunder Jah, of Azim ul Omra, and of the British interests 
at Hyderabad, aware of the importance of inducing his High- 
ness to nominate a successor of their selection, may avail 
themselves of the weakness of his last moments to prevail on 
him by misrepresentation or other acts, to nominate one of 
his younger sons; or in the event of his Highness’s death 
during the absence of Azim ul Omra, and of the friends of 
Secunder Jah, the enemies of Secunder Jah, may assert that 
his Highness had made a nomination of one of the younger 
sons; and under such circumstances, the falsehood of that 
assertion may be difficult of proof. 

43, It is not my wish to interfere in the succession to the 


106 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. TO July, 


throne of the Nizam, in repugnance to the established laws 
or customs of India. On the other hand, I hold it to be my 
absolute duty, to prevent the regular order of the succession 
from being disturbed, either by domestic faction, or by 
foreign intrigue or force, to the prejudice of a Prince, the 
establishment of whose right is so intimately connected with 
the security of the British interests in India. 

Although primogeniture may not be considered to give 
the same absolute and exclusive right to succession in India, 
as it does in Europe, it is invariabiy deemed the strongest 
title, and is rarely superseded excepting in the cases of dis- 
affection, or of positive disqualification. 

So far from these, or any other grounds of objection 
being applicable to Secunder Jah, it is well known that his 
Highness has given the strongest indications of his favorable 
intentions towards Secunder Jah, by entrusting that Prince 
with his seal, and empowering him to perform certain acts 
which are reserved exclusively for the sovereign. 

Sufficient proof has already appeared of the interest which 
Tippoo, and the French take in the exclusion of Secun- 
der Jah, and of their determination to interfere in the suc- 
cession to the throne of the Nizam. During the absence 
of Azim ul Omra at Poonah, ,when the French army at 
Hyderabad was neither so formidable in point of numbers 
or of discipline as in the present moment, Monsieur Raymond 
obtained the most decided influence over the councils of the 
Ministers then in power; a permanent establishment was 
given to the French in the Deccan by the grant of a large 
Jaghire to Mons. Raymond; the British detachment was dis- 
missed ; and a considerable body of Tippoo’s troops was en- 
camped on the Nizam’s frontier; a close correspondence was 
established between Tippoo and Imtiaz ud Dowlah through 
Medina Saheb; the enemies of Secunder Jah openly sought 
the assistance of Tippoo, and of the French, with a view of 
influencing the succession; and according to the opinion of 
the Resident at Hyderabad, the event of the Nizam’s death in 
that crisis would have left the throne absolutely at the dis- 
posal of M. Raymond. 

A similar plan may be again attempted, and its success 
would necessarily involve the destruction of Azim ul Omra 
and of Secunder Jah, together with the consequent annihi- 


1798. J. A. KIRKPATRICK, ESQ. 107 


lation of the British influence at Hyderabad: all hope of 
re-establishing the balance of power in India as it existed at 
the peace of Seringapatam would then be precluded. The 
countries of the Nizam would in such an event become in 
effect a dependency of France; and the partizans of. that 
nation, in conjunction with Tippoo and with the body of their 
countrymen lately received into his pay, would have the 
means of endangering the existence of the British power in 
India. 

That danger would be greatly aggravated by the approach 
of Zemaun Shah, who has formally announced to me his in- 
tention of invading Hindostan. 

The moment is arrived when we must either determine 
to support the rights of Secunder Jah, founded on priority 
of birth and on the virtual nomination of the Nizam in full 
possession of his faculties, against any actual or asserted 
nomination of any of the younger sons, under all the circum- 
stances of suspicion which must attend such a transaction, 
or we must submit to the certain establishment of the influence 
of Tippoo and of France in the Deccan, and to the equally 
certain destruction of our own. 

I have therefore no hesitation in declaring my firm de- 
termination to support the succession of Secunder Jah, as 
being essentially connected with the security of all the in- 
terests committed to my charge. The execution of this deter- 
mination will be attended with little difficulty should his 
Highness’s death be protracted until after the proposed 

augmentation of the subsidiary engagements with him shall 
haye taken place. The French party at Hyderabad will then 
be no longer in existence, and so powerful a body of our 
troops as will then be in the service of his Highness, will be 
sufficient to preclude either foreign or domestic opposition. 

It is more than probable, however, that his Highness’s 
death will take place before the proposed engagements can 
be carried into effect. 

With a view to the probability of this case, I have re- 
solved to direct the Government of Fort St. George im- 
mediately to station a force, consisting of not less than two 
regiments, in whatever position may be deemed most eligible 
for affording you the necessary assistance in supporting the 
right of Secunder Jah; and I authorize you, in the event of 


108 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


the.death of the Nizam, or whenever you may understand 
from Azim ul Omra that the death of his Highness is likely 
to také place within a very short period of time, to order the 
commanding officer of this force (who will be directed to obey 
your instructions) to march directly to Hyderabad. 

Considerable advantages might arise from your commu- 
nicating this determination to Azim ul Omra, but as it is 
to be apprehended that he would avail himself of such a com- 
munication to serve his private pyrposes, and as a disclosure 
of my determination on this point, either to the Nizam himself, 
or to the Mahrattas, or to Tippoo, might lead to very serious 
inconveniences, you will take every possible precaution to 
prevent this part of my instructions from transpiring until the 
death of the Nizam, or the certainty of the near approach of 
that event, shall render it necessary to impart my determi- 
nation to Azim ul Omra. 

Having received overtures of a very friendly nature from 
the Rajah of Berar, who has requested the presence of 
a British Resident at his Court, I have despatched an Am- 
bassador to Nagpore with full powers to ascertain the precise 
nature of the Rajah’s views. You will make such use of 
your knowledge of this circumstance as you may think most 
advantageous in the present state of affairs; without deciding 
what benefits to the common cause of the Allies may result 
‘ultimately from this Embassy, it may be expected that the 
appearance of an established intercourse between this Go- 
vernment and that of Berar, may lead Scindiah to form serious 
reflections upon his own situation, and may tend to give addi- 
tional confidence to the adherents of the Peishwa and of the 
Nizam. 

Although the previous consent of the Peishwa to thear- 
rangements intended to be made at Hyderabad is highly 
desirable, and is therefore in the first instance to be stated 
to Azim ul Omra as a necessary preliminary to the increase 
of our detachment, yet should Col. Palmer inform you that 
the plan detailed in this letter has failed at the Court of 
Poonah, either from the Peishwa’s rejection of the proposed 
conditions, or from the success of Scindiah’s operations in 
that quarter, or from any other cause, you will notwithstand- 
ing proceed with all practicable dispatch to carry into effect 
such parts of these instructions as shall appear to you prac- 


1798. J. A. KIRKPATRICK, ESQ. 109 


ticable at the Court of Hyderabad. Reserving always to.the 
Peishwa the power of acceding hereafter to the new system 
of alliance, and with that view continuing in the new sub- 
sidiary treaty with the Nizam the restrictive terms of our 
present subsidiary engagements with his Highness. The 
arrangement will indeed be very incomplete without the res- 
toration of the Peishwa’s authority, accompanied by his full 
concurrence in the measures to be taken at Hyderabad; but 
as the great danger to be averted is the growth of the in- 
fluence of Tippoo and of France in India, it is evident that 
the failure of the proposed plan at Poonah would increase 
the necessity of providing for the existence of the Nizam, and 
of destroying the French party at his Court. 

From your reply to the further information required of 
you respecting your passport for Hybut Rao, I am not alto- 
gether certain whether you considered this Government as 
pledged to exempt him and his followers from the payment 
of the duties at Gya, if you should be of opinion th&t this 
indulgence would materially conduce to conciliate his son, 
Ragotim Rao, and to render him favorable to the British 
interests at Hyderabad, I authorize you to assure Ragotim 
Rao that Hybut Rao’s payments, on account of the persons 
who actually accompanied hjm, shall be returned to him at 
Hyderabad as soon as the amount of those payments can be 
ascertained. I rely upon you, however, to render this con- 
cession the source of advantage with respect to the proposed 
arrangements, and also to provide effectually against any 
future attempt to convert so peculiar an indulgence into a 
precedent for further applications of a similar nature. 

I entirely approve of your repeated representations to 
the Court of-Hyderabad on the subject of the surrender of 
the deserters ; in the present moment, however, it would not 
be advisable to agitate this question, otherwise than as it is 
connected with the instructions already detailed in this des- 
patch; but if the proposed engagements with his Highness 
should not take effect, I desire you will, without delay, insist 
peremptorily on the surrender of all the deserters from our 
army, whether Europeans or Natives, now entertained in the 
service of his Highness. 

Having your whole correspondence now under my con- 


110 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


sideration, I shall shortly furnish you with orders on such 
points of detail as require a reply. 
: Mornineton. 


No. XXVI. 
The Earl of Mornington to Jonathan Duncan, Esq. 


Sir, Fort William, July 8th, 1798. 


I return you many thanks for your two obliging letters, the 
first upon the subject of my arrival at this presidency ; and 
the second, transmitting a packet of letters from Europe. I 
am fully persuaded, that my endeavours to promote the 
public interest, will be cordially seconded by your acknow- 
ledged experience, ability, and integrity. On the other hand, 
I trust you will always act with the fullest confidence of my 
unqualified support, and that you will on all occasions be 
persufded, that I place a reliance on your character, which 
will induce me by every possible means to give strength, 
energy, and dispatch to the operations of the Government 
committed to your particular charge. 

You have already received my instructions with regard to 
Tippoo Sultaun. In a few days, I shall communicate to you 
a copy of the representation, which I propose to make to him 
in conjunction with our allies, and also of my letters to the 
Presidents at Poonah and Hyderabad. My first object will 
be to enable the allies to fulfill their engagements with us. 
For this purpose, I mean to empower the Resident at 
Poonah to require from your Presidency as large a force as 
you can spare, not exceeding two regiments of native and one 
of European infantry, and one company of artillery. There 
can be no danger in the present moment of an attack upon 
Bombay, therefore, this force may safely be spared. If it 
should appear necessary, however, you may draw one Native 
regiment from the coast of Malabar, which may be replaced 
by one from that of Coromandel. You will inform the Go- 
vernment of Fort St. George of your intentions in this respect, 
for their guidance in the execution of the conditional orders, 
which they will have received from me. 

I have communicated these suggestions to you, for your 


1798. JONATHAN DUNCAN, ESQ. 111 


private information, in order that you may be better prepared 
to receive the instructions, which will be dispatched to you in 
a few days. I request that you will use every degree of cau- 
tion, to prevent the nature of my intentions from transpiring, 
until the moment of putting them into execution shall arrive ; 
you may, however, impart the contents of this letter to the 
Commander-in-Chief, requesting that no measure may be 
taken, which may indicate the destination of the force. You 
may also shew this letter to my friend Mr. North, and com- 
municate to him such further despatches, as you shall receive 
from me upon this important subject. The documents which 
I propose to have the honor of transmitting to you in a few 
days, will fully explain to you the whole extent and nature of 
my present views, as well as the principles from which they 
proceed. 

’ Notwithstanding present appearances, I trust we shall not 
be involved in war with any power in India, and my object is 
to prevent that calamity by every possible effort. 


Mornineron. 
No. XXVII. 
The Earl of Mornington to Colonel William Palmer, Resident at Poonah. 
(Private.) 
Sir, Fort William, 8th July, 1798. 


Iam very much flattered by the obliging expressions con- 
tained in your private letter of the 12th June. You may be 
assured that it is a matter of real satisfaction to me that the 
affairs of this Government at the Court of Poonah should be 
in the hands of a person of your talents and experience in a 
moment the fnost critical to our interests. You will learn by 
my public instructions, the nature and extent of the general 
system of policy with respect to our alliances, which in my 
judgment the present crisis absolutely demands. I have the 
fullest confidence in your zeal for promoting the success of a 
plan which is founded on principles of justice and moderation, 
and intended to conciliate the real interests of all parties to 
be affected by its execution. There are only a few points 
which have been omitted in my public instructions, as being 
more properly the subjects of a private communication. If 
any opportunity should offer of restoring Nana on conditions 


112 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


favourable to our interests, and consistent with the general 
tenor of my instructions, I think that such an event might 
tend to secure the permanent advantages of the proposed 
plan; but I feel that it would be difficult to reconcile the 
Peishwa to this measure, and that Azim ul Omra would pro- 
bably view it with jealousy. Notwithstanding these objec- 
tions, I am persuaded that the experience and wisdom of the 
person in question would give great vigour to the new 
arrangements, could he be induced to consider them as con- 
nected with his own interests. If you should concur with me 
in this opinion, you will meet with my support and appro- 
bation in any steps which you may take for the restoration of 
Nana. You will observe in the detailed instructions, that I 
have deducted one Native regiment from the force which 
I supposed you might immediately obtain from Bombay. 
This is a matter of necessity arising from a fuller investigation 
of the subject. Should you apprehend that the force which 
I now offer may not prove equal to the proposed object, you 
will of course make no application to Bombay, and you will 
signify your determination in this respect by express to me, 
to Bombay, and to Hyderabad.—I have just now received 
your letter of the 23d June, and entirely approve all the steps 
you have taken, and propose to take. Nothing in that letter 
appears to me to require any further observations from me. 
With the most implicit reliance on your faithful and diligent 
discharge of the duty which the present circumstances im- 
pose upon you. 
Ihave the honor to be, &c. 
; Mornineron. 

P.S. In the abstract of this despatch, I cautioned you 
against making any communication to the Peishwa of my in- 
tention with respect to the French army at Hyderabad. It 
was necessary to observe caution until measures could be 
taken at Hyderabad for dispersing the French army in small 
parties, as it is probable that such a dispersion will have 
taken place before you can receive this despatch, I have given 
you full liberty to apprize the Peishwa of the nature of the 
arrangement to be adopted at Hyderabad, feeling that it 
would be very improper to use any concealment at Poonah 
or at Hyderabad with respect to the real object of the nego- 
tiations at either Court. The deficient enclosures will be 
forwarded by the next dawk. 


e 


1798. COLONEL WILLIAM PALMER. 113 


No. XXVIII. 


The Earl of Mornington to Colonel William Palmer, Resident at Poonah. 
Sir, 8th July, 1798. 

I transmit to you an authentic copy of a Proclamation pub- 
lished by the Governor General of the Isle of France, during 
the residence of two Ambassadors from Tippoo Sultaun on 
that island. 

It is difficult to ascertain the precise motives which may 
stimulate the violence of Tippoo Sultaun’s temper to action; 
and his late embassy to the Isle of France is a sufficient 
proof that revenge against the British nation in India is an 
object which he is capable of pursuing with more zeal than 
discretion. 

Under such circumstances, it is prudent to be prepared to 
repel the attack, which he has openly menaced ; and as our 
future security, our reputation, and our honour demand that 
he should be reduced to the alternative, either of making such 
satisfaction to the Allies as they may hereafter require for 
the injury which he has committed, or of risking another 
contest with the British Power, it is advisable to arm for the 
purpose of supporting whatever requisition we may deem it 
necessary to make to him, when our respective preparations 
shall be sufficiently advanced to enable us to act with effect. 

The 13th Article of the Treaty of Poonah provides that 
“ If Tippoo should molest or attack either of the contracting 
parties, the others shall join to punish him, the modes and 
conditions of which shall be hereafter ‘settled by the three 
contracting parties.” And the declaration of the Durbar of 
Poonah of the 3d of July, 1793, explanatory of this article, 
states “if a breach of engagement occurs on the part of 
Tippoo with respect to either of the Allies, let that Ally 
advise the other Allies thereof, when having understood the 
said breach of engagement we will admonish him, and if he 
does not attend to the admonition, then let the States act 
agreeably to the treaties which have been formed.” 

Adverting to your letter of the Ist June, I take this occa- 
sion to declare that Baajy Rao would not be justified in 
attempting to evade the obligation contracted by the Peishwa 
under this article. The defensive stipulations in the Treaty 

VOL, I. ; I 


114 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


of Triple Alliance must be presumed to have been intended 
by the contracting powers to operate, not as personal but as 
real engagements, binding the three states, and not merely 
the persons whose names are inserted in the treaty. Upon 
established principles of public faith, the obligation of the 
article in question must therefore be deemed to pass to the 
Peishwa for the time being, although the treaty does not ex- 
pressly include the heirs and successors of the prince whose 
signature it bears. In 1796, when an application. for co- 
operation against Tippoo was made under the same article 
by this Government to Chimna Appa, then holding the office 
of Peishwa, the idea of the defensive obligations of the treaty 
being merely personal to Madha Rao was never suggested ; 
and Chimna Appa united, without hesitation, in the joint 
representation then made to Tippoo by the Allies. 

The objection, therefore, is unsupported by the practice 
of the Court of Poonah, in the only case which has yet arisen 
with relation to that Court under the article in question; but 
even if the practice of the Court of Poonah had been dif- 
ferent in this instance, it never would be admitted to derogate 
from a known and fundamental maxim of the law of nations, 
* That treaties of a defensive nature (unless limited in ex- 
press terms) are not merely personal contracts with the reign- 
ing prince, but permanent obligations binding the faith of the 
State, into whatever hands the supreme power may devolve.” 
I therefore desire that you will immediately communicate to 
the Peishwa, in a formal manner, the accompanying Procla- 
mation, and explain to him the nature of the propositions 
which it contains; you will also notify to him the landing of 
the French force at Mangalore, and declare to him in my 
name that I consider the whole transaction as a violation of 
treaty, and a direct act of hostility on the part of Tippoo; 
and that I claim the assistance and co-operation of the 
Peishwa under the 13th article of the Treaty of Poonah. 
You will, however, add, that although I should feel myself 
completely justified in making an immediate attack upon the 
territory of Tippoo, my disposition to preserve the tranquillity 
of India induces me in the first instance to afford to him an 
opportunity of restraining the excess of his violence, before it 
shall have involved him in the calamity of war, With this 
view you will signify to the Peishwa my wish that he should 


1798. ‘COLONEL WILLIAM PALMER. 115 


now express his disposition to concur with the Nizam and 
with me in making a demand of satisfaction from Tippoo Sul- 
taun: the nature and extent of the demand, as well as the 
time of making it, to be hereafter concerted between the 
Allies. You will inform him that a similar application has 
been made to the Nizam,; and as soon as the Peishwa shall 
have signified his concurrence in the proposition made to 
him on this part of the subject, you will notify that event by 
express to the Resident at Hyderabad.- The Resident at 
Hyderabad will be directed to communicate to you the pro- 
gress of his proceedings at that Court under the instructions 
which he will have received from me. For your full informa- 
tion and guidance I transmit to you a copy of those in- 
structions. If Tippoo Sultaun, in the career of his ungovern- 
able passions, should refuse to make the satisfaction which 
shall be demanded of him by the allies, hostilities will be- 
come inevitable; and you will signify to the Peishwa, that I 
have already taken the necessary precaution of assembling 
the forces of the Company with a view to that event, enter- 
taining no doubt that in such a contingency, the Peishwa will 
be ready to afford to the common cause of the allies the 
effectual co-operation of the Mahratta force. 

Although I have thought it expedient to communicate my 
instructions to you in the foregoing order, I am sensible that 
their effectual execution will be impracticable, unless some 
previous measures be taken for re-establishing the Govern- 
ment of Poonah in that degree of power which it possessed 
before the death of the late Peishwa; and I entirely concur 
with you in lamenting the distractions which “by dividing 
and weakening that state, have subjected it to the undue in- 
fluence of Scindiah, and nearly disqualified it for affording us 
the assistance which we are entitled to claim by treaty in any 
war with Tippoo.” 

In considering the actual situation of the Government 
of Poonah, it is necessary to advert also to that of the other 
ally, whose co-operation it was equally the object of the same 
treaty to secure to us in the same event. 

The present crisis demands a serious and dispassionate 
review of the relative interests of the powers united by treaty 
for the purpose of securing an effectual barrier against the 


116 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


inordinate ambition and implacable revenge of Tippoo Sul- 
taun. 

It has been painful to observe, that since the conclusion 
of the treaty of Seringapatam, two great branches of the 
triple alliance have been engaged in mutual contests, of which 
the result has terminated in their mutual weakness, while the 
common enemy has remained at rest, improved his resources, 
and increased his strength. The unfortunate animosity be- 
tween the Courts of Poonah and Hyderabad, while it has 
tended to foment and aggravate the distractions in the former 
Court, has contributed to reduce the latter to the lowest de- 
gree of weakness and humiliation. In the meanwhile the 
French faction at the Court of Hyderabad has grown to such 
a formidable degree of power as to control, on many impor- 
tant occasions, the councils of that state, and to menace an 
ascendant influence in the eventual succession to the throne 
of the Nizam. Although the death of M. Raymond and the 
resumption of the Jaghire, which had been granted to him, 
have in some degree reduced the political influence of the 
French army at Hyderabad, it now forms the only efficient 
part of the Nizam’s military strength; its numbers have been 
lately increased, its discipline considerably improved, and it 
possesses sufficient activity and power to attempt and to ac- 
‘complish objects of the most prejudicial nature to the inde- 
pendence of the Court of Hyderabad, to the common interests 
of the Nizam, and of the Peishwa, as well as to those of the 
British nation in India. 

In the event of a war with Mysore, there can be no 
doubt that the wishes and interests of this part of the Nizam’s 
army must be favorable to the cause of Tippoo Sultaun, more 
especially under the actual circumstance of his having con- 
cluded an alliance with France, and having admitted a body 
of French troops into his service. 

If the French troops of the Nizam did not afford 
Tippoo open assistance, at least they could not be brought 
into the field against him without the utmost danger to the 
cause of the allies; nor could they be suffered to remain in 
the Deccan during the continuance of the contest, unless 
checked by the presence of an equally powerful force, which 
must in that case be diverted from the common objects of the 


1798. COLONEL WILLIAM PALMER. 117 


war, and must operate as a positive diminution of our effec- 
tive strength in the field. 

It appears, however, nearly certain, that in the present 
weak state of the Nizam’s Government, the French corps in 
his service would openly join Tippoo Sultaun, and by a sud- 
den blow endeavour to seize the Nizam’s territories, and to 
secure them to the dominion of France under an alliance offen- 
sive and defensive with Tippoo Sultaun. It is scarcely neces- 
sary to observe, that the success of such a design must be highly 
injurious to the interests of the Court of Poonah, especially 
when it is considered, that it must be the interest and inclina- 
tion of Scindiah (who entertains a large body of infantry in 
his service under the command ofa French officer) to engage 
with Tippoo Sultaun and the French upon conditions fatal to 
the existence of the Peishwa’s authority, and even of his 
office. .The junction which might thus be effected between 
the French officers with their several corps in the respective 
services of the Nizam, of Scindiah, and of Tippoo, might esta- 
blish the power of France in India upon the ruins of the 
states of Poonah, and of the Deccan. The Court of Hydera- 
bad therefore in its present condition is more likely to prove 
the source of additional strength to the common enemy of the 
Nizam, of the Peishwa,.and of the Company, than to afford 
useful assistance to any branch of the triple alliance. 

I rely upon your ability, experience and zeal for the 
public service to state with every degree of advantage, the 
arguments of prudence and policy which should induce the 
Peishwa to view the restoration of the Nizam to a just de- 
gree of consideration and power, as an object intimately 
connected with the Pesihwa’s own emancipation from the 
undue influence by which he is now oppressed, as well as with 
his future security against the violence both of Tippoo Sultaun 
‘and of Scindiah. 

If the Peishwa can be made sensible of his real interest 
in the destruction of the French party at Hyderabad, he can- 
not view with jealousy or suspicion any assistance which I 
may think it advisable to afford to the Court of Hyderabad for 
that desirable purpose. 

The same train of reflection will lead him to acknow- 

-ledge the benefit which must result to all parties from ac- 
cepting my arbitration between the Courts of Poonah and 


118 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


Hyderabad and Scindiah, for the amicable adjustment of all 
subsisting differences upon the permanent basis of reciprocal 
interests and mutual advantage. 

In your letter, No. 17, dated on the Ist of June, you 
state your opinion that “the authority of the Peishwa would 
be restored by the appearance of a strong British force at 
Poonah, and that Scindiah under the circumstance of Tippoo’s 
recent aggression could on no pretence object ‘to such a 
movement of our troops, nor in his present condition be able 
to oppose it.” It is not my intention either to give any just 
cause of offence to Scindiah, or to assist the Peishwa in any 
hostile attempt against him, however I may disapprove his 
late violent and oppressive measures, and lament their injuri- 
ous consequences to the strength of our ally. But it must be 
an essential part of our preparations for counteracting the 
avowed hostility of Tippoo, to place our allies in a condition 
to fulfil their engagements with us; and if the presence 
of a British force at Poonah be necessary to the accomplish- 
ment of this object as far as respects the Peishwa, it is my 
strict right to furnish him with such assistance; nor can 
Scindiah, with any colour of justice resist this step, although 
the consequence of it must be to compel him to retire from 
Poonah: for he cannot be ignorant that his present position 
obstructs the operation of the triple alliance, and thereby 
affords the most effectual aid to the. cause of Tippoo. 

I therefore empower you to inform the Peishwa that you 
have my authority to furnish him with a strong force from 
Bombay, whenever he shall require their presence at Poonah, 
provided he shall stipulate to secure the regular discharge of 
the pay of the detachment, in a manner satisfactory to you; 
and shall agree to certain other conditions stated in a subse- 
quent part of this despatch. 

Ihave directed the Government of Bombay to order the 
troops to march as soon as they shall receive a requisition 
from you to that effect. You will state to the Government of 
Bombay the strength of the force necessary to secure the 
proposed objects; and if the force required should not exceed 
one regiment of native infantry, each battalion completed to 
one thousand men, a company of artillery, and one regiment 
of Europeans, I should hope, assistance to that extent might 
be immediately furnished from that Presidency. To this 


1798. COLONEL WILLIAM PALMER. 119 


force they would probably be able to add another native 
regiment after the breaking up of the monsoon.. The com- 
manding officer will be ordered to obey your directions re- 
specting the employment of the troops when arrived at 
Poonah. 

Before, however, you engage to furnish the Peishwa 
with the proposed force, you will take care to explain to him 
that it is my intention to increase the British detachment now 
in the service of the Nizam with a similar view of enabling 
that Prince to fulfil his engagements with us in the event of 
a war with Tippoo. You will add, that the additional force 
to be furnished to the Nizam, will be subject to the same re- 
strictions and limitations with regard to its employment, as the 
detachment now in his Highness’ service, and that no enlarge- 
ment or alteration of those restrictions or limitations will be 
made without the previous knowledge and consent of the 
Peishwa. You will also make a formal tender to the Peishwa in 
my name of my arbitration between the Courts of Poonah and 
Hyderabad, and Scindiah, and you will declare to him my 
decided opinion that his own authority can neither be re- 
stored, nor ultimately secured, without a cordial union be- 
tween the two Courts; nor can that union be firmly cemented 
by any other means than the arbitration of the British Go- 
vernment, which must always feel an equal interest in the 
welfare, dignity, honor and strength of both parties. You 
will further state to the Peishwa, the advantages which he 
would derive from a settlement of all contested points between 
him and Scindiah under my mediation. You will also de- 
clare my wish that he should bind himself by treaty to exclude 
for ever all natives of France from his armies, and from his 
dominions; a measure essentially necessary to the preserva- 
tion of his own authority, which would be exposed to per- 
petual hazard from the admission of the agents of French in- 
trigue. The state of the Nizam’s Government has for some 
time past afforded a sufficient example of the danger to be 
apprehended from the introduction of the natives of France 
into an Asiatic Court. After having fully explained all these 
points to the Peishwa, you will consider his consent to the 
increase of the British detachment in the service of the 

‘Nizam, to my arbitration of the subsisting differences be- 
tween the Courts of Poonah and Hyderabad and Scindiah, 


120 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


and to the exclusion of the French from his armies and do- 
minions, as a necessary preliminary to the measures which I 
have authorised you to take for restoring the Peishwa to his 
due authority and power in the Mahratta Empire. I have 
already observed, that the present position of the army of 
Scindiah operates as an effectual assistance to the cause of 
Tippoo Sultaun; if an alliance offensive and defensive had 
been formally concluded between those two powers, Scindiah 
could not render a more acceptable service to Tippoo, than he 
now performs by holding in check both the allies of the Com- 
pany. You will, however, omit no endeavour to conciliate 
the mind of Dowlut Rao Scindiah to the measures which I 
have empowered you to take for restoring the authority of 
the Peishwa, and you will assure Dowlut Rao Scindiah that I 
feel the most sincere desire to maintain and improve the rela- 
tions of amity and peace with him, and that it will always 
give me pleasure to receive accounts of his prosperity within 
his own.dominions, and to witness the stability of his just 
authority and power over his own subjects. 

At the same time you will, represent to him that the 
continuance of his army in its present position renders our 
allies, the Peishwa and the Nizam (especially the former), 
unable to fulfil their defensive engagements with us in the 
actual crisis of Tippoo Sultaun’s preparations for offensive 
war; and that it would therefore be esteemed a testimony of 
friendship and good will towards this Government if Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah would return within the limits of his own domi- 
nions. 

You will at the same time deliver to Scindiah the ac- 
companying letter from me communicating a paper lately 
received by the Resident at Lucknow from a Vakeel of Ze- 
maun Shah. I forward to you a copy of my letter to Scin- 
diah, and of that paper; by which you will perceive, that 
Zemaun Shah has announced his intention of invading Hin- 
dostan, and has demanded the cooperation of this Govern- 
ment and of the Nabob Vizier for the purpose of delivering 
Shah Allum from the hands of the Mahrattas, and of ex- 
pelling them from their possessions on the north-western 
frontier of Hindostan. 

I authorize you to assure Scindiah that I will use every 
effort to counteract the designs of Zemaun Shah, being re- 


1798. COLONEL WILLIAM PALMER. 121 


solved to resist to the utmost extent of the power vested in 
me, the attempts of any invader, who shall endeavour to dis- 
turb the established States of India in their actual posses- 
sions. You will further suggest to Scindiah that as soon as 
he shall arrive in his own dominions, he will find the British 
Resident at his Durbar prepared to enter into defensive en- 
gagements with him for the mutual protection of his terri- 
tories, of those of the Nabob Vizier, and of the Company 
against the threatened invasion of Zemaun Shah, and that it 
is my intention to propose a similar defensive treaty to all 
the British allies in India. You will inform Scindiah that if 
contrary to my expectations he should not return to Hindos- 
tan for the purpose of assisting in person in the protection 
of his dominions against the menaced attack of Zemaun 
Shah, I will take no concern in the security of a country 
abandoned by its own sovereign, and I will limit the opera- 
tions of the British troops exclusively to the defence of our 
own territories and of those of the Vizier. In addition to 
whatever Scindiah may apprehend from Zemaun Shah, he 
must be sensible, that in the present disturbed state of his 
dominions and of his army, his fate is in our hands; but it 
would not be proper to make any direct intimation to him of 
our sense either of his danger, or of our own power with 
relation to the internal condition of his Civil and Military 
Government. This instruction is not meant to apply to the 
cases of Scindiah’s obstructing the march of the British de- 
tachment from Bombay, or of his entering into engagements 
with Tippoo either against the Peishwa or the Company. 
In any of those cases, I empower you to state distinctly to 
Scindiah that I shall deem myself justified in acting offen- 
sively against his dominions in Hindostan. 

The proposition to be made to Dowlut Rao Scindiah 
appears to be so reasonable, that I have formed a strong ex- 
pectation of its success. If he should be induced by your 
representations to retire from Poonah, it is my intention upon 
his arrival in his own dominions to offer to him my mediation 
between him, the Peishwa, and the Nizam, for the purpose 
of establishing peace between those powers. You will ap- 
prize him of my intentions in this respect, at the moment 
which shall appear to you most favorable to such a commu- 
nication. I now proceed to give you my instructions with 


122 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


respect to the employment of the force which I have autho- 
rized you to require from Bombay. If Scindiah should dis- 
regard the representations which I have directed you to make 
to him, you will apprize him in the first instance that you 
have power to employ the British force for the protection of 
the Peishwa’s person, and for the support of his authority. 
Accordingly, if Scindiah should attempt to obstruct the march 
of the British detachment from Bombay to Poonah; or if, 
after its arrival at Poonah he should not conform to the 
orders of the Peishwa, enjoining him to retire to his own 
territories; or if (according to the suggestion stated in the 
11th paragraph of your letter to me, No. 19, of the 12th of 
June) he should manifest an intention of soliciting the suc- 
cour of Tippoo in the prosecution of hostilities against the 
Peishwa; or if he should enter into any engagements with 
Tippoo, of a nature dangerous to our safety, I authorize you, 
in each of these cases, to employ the British troops in active 
operations against Scindiah, provided that the force de- 
tached from Bombay shall in the judgment of the command- 
ing officer be deemed adequate to the service required. 

You will communicate my letter to Scindiah to the 
Peishwa at such time as you may think most proper. 

Although I have entered into so particular a detail with 
respect to the communications to be made to Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah, placing great reliance on your discretion, I autho- 
rize you either to vary the mode of those communications or 
wholly to omit them, and to withhold my letter to Scindiah, 
according to your judgment, on all the circumstances of the 
case, and you may look with confidence to my approbation of 
any measures which you shall pursue for the purpose of re- 
moving Dowlut Rao Scindiah from his present position, pro- 

‘vided those measures be not inconsistent with the general 
spirit of my instructions. 

I concur with you in opinion that the treaty of triple 
alliance is very defective, inasmuch as it does not specify the 
amount of the aid to be furnished by each of the contracting 
parties in the event of hostilities with Tippoo Sultaun. Your 
letter of the Ist of June states that, “the Peishwa is very 
desirous of entering into new engagements with us, and that 
a new treaty with him might comprize many new objects.” 

am ready to enter into the consideration of a new 


1798. COLONEL WILLIAM PALMER. 123 


treaty with the Peishwa, provided it be founded on the basis 
of his present engagements with us, that it be consistent with 
the tenor of our treaties with other powers, and that it con- 
tain no stipulation of an offensive tendency, or calculated to 
disturb the general peace of India. But before I can consent 
to contract any new engagements with the Peishwa, I must 
require his full and unqualified acknowledgment of the bind- 
ing force of the treaty of Poonah upon. him, and upon that 
State. Should he attempt to evade the obligations of that 
treaty, under the pretence stated in your letter of the Ist of 
June, I never will place any reliance on his faith, nor will I 
enter into any engagements with him of any kind. But as I 
am persuaded that you will, without difficulty, convince him 
of the injustice and danger to his own interests of endeavour- 
ing to shake an acknowledged principle of public faith, I 
trust no obstacle will occur to the commencement of the pro- 
posed negociation, which I authorize you to open under the 
reservations and exceptions already stated. 

I refer you to the correspondence in the years 1792 and 
1793, relative to the guarantee treaty then in agitation be- 
tween this Government and those of Poonah and Hyderabad, 
and I desire that you will communicate to me such articles of 
a new engagement as you think would be either acceptable 
to the Peishwa, or desirable for us, before you make any 
formal propositions to the Ministers of the Peishwa. 

You will understand that I do not mean to prevent 
your opening conferences for the purpose of collecting the 
general sentiments of the Court of Poonah respecting a new 
treaty, but merely to caution you against either making or 
receiving any formal propositions of detail before you shall 
have apprized me of the nature and extent of the Peishwa’s 
‘views and of your own. 

There is one point however, upon which you may make 
a direct offer at the moment which may appear to you most 
favourable. You may inform the Peishwa that I am disposed 
to enter into the same subsidiary engagements with him, 
which now exist or shall hereafter be contracted between this 
Government and the Nizam. 

You will however take care in negociating any subsidiary 
treaty not to agree to furnish any European troops, ex- 
cepting the requisite proportion of artillery men, and also not 


124 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


to demand in any case, nor to accept without previous refer- 
ence to me any assignment of territory, or of revenue for 
defraying the payment of the troops to be furnished. It is 
entirely contrary to the whole object and policy of the ar- 
rangement proposed in this letter to extend the territory of 
the Company at the expense of any of the parties concerned. 
It would be injurious to our character that any circumstance 
attending the negociation should betray the symptoms of that 
species of irregular ambition which is utterly repugnant to 
the disposition of this Government. 

It would be desirable that the Nizam should be made a 
party to any new engagements which we may contract with 
the Peishwa; the Nizam’s participation might facilitate the 
restoration of harmony between the two States, tend to secure 
their future union and cooperation, and strengthen the re- 
vived authority of the Peishwa. 

You will communicate to the Resident at Hyderabad 
with all practicable dispatch, the result of your endeavours 
to obtain the Peishwa’s consent to the several conditions pro- 
posed in this despatch. 

The Resident at Hyderabad will be directed to govern 
his conduct by the nature of the information which he shall 
receive from you with respect to those important points, 

The whole scope of my views is to establish our means of 
defence against the avowed designs of Tippoo, by restoring 
to our allies that degree of consideration and strength which 
-they possessed at the conclusion of the treaty of Seringapa- 
tam, and which it was the object of that treaty to secure on 
solid and permanent foundations; an. object inseparably con- 
nected with the security of the British possessions in India. 

Since the conclusion of the peace of Seringapatam a mate- 
rial change has taken place in the situations of almost all the 
States of India both with relation to each other, and to the 
interests of the British Government. The revolutions at 
Poonah have impaired the influence of the constitutional 
head of the Mahratta Empire and deranged the whole system 
of the balanced powers and interests of the several confede- 
rate Mahratta States. Both the Peishwa and the Nizam, 
whose respective power it was the object of the treaty of 
Seringapatam to strengthen and uphold, are now depressed 
and weakened, the former by the intrusion of Scindiah, and 


1798. COLONEL WILLIAM PALMER. 125 


the latter by the threatened hostilities of the same chieftain 
and by the establishment of a French faction in the centre 
of the Deccan. The cooperation of these two members of 
the triple alliance has been rendered impracticable by the 
progress of their mutual contentions and intrigues, at the 
same time that the internal convulsions of each State have 
diminished the resources of both. 

- In this scene of general confusion, the power of Tippoo 
Sultaun alone (to restrain which was the policy of all our alli- 
ances and treaties) has remained undisturbed and unimpaired 
if it has not been augmented and improved. 

The final result to the British Government, is the entire 
loss of the benefit of the treaty of triple allance against 
Tippoo Sultaun, and the establishment of a French army of 
fourteen thousand men in the dominions of one of our allies, 
in the vicinity of the territories of Tippoo Sultaun, and on the 
confines of the Carnatic and of the northern Circars. 

It is now become an urgent duty to make an effort for the 
arrangement of a system, the disorder of which already me- 
naces our safety by exposing us to the hazard of a war, with- 
out the aid of an ally, while on the other hand, the influence 
of France acquires daily strength in every quarter of India, 
under the progressive system of introducing French officers 
into the armies of all the native powers. The principle of 
justice, good faith, and moderation enjoined by Parliament, 
and by the orders of the Honorable the Court of Directors, 
must form the basis of those comprehensive measures, the 
execution of which is demanded by the exigency of our pre- 
sent situation, and is favored by the peculiar circumstances of 
the moment... 

Pursuing no schemes of conquest or extension of domi- 
nion, and entertaining no projects of ambition or aggrandize- 
ment either for ourselves or for our allies, it is both our right 
and our duty to give vigor and effect to our subsisting alli- 
ances and treaties, by restoring to our allies the power of 
fulfilling their defensive engagements with us. Through the 
means of moderate and pacific representations, confirmed by 
the force of our own example, it must also be our policy to 
convince the several powers of India, that their real interest 
consists in respecting the rights of their neighbours, and in , 

cultivating their own resources within the limits of their 


126 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


several territories. To these efforts, we must add a firm 
resistance against the intrusion of any foreign power, which 
shall endeavour {to the prejudice of our alliances and in- 
terests) to acquire a preponderant influence in the scale of 
Indian politics, either by force or intrigue. But the primary 
object of all our vigilance and care must be, the destruction 
of every seed of the French party already grown to so dan- 
gerous a height; and still encreasing in the armies and coun- 
cils of the Nizam, of Scindiah, and of Tippoo. The exclusion 
of the influence of France from the dominions of the native 
states, is not more necessary to the preservation of our own 
power, than to the happiness and prosperity of this part of 
the world. 

In this first communication with you, I have thought it ad- 
visable to apprize you of the leading principles, which will 
regulate my conduct towards the native powers; and I have 
taken a general view of the actual state of our political rela- 
tions, in order to enable you to act with more confidence and 
dispatch upon such questions of detail, as may occasionally 
call for the exercise of your judgment, in promoting the 
objects of your mission. 

Having received overtures of a very friendly nature from 
the Rajah of Berar, who has requested the presence of a 
British Resident at his court, I have dispatched an ambas-. 
sador to Nagpore, with full powers to ascertain the precise 
nature of the Rajah’s views. You will make such use of 
your knowledge of this circumstance, as you may think most 
advantageous in the present state of affairs. Without decid- 
ing what benefits to the common cause of the allies may result 
ultimately from this embassy: it may be expected that the 
appearance of an established intercourse between this Go- 
vernment and that of Berar, may lead Scindiah to form serious 
reflections upon his own situation, and may tend to give ad- 
ditional confidence to the adherents of the Peishwa and of 
the Nizam. 

You will consider this letter as an answer to all those ad- 
dressed by you to this Government, down to the date of your 
despatch of the 19th June. 

Tam, &c. &c., 
Mornineron. 


1798. LIEUT.-GENERAL STUART. 127 


No. XXIX. 
From Tippoo Sultaun to the Governor General. 
Received 10 July, 1798. 


Your Lordship’s friendly letter* containing the agreeable 
intelligence of your arrival at Calcutta, and your taking charge 
of the Company’s affairs, reached me at the happiest of times, 
and afforded me a degree of pleasure and satisfaction that 
cannot be adequately expressed upon paper. May the Al- 
mighty prosper to your Lordship this event! By the divine 
grace, the exalted fabric of union and attachment, and the 
firm foundations of friendship and harmony between the two 
states, are in full strength. To adhere to the obligations of 
existing treaties, is a constant object with me. Your Lord- 
ship is from your heart a friend and well wisher, and I am 
confident will hold in mind the observance of union and con- 
cord, I hope you will continue to gratify me by letters noti- 
fying your welfare. 


No. XXX. 
The Earl of Mornington to Lieut.-General Stuart. 
Sir, Fort William, July 14, 1798. 


Mr. Duncan will have communicated to you the instruc- 
tions of this Government of the 13th of July. Knowing your 
zeal for the public service, as well as the superiority of your 
military talents, I have the fullest confidence that you will 
execute that part of the important arrangement in question 
which shall come within your department, with alacrity, 
vigour, and dispateh. You will soon be apprized of the 
whole extent and tendency of the plan in agitation; until that 
period I must request you to give me credit when I assure 
you, that I consider its success to be indispensable to the 
security of our possessions in India. 

There is another point which appears to me to call for 
your vigilant attention, and although it is my intention to 
forward, by an early opportunity, the directions of this Go- 
vernment on some parts of the subject, I should be glad in 


* The letter alluded to being merely complimentary, is omitted. 


128 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


the first instance to receive the advantage of your opinion and 
of Mr. Duncan’s. 

It appears nearly certain, by the last accounts from Europe, 
that the French will soon either conquer Portugal or compel 
that power to sign a disgraceful treaty of peace. In either 
case it is more than probable that the French will endeavour 
to obtain possession of Goa, either by directing a force 
against it, or by a formal cession, which perhaps may be made 
a secret article of the peace with Portugal. 

Should Portugal fall into the hands of France, either by 
conquest or by treaty, I have no hesitation in declaring that 
I would make every effort to secure Goa from the same fate; 
and with this view I would offer to the Portugueze Governor 
of that settlement, the same terms proposed to the several 
Dutch Governments in India; if these terms should be re- 
jected, I should immediately attempt the reduction of Goa, 
provided such a measure appeared practicable. 

I wish to know whether you have any reason to hope that 
the Portugueze Governor would admit a British garrison into 
Goa, and if he would, what force you think necessary for 
that purpose, and what means you would suggest for furnish- 
ing it. I should also wish you to state to me, without reserve, 
any measure which appears to you likely to frustrate the 
supposed designs of the French against Goa, and what force 
you would think necessary for the reduction of that place in 
its present state. 

I need not urge the importance of the settlement in ques- 
tion to a person of your experience and knowledge in the 
affairs of India. 

- It will give me great satisfaction to have the advantage of 
your correspondence, and your free opinion upon every sub- 
ject within the reach of your observation will be received by 
me as a personal favour. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 
MornINeTON. 


1798. COLONEL WILLIAM PALMER.’ 129 


No. XXXII. 
‘The Earl of Mornington to Colonel William Palmer, Poonah. 
, (Private.) 
Sir, Fort William, July 14, 1798. 

In addition to the suggestions offered in my last letter, 
1 wish to recommend two points to your attention; the first 
will be best stated by the following extract from my letter of 
this date to the Acting Resident at Hyderabad :— 

In framing: the new subsidiary engagements with the 
Peishwa, I desire you will endeavour to restrict the employ- 
ment of the British troops within his Highness’s dominions, 
to those important cases in which his person or authority 
shall really be endangered, and that you will provide effec- 
tually against the use of the British force in those disgraceful 
services against petty renters and Zemindars, which more pro- 
perly belong to Sebundy corps.” 

You will attend to this suggestion, which applies equally 
to the employment of the British force to be detached to 
Poonah, if it should continue there under a subsidiary treaty. 
The second point will also be explained by another extract 
from the same letter :— 

“It is very desirable that a body of the Nizam’s troops 
shall be stationed upon the frontier of the Peishwa’s domi- 
nions, for the purpose of co-operating with our detachment 
in the restoration of order at Poonah. You will urge this 
measure to Azim ul Omra, but you will not advise the march 
of the troops until you have learnt from Colonel Palmer that 
such assistance is both necessary and acceptable to the 
Peishwa.” 

This extract requires no comment; you will regulate your 
conduct according to the intimation which it suggests. 

I am, &c. MornincrTon, 


No. XXXII. 
The Earl of Mornington to Captain Kirkpatrick. 
(Private.) 
Sir, . Fort William, July 14, 1798. 
I return you many thanks for your several private com- 
munications, and I am happy to avail myself of an early op- 
VOL. I. K 


130 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


portunity to express my approbation of your diligence and 
activity in the discharge of the important duties of your 
mission. I shall always acknowledge with gratitude the 
assistance which I received from the extensive knowledge, 
experience, talents, and integrity of Major Kirkpatrick, 
during the period of my continuance at the Cape. As he 
expressed a desire of being near my person, it is my intention 
to offer him the situation of my Military Secretary whenever 
he shall arrive in India; and as it is probable that he may 
touch at Madras, I mean to despatch a letter to meet him at 
that Presidency, suggesting to him the service which he 
might render to the public, by adding the exertion of his 
talents to yours in the present crisis of affairs, and by visit- 
ing you for a short time, if his health should admit of such a 
journey. 

My detailed instructions to you and to Colonel Palmer, 
which accompany this letter, will make you fully acquainted 
with the whole plan, of which the abstract was forwarded to 
you on the 8th of this month. A few points remain to be re- 
commended to your attention. 

It is very desirable that a body of the Nizam’s troops 
should be stationed upon the frontier of the Peishwa’s domi- 
nions, for the purpose of co-operating with our detachment 
in the restoration of order at Poonah. You will urge this 
measure to Azim ul Omra, but you will not advise the march 
of the troops until you have learnt from Colonel Palmer that 
such assistance is both necessary and acceptable to the 
Peishwa. 

_In framing the new subsidiary engagements with the Nizam, 
I desire you will endeavour to restrict the employment of the 
British troops within his Highness’s dominions, to those im- 
portant cases in which his person or authority shall really be 
endangered, and that you will provide effectually against the 
use of the British force in those disgraceful services against 
petty renters and Zemindars, which more properly belong 
to Sebundy corps; this is an essential point. Your own dis- 
cretion will sufficiently warn you of the caution and secresy 
to be observed in the first step towards the proposed general 
plan. Above all, you must take care to provide for the 
effectual dispersion of Perron’s corps at the earliest possible 
period. The Government of Fort St. George have my orders 


1798. CAPTAIN KIRKPATRICK. 131 


to apprize you of the station appointed for assembling the 
two regiments intended for Hyderabad. The officer who 
will command the regiments sent from Fort St. George will 
be senior to Lieut.-Colonel Hyndman, and will take the com- 
mand of the whole force. IT am, &c. 
MornINGTON. 


No. XXXIIL 


General Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 


My pear Lorp, Madras, July 14, 1798. 
Our preparations are going on with every possible energy 
consistent with the necessary regard to secrecy, which I shall 
maintain until I can be informed from General Floyd, that 
the corps south of the Coleroon are prepared to move across 
it, and I shall not fail to keep your Lordship constantly ad- 
vised of the progress of our equipment, and of the effect 
which it may, appear to have on the minds of the enemy. 
Your Lordship will observe that I have forborne to offer 
any opinion upon the political part of this question, and this 
not from any disposition to withhold my sentiments upon any 
subject of importance to the national interests, but from a 
consciousness of my inability to assist your Lordship’s judg- 
ment. , 
+ Amidst the trouble of my present situation, it is indeed a 
great consolation to me that the momentous duty of deter- 
mining whether we must endure the calamity of war or remain 
peaceful as we now are, does not belong to me, but is en- 
trusted to a person so well qualified to decide it. This 
remark appears a proper introduction to my reply to that part 
of your Lordship’s letter of the 26th ult. which respects the 
letter written by this Government to Admiral Rainier. It 
had been so customary for Lord Hobart almost to direct the 
fleet, that the secretary drafted the letter, and we passed it 
as an ordinary occurrence without the most distant idea that 
we were transgressing the strict line of our duty. In inadver- 
tence therefore, not in any degree of infringing upon your 
Lordship’s responsibility, this measure originated ; and whilst 
I shall acknowledge the propriety of the public admonition 


132 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


we have received, I cannot but feel gratified by the sentiments 
which your Lordship has been pleased to express in your 
private explanation. . 
I am, with great regard, 
Your Lordship’s faithful and obedient Servant, 


‘ Gero. Harris. 
No. XXXIV. 
The Earl of Mornington to General Harris. 
My Dear Str, Fort William, 15th July, 1798. 


I transmit with this letter, a despatch from this Govern- 
ment in the Secret Department, which I must request you 
not to record until you receive further communications from 
me. ‘The measure directed to be executed in the secret des- 
patch, requires the utmost degree of promptitude, as well as 
of caution. My object is to restore the Nizam to some 
degree of efficiency and power. The measure forms part of 
a much more extensive plan for the re-establishment of our 
alliances, previously to the moment when Tippoo may expect 
to be enabled to attack us. The whole of my arrangements 
will shortly be communicated to you; at present, I shall only 
recommend to you in the most earnest manner, the speedy 
and effectual execution of the measure directed in the an- 
nexed despatch; as I know your honest zeal for the public 
service, and the activity which accompanies it, I look with 
confidence to the accomplishment of my anxious wish for the 
success of that part of my plan, which is now committed to 
your charge. I imagine, that the best position for assembling 
the troops destined for Hyderabad, would be in the Guntoor 
Circar. You will feel the great importance of selecting a 
proper officer for this very arduous command. The British 
force at Hyderabad, after the proposed addition, will amount 
nearly to seven thousand men, officers and artillery included. 
It is my intention if the plan should succeed, to recall the 
Bengal regiment, and to draw the whole detachment for 
Hyderabad from Fort St. George. This will preserve a 
unity of discipline, as well as prevent jealousies in the de- 
tachment. You will at once feel, that such a command, is 
an object for the ambition of your most distinguished officers. 


1798. GENERAL HARRIS. 138 


I need not recommend the most strict attention to secresy in 
the whole of this proceeding; the least intimation of my de- 
sign, would instantly set the whole French faction at Hyder- 
abad in motion, and frustrate the whole of my views. It will 
be necessary to apprize the acting Resident at Hyderabad, 
of the intended station of the troops, in order that he may. 
communicate with the commanding officer. I repeat my re- 
liance on you for the expeditious and effectual performance 
of this service, of which the importance in my estimation is so 
high, that in addition to my applause on public grounds, I 
shall consider your cordial co-operation as a great claim on 
my private gratitude. I take this opportunity of suggesting 
to you, the expediency of as great an attention to economy in 
the mode of assembling the army, as may be consistent with 
the great object of persuading Tippoo Sultaun, that we are 
really prepared to repel his menaced attack, or to demand 
such satisfaction for his late conduct, as we may deem just. 
The objects of economy and effectual preparation would be 
perhaps best combined, by ordering native troops only to take 
the field, and drawing the Europeans into the frontier garri- 
sons with all necessary equipments; I do not mean to disarm, 
until I shall have effected all my objects of renewing the 
efficacy of our alliances, and of obtaining satisfaction from 
Tippoo; I think, however, that I shall be able to accomplish 
all my measures without a war; and the ultimate effect of 
them will be, either wholly to avert that calamity for a con- 
siderable period of time, or to enable us to meet it with in- 
creased strength. 

You will sogn receive my ideas with respect to a permanent 

plan for the defence of the Carnatic, by constantly keeping 
considerable stores of grain in the frontier fortresses, and by 
establishing a train of artillery at Arnee and Vellore, to be 
always maintained in a state of readiness for the field. I am 
aware of the expense of the measures of precaution, but I am 
persuaded that if we do not provide the permanent means of 
moving our army suddenly into Mysore, as the occasion may 
require, we never shall be safe in the Carnatic, 

I have received your letter with an account of your orders 
to the Resident at Tanjore, which I entirely approve. You 
will perceive that I had anticipated the want of the questions 
and answers of the Pundit, and that 1 despatched the ori- 


134 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


ginals to you on the 16th of June. You will communicate 
the whole proceeding to the Residents at Poonah and Hyder- 
abad for their information only, and not to be imparted to 
their respective Courts. I am sorry that Mr. Cockburn does . 
not go to Tanjore, and very anxious to know the names of 
your Committee, on whose report much will depend. 
I am, &c. MoRNINGTON. 

There can be no objection to the public mention of your 
expectation of the 33rd* regiment, I should even be glad 
that the news reached Tippoo, as it would convince him that 
IT am in earnest. Should Tippoo desire from you any ex- 
planation of our preparations, you will be so good as to refer 
him to me for an answer. If you should be of opinion, that 
the not encamping the European forces will be likely to leave 
Tippoo to doubt the seriousness of my intentions, I beg you 
will not attend to my suggestions, with respect to the measure 
of stationing the English regiments in the frontier garrisons, 
my object being to impress the mind of Tippoo with serious 
apprehension. 


No. XXXV. 
Lhe Earl of Mornington to Colonel William Palmer. 
(Private.) 


Sir, Fort William, 18th July, 1798. 

The intelligence conveyed in your letter, No. 23, of the 
27th June, leads me to apprehend that the contest between 
Scindiah and the Peishwa may have terminated unfavourably 
to the latter before you can have received my Jnstructions of 
the 8th instant. 

If that event should unfortunately have taken place, it is . 
still my wish that you should endeavour to execute such parts 
of those instructions as appear to you to be practicable, and 
for this purpose you will concert measures with the Govern- 
ment of Bombay and the Acting Resident at Hyderabad. 

I despatch this letter to you by express, lest in the event 
which I apprehend, you should be induced to suppose that it 
might be my intention to abandon all hope of carrying into 


* Then at Fort William, Bengal, Colonel Wellesley being Lieutenant 
Colonel, and ordered to Madras by Lord Mornington. 


1798. COLONEL WILLIAM PALMER. 135 


effect any part of the general arrangement communicated to 
you in my despatches of the 8th instant. 

You will have observed from my letter of the 8th instant 
to the Acting Resident at Hyderabad that even the total 
failure of the negociation at Poonah will not prevent me from 
making an effort to recover the power and authority of the 
Nizam. I am, &c. 

MorninGTON. 


No. XXXVI. 
The Earl of Mornington to General Harris. 


My Dear Sir, Fort William, 18th July, 1798. 

I return you many thanks for the despatch received by the 
Bombay frigate yesterday at 4.0’clock p.m. The frigate met 
with such bad weather on her passage that she could not 
touch at Masulipatam, and she arrived here without Major 
Beatson, and so much disabled that she will require a repair. 
at Diamond Harbour before she can return to sea. 

The information with which you have furnished me is suffi- 
cient for my present purpose, and I cannot express, in terms 
equal to my real sentiments, my cordial approbation of the 
zeal with which you have entered into all my views for the 
public service, and of the alacrity, diligence and correctness 
with which you have executed all the commissions which I 
entrusted to your charge. I perceive however that the object 
and principle of my late directions to your presidency, are 
not thoroughly understood, for your satisfaction therefore I 
will state very shortly a summary view of both. I have ob- 
tained the fullest evidence of the nature of Tippoo’s design 
against the British power in India, and I have been apprized 
that in conformity to the public declaration of his Ambassa- 
dors he has actually made preparations for carrying that de- 
sign into effect.* At what moment he may think fit to strike 
the blow which he has openly menaced, must always be a 
matter of conjecture; the interests and wishes of France are 
decidedly in his favor, the precise period of time when she 
may be able to afford him assistance must be uncertain, it is 


* Sec Appendix. 


136 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


equally uncertain whether the impetuosity of his temper will 
suffer him to wait for that assistance ; various events in India 
might offer opportunities which he might deem (and perhaps 
with reason) favorable to the success of his hostile projects, 
and without pretending to estimate the considerations which 
may govern his conduct, it is evident that while we remain 
without a soldier prepared to take the field in the Carnatic, 
and without an ally to assist our operations, we yield to this 
implacable adversary the decided advantage of selecting the 
time and mode of his long meditated attack against our de- 
fenceless possessions. 

Under these circumstances I have never considered that 
the option between temporary peace and immediate war re- 
sided in our own hands; the motionless condition of our army 
on the coast, contrasted with the advanced state of Tippoo’s 
preparations, places in his hands not only that option, but the 
choice of the moment of conquest; for in our present weak- 
ness, his first assault must be successful, whatever might 
afterwards be regained by our perseverance and resolution. 

The true state of the question therefore is, whether by 
continuing unarmed and unallied we shall abandon the issues 
of peace, war, and certain victory, to the discretion of a vin- 
dictive enemy, or whether by resuming the power of meeting 
him in the field, we shall place in our hands the advantages 
now possessed by him. 

With this view of the subject, the assembling our forces, 
and the placing ourselves in a state of preparation for war at 
least-equal to that of the enemy, appeared to me from the 
first moment of the authentication of the proclamation to be 
measures not of choice, but of irresistible necessity, and of 
indispensable duty. But I did not stop at this point; my 
decided opinion was and is, that every practicable reduction 
of the power of Tippoo is warranted by the principles of jus- 
tice, and demanded by those of policy: and I therefore deter- 
mined, in the first instance, to endeavour to anticipate the 
execution of his projects of vengeance by attacking him on 
all sides without delay,.and thus intercepting his means of 
availing himself of the solicited aid of the French or of any 
other assistance, which might be presented to him by the 
variable course of Indian politics. But I never proposed to 
undertake any attack upon him, of which the success would 


1798. GENERAL HARRIS. 137 


be doubtful in the judgment of those, whose opinions must 
always govern my discretion on every question of military de- 
tail; and although my judgment remains unaltered with re- 
spect to the justice, policy, and even indispensable necessity 
of an effectual reduction of Tippoo’s power, I have not un- 
dervalued the practical difficulties of such an attempt in the 
present moment. 

The delay which must attend any movement of the army 
upon the coast, and the immense expense of protracted mili- 
tary operations had made a considerable impression on my 
mind, previously to the receipt of your letter, despatched by 
the Bombay frigate; and J had in consequence of that im- 
pression, relinquished all hope of effecting, within any short 
period, the only operation which ean afford permanent security 
to our possessions on the coast. 

Your letter, together with the opinion of Colonel Close,* 
confirmed the decision which I had already taken, and proved 
that any effectual blow against the power of Tippoo must be 
deemed utterly impracticable under the present circumstances 
of the army at your Presidency. e 

But the orders which I originally gave for assembling the 
army upon the coast, although pointed more particularly at 
the object of an immediate attack upon Seringapatam, were 
founded (as I have already stated) upon principles indepen- 
dent of the judgment which I might hereafter form of the 
practicability of that object. The measure of assembling the 
army and of continuing it, if not in the field, at least in a state 
of forward preparation, is indispensable to the present defence 
of the Carnatic, the security of which it is my duty to esta- 
blish upon foundations more solid than can be found in the 
forbearance of Tippoo Sultaun. In addition to this most 
pressing object, my views at every period of this crisis have 
been extended to other general measures essentially connected 
with the security of our power in India, and with our means 
of restraining the enmity of Tippoo. I have always known that 


* These letters presented the state of the Madras army ina very alarm- 
ing point of view,—namely, as not being capable of defending the E. I. 
Company’s territories, much less of carrying on offensive operations, 
particularly in a country like Mysore, protected by an almost impregnable 
fortress as Seringapatams was considered. 


138 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


an offensive war of any long duration in Mysore would be 
difficult if not impracticable, without the co-operation of the 
Peishwa, and of the Nizam, at least to the extent of facilitat- 
ing the supplies of provision to our army in the field. A 
principal branch therefore of the precautions, which from the 
first moment I proposed to take for our general defence, was 
the restoration of those two members of the triple alliance to 
the power of fulfilling their engagements with us. And it 
was always my intention that a negociation, accompanied with 
other measures for that purpose, should precede any attack 
upon Tippoo. This part of my plan I have not abandoned, 
it is now in train with every fair prospect of success. 

I have annexed to this despatch copies of several letters 
from the Residents at Poonah and Hyderabad, and of my re- 
cent instructions to them. These papers will furnish you 
with a complete knowledge of the actual dispositions and in- 
terests of the two Courts, as well as of the nature of the 
system which I have framed for the purpose of uniting them 
with us upon the original basis of our subsisting treaties of 
defence against Tippoo. 

You will observe that my views have also been directed to 
avert another danger which I have long considered with great 
apprehension and which is now aggravated by the inclination 
which Tippoo has manifested to admit large bodies of French- 
men into his armies. 

The growth of a French party in the councils and armies of 
the several native powers of India had attracted my attention 
before I left Europe; this evil has now reached an alarming 
height, and if not checked, will soon produce convulsions in 
the system of Indian politics, which may facilitate the intro- 
duction of the power and influence of France, and expose 
ours to imminent hazard. The French army at Hyderabad 
is the main root of this mischief, and I feel it to be a most 
urgent point of my duty to extirpate it without delay. 

In considering the annexed papers, you will perceive what 
erroneous notions have been formed at Madras of the temper 
and views of Azim ul Omra and the Mahrattas, as well 
with respect to the reciprocal relations of the two Courts to- 
wards each other, as to their common disposition towards the 
British Government. The moment is very favorable for ad- 
justing their mutual differences, and for reconciling both 


1798. . GENERAL HARRIS. : 139 


parties to co-operate with us against Tippoo. I do not ex- 
pect that Scindiah will be able to oppose any effectual ob- 
stacle to the success of a plan founded on the real interests 
of all parties, and calculated to conciliate the approbation of 
all the ancient friends of his family, and of all who possess 
any degree of personal influence in his armies or. dominions. 
It would be impossible to carry this plan into execution, with- 
out accompanying it by a respectable state of preparation in 
the Carnatic; as it cannot be supposed that Tippoo would 
remain an inactive spectator of our negociations at Poonah 
and Hyderabad, unless he were checked by an appearance 
of our ability to move upon his frontiers. Our preparations 
are the necessary consequences of those which he has made, 
and it would neither. be rational nor just in him to consider 
them as provocations of war. If the fear of an attack from 
him in the early stage of our preparations, is absolutely to 
preclude us from making them, we are indeed upon most un- 
equal terms with him, and we must then at once determine to 
leave our fate at his disposal. For it will then appear that 
we dare not take the common precautions of defence, while he 
with impunity enters into an offensive alliance with the 
French, for the declared purpose of expelling the British 
nation from India. Having already stated to you, that I no 
longer entertain any idea of an immediate attack upon Tippoo, 
it will follow that my objects must for the present be limited to 
those measures of general preparation and defence, which 
are absolutely necessary for enabling us to recover the effi- 
ciency of our alliances, to repel any attack which Tippoo 
may make upon us, or eventually to support any representa- 
tion, which we may hereafter judge it advisable to make to 
him. 

It is not my intention to forward any despatch to Tippoo 
until the allies shall have concurred in it,—shall be ready to 
second our demand, and until our preparations shall be con- 
siderably advanced. The nature of our remonstrance to 
Tippoo, will be determined by the circumstances of the mo- 
ment when it shall be made. 

I now proceed to state to you another part of my general 
plan for the protection of the Carnatic. The result of my 
earliest enquiries into the nature and condition of the mili- 
tary establishments on the coast; convinced me, that there 


140 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


existed a radical defect in them, which rendered them pecu- 
liarly ill adapted to secure the principal object of their insti- 
tution, more especially in the actual state of Tippoo’s prepara- 
tions, of his temper, and of his power. It is impossible for any 
human foresight to ascertain the precise time when an attack 
from Tippoo may be expected; but it is a matter of public 
notoriety that he will attack the Carnatic, whenever circum- 
stances shall appear to favor his declared design. To coun- 
teract such a design, and to avert the dreadful evils which 
must attend even the most limited practical execution of it, 
the character of the enemy, and the nature of his force re- 
quire that our protecting force should be so constituted, as 
to be capable of sudden and rapid movements at a short 
notice. But the want of an establishment of draft bullocks, 
the want of a regular system for the speedy collection of ‘the 
carriage bullocks from the country, the inadequate stores of 
grain and other supplies necessary for the provision of our 
army in the field, the defects in the regulations for providing 
camp equipage, and lastly, the want ofa regularly established 
train of artillery with all its proper equipments, nearly dis- 
qualify the army upon the coast for any speedy operation, 
even of a defensive nature. 

This was my opinion previous to the receipt of your de- 
spatch, from the perusal of which, and of the paper accom- 
panying it, I am compelled to declare that I have received 
the most alarming impressions of the totally defenceless state 
of the Carnatic, in the present condition of our army, as well 
as of the utter inefficiency of that force, for any present pur- 
poses even of the most limited nature of mere defence. The 
report of your Adjutant General, states distinctly, that the 
army in the Carnatic under its present circumstances cannot 
be put in motion, even for the purpose of defending that 
valuable possession, under a shorter notice than six months. 
A body so tardy in its operations, cannot be deemed a suffi- 
cient check upon the rapid and active movements, which are 
supposed to form the characteristic qualities of the adversary 
to whom it is opposed. 

If the opinion of your Adjutant General is to be deemed 
correct, I have no hesitation in declaring that the army upon 
the coast, notwithstanding its high state of discipline, and 
the acknowledged gallantry, activity and skill of its officers, 


1798. . GENERAL HARRIS. 141 


must be considered as an useless burthen upon the finances 
of the Company; being from its constitution, wholly unser- 
viceable in the emergency of that species of war, which it 
must ever expect to encounter, until the character of the 
enemy and the nature of his force shall be entirely changed. 
It cannot be doubted that if Tippoo in consequence of his 
alliance with France, had received the aid of one or two re- 
giments, either from the Mauritius or from France, he would 
immediately have attempted an irruption into the Carnatic with 
the whole force of his cavalry, which although diminished is 
still considerable. In such an event if the Adjutant General’s 
opinion be correct, your army could have opposed no obstacle 
to the progress of Tippoo for many months. The state of 
Tippoo’s preparations is supposed to be such, as to enable 
him to move with facility and celerity even for the purposes 
of offence, while the condition of our protecting force is re- 
presented by the Adjutant General to be such, as will not 
admit of its moving even for the purpose of defence, before 
the commencement of the ensuing year. The acknowledged 
talents and experience of your Adjutant General, will not 
allow me to treat his opinion lightly upon a subject so im- 
portant as that which was submitted to his consideration ; I 
am persuaded, that he is incapable of attempting to exag- 
gerate difficulties, and I can conceive no motive which could 
induce him to endeavour to impede the progress of measures, 
which it is his duty to execute with the full exertion of his 
zeal and ability; yet if I am to receive his judgment impli- 
citly, I cannot view it in any other light, than that of a sen- 
tence of disqualification upon your army, as far as relates to 
the primary object of its institution; namely, ‘ defence against 
a sudden invasion of the Carnatic.” I am, however, aware 
that this sentence of disability is mitigated in a considerable 
degree by your judgment and that of Mr. Cockburn, to both 
of which on every account, I pay the greatest deference and 
respect. But even from the result of your opinion it appears, 
that it would be nearly three months, before the army could 
be enabled to move even for operations of a defensive nature. 
This my dear Sir, is a most serious consideration to me, who 
am charged with the arduous responsibility of preserving 
from injury, every part of the British empire in India, I am 
determined not only to apply an immediate remedy to this 


142 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


evil, but to encounter the expense which I know must be 
incurred, in providing a permanent security against the future 
return of the peril of our present situation. With this view 
I mean to record my sentiments in the secret department 
upon the difficulties which obstruct the movements of your 
army; this step will be followed by a direction to your Go- 
vernment to report to me in council, the most eligible plan 
for enabling the army upon the coast to be in constant readi- 
ness to take the field expeditiously, upon any sudden emer- 
gency. On your report, combined with such information as 
I shall receive from the Commander-in-Chief, and from other 
authorities here, I propose to ground a permanent system for 
the necessary purpose already stated. In the meanwhile the 
measure which it is my intention to suggest to you for our 
present defence, will lay the foundation of a more regular 
establishment of your means of taking the field in future, and 
will co-operate in promoting my ultimate object. My wish 
now is, that you should immediately encamp the native troops 
in such a position as you may deem most eligible for expel- 
ling any invasion of the Carnatic; that you should draw the 
European force immediately into the frontier garrisons; and 
if your point of union should be, as I suppose it must be, the 
Baramahl, that you should encamp the European force also 
there before the period of the monsoon. 

You will also immediately procure the necessary draft 
bullocks for the artillery; it is my opinion that a permanent 
establishment of these will be absolutely necessary for your 
future safety. r 

The carriage bullocks must be hired immediately, accord- 
ing to Mr. Cockburn’s suggestion ; some system must here- 
after be regularly introduced into the country, in order to 
facilitate the collection of these upon all future emergencies. 

Grain and other necessary provisions must be stored in | 
whatever place shall be judged most proper for such a depot. 
I am persuaded that means must be found of constantly main- 
taining upon the frontiers such a store of grain as would 
serve a large army for at least six months in the field. 

The train of artillery must be provided without delay ; 
this will serve as a foundation for a permanent establishment 
of artillery, to be always ready for use; the camp equipage, 
will be furnished of course; but the best mode of providing 


1798. CAPTAIN KIRKPATRICK. 143 


articles in future will be a leading object of your report 
to ine. P 

Thus I have endeavoured to open to your view the general 
outline of my arrangements for frustrating the united efforts 
of Tippoo and of France. My leading objects are—to place 
your army in a respectable state of preparation for the pre- 
sent, and to enable it to move with alacrity and expedition 
on any future emergency. To restore to our Allies the power 
of fulfilling their defensive engagements with us, both now 
and hereafter; to destroy every seed of the French party, 
now growing up in the heart of the dominions of one of 
our principal Allies, and on, the confines of our own. 
By the natural and necessary effect of this change in the 
political state of India, to strengthen our barriers against the 
resentment and violence of Tippoo Sultaun, and to place in 
our hands the option of reducing his power according to 
our discretion, instead of abandoning our tranquillity to his 
mercy. 

All these objects appear to me to be. attainable; but if 
they should not be attained, the blame shall not be imputable 
to any failure of diligence or labour on my part. 

I am extremely pleased with the accounts from Tanjore; 
and I flatter myself that the country will at length become’a 
scene of order and affluence, an honour to the government 
of the Company and of the Rajah, and an increasing source 
of profit to both. 

Believe me, &c. &c. 
. Mornineron. 


No. XXXVII. 
The Earl of Mornington to Captain Kirkpatrick. 
Sir, Fort William, July 18, 1798. 

I take the earliest opportunity to acknowledge your two 
very interesting letters, Nos. 57 and 58. 

The intelligence which they contain corresponds in a 
striking manner with the view which I had taken in my in- 
structions to you and to Colonel Palmer of the 8th inst. of 
the actual state of affairs at the Courts of Poonah and Hy- 
derabad, and leads me to form a confident expectation that my 
proposed arrangements for restoring to us the benefit of the 


144 GENERAL HARRIS, TO July, 


triple alliance, will be brought to a successful issue, unless 
my endeavours should unfortunately be frustrated by the 
success of Scindiah’s designs upon the power of the Peishwa 
before Colonel Palmer can have received my despatches of 
the 8th inst. In your letter, No. 58, you relate a singular 
instance of the penetration of Azim ul Omra, who, as you 
will have observed, has anticipated nearly the whole prin- 
ciple and object of my instructions of the 8th inst. Al- 
though I consider this coincidence of sentiment as a very 
favourable circumstance in many points of view, I am appre- 
hensive that it may be difficult to convince Azim ul Omra of 
the fact of my first instructions to Colonel Palmer having 
been despatched on the same day with those addressed to 
you. : 
I think it necessary to authorize you to declare that I have 
had no correspondence whatever with Colonel Palmer pre- 
viously to my despatch of the 8th inst. You will naturally 
observe to Azim ul Omra, that he has foreseen nearly the 
whole of my plan with this material exception, that the fun- 
damental principle of my instructions, both to you and Col. 
Palmer, is an unreserved communication to each Court of the 
propositions to be made to the other; and that the full pre- 
vious knowledge and consent ofall parties forms an essential 
condition of the whole arrangement. This circumstance will 
afford sufficient proof of my sincerity; and, indeed, I cannot 
conceive what possible motive could be assigned for my pre- 
ferring the interests of the Peishwa to those of the Nizam, or 
for my undertaking any negociations at Poonah without his 
Highness’s participation. 

But I repeat it, the best answer to any such suspicion is 
to be found in the whole tenor and spirit of my instructions 
to you and ‘to Colonel] Palmer. 

I shall wait for your reply to my letter of the 8th of July. 
before I furnish you with my instructions upon any other 
points stated in your last despatches. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 
MornineTon. 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 145 


No. XXXVIII. 


General Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 
My pear Lorn, Madras, July 22, 1798. 


When your Lordship hears of our difficulties from the 
want of cash, you will not be surprized that we begin to be 
very anxious to hear from you on this subject. 

Yesterday we advertized your ten years’ proposal, from not 
having a better to offer, but much cannot be expected from 
it, as in the present state of exchange between the Presi- 
dencies it would be a great advantage to purchase your bills, 
and send them to be placed in your remittance. To equalize 
the exchange, we must remit the pagoda at nine shillings, which 
we did not think ourselves authorized to offer. 

We have also advertised that proposals will be received for 
bills on Bengal, and from which I have some expectations, or 
should be under the necessity of entirely stopping our pre- 
parations, and which partially is the case, having stopped a 
further provision of bullocks (draft) than will move our field 
train and some arrack carts. I have not brought the corps 
from the westward of Wallajawbad out of cantonments, and 
I had intended to send the 36th into Arnee instead of allow- 
ing them to remain on field allowances, but shall wait until 
I hear further from your Lordship. A few days will always 
join the troops from the cantonments of Arcot, Conatore, 
Arnee, and Vellore, as their carriage and camp equipage are 
ready. 

General Floyd informs me the 3d N.C. (the first corps 
ready with him) begins to cross the Coleroon the 17th or 
18th, and will be five or six days in effecting the passage 
from his having but three boats; his Majesty’s 19th dragoons 
and 12th infantry will follow in about eight days. Any one 
of these corps would enable us to watch Tippoo should he 
come to see us. ; 

The camp at Wallajawbad will consist of his Majesty’s 12th 
and 36th regiments, 19th dragoons, 3d and 4th N. cavalry, 
Ist B. 1st N. infantry, with the 74th and two corps of N. I. 
in the cantonments. 

A few days will always join these to the corps at Arnee 
and Arcot, &c. as carriage and camp equipage is now all 

VOL. I. L 


146 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO July, 


ready. This, from absolute want of cash to make any further 
preparation, must be the state until your Lordship supplies 
us. I have now, my Lord, to address you on the subject of 
the French prisoners whom I have been much urged to send 
to Calcutta, but have refused until I know your pleasure :— 
1. As being well acquainted with the nuisance they would be 
in Fort William. 2. AsI am doubtful whether, under the 
Capitulation of Pondicherry, we can send them any where 
but to Europe without being guilty of a breach of it; and 
3. As we can get vessels here that will engage as cartels, and 
which I should instantly have closed with, but that I do not 
think it safe to despatch them without convoy, for fear of 
their going to Mangalore instead of Old France. 


I remain, with truth, 
Your Lordship’s 
Faithful and obedient Servant, 
Gero. Harris. 


P.S. We have appointed the Commission for Tanjore, 
consisting of Mr. Torin, Mr. Harris (not even an acquaint- 
ance of mine), and Mr. Stratton, as youngest member and 
Secretary. Your Lordship has a pretty good notion of the 
difficulties attending the finding proper members who are not 
more usefully employed. 

The above young men have lately conducted themselves 
very much to their credit ; Mr. Harris in a business of a simi- 
lar nature, in the Ramnad country, and Mr. Stratton as Se- 
cretary to the Court of Cutcherry. 

Your Lordship’s favorites, Messrs. Cockburne and Lush- 
ington are positively against accepting the country from Ser- 
fogee, and I join them most cordially—but particulars will be 
forwarded by the Sybelle, and then your Lordship will 
decide. 

The amount of fixed pay and allowances of the army now 
under orders for the Field, is - Pagodas 91,449 

Additional in the Field, - 1,18,105 


2,09,554 


1798. COLONEL WILLIAM PALMER. 147 


No. XXXIX. 
The Earl of Mornington to Colonel William Palmer, Resident at Poonah. 
Sir, : Fort William, the 25th July, 1798. 


From the enclosed copy of my letter to the Resident at 
Hyderabad, you will observe that I consider it of essential im- 
portance that the part of the proposed engagements with the 
Peishwa and the Nizam which relates to the dismission of the 
French from the service of the two Courts, and the future 
exclusion of all persons of that nation from their respective 
dominions, should be finally ratified with all possible ex- 
pedition. 

You will accordingly take the necessary steps for obtaining 
without, delay from the Peishwa a separate engagement com- 
prising all the proposed stipulations in my letter of the 8th 
instant, regarding the French. The engagement should be 
concluded subject to my approbation, and should be forwarded 
to me with all practicable despatch for my ratification. 

It is not improbable that the apparent reconciliation be- 
tween Nana and Scindiah, has been founded on engage- 
ments injurious to the rights and authority of the Peishwa, 
Should this conjecture prove well founded, there is little 
room to expect that Bajee-Row will ever consent to Nana’s 
restoration to his former influence in the administration of 
affairs, especially when it is considered that the grounds of 
the enmity between Bajee-row and Nana are of a nature which 
would appear to preclude any hope of a sincere reconciliation. 

To use our influence for the restoration of Nana to his 
former power, in opposition to the Peishwa would be unjust. 
I have great doubts also of the policy of such a line of con- 
duct. For it could not be expecied that Bajee-row would 
adhere to engagements which subjected him to the control of 
the implacable enemy of his family, and such an arrangement 
might be expected to terminate either in an application to 
Scindiah for his assistance against Nana, or in a connection 
with Tippoo to the prejudice of the triple alliance. 

Your communication with the parties will best enable you 
to judge of the consideration to which these conjectures 
are entitled. Should you be of opinion that the recent in- 
juries which Bajee-Row and Nana have mutually sustained 


148 GENERAL HARRIS, TO July, 


from Dowlut Rao are likely to induce them to forget their 
former animosities, and that Nana can be restored to his 
former power, or placed in any other situation in the ministry 
at Poonah without danger to the immediate success of the 
proposed arrangements, or to their future stability, I shall 
readily acquiesce in such stipulations as you may make in his 
favor. 

You will consider the instructions which I have given to 
the Acting Resident at Hyderabad for forwarding an ac- 
count of the result of his proceedings under my instructions 
down to the latest date by the overland despatch: which will 
proceed from Bombay by the 1st September next, as-equally 
intended for your guidance. 

; Iam, &c. Mornineron. 


No. XL. 
General Harris to the Earl of Mornington, 


My pear Lorb, July, 29th, One p.m. 1798. 


Your Lordship’s private and public letters of 13th inst. 
are this moment received. You may rely that no time shall 
be lost in giving directions for carrying into effect the orders 
they convey, the moment I have determined in what manner 
your intentions will be best effected, and which in the scat- 
tered state of our troops to the northward, and owing to the 
urgent demands for them in other quarters requires much 
consideration. 

July 30th.—Having turned the subject much in my mind 
last night and this morning, I am come to the resolution to 
acquaint your Lordship with two or three points by express 
before I finally determine from whence the force shall be 
brought. 

That unless we receive from Bengal a supply of money 
before the end of August, we positively cannot proceed. 

That the marine battalion should be sent with every pos- 
sible expedition to Masulipatam, and the 33d. here. 

That the force you have ordered cannot be assembled in 
the Guntoor Circar before the end of August, as a battalion, 
if not two, must go from the centre division, and where, it is 
to be observed, we have not a man to spare if an attack is 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 149 


made ; and lastly, that the execution of your Lordship’s orders 
for sending round the men of the 36th on the arrival of the 
83d must be suspended if possible. 

I sent an order last night for steps to be taken for the 11th 
regiment to be assembled, hoping that the force could have 
been furnished from the Circars, but shall stop them for a 
few days, as I am now convinced half of it must march from 
here. 

Depend on every possible exertion, and that although de- 
pressed by want of cash, I do not despond, and am always 
very faithfully your Lordship’s obedient Servant, 

Gro. Harris. 


No. XLI. 
From Tippoo Sultaun to the Governor-General. 
(Dated \st Suffer, 1213, or 18th of July,) 
,. [Received 2d of August, 1798.] 

In happy time I had the pleasure to receive your Lordship’s 
letter, which afforded me great satisfaction, and its friendly 
contents have been understood—(vide letter written 14th 
June). Since the time that the country of Nuggur and Kori- 
aul was first subjugated; the Talooks of Ameera and Souleah, 
in which (latter) Kamtamungle and Coloorbajee are situated, 
have belonged to Koriaul, and this proved and confirmed by 
the records of a century.—The names of the persons who 
paid the collections of those Talooks to the officers of Koriaul, 
of those who collected the revenues of them, and the accounts 
of advances made to the Ryots for the purposes of cultiva- 
tion, are contained in those records, and from the first esta- 
blishment of the authority of this Sircar down to the year 
1220 of Mohummed, they have been attached to the country 
of Koriaul. The Coorga people have had no concern in them. 
Indeed, between the above Talooks and the Coorga country 
vast hills interpose. By the Treaty of Peace, the Talooks of 
Ahmednuggur, otherwise called Chuckloor, belongs to my 
‘Sircar, and Wynaad (or Wynaur) is a Kurreah (or village. 
with its appertaining lands) among the Kurreahs of Ahmed- 
nuggur above the Tambacherry pass. The territory of the 
Company is below that pass, and the hills form a barrier 

between. . : : 


150 THE HON. JONATHAN DUNCAN, TO August, 


Your Lordship has written that ‘ subordinate officers are 
naturally inclined to make. misrepresentations to their respec- 
tive governments in such trivial cases, and to foment jealousies 
and disturbances.”—It is certain, then, that in plain and 
simple cases, the representations of interested people will not 
have any weight or credit whatever with your Lordship. 
Nevertheless as your Lordship is desirous of obtaining an 
explanation and removing doubts, orders have been issued to 
the officers of Koriaul to confer with the persons who may be 
appointed from the Malabar side ; and fairly to ascertain and 
remove all doubts, a person of rank shall also be deputed by 
me for this business. By the favour of God the bonds of 
friendship and union are firmly drawn between the two 
States, and I am to the last degree disposed to give addi- 
tional strength to the beneficial system of amity and peace. 

Believing me gratified by the agreeable intelligence of your 
Lordship’s welfare, I hope you will always continue to rejoice 
me by your exhilarating letters. 


A true Copy, N. B. EpMonsToNs, 
Persian Translator to Govt. 


No. XLII. 
The Hon. Jonathan Duncan to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Lorop, ; Bombay, 2d August, 1798. 

I lose no time..in .acknowledging the honor and gratifica- 
tion I have experienced in the receipt of your Lordship’s 
communication of the 6th ult., that reached me on the 30th 
of last month; and from the obliging expressions in which I 
am encouraged, and shall certainly feel every inclination to dis- 
charge the particular duties dependent on me in a manner to 
afford satisfaction to your Lordship, whose instructions and 
advice, whenever I may be favored with either, can never fail 
to have their full operation on my conduct. 

Having imparted to the. Commander-in-Chief, as well as 
to the Hon. Mr. North, the particulars relative to the mea- 
sures in deliberation respecting Tippoo, the former has 
furnished me with the state and disposition of our forces, 
whence it appears that the present garrison of Bombay 
consists of the King’s 75th regiment, two companies and 


. 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 151 


a half of artillery, one regiment of native infantry, six com- 
panies of the grenadier battalion of N. I. and about half the 
marine battalion, composing an effective force of 815 Euro- 
peans, and 2,320 Natives, besides 360 gun-lascars, without 
arms; and of the Sepoys, about seven hundred are at present 
unfit for field service; neither can the marine battalion be 
relied or reckoned on, as a part of the garrison, because their 
numbers are constantly fluctuating, and are no more than 
sufficient for their proper duties. 

Tannah, in Salsette, is garrisoned by invalids, and a de- 
tachment of two companies of native infantry from Bombay ; 
Surat, by one company of Europeans from the Company's 
regiment in Malabar; half a company of artillery, and the 
local battalion of Sepoys. 

In Malabar, we have the 77th regiment, and the Company's 
European regiment (excepting the company detached to 
Surat, and the detachment on board of the Bombay frigate) 
three companies of artillery, and three regiments and a half 
of native infantry, exclusive of the pioneers, gun-lascars and 
Sebundy corps. Thus by the present distribution of our 
forces, the far greater part of our army is in the province of 
Malabar, and so situated that, from the season, it cannot im- 
mediately be called up to service in the northern quarters. 

Under these circumstances, General Stuart (whose zeal for 
the service and professional ability I dare say your Lordship 
is fully aware of) thinks that, without much hazard, so large 
a force can hardly be detached from the garrison here, as to 
the greatest number your Lordship’s letter adverts to; or of 
more than 500 men from the 75th regiment, with one com- 
pany of artillery and complement of gun-lascars, and also the 
six companies of the grenadier battalion, making 350 men, 
with the 2d battalion of the 4th regiment, consisting of 900, 
composing in all 1250 sepoys ; it being at the same time fur- 
ther observed by our Commander-in-Chief, that the emer- 
gency of the case could perhaps alone warrant our sparing 
‘such a great proportion of the force, which is not even now 
deemed adequate to the defence of this place were it attacked, 
‘and it will consequently be necessary to supply and replace 
them, without delay, by drafts from Malabar. The General 
also intimating that, in the intermediate time, and until the 
arrival of the reinforcements (which can hardly be looked to 


152 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO August, 


before the end of September or middle of October), he will 
not be inclined to hold himself responsible for the conse- 
quences, in case of any attack on Bombay, which, although 
not a probable event, seems still within the range of possi- 
bility ; and desiring likewise to notice, for your Lordship’s 
observation, that we should have found less difficulty in send- 
ing a force from Malabar, where the greatest part of our 
army is stationed, and the troops ready for field-service, all, 
except what must be left in the garrisons of Cannanore, Cochin, 
and Paulghaut, with one native regiment (as I calculate) to 
preserve the peace throughout the districts, to which the 
Sebundies alone are not adequate ; so that I hardly suppose 
we could safely send from Malabar above 3,000 Native In- 
fantry fram the force at present stationed there, whether to 
come up here, or to act in that quarter in co-operation with 
the Madras army, and there is certainly more material danger 
in withdrawing any part of our force from Malabar, at this mo- 
ment, than might be probably incurred by sending all the 3000 
men in question to act against the Sultaun’s territories in that 
quarter; for, whilst the troops were acting within the obser- 
vation of the Malabar chieftains, these latter would, at least, 
be quiet, during our successful progress ; but if they see the 
troops withdrawn, as it were altogether, by bringing them up 
to Bombay, they will be apt to ascribe it to our necessities 
and weakness; and to presume accordingly; for they one 
and all continue still uneasy under the yoke, we have been 
endeavouring to impose on them, and are only manageable by 
policy, aided by the appearance, at least, of a competent mi- 
litary force, 7 
Having thus submitted to your Lordship the General's opi- 
nion and my own, as it is our duty ;—be assured I shall, when 
your further instructions arrive, leave nothing undone to give 
them the fullest possible effect, and shall in the mean time, 
write to Fort St. George, as your Lordship has suggested. 
Your Lordship may in this and in all other instances rely 
on my secrecy; but there will, I fear, be. no disguising the ob- 
ject of our preparations ; because, the notoriety of Malartic’s 
publication (which I Jong prevented getting into the news- 
papers here, and until they were printed in the Bengal ones) 
leaves but one general belief, that your Lordship must unavoid- 
ably adopt the measures now in meditation ; and which I do 


1798. THE RESIDENT AT LUCKNOW. 153 


“also most fervently join my own wishes to those of your Lord- 
ship, may yet terminate in the confirmation of the public 
peace. 

I must still add the farther opinion of General Stuart, that, 
if so great a draft of troops be made from this Presidency, it 
will be absolutely necessary to raise another native regiment. 
He at the same time doubts, whether the Madras Govern- 
ment will be able to spare us a man; in which case, I might 
perhaps obtain one or two battalions from the Rajah of Tra- 
vancore, on the terms of the treaty with him, if your Lordship 
approves of that expedient. 

I have the honor to remain with the utmost consideration, 

My Lord, your Lordship’s 
Most obedient and very humble servant, 
JonaTHAN Duncan. 


No. XLIII. 
The Earl of Mornington to the Resident at Lucknow, 


Sir, Fort William, 6th August, 1798. 

I have received your letter of the 27th ultimo. 

Considering the advance of Golaum Mahommed Khan to- 
wards Rohilcund without my sanction, as a decisive proof of 
his intention to create disturbance, I have communicated the 
intelligence which you have transmitted respecting him to 
the commanding officers at Futtehghur and Cawnpore, and 
have desired them to hold in readiness such part of their 
force as they may judge necessary for suppressing any com- 
motion which may be excited by Golaum Mahommed and his 
adherents. 

You will also apply to the Nabob to furnish a body of his 
troops to be stationed at Nujeebadad or at whatever place 
may be found advisable, and you will, in concert with the 
Vizier, direct Nussur Ullah Khan to have recourse to every 
means in his power for preventing any of the Rohillahs from 
joining Golaum Mahommed. Nussur Ullah Khan must be 
ordered to apprehend and send to Lucknow any persons who 
may be detected in favoring the views of Golaum Mahommed. 

You will communicate to Major Generals Craig and Stewart 
such farther information as you may receive respecting the 
designs of Golaum Mahommed Khan, and you will concert 


154 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO August, 


with those officers and with the Vizier the detail of the mea- 
sures which may be necessary for preserving the tranquillity 
of the country. 

- In the meanwhile no time should be lost in obtaining the 
Vizier’s consent to the removal of the whole of the family of 
Golaum Mahommed, including his sons, together with any 
treasure which the family may have in their possession to 
Benares. 

You will have received my letter to the Vizier pressing him 
for the payment of the arrears of his subsidy. As I am per- 
suaded his Excellency possesses ample means of discharging 
the whole arrear without waiting the receipt of the collections 
from the country, I desire that you will urge to’ him, in the 
strongest terms, my expectation that he will immediately re- 
sort to whatever resources of any description he can command 
for the purpose of fulfilling his engagements. 

My intention of visiting Lucknow has suspended my answer 
to your several letters, but as I have thought it advisable to 
postpone my visit to that place for some time, I shall proceed 
without delay to the consideration of the various points on 
which you have desired my instructions. 

I am, &c. 
MornincTon. 


No. XLIV. 


The Earl of Mornington to Tippoo Sultaun. 
Fort William, 7th August, 1798. 

Your Highness’s Letter gave me great satisfaction; at*the 
same time that it reached me, I received from the Commis- 
sioners in Malabar, their final opinion upon the subject of 
Wynaad. After a full examination of every circumstance 
relating to your rights and to those of the Company, I am 
now convinced that Wynaad was not ceded to the Company 
by the treaty of peace, and therefore that it belongs to your 
Highness. As it never will be my wish to contest the small- 
est particle of your Highness’s rights, I have directed the 
Commissioners to make a formal acknowledgment of the jus- 
tice of your claim to Wynaad, which district you will occupy 
whenever it may suit your pleasure. As some doubts how- 
ever remain whether the Tambacherry Pass be not included 


1798. TIPPOO SULTAUN. 155 


in the cessions made to the Company, by the treaty of peace, 
I have directed the officers of the Company to confer on that 
subject, with the person to be appointed by your Highness. 
All question between your Highness and the Company with 
respect to Wynaad, is now brought to a happy conclusion :— 
The right to the Tambacherry Pass, and to the Talooks of 
Ameerah and Souleah and Ersawaraseemy still remains for 
discussion. You will find me sincerely disposed to consider 
the several questions relating to these districts, with the same 
impartiality, of which I have endeavoured to afford your 
Highness an unequivocal testimony in the final settlement of 
your claims upon Wynaad. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 

MornineTon. 


A true Copy, N. B. Epmonsrone, 
Persian Translator to Govt. 


No. XLV. 
General Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 

My Dear Lorn, Madras, 7th August, 1798. 

My last letter to your Lordship, of which I now transmit 
a duplicate, was in a more desponding strain than you were 
probably prepared to receive ; but if it had been my wish to 
soften the truths which it contained, I should have deemed 
it treacherous to your Lordship to have done so, for as the 
responsibility of the orders rests exclusively with your Go- 
vernment, it was especially incumbent on me to apprize you 
of the difficulties which opposed their execution, that you 
might be enabled to send us early and effectual succour. 

The situation of a person to command the detachment* has 
been justly considered an object of the greatest importance ; 
after the fullest enquiry my choice has fallen upon Lieut.- 
Colonel Robarts commanding the 11th native regiment; he 
was at Hyderabad with it till relieved by the Bengal detach- 
ment, and gave great satisfaction to the Nizam and his Mi- 
nisters. Lieut.-Colonel Dalrymple, the brother-in-law of 
Lieut.-Colonel Robarts is the second in command, and an 


* This refers to the portion of troops which the Governor General or- 
dered to be assembled in the Guntoor Circar (see Map) for the purpose 
of marching on Hyderabad, in order to disarm the French legion of 
11,000 men then in the service of the Nizam. 


156 GENERAL HARRIS, TO August, 


officer of high military character: he was also before at Hy- 
derabad, and is the officer who so much distinguished himself 
at the taking of Raibor. But as Sir Alured Clarke is per- 
fectly acquainted with their characters, I beg to refer your 
Lordship to him for more particular information. It will 
appear somewhat extraordinary to your Lordship (upon a 
perusal of the accompanying minute read in Council the 13th 
instant, but withdrawn for the present) that the required de- 
tachment would have been nearly ready at this time if the 
want of money had not afforded so serious an objection, and 
if. I had not been much importuned to refrain from the mea- 
sure, and perhaps convinced that 1 should have met with 
much counteraction which in my present temporary situation 
it would have been troublesome to overcome. The receipt 
of your instructions placed the measure in a stronger point of 
view, and yesterday I delivered to the Council the minute 
No. 2. 

Objections were, as I expected, enumerated, but as I de- 
clared my resolution to take the measure upon myself; and 
execute it with my own funds if no public money could be 
obtained, the opposition was silenced, and my arrangements 
were instantaneously put in execution. I must confess to 
your lordship, that this minute has relieved the disquietude 
of mind under which I wrote my last letter; because I feel 
that I have done my duty towards the public and myself, in 
adverting to the difficulties to which we are exposed; whilst 
T have at the same time, placed your lordship’s wishes in the 
best possible train of accomplishment, and write this letter 
under a determination to use my unceasing endeavours for 
their effectual and speedy completion. In the various consi- 
derations that will engage your Lordship’s mind in deliberat- 
ing upon the great question, that of the limited powers al- 
lowed to the Commander-in-Chief on the coast, will not 
escape you. In the event of hostilities, I should most 
earnestly wish your lordship to be here, and the Commander- 
in-Chief in India to be in command of the army; for although 
I have no doubt your Lordship would endeavour to prevent 
the certain bad consequences of placing me in the command, 

‘without an extension of my previous powers, I am thoroughly 
convinced, that the service would most essentially benefit by 
your Lordship’s presence at Madras. 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 157 


* 


The outline of your Lordship’s ideas for the defence of the 
Carnatic, appears to me perfectly correct; and so sensible 
am I of the necessity of stores and a train in advance, that 
you will have a plan immediately laid before you, for putting 
the Pettah of Kistnagherry into a state for a depdt. The 
unusual swelling of the rivers at Trichinopoly, and our total 
want of preparation in every way, not a boat being ready, 
and the Nabob’s people doing nothing, has caused a delay in 
that quarter, which might have been most fatal, had Tippoo 
come down when he first received intelligence of our prepara- 
tions. 

I am my Lord, 
, Your very faithful and obedient servant. 
Gero. Harris. 


No. XLVI. 
The Earl of Mornington to Lieut.-Col. W. Palmer, Resident at Poonah. 
Sir, Fort William, 9th August, 1798. 


Your letter of the 13th July, No. 28, is now before me. 

In the 11th paragraph, you state the probability of the 
Peishwa’s endeavouring to save his person by joining the 
forces of the Nizam; but you add your apprehension, that 
he may find it difficult to effect his retreat if Scindiah should 
determine to seize him in the city. 

Under such circumstances, it is possible that the Peishwa 
might be able to effect his retreat with more facility, if he 
were to direct his motions towards Bombay, and to join our 
troops. 

If therefore the Peishwa shall have consented to the pro- 
positions contained in my instructions to you of the 8th July, 
I authorize you to offer him a retreat at Bombay, and to 
assure him, that he will be received with every mark of res- 
pect and friendship, and that his person will be protected 
with the most exact attention. 

You will take care to give sufficient notice to the Govern- 
ment of Bombay, if the Peishwa should be likely to avail 
hitnself of this offer, in order that they may prepare for his 
reception. 

Iam, &c. 
Mornineron. 


158 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO August, 


No. XLVII. 
The Earl of Mornington to Captain J. A. Kirkpatrick, acting Resident at 
Hyderabad. 
Sir, Fort William, J1th August, 1798. 


I have received your letter of the 24th July, to which I 
now return my answer. 

By referring to my detailed instructions of the 8th July, 
you will perceive that the arrangements which I propose, are 
not limited to a mere enlargement of our existing subsidiary 
engagements with the Nizam. 

I collect from your letter, that Azim ul Omra would be 
likely to require three conditions in addition to those stated 
in the abstract of my instructions of the 8th July, before he 
would consent to accede to my propositions. 

The first, an engagement to support the succession of Se- 
cunder Jah. 

Secondly, the power of employing the British detachment, 
in carrying into effect yarious measures of internal reform in 
the Nizam’s dominions. 

Thirdly, the extension of my proposed arbitration of the 
existing differences between the courts of Poonah and Hyde- 
rabad, to any cases of difference which may hereafter arise. 

It is my decided intention to support the succession of Se- 
cunder Jah. But I have directed you to conceal that inten- 
tion from Azim ul Omra for the present, under an apprehen- 
sion that the disclosure of it might excite suspicion and 
jealousy in the mind of the Nizam. 

If, however, you should be of opinion that this communica- 
tion could be made to Azim ul Omra, without any danger of 
the nature which I apprehend, I authorize you to act accord- 
ing to your own discretion in this respect. 

With regard to the employment of the British detachment 
within the Nizam’s dominions, it appears to me that I have 
already laid down the rule with sufficient clearness in my letter 
of the 14th July; in which I have directed, that the employ- 
ment of the British troops, in his Highness’s dominions, shall 
be restricted to those important cases in which his person or 
authority shall be endangered, and shall not be extended to 
those services, which more properly belong to Sebundy corps. 


1798. CAPTAIN J. A. KIRKPATRICK. 159 


This rule would certainly admit of the employment of the 
detachment in the cases stated in your letter of the 24th 
July, nor am I aware of any objection to the use of the British 
troops, under the direction of the Nizam’s ministers, in ser- 
vices connected with the introduction of a system of internal 
reform into his Highness’s dominions. 

Ifthe Courts of Poonah and Hyderabad, shall concur in 
accepting my arbitration of their subsisting differences, there 
will be every reason to hope, that they would be prepared to 
receive a similar security against the effects of any disputes 
which may hereafter arise. It never was my intention to 
confine my interposition to the circumstances of the present 
moment, my object being to unite the interests of the two 
courts, upon a permanent basis. 

My wish unquestionably is, that the Company should for 
the future, be placed in the situation of a mediator between the 
other two branches of the triple alliance, and should here- 
after by a timely interposition of good offices, prevent them 
from engaging in contests, which must eventually impair the 
strength of both parties, and defeat the ends of the triple 
alliance. 

I am, &c. 
Mornineron. 


No. XLVIII. 
[Minute of the Governor-General in the Secret Department. ] 


Tue Governor-GENERAL. Fort William, August 12, 1798. 
In communicating to the Board an authentic copy of the 
proclamation issued by the Governor-General of the Isle 
of France, during the residence of the Ambassadors of 
Tippoo Sultaun in that island, I informed the Board that 
I would prepare the detail of such measures, as appeared 
to me most advisable for the purpose, of frustrating the 
united efforts of Tippoo Sultaun and of France. Accord- 
ingly I have laid before the Board, for that necessary pur- 
pose, a number of propositions, connected in their prin- 
ciple as well as in their object, and I have endeavoured to 
carry the proposed system of measures into execution with 
every practicable degree of diligence and despatch. When it 


160 MINUTE OF August, 


is remembered that I did not take charge of this Government 
until the 18th of May, that the proclamation did not make 
its first appearance at this Presidency until the 8th of June, 
and was not authenticated here until the 18th of June, I trust 
it will appear that I have proceeded with as much expedition 
as was compatible with the due consideration of the various 
and important questions which demanded my decision.* 
Although the leading objects of the several propositions 
which have been adopted by this Government may be col- 
lected from my late correspondence with the Governments of 
Fort St. George and Bombay, and with the Residents at 
Poonah and Hyderabad, it may be useful to review, with 
more particularity, the circumstances which have suggested 
this system of measures to my judgment. My present inten- 
tion, therefore, is to explain and illustrate the principles upon 
which that system is founded, the means by which I hope to 
carry it into effect, and the ends which I expect to accom- 
plish by its ultimate success and permanent establishment. 
In this retrospect of my conduct, I shall disclose, without 
hesitation or reserve, the whole train of reflections which has 
passed in my mind during the agitation of this intricate and 
extensive subject; and I shall avow, without disguise, every 
successive variation of my opinion, and every instance in 
which I have reluctantly submitted my unaltered judgment to 
the pressure of practical difficulties; nor shall I deny that 
I have ultimately pursued a course, far within the limits of 
that, to which the sense of my own duty and character, the 
clearest principles of justice and of policy, the unquestionable 
rights and interests of the Company, and the honour of the 
British name in India, would have directed me, if the obsta- 
cles to my progress had not appeared absolutely insur- 
mountable. 

The various considerations which have successively en- 
gaged my attention may be stated in the following order :— 


* The Minute of the Governor-General, (see p. 54) respecting the finan- 
cial distress of India, bearing date 12th June 1798, demonstrates that it re- 
quired deliberation before increased expenses were to be incurred ; and it 
also proves that Lord Mornington had attentively examined the whole 
question of the pecuniary embarrassments in which his Lordship found 
the East India Company’s territories involved. 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 161 


First,—The nature and character of the recent proceedings 
of Tippoo Sultaun. 

Secondly,—The rights and interests of the Company, and 
the principles of my duty arising out of those proceedings. 

Thirdly,—The circumstances which might suspend or limit 
the actual exercise of those rights, the immediate and com- 
plete establishment of those interests, and the satisfactory 
discharge of that duty. 

Fourthly,—The intermediate precautions which might be 
adopted during the suspension of more effectual measures, 
and the securities which might now be provided against the 
return of our actual danger. 

The first consideration required an attentive examination 
of the proclamation issued at the Isle of France, together with 
all the collateral circumstances accompanying that extra- 
ordinary publication. The proclamation made its first ap- 
pearance at Calcutta in a newspaper of the 8th of June. 

Upon the first view of the subject, I was much inclined to 
doubt the authenticity of the proclamation. It seemed in- 
credible that, if the French really entertained a design of 
furnishing aid to Tipp$o, they would publicly declare that 
design, when no other apparent end could be answered by 
such a declaration, excepting that of exposing the project in 
its infancy to the observation of our Governments, both at 
home and in India, and of preparing both for a timely and 
effectual resistance. It did not appear more probable that 
Tippoo (whatever might be his secret design) would have 
risked so public and unguarded an avowal of his hostility; 
however, even under these circumstances, I thought it ad- 
visable to transmit a copy of the proclamation to the Governor 
of Fort St. George, in a private letter of the 9th of June, 
apprizing him that, if the proclamation should prove authentic, 
it must lead to a serious remonstrance from this Government 
to Tippoo, the result of which remonstrance must be uncer- 
tain; my letter, therefore, directed him to turn his attention 
to the means of collecting a force upon the coast, if necessity 
should unfortunately require such a measure. 

The first regular authentication of the proclamation which 
I received was contained in the letter from Lord Macartney, 
of 28th March, and in that from Sir Hugh Christian of the 
same date, received on the 18th of June. It could now no 

VOL. I. M 


162 MINUTE OF August, 


longer be doubted that the proclamation actually had been 
issued by the Governor General of the Isle of France. Still, 
however, it might have remained a question whether this 
step might not have been taken without the concurrence of 
Tippoo Sultaun, and for the promotion of some separate 
object of the French Government, unconnected with his in- 
terests and unauthorized by his consent. From the accounts 
which I had received of the state of the Isle of France, I was 
led to believe that the object of Mr. Malartic might have 
been to clear the Island of the adherents to the cause of the 
present Government of France, rather than to afford any 
effectual assistance to Tippoo. It appears, however, from 
amore accurate investigation of evidence, that the ship (which 
first conveyed to the Isle of France those accounts of the last 
revolution in France, and of the violent measures projected 
against the Isles of France and Bourbon, which occasioned 
the late disturbances at Port Nord Ouest, and the expulsion 
of the French national troops from thence) did not reach the 
Isle of France until Tippoo’s Ambassadors had departed from 
thence on their return to Mangalore. ‘The assistance afforded 
to Tippoo cannot therefore have been connected with the 
recent commotions in the Isle of France. However, I do not 
apprehend, unless some new revolution shall happen in the 
Isle of France, that Tippoo Sultaun will be able to derive any 
considerable aid from that quarter. But whatever may have 
been the motives of Monsieur Malartic in this transaction, 
the object of Tippoo Sultaun was always plain .and clear, 
although, fortunately for our interests, his success has not 
yet been answerable to the extent of his design. Of the 
object of that design, I soon possessed ample proof, arising 
from the best evidence which the nature of the case could 
admit. In the first place it appeared, by the general tenor 
of the letters from the Cape, as well as by every public ac- 
count which had been given of the transaction, to be an 
undisputed fact, that Tippoo despatched two Ambassadors to 
the Isle of France, and that the proclamation in question was 
published subsequently to their arrival and during their resi- 
dence in that island. ‘These facts would perhaps have been 
sufficient, without further inquiry, to warrant a strong pre- 
sumption that this proclamation, purporting to declare the 
object of the embassy, must have been framed with the con- 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 163 


sent and knowledge of the Ambassadors of Tippoo, then on 
the spot, and must have corresponded with their instructions 
from their sovereign, whose orders they would scarcely have . 
ventured to exceed in a matter of such serious consequence as 
the conclusion of an alliance, offensive and defensive, with the 
French. In order, however, to obtain the most accurate in- 
formation with respect to the circumstances attending the 
reception of the embassy, the publication of the proclamation, 
and the conduct of the Ambassadors, I examined, upon oath, 
some respectable persons who were present in the Isle of 
France during the residence of the Ambassadors at Port Nord 
Quest. From the concurrent testimony of these persons, 
since corroborated by intelligence from various quarters, I 
obtained a connected account of the whole transaction. 
Tippoo despatched two Ambassadors, who embarked at 
Mangalore for the Isle of France, and arrived there at the 
close of the month of January {798. They hoisted Tippoo’s 
colours upon entering the harbour of Port Nord Ouest, were 
received publicly and formally by the French Government 
with every circumstange of distinction and respect, and were 
entertained during their continuance on the Island at the 
‘public expense. Previously to their arrival, no idea or 
rumour existed in the Island of any aid to be furnished to 
Tippoo by the French, or of any prospect of a war between 
him and the Company. The second day after the arrival of 
the Ambassadors, an advertisement was published of the 
same purportas the proclamation, and immediately afterwards 
the proclamation was fixed up in the most public places, and 
circulated through the town. One of the Ambassadors was 
perfectly conversant with the French language. A person 
accompanied the embassy from Mangalore, who was habited 
in the Turkish dress, who spoke French and English with 
uncommon correctness and fluency, and who appeared to 
possess considerable knowledge and talents, and to be well 
acquainted with most of the country languages of India. This 
person had been known at Bussorah by the name of Abdoolah, 
at Surat by that of Derwish, and in the Isle of France passed 
under that of Talamas, under which last name he had also 
passed in Bengal, where he resided for some years. The 
Ambassadors (far from protesting against the matter or style 
of the proclamation) held, without reserve, in the most public 


164 MINUTE OF August, 


manner, the same language which it contains with respect to 
the offensive war to be commenced against the British pos- 
sessions in India; they even suffered the proclamation to be 
publicly distributed at their own house. Talamas’s conversa- 
tion, though with more caution and mystery, corresponded in 
substance with theirs. In consequence of these circumstances, 
an universal belief prevailed in the Island, that Tippoo would 
make an immediate attack upon the British possessions in 
India, which opinion had gained so much force, that the per- 
sons who gave this evidence, and all those who arrived at that 
period in India from the Isle of France, expected to find us 
at war with Tippoo, but they all concurred in declaring, that 
the temerity of Tippoo’s design had excited general ridicule 
in that Island. The Ambassadors were present in the Island 
when the French Government proceeded to act under the 
proclamation in question, and they aided and assisted the 
execution of it, by making promises in the name of Tippoo 
for the purpose of inducing recruits to enlist; they proposed 
to levy men to any practicable extent, stating their powers to 
be unlimited with respect to the numbers of the force to be 
raised. The Ambassadors aided and assisted in the levy of 
150 officers and privates for the service of Tippoo, under the 
terms and for the purposes of the proclamation. Few of the 
officers are of any experience or skill, and the privates are 
the refuse of the lowest class of the democratic rabble of the 
Island. Some of them are volunteers, others were taken from 
the prisons and compelled to embark, several of them are 
Caffres and people of half-cast. With such of these troops 
as were volunteers, the Ambassadors entered into several 
stipulations and engagements in the name of Tippoo. 

On the 7th of March, 1798, the Ambassadors embarked on 
board the French frigate La Preneuse, together with the 
force thus raised, and they publicly declared an intention of 
proceeding to the Isle of Bourbon, with the hope of obtaining 
more recruits for the same service. 

The proclamation, therefore, originated in the arrival of the 
Ambassadors at the Isle of France, was distributed by their 
agents, was avowed in every part by their own public declara- 
tion, and finally was executed according to its tenor by their 

ersonal assistance and co-operation. 

The proclamation itself furnished the most powerful in- 


1788. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 165 


ternal evidence of the concurrence of the Ambassadors in all 
its essential parts, the principal facts stated therein are— 

“That Tippoo Sultaun, through two Ambassadors des- 
patched for the purpose to the Isle of France, had addressed 
letters to the colonial assembly of the Isle of France, to all 
the Generals employed there, and to the Executive Directory 
of France, and had made the following propositions :— 

“Ist. That he desired to form an alliance, offensive and 
defensive, with the French, and offered to maintain at his 
expense, during the continuance of the war in India, whatever 
troops should be furnished by the French, and to supply 
(with the exception of certain stores) every necessary for 
carrying on the war. 

“2d. That he had given assurances that all his prepara- 
tions were already completed, and that the generals and 
officers would find every thing necessary for carrying on a 
species of war, to which Europeans have not been accustomed 
in their contests with the Native Powers in India. 

“ 3d.. That he only waited for the succour of France to 
declare war against the English, and that it was his ardent 
desire to expel the English from India.” 

Upon the ground of these facts, the proclamation recom- 
mends a general levy of men for the service of Tippoo; and 
it concludes by assuring “ all the citizens who shall enlist, 
that Tippoo will give them an advantageous rate of pay and 
allowances, which will be fixed by his Ambassadors, who will 
also engage, in the name of their sovereign, that the French- 
men who shall have enlisted in his army, shall never be de- 
tained there after they shall have expressed a desire of return- 
ing to their native country.” 

The avowed purport of this proclamation is to acquaint the 
inhabitants of the Island with the propositions made by Tippoo 
Sultaun, through his Ambassadors then on the spot. It 
enumerates those propositions with a particularity of detail 
which could never have been hazarded in the presence of the 
Ambassadors if the facts stated had not been correctly true, 
or if the propositions enumerated had varied in substance 
from those communicated by the Ambassadors under the 
orders of their sovereign. But the last paragraph of the pro- 
clamation connected with the conduct of the Ambassadors as 
already described, establishes in the clearest manner their 


166 MINUTE OF August, 


participation in the whole transaction. 'That paragraph con- 
tains a direct reference to the powers of the Ambassadors, 
and engages on their behalf that they shall enter into certain 
stipulations in the name of their sovereign with respect to the 
pay and final discharge of such French subjects as shall enlist 
in his army under the conditions of the proclamation. The 
accounts which I have received from the Isle of France con- 
cur in stating, that the Ambassadors openly acted under this 
part of the proclamation, and in the name of Tippoo entered 
into engagements and stipulations with the recruits according 
to the assurances specified in the proclamation. Monsieur 
De Bue, now master attendant at Mangalore, stated to one of 
the witnesses whom I examined, the whole substance of the 
engagements which had passed personally between him and 
the Ambassadors, all of which engagements referred imme- 
diately to Tippoo’s intention of commencing war upon the 
Company, with the aid of the French force then about to be 
levied; and it is certain that without some such engagement 
not a man would have been raised in the Isle of France for 
the service of Tippoo. It appears from the evidence which 
I have collected, that the Ambassadors had not brought to 
the Isle of France a supply of treasure sufficient for advancing 
bounty money to the recruits. It was stated that an appre- 
hension of the English cruizers had prevented the embarka- 
tion of treasure for this purpose, and no doubt was enter- 

tained that if the Ambassadors had been better provided 
with money, they might have raised a much greater number 
of men, who refused to engage on the mere security of pro- 
mises in the name of Tippoo. 

The Ambassadors, together with the force thus collected 
during the time of their mission in the Isle of France, landed 
from the frigate, La Preneuse, at Mangalore, on the 26th of 
April, 1798. Accounts vary with respect to the exact number 
of the force landed; the most probable are that it did not 
exceed 200 persons. Tippoo (far from manifesting the least 
symptom of disapprobation of the conduct of his Ambassadors 
in any part of the transaction) formally received them, and the 
officers and leading persons so landed with public marks of 
honour and distinction. One of his Ambassadors resided for 
some'tinie with the French recruits in a fortress near Manga- 
lore, and the Sultaun has admitted the whole levy of officers 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 167 


and men into his service. Referring, therefore, to the conduct 
of the Ambassadors in the Isle of France to their arrival at 
Mangalore with the force levied in consequence of their mis- 
sion, and finally to the reception of the Ambassadors and of 
the French recruits by Tippoo Sultaun, the following conclu- 
sions appeared to me to be incontrovertibly established :— 

First,—That the Ambassadors despatched by Tippoo Sul- 
taun to the Government of the Isle of France proposed to 
that Government an alliance, offensive and defensive, against 
the British possessions in India, which alliance was accepted 
by that Government, and its acceptance formally notified by 
a public’ proclamation. 

Secondly,—That the Ambassadors were charged with let- 
ters from Tippoo Sultaun to the Executive Directory of 
France, which letters were stated to contain the same propo- 
sition, and that the Ambassadors delivered these letters to 
the Governor General of the Isle of France for the purpose 
of transmission to France. 

Thirdly,—That the Ambassadors, in the name of Tippoo 
Sultaun, gave public assurances that he had actually com- 
pleted the necessary preparations for commencing immediate 
hostilities, and that he only waited the arrival of succours 
from the French to declare war against the Company, for the 
express purpose of expelling the British nation from India. 

Fourthly,—That the Ambassadors demanded unlimited mi- 
litary succour from the French, and levied a military force in 
the Isle of France with the declared object of commencing 
immediate war against the British nation in India. 

Fifthly,—That this force has been actually landed in 
Tippoo’s country, and publicly admitted into his service with 
signal marks of approbation; and that the Ambassadors have 
been received with similar distinction. 

Sixthly,—That Tippoo Sultaun (by receiving with public 
marks of approbation his Ambassadors, who had concluded in 
his name an offensive and defensive alliance with the French; 
and by admitting into his service the military force raised for 
effecting the objects of that alliance) has personally ratified 
the engagements contained in the proclamation of the Go- 
vernor General of the Isle of France, and has proceeded to 
act. under those engagements conformably to the tenor of that 
proclamation. 


168 MINUTE OF , August, 


Seventhly,—That although the succour actually received by 
Tippoo Sultaun under his offensive alliance with the French 
is inconsiderable, yet the tenor of the proclamation, the pro- 
position made to the French Government for unlimited mili- 
tary aid, &c. &c., and the declarations of the Ambassadors 
prove, that it was the intention of Tippoo Sultaun, to receive 
into his service the largest force which he could obtain, for 
the purpose of commencing a war of aggression against the 
Company in India. 

Having thus entered into offensive and defensive ergage- 
ments with the enemy, having proceeded to collect in con- 
junction with the enemy, a force openly destined to act 
against the possessions of the Company, having avowed 
through his public Ambassadors, that he has compleated 
his preparations of war for the express purpose of attempt- 
ing the entire subversion of the British Empire in India, and 
having declared that he only waits the effectual succour of 
the French to prosecute offensive operations ; Tippoo Sul- 
taun has violated the treaties of peace and friendship sub- 
sisting between him and the Company, and has committed an 
act of direct hostility against the British Government in India. 

Before I proceeded to apply the principles of the law of 
nations to the conduct of Tippoo Sultaun, it appeared pro- 
per to enquire what had been the conduct of the Company 
towards him for some years past, and whether he had re- 
ceived any provocation to justify or to palliate his late pro- 
ceedings. 

Since the conclusion of the Treaty of Seringapatam, the 
British Governments in India, have uniformly conducted 
themselves towards Tippoo Sultaun, not only with the most 
exact attention to the principles of moderation, justice, and 
good faith; but have endeavoured by every practicable 
means to conciliate his confidence, and to mitigate his vin- 
dictive spirit. Some differences have occasionally arisen with 
respect to the boundaries of his territory bordering upon the 
confines of our possessions on the coast of Malabar; but the 
records of all the British Governments in India will shew, 
that they always manifested the utmost anxiety to promote 
the amicable adjustment of every doubtful or disputed point; 
and that Tippoo Sultaun has received the most unequivocal 
proofs of the constant disposition of the Company to acknow- 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 169 


ledge and confirm all his just rights, and to remove every 
cause of jealousy, which might tend to interrupt the continu- 
ance of peace. 

The servants of the Company in India, have not however 
been ignorant of the implacable sentiments of revenge, which 
he has preserved without abatement since the hour of his 
last defeat. It has always been well understood, that Tippoo 
Sultaun’s resentment wag not to be appeased by any conci- 
liatory advances on our part, nor by any other means than 
the recovery of his lost power, the disgrace of the British 
arms, and the ruin of the British interests in India. With 
such views it was expected that he would eagerly embrace 
the first favorable occasion of striking a blow against our 
possessions; and his intrigues at the Courts of Hyderabad 
and Poonah, together with his Embassy to Zemaun Shah, 
(although managed with such a degree of caution as to 
avoid the appearance of direct acts of aggression,) were 
sufficient indications of an hostile mind. But none of 
these circumstances have in any degree affected the conduct 
of the Company’s servants towards him, and the correspon- 
dence between him and the late Governor General, and the 
letters from Bombay on the subject of the district of Wynaad, 
furnish ample proofs of a sincere desire to bring that ques- 
tion to a fair issue, “ with the consent and knowledge of both 
parties,’ according to the tenor of the 7th article of the 
treaty of Seringapatam; I appeal to the letter which I des- 
patched to him soon after my arrival] in Bengal, proposing an 
amicable adjustment of the same question, as well as of his 
recent claims upon certain parts of the district of Coorga, 
for a testimony of the pacific spirit which has marked my 
first communication with him; although, perhaps, a less mild 
representation might have been justified, by his unwarranta- 
ble precipitation in stationing a military force on the frontier 
of Coorga, before he had made any trial of the prescribed 
and regular channels of negociation. Tippoo Sultaun cannot 
therefore alledge even the pretext of a grievance to palliate 
the character of his recent acts; he has indeed alledged none, 
but has constantly professed the most sincere desire to main- 
tain the relations of amity and peace with the Company. In 
his letters to Sir John Shore (written a short time before the 
return of the Mysorean Ambassadors from the Isle of France, 


170 MINUTE OF August, 


and received at Fort William on the 26th April, 1798, the 
day on which the French force landed at Mangalore) Tippoo 
declares, “that his friendly heart is disposed to pay every 
regard to truth and justice, and to strengthen the foundations 
of harmony and concord established between the two states,” 
And he- signifies his desire that “Sir John Shore would im- 
press Lord Mornington, with a sense of the friendship and 
unanimity so firmly subsisting betwgen the two states.” 

This is not the language of hostility, nor even of discon- 
tent. From what disposition in the friendly heart of Tippoo 
these amicable professions have proceeded, how they are 
connected with a regard to truth and justice, or calculated to 
strengthen the foundations of harmony and concord, and to 
impress me with a sense of the Sultaun’s friendship, can now 
admit of no question, since it is now proved, that these letters 
were written at the very moment, when Tippoo was in an- 
xious expectation of the hourly arrival of that military suc- 
cour, which he had solicited from the enemy for the express 
purpose of commencing a war of aggression against the Com- 
pany’s possessions. 

The motive therefore of Tippoo Sultaun, was no other 
than that avowed in his correspondence with the enemy, and 
published under the eyes of his own Ambassadors, “an ar- 
dent desire to expel the British nation from India.” 

It appears highly probable, that he was instigated by the 
promises and exhortations of the Government of France, 
(whose emissaries have reached his councils) to hasten the 
execution of a project, in which every consideration of in- 
terest, and every sentiment of passion would induce the 
French to embark with a degree of zeal, ardour, and rancour 
not inferior to his own. 

The importance of these possessions to all the most valua- 
ble interests of Great Britain, has pointed the particular at- 
tention of the Government of France to the destruction of 
our empire in India. The prosperity of our settlements in 
India, has long been the primary and undisguised object of 
the jealousy of France, avowed by all her ministers in every 
negociation, and by all her rulers in every stage of her innu- 
merable revolutions; Tippoo therefore might reasonably 
hope, that if the cessation of hostilities on the continent of 
Europe, should at any time enable the French directory to 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 171 


turn their views to the disturbance of the peace of India, 
such an adventure would be among the earliest of theirjoper- 
ations. 

The conclusion of a peace upon the continent of Europe, 
the weak state of the internal Governments of Poonah and 
Hyderabad, the existing dissentions, apparently precluding 
all co-operation and concert between those two powers, added 
to the growing strength of a French faction in every part of 
India, may have appeared both to Tippoo and to the French 
to offer a favorable opportunity for the prosecution of their 
joint design. The premature disclosure of this design may 
perhaps be imputed rather to the policy of M. Malartic, 
than to the imprudence of Tippoo; whether the scope of 
that policy was to involve us in a war with Tippoo, or to ex- 
pose his treachery to our view, is yet a matter of doubt; but 
whatever circumstances occasioned the premature disclosure 
of the design, whether the design was wisely or rashly con- 
ceived ; whether it has partially succeeded, or entirely failed, 
are questions, the solution of which in no degree affects the 
offensive nature of an aggression so unprovoked, and of a 
violation of faith so flagrant and unqualified. The history of 
the world scarcely furnishes an instance, in which any two 
powers have united in confederacy or alliance precisely with 
the same motives, The party proposing an offensive alliance 
against the Company, cannot be absolved from the conse- 
quences of such an act, by any apparent or real indifference 
in the party accepting such a proposal. The conduct of 
Tippoo Sultaun, therefore, cannot be correctly estimated 
by reference to the supposed motives of Monsieur Malartic. 
From the application of the acknowledged principles of the 
law of nations to the facts of this case, I formed my judgment 
of the rights of the Company, and of my own duties with re- 
ference to the aggression of Tippoo. The course of reason- 
ing which I pursued may be stated in the following manner. 

The rights of states applicable to every case of contest 
with foreign powers, are treated and limited by the necessity 
of preserving the public safety; this necessity is the founda- 
tion of the reciprocal claim of all nations to explanation of 
suspicious or ambiguous conduct, to reparation for injuries 
done, and to security against injuries intended. 

In any of these cases, when just satisfaction has been de- 


172 MINUTE OF August, 


nied, or from the evident nature of circumstances cannot 
otherwise be obtained, it is the undoubted right of the in- 
jured party to resort to arms for the vindication of the 
public safety; and in such a conjuncture, the right of the 
state becomes the duty of the Government, unless some ma- 
terial consideration of the public interest should forbid the 
attempt. 

If the conduct of Tippoo Sultaun had been of a nature 
which could be termed ambiguous or suspicious; if he had 
merely increased his force beyond his ordinary establishment, 
or had stationed it in some position on our confines or on 
those of our allies, which might justify jealousy or alarm; if 
he had renewed his secret intrigues at the Courts of Hydera- 
bad, Poonah and Cabul, or even if he had entered into any 
negociation with France, of which the object was at all ob- 
scure ; it might be our duty to resort in the first instance to 
his construction of proceedings, which being of a doubtful 
character, might admit of a satisfactory explanation. But 
where there is no doubt, there can be no matter for explana- 
tion. The act of Tippoo’s ambassadors, ratified by himself, 
and accompanied by the landing of a French force in his 
country, is a public, unqualified and unambiguous declaration 
or act of war, aggravated by an avowal, that the object of the 
war is neither explanation, reparation, nor security, but the 
total destruction of the British Government in India. To 
affect to misunderstand an insult and injury of such a com- 
plexion would argue a consciousness either of weakness or of 
fear; no state in India can misconstrue the conduct of Tippoo; 
the correspondence of our Residents at Hyderabad and 
Poonah sufficiently manifests the construction which it bears 
at both those Courts; and in so clear and plain a case, our 
demand of explanation would be justly attributed either toa 
defect of spirit or of power, the result of such a demand 
would therefore be, the disgrace of our character, and the 
diminution of our influence and consideration in the eyes of 
our allies, and of every power in India. Ifthe moment should 
appear favourable to the execution of Tippoo’s declared de- 
sign, he would answer such a demand by an immediate at- 
tack; if, on the other hand, his preparations should not be 
sufficiently advanced, he would deny the existence of his en- 
gagements with France, would persist in the denial until he 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAI. 173 


had reaped the full benefit of them; and finally, after having 
completed the improvement of his own army, and received the 
accession of an additional French force, he would turn the 
combined strength of both against our possessions, with an 
alacrity and confidence inspired by our inaction, and with 
advantages redoubled by our delay. In the present case the 
idea therefore of demanding explanation must be rejected, as 
being disgraceful in its principle, and frivolous in its object. 
The demand of reparation, in the strict sense of the term, 
cannot properly be applied to cases of intended injury, ex- 
cepting in those instances, where the nature of the reparation 
demanded may be essentially connected with security against 
the injurious intention. 

Where a State has unjustly seized the property, or invaded 
the territory, or violated the rights of another, reparation may 
be made by restoring what has been unjustly taken, or by a 
subsequent acknowledgment of the right which has been in- 
fringed; but the cause of our complaint against Tippoo Sul- 
taun, is not that he has seized a portion of our property which 
he might restore, or invaded a part of our territory which he 
might again cede, or violated a right which he might here- 
after acknowledge; we complain, that, professing the most 
amicable disposition, bound by subsisting treaties of peace 
and friendship, and unprovoked by any offence on our part, 
he has manifested a design to effect our total destruction; he 
has prepared the means and instruments of a war of extermi- 
nation against us; he has solicited and received the aid of our 
inveterate enemy for the declared purpose of annihilating our 
Empire: and he only waits the arrival of a more effectual 
succour to strike a blow against our existence. 

That he has not yet received the effectual succour which 
he has solicited, may be ascribed either to the weakness of 
the Government of Mauritius, or to their want of zeal in his 
cause, or to the rashness and imbecility of his own Councils; 
but neither the measure of his hostility, nor of our right to 
restrain it, nor of our danger from it, are to be estimated by 
the amount of the force which he has actually obtained ; for 
we know that his demands of military assistance were un- 
limited ; we know that they were addressed not merely to the 
Government of Mauritius, but to that of France, and we can- 
not ascertain how soon they may be satisfied to the full ex- 


174 MINUTE OF August, 


tent of his acknowledged expectations. This, therefore, is 
not merely the case of an injury to be repaired, but of the 
public safety to be secured against the present and future 
designs of an irreconcileable, desperate and_ treacherous 
enemy: against an enemy of this description, no effectual 
security can be obtained otherwise than by such a reduction 
of his power, as shall not only defeat his actual preparations, 
but establish a permanent restraint upon his future means of 
offence. 

To this species of security our right is unquestionable, 
upon the grounds already stated. But it cannot be supposed 
that Tippoo Sultaun will voluntarily concede to us a security 
of this nature against the effects of his own resentment, 
treachery and ambition, and against the success of the most 
favorite projects of his mind. 

Since, therefore, the principles of justice and of the law of 
nations entitle us to such a security, and since we cannot 
possibly obtain it by the voluntary concession of Tippoo Sul- 
taun, it is the right of the Company to compel him to yield 
it; and it is equally my duty to use that compulsion without 
delay, provided the interests of the Company committed to 
my charge be not more endangered by the attempt, than by 
the unrestrained progress of his preparations for war. 

In proportion to the continual progress of Tippoo’s prepa- 
parations, he will acquire more decisively the advantage of 
holding in his hands the issues of peace and war, together 
with the power of selecting the time and mode of his long 
meditated attack upon our possessions. He has not yet ob- 
tained any formidable accession of strength from his alliance 
with France, nor is it probable that any such accession will 
reach his country within a short period, certainly not before 
the close of the monsoon on the coast of Malabar; while he 
shall retain the ready means of intercourse by sea with the 
French Government, it cannot be doubted that they will use 
every endeavour to assist him with military aid, and to insti- 
gate himto war. The arrival of one or two French regiments 
would probably induce Tippoo to commence offensive opera- 
tions, and the assistance even of so small a body of French- 
meh might become alarming in the actual state of the native 
armies .of India. The systematic introduction of French 
officers into the service of all the native powers, is described , 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 175 


by Mr. Wickham as the fixed policy of France, adopted with 
a view of establishing the most certain means of subverting 
the, foundation of our power. This system has been pursued 
in the armies of the Nizam, of Scindiah, and of many other 
inferior powers with unremitting assiduity, and extensive suc- 
cess. If Tippoo should be allowed to derive from France 
such succour as would induce him to act offensively against 
us, his earliest movements would probably be seconded by the 
general insurrection of the various bodies of French adven- 
turers, who are incorporated in the service of the several 
native powers, and who maintain a concert and correspon- 
dence in every quarter of India. Under such circumstances, 
it would be prudent to take advantage of the actual crisis, 
in which the hostile design of Tippoo has been clearly mani- 
fested, but the means of accomplishing it have happily disap- 
pointed the ardor of his hopes. In this moment of his com- 
parative weakness, of his disappointment, and of his probable 
dejection, no policy could be more wise than to strike such 
an instantaneous blow against his possessions, as should effec- 
tually frustrate his preparations for war, and should render 
him unable to avail himself of the aid of France whenever it 
may arrive. : 

The inconsiderable amount of the force which he has al- 
ready received from France, while it cannot limit our just 
right to reduce his power, affords a strong argument of policy 
in favour of an immediate attack. 

It is therefore evident that the rights and interests of the 
Company concur to demand from this Government every 
practicable effort to anticipate the execution of his projects 
of vengeance by attacking him on all sides without delay. In 
this train of reasoning I was confirmed by adverting to the 
general tenor of the orders of the Court of Directors, and of 
the proceedings of this Government with reference to the 
contingency of a French force landing at any time in the terri- 
tories of Tippoo Sultaun. 

The orders of the Court of Directors uniformly enjoin that 
the landing of a French force in Tippoo’s country should be 
“ the signal for our attack upon him.” The construction of 
those orders by the late Governor General in his instructions 
to the President in Council of Fort St. George of 12th Sep- 
tember, 1796, appears to have been, that the number of the 


176 MINUTE OF August, 


French force should be constderable in order to justify our 
attack. But I am persuaded that the real intention of the 
late Governor General in those instructions, could not have 
been to declare, that the justice or policy of attacking Tippoo 
was hereafter to be measured solely by the magnitude of any 
French force landed in his country. 

It is certainly true that, on the one hand, the landing of a 
considerable French force in Tippoo’s country would be an 
unquestionable indication of his hostile intentions against the 
British power, while on the other hand the landing of a few 
French officers and privates, and even their admission into 
the service of Tippoo, might, under certain circumstances, be 
supposed to manifest nothing more than a disposition to im- 
prove the general discipline of his armies, without imply- 
ing any formed design of war against the Company or their 
Allies. This, I am persuaded, is the only view in which the 
late Governor General in Council could consider the magni- 
tude of the French force landed in Tippoo’s country as the 
foundation of a rule for limiting the discretion of the Com- 
pany’s governments in such a contingency. On the present 
occasion, the hostile intentions of the Sultaun are unequi- 
vocally manifested by the proclamation, by the declarations 
and conduct of his Ambassadors, and by their demand of 
French troops to an unlimited extent. Connected with these 
circumstances, the landing and admission into the Sultaun’s 
armies, even of a less considerable force than that which he 
has received, would be deemed, under the just construction 
of the opinions both of the Court of Directors and of this 
Government, “a signal for our attack upon him.” 

My determination, therefore, was fixed to attack Tippoo 
with every degree of practical despatch. 

The objects which appeared to me the most desirable, as 
well as the most easily attainable, were,— First, To seize the 
whole maritime territory remaining in his possession below 
the Ghauts on the coast of Malabar, in order to preclude 
him from all future communications by sea with his French 
allies. 

Secondly, By marching the army from the coast of Coro- 
mandel directly upon his capital, to compel him to purchase 
peace by a formal cession of the territory seized on the coast 
of Malabar. 


1798. . TUE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 177 


Thirdly, To compel him to defray our whole expense in 
the war, and thus to secure the double advantage of indem- 
nifying us for the expense occasioned by his aggression, and 
of reducing his resources with a view to our future security. 

Fourthly, To compel him to admit permanent Residents at 
his Court from us and from our Allies, a measure which would 
enable us at all times to check his operations, and to counter- 
act the intricacies of his treachery. 

Fifthly, That the expulsion of all the natives of France 
now in his service, and the perpetual exclusion of all French- 
men, both from his army and dominions, should be made con- 
ditions of any treaty of peace with him. 

With this plan in view, I directed that the army upon the 
coasts of Coromandel and Malabar, and at Bombay, should 
be immediately assembled; and I entertained a very sanguine 

hope that active operations might have been commenced so 
early as, with the co-operation of his Majesty’s squadron on 
the coast of Malabar (which Rear-Admiral Rainier had pro- 
mised), might have secured the effectual reduction of'Tippoo’s 
power before any assistance could have reached him from 
France. But I never proposed to undertake any attack upon 
him, of which the success could be doubtful in the judgment 
of those whose opinions must always govern my discretion in 
every question of military detail. 

The avowed designs of Tippoo, the state of his preparations 
for war (which, notwithstanding his late disappointment, was 
certainly forward as far as regarded his own troops), the 
uncertainty of the motives which might impel the violence of 
his temper to action, and my knowledge of the indiscreet zeal 
with which he has frequently pursued his favourite object of 
revenge against the British power, all concurred to urge the 
necessity of placing ourselves in a state of preparation for 
war at least equal to that of his army. These measures ap- 
peared to me not matters of choice, but of indispensable duty. 
I could not suffer the security of the Carnatic to rest on so 
precarious a foundation as the forbearance of Tippoo Sultaun 
and of his French allies. To resume the power of meeting 
him in the field, and to replace in our hands the option which 
he then possessed, of accommodating the time of attack to 
circumstances and events, appeared to me to be the most 
prudent step which could be immediately adopted, whatever 

VOL. I. N 


178 MINUTE OF August, 


might ‘hereafter be the service ‘to which our force might be 
applied. The orders, therefore, which I gave for ‘assembling 
the army (although pointed more particularly at the execution 
of the plan of operations, which I have just now detailed) were 
founded upon principles independent of the practicability of 
that plan, and were connected not only with the immediate 
defence of the Carnatic, but with other comprehensive mea- 
sures of permanent precaution and security, to which my views 
have been extended at every period of this crisis. 

When I submitted my ideas of the time and objects of the 
proposed attack upon Tippoo to those military authorities, 
which I shall always tonsider with respect, it seemed to be 
their opinion, that the state of our army admitted no doubt 
of the ultimate success of the plan which I had proposed. 
If its speedy accomplishment had appeared to them as certain 
‘as its ultimate success, I should not have hesitated ‘a ‘moment 
in directing the commencement of offensive operations ; but 
‘T found that, instead of deriving to the interests of the Com- 
‘pany the inestimable advantages of a sudden and rapid re- 
‘duction of Tippoo’s means of offence, the result of such an 
attempt was likely to lead to a tedious, protracted, and ex- 
pehsive, although ultimately successful, war. The obstacles 
which arose were of a nature not to be surmounted by any 
degree of present activity or resolution, although they ori- 
ginated in causes which I trust may be removed by future 
diligence and perseverance. 

The result of my earliest inquiries convinced me that 
radical defects existed in the military establishments on the 
coast of Coromandel, which would render it ‘impossible to 
put our army in that quarter in motion ‘soon enough to 
“effect the object which I proposed. The opinions which 1 
‘received from military authorities here, with respect to the 
impossibility of making any sudden or speedy military move- 
ment on the coast of Coromandel, were afterwards confirmed 
‘by the ‘concurrent testimony .of the Governor of Fort ‘St. 
‘George, and of the Adjutant General of that establishment. 
I have entered into a particular consideration of this testimony 
in a Minute recorded in ‘the Secret Department of the 20th 
July, to which I-desire to refer on this part of the subject. 
The letter* of the Government of Fort St. George of the 10th 


* See Appendix. 


1798, THE GOVERNOR GENERAL, 179. 


of July proceeds far beyond the limits of any opinion which 
I had ever formed or heard with respect to the diffieulty of 
restraining the hostility of Tippoo; in that letter the Presi- 
dent in Council even deprecates the ordinary precautions of 
defence, lest they should draw down the resentment of the 
Sultaun upon our unprotected possessions. 

The expense of a protracted war, and the evil effects which 
such a calamity must produce on the trade of the Company, 
upon their pecuniary affairs at home, upon the welfare of 
their subjects in India, and upon the general state of the 
public revenue and credit of Great Britain, now pressed with 
great weight upon my mind, and the‘embarrassment of our 
finances aggravated all the difficulties of my situation. The 
question was now entirely changed; the plan which I had 
originally had in contemplation ‘was nothing more than.a mili- 
tary expedition .of short duration, of no heavy expense, and 
of certain success, with the additional advantage that success 
would certainly exonerate our finances, and throw the whole 
expense of the undertaking upon the. enemy, who had pre- 
voked it. But it now appeared that I could not hope to effect 
any of my proposed objects without encountering the expense 
and inconvenience of a long war. 

In this state of the questiou, the condition of our Allies 
occurred as an insuperable obstacle to our progress. Although 
the assistance of the Peishwa and of the Nizam might not 
have been deemed indispensable in an expedition of the 
nature which I have described; I have always been apprized 
that an offensive war of any long duration in Mysore would 
be difficult, if not impracticable, without the effectual aid of 
the Peishwa and of the Nizam, in facilitating the supplies of 
provision to our army in the field. 

The state of the Courts of Hyderabad and_ of Poonah 
afforded no hope of their early cooperation with us; and 
although I had determined to take the most expeditious mea- 
sures for restoring both our Allies to the power of fulfilling 
their defensive engagements with us, I could not expect to 
derive any benefit from those measures for a :considerable 
period of time; and it would have been imprudent to have 
undertaken offensive operations, with the prospect of a con- 

tinued war, until the efficiency of our alliances had been pre- 
viously secured. Under the accumulated pressure of all'these 


180 MINUTE OF August, 


difficulties, I felt, with the utmost degree of disappointment 
‘and regret, that the moment was unfavourable to the adoption 
of the only measure which appeared to me sufficient to satisfy 
the rights and interests of the Company and the exigencies 
of my own duty; I was therefore compelled to relinquish the 
idea of striking an immediate blow against the possessions of 
Tippoo Sultaun. But the circumstances which thus suspended 
the actual exercise of the rights and the immediate establish- 
ment of the interests of the Company, could not absolve me from 
the duty of providing, without delay, every degree of inter- 
mediate security which might now be attainable, by adopting 
such a system of preparation and defence as might enable us 
to repel any attack which Tippoo might make upon us, or to 
support any demand of satisfaction, which we may eventually 
deem it advisable, in concert with our Allies, to make to him. 
’ The. sense of this duty induced me to propose to the Board 
the several orders and instructions which have been forwarded 
to the Governments of Fort St. George and Bombay, and to 
the Residents at Poonah and Hyderabad, from the 8th of 
July to the present time. « 

‘The principles upon which these instructions and orders 
are founded will be best illustrated by referring to the nature 
of our actual danger, as well as to the causes which have con- 
tributed to produce it. 

No comprehensive or satisfactory view can be taken of this 
subject without adverting to the whole system of our defen- 
sive alliances with the Native States, and to the various cir- 
cumstances which have affected or which now influence the 
general balance of power in India. 

The primary objects of the Treaties of Poonah and Paun- 
gul, combined with the Treaty of Seringapatam, were to 
diminish Tippoo Sultaun’s means of future aggression, by re- , 
ducing his resources and territory, and to provide an efficient 
defence against him by strengthening the Peishwa and the 
Nizam, by uniting their interests with ours, and by securing 
their cooperation in any future war with Mysore. On the 
other hand, a part of the policy of the Treaty of Seringapatam 
seems to have been to preserve to Tippoo Sultaun that degree 
of power which might enable him to maintain a balance with 
the Mahrattas and the Nizam in such a manner that the inter- 

position of our force might always turn the scale. 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 181 


It is evident that the policy of this system has been entirely: 
frustrated by the course of recent events, and that neither. 
the Peishwa, the Nizam, nor Tippoo Sultaun now retain the 
same relative position which they held at the conclusion of 
the Treaty of Seringapatam, either with respect to one ano- 
ther or to our interests. 

Since the conclusion of the peace of Seringapatam, the 
power and resources of the Court of Hyderabad have been 
constantly declining. The disgrace which fell upon the 
Nizam’s arms in the unfortunate contest with the Mahrattas 
at Kurdlah reduced the military character of the Court of 
Hyderabad to the lowest point of degradation. The treaty 
in which that defeat terminated completed the humiliation of 
the Nizam; he was compelled to sacrifice a large portion of 
territory, to engage to pay a fine of three crores of rupees, 
and to submit to the captivity of his minister, Azim ul Omra, 
who was carried a prisoner to Poonah. Azim ul Omra re- 
sided at Poonah during the late convulsions in the Mahratta 
Government; and, although a prisoner, bore a very distin- 
guished part in supporting Nana through the various revo- 
lutions which followed the sudden death of the Peishwa, 
Mahda Row. For these services Nana agreed to relinquish 
all the benefits acquired by the Peishwa against the Nizam, 
under the Treaty of Kurdlah. 

But the Peishwa, Bajee-row, having called in the assistance 
of Scindiah to check the overgrown power of Nana, Scindiah 
persuaded the Peishwa to violate the engagements concluded 
with Azim ul Omra; and the event has been, that the Peishwa 
has insisted upon and obtained from the Nizam a cession of 
one-fourth part of the territory, and the payment of one- 
fourth part of the fine stipulated by the Treaty of Kurdlah. | 

In addition to so heavy a loss, both of power and honour, 
the internal resources of the Nizam’s Government have not 
yet recovered the derangement occasioned by the rebellions 
of Ali Jah, and the son of Dara Jah; by the unfortunate con- 
test with the Mahrattas; and by the detention of Azim ul 
Omra at Poonah. 

The effect of these causes has necessarily been to reduce 
the consideration of the Nizam in the scale of the neighbour- 
ing states; and in this weak and degraded condition he has 
been for some time past menaced by the army of Scindiah, 


182 MINUTE OF August, 


stationed in the neighbourhood of Poonah.’ But the most 
striking feature of change in the state of the Nizam’s affairs 
since 1793, is the alteration which has taken place in his 
military establishment. The Nizam, since the peace of Se- 
ringapatam, has greatly reduced his cavalry and other troops, 
and considerably augmented the body of infantry commanded 
by French officers, and known by the name of Raymond’s corps. 
The corps of Raymond had been in the service of the 
Nizam before the last war with Tippoo Sultaun, and in 1792, 
when it served with Lord Cornwallis’s army, its strength was 
not greater than 1,500 men at the highest estimation, and its 
discipline very defective. At the battle of Kurdlah, in 1795, 
its strength amounted to about 11,000 men. During the 
rebellion of Ali Jah, and in a variety of service in which the 
corps has since been employed, it has acquired experience 
and skill, and it is now composed of thirteen regiments of two 
battalions each, amounting in the whole to upwards of 14,000 
men. Its discipline, according to every recent account, is 
very considerably improved, insomuch that, although inferior 
to our native force, it is said to be superior, in nearly an equal 
proportion, to the ordinary*scale of the infantry in the service 
of any of the Native Powers. Besides field pieces to each 
regiment, a park of 40 pieces of ordnance, chiefly brass, from 
12 to 386 pounders, with a well trained body of artillery men 
(including a number of Europeans) is attached to the corps. 
A foundation has also been laid for raising a body of cavalry 
to act with the corps of infantry. The chief officers of this 
corps are all Frenchmen of the most virulent principles of 
jacobinism; many of the privates served originally with the 
French native force at Pondicherry, and the whole corps con- 
stitutes an armed French party of great power, zeal, and 
activity. The efforts of this party are continually employed 
‘to magnify the power, resources and success of France, and ° 
to depreciate the character, force, and credit of Great Britain 
in the eyes of the Court at Hyderabad; and it appears by 
authentic intelligence, that wherever any detachment of this 
corps has been stationed for any considerable time, a most 
unfavourable impression has been produced against the cha- 
racter of the British nation. 
_ The death of Monsieur Raymond, which happened a few 
months past, appeared likely to impair the influence of this 


1798, THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 183 


corps at the Court of Hyderabad; and accordingly Azim ul 
Omra took that opportunity to resume the large Jaghire 
which had been allotted for the pay and maintenance of the 
corps, but another Frenchman of the name of Peron has suc- 
ceeded to the command: his disposition is described to be 
violent and brutal; and his principles do not appear to differ 
essentially from those of Raymond. The corps, as now con- 
stituted, forms the most considerable and only efficient part 
of the Nizam’s military establishment, and retains such a de- 
gree of ascendancy over the councils of the Nizam, as to be 
an object of serious alarm to Azim ul Omra.* This corps 
has been recruited, in the proportion of one-third of its total 
numbers from our territories, and from those of the Nabob 
of Arcot, and partly, from deserters abandoning our service. 

Distinct proof has been given of the assiduity and success 
of the emissaries employed by Monsieur Baptiste (the second 
in command to Monsieur Peron, and stated to be of a very 
designing and artful character) for the purpose of exciting 
mutiny and sedition, and of inviting desertion amongst our 
sepoys stationed on the frontier of the Nizam’s dominions. 
A considerable desertion of our ‘troops took place in that 
quarter some time ago, and nearly 500. men, with several 
native officers, who deserted on that occasion, are now serving 
in Monsieur Peron’s corps. The repeated applications of our 
Resident for the surrender of these deserters have hitherto 
been frustrated by the prevailing influence of Monsieur Peron 
and of his army, and by the weakness of the Nizam’s Govern- 
ment, which Azim ul Omra has declared to be unable to 
control the overbearing spirit and formidable power of the 
French faction. After a protracted negociation, Azim ul 
Omra has at length, with much difficulty, and by an extra- 
ordinary effort, obtained the surrender of two Subadars, who 
were the principal contrivers of the desertion. 

Monsieur Peron and his officers maintain a correspondence 
with a faction at the Nizam’s Court denominated the Paugah 


* In addition to the command of this corps, M. Raymond had the 
entire conduct of the Nizam’s Ordnance, with an allowance of 50,000 
rupees monthly; the Ordnance has since been placed under the com- 
mand of M. Peron, and he derives great influence from so important a 
charge. 


184 MINUTE OF August, : 


party, being composed principally of the officers of his High- 
ness’s body guard of cavalry. 

The Paugah party has long been connected with Tippoo 
Sultaun, and is entirely adverse to Azim ul Omra, and to all 
the friends of the British interests at the Court of Hyderabad. 

It must not be forgotten, that in the year 1796, during the 
detention of Azim ul Omra at Poonah, the French faction, 
with the assistance of the Paugah party, prevailed upon the 
Nizam to dismiss the British detachment, and took such 
measures in concert with Tippoo (a large body of whose army 
marched in this crisis to the frontier of the Nizam’s domi- 
nions) as would have enabled them to dispose of the succes- 
sion to the Musnud according to their pleasure, if the Nizam’s 
death had happened in that critical conjuncture. At this 
period of time, the French contrived to obtain the grant of 
the large Jaghire, since resumed; this grant (which com- 
prized the district of Maiduck, containing* 2,142 square 
British miles, situated to the northward of Hyderabad, and 
producing an annual revenue of eighteen lacs of rupees) may 
be considered as the first step towards the establishment of 
a territorial revenue; and there can be no doubt that it would 
have led to that necessary foundation of European ‘power in 
India, if the death of Monsieur Raymond had not enabled 
Azim ul Omra to frustrate the project. The French officers 
at Hyderabad maintain a direct correspondence with their 
countrymen in the service of Tippoo Sultaun, and of Scin- 
diah. The latest accounts from the Resident at Hyderabad 
state, that French officers and adventurers arrive continually 
at Hyderabad to. reinforce Monsieur Peron’s corps, although 
the routes by which they gain access to the Deccan are as 
yet unknown. 

This French party, connected as it is with the prevailing 
factions in the Court of the Nizam, corresponding with Tip- 
poo Sultaun, zealous in the cause of France, and actuated 
by a spirit of intrigue, which would lead it to mix in every 
distraction of the State, if not to originate internal confusion, 
must be considered as a circumstance of positive weakness in 
the frame of the Government of Hyderabad. Azim ul Omra 


r) 
* The Company’s Jaghire in the Carnatic contains 2,436 square British 
mniles. 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 185 


is fully aware of the magnitude of this evil, and dreads the 
growth of a party which he can no longer restrain within any 
bounds of moderation, and which already threatens to sub- 
vert his power, and to disturb the regular order of succes- 
sion, if not to destroy the throne itself. With respect to our 
interests, and to the value of our defensive alliance under the 
treaty of Pangul, the change in the Nizam’s military esta- 
blishments places him in a condition worse than that of abso- 
lute inefficiency, and renders the Court of Hyderabad a 
source of additional strength to our enemies, rather than of 
useful assistance to any branch of the Triple Alliance. The 
dangers to be apprehended from the existence of Peron’s 
corps are not to be estimated merely by the actual state of 
its discipline, of its numbers, or of its influence over the- 
councils of the Nizam: our views of this danger must be 
extended beyond the present moment. The French army at 
Hyderabad must be considered not only as a powerful aid to 
the cause of France in the present crisis, but as the basis of 
a permanent French faction in India; on which, according to 
the opportunities of fortune, and the variation of circum- 
stances and of events, the activity of the enemy may establish 
a strength of the most formidable kind, either in peace or 
war. 

It requires no labour of argument to prove the benefits 
which must be derived to the cause of France, even in time 
of peace, from the establishment of an army of 14,000 men, 
commanded by natives of France, in the heart of the domi- 
nions of one of our principal allies, in the vicinity of our most 
active enemy among the native powers, and on the borders 
of a vulnerable part of our own dominions. In the event of 
peace, no more convenient channel could be provided for the 
intrigues of France, no more useful point of union for the 
numerous adherents to her principles, and emissaries of her 
designs. And it cannot be doubted, that the natural effect 
of the unchecked and rapid growth of such an army at the 
Court of the Nizam must be, to detach that Court from our 
interests, and to fix it absolutely in those of our enemy. 

But in the event of a war with Tippoo Sultaun, or in the 
still more aggravated case of a war with him, aided by a 
French force, what assistance can we expect from the Nizam, 
the main body of whose army is commanded by the corres- 


186 MINUTE OF August, 


pondents of Tippoo, natives of France, distinguished by 
their zeal in the cause of that country, and united with the 
whole body of French adventurers now established in India? 

Under such circumstances, the force of the Nizam would 
become useless and even dangerous to us, precisely in pro- 
portion to the exigency of the case, in which we should re- 
quire its services. 

If the French troops of the Nizam did not afford Tippoo 
open assistance, at least they could not be brought into the 
field against him without the utmost danger to our cause; 
nor could they be suffered to remain in the Deccan during 
the continuance of the contest, unless checked by the pre- 
sence of an equally powerful force, which must, in that case, 
be diverted from the objects of the war, and must operate as 
a positive diminution of our effective strength in the field. 
It appears however nearly certain, that in the present weak 
state of the Nizam’s Government, the French corps in his 
service would openly join Tippoo Sultaun, and by a sudden 
blow, endeavour ta seize the Nizam’s territories, and to 
secure them to the dominion of France, under an alliance 
offensive and defensive with Tippoo Sultaun. This danger 
is aggravated by the present position of Scindiah’s army, and 
by the disposition and present views of that Chief; he now 
entertains a large body of infantry in his service under the 
command of a French officer; and it might be expected that 
he would readily engage with Tippoo Sultaun (with whom he 
is supposed to have lately opened a negociation) and with the 
French, upon the conditions of a partition of the territories 
and authority of the Peishwa and of the Nizam. The junc- 
tion which might thus be effected by the French officers in 
the several armies of the Nizam, of Scindiah, and of Tippoo, 
might establish the power of France in India upon the ruins 
of the States of Poonah and of the Deccan. Under all these 
circumstances therefore it is evident, that the Court of Hy- 
derabad in its present condition, (whatever may be its dis- 
position to use every effort for ,our assistance) is not only 
disqualified from cooperating with us as an ally against 
Tippoo, but furnishes him with powerful means of prosecuting 
his designs against us, and offers every temptation to the 
ambition of France. 

Such being the condition of the Nizam, it will be found 


1798, THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 187 


that the Peishwa, who forms another branch of the triple 
alliance against Tippoo Sultaun, is not more able to fulfill his 
defensive engagements with us. 

The precise situation in which the Mahratta Empire stood 
after the peace of Seringapatam, was the most favourable to 
eur interests: the several co-estates were then so equally 
balanced as to prevent any danger of that degree of union 
which might concenter the formidable force of the whole in 
one consolidated mass, either against the British possessions, 
or against any other established power in India; nor had any 
one member of the Empire attained such a degree of strength 
as to be able singly to encounter our force. On the other 
hand, the Peishwa, the acknowledged and constitutional head 
of this extensive confederation, aided by the abilities of his 
Minister Nana Furnavese, possessed a sufficient influence 
over several of the leading Chiefs to render him a respectable 
ally, and to furnish him with the means of bringing a consi- 
derable force into the field. 

From the period of the peace of Seringapatam to that of 
the death of Mahda Row, the danger appears to have been, 
that the address of Nana might have drawn too great a 
weight into the scale of the Peishwa’s power, and have en- 
abled the Government of Poonah to wield the united force of 
the whole Mahratta Empire. At the battle of Kurdlah the 
Peishwa was assisted against the Njzam by the contingents 
of most of the confederate chieftains of the Mahratta Em- 
pire; and the power of the Nizam was greatly endangered in 
that state of the Peishwa’s authority and force. But Nana’s 
ambition or jealousy having induced him, upon the sudden 
death of Mahda Row, to attempt the disturbance of the re- 
gular order of succession by intruding an adopted child upon 
the throne, opened the way to those successive intrigues and 
revolutions which for some time past have distracted the 
Mahratta Empire. Without pursuing the various changes 
and convulsions of the Government of Poonah during the 
period described, it is sufficient to observe, that their pro- 
gress naturally tended to weaken the Sovereign power, and 
has terminated in the imprisonment of Nana, in the ruin of 
his influence, and in the suspension of the power and autho- 
rity of the reigning Peishwa, under circumstances which 
menace the abolition of his office. 


188 MINUTE OF August, 


Scindiah, who in this changeable scene has alternately 
taken part with the present Peishwa-and with Nana, has at 
length overpowered both, and has,been for some time past 
so far master of the Government of Poonah, that the Peishwa 
could not, in his present condition, command the cooperation 
of any considerable body of the Mahratta chieftains,. nor 
afford us any assistance against Tippoo Sultaun. 

During the course of the events which have contributed to 
weaken and degrade the Governments of Poonah and Hy- 
derabad, their mutual animosities and opposition of interests 
have risen to such a height as to render all cooperation be- 
tween them utterly impracticable. The efficiency of our 
system of defensive alliance against Tippoo Sultaun has there- 
fore been impaired, not only by the respective weakness of 
each of our allies, but by the difficulty of uniting them in any 
common view or joint operation. 

In the meanwhile Tippoo Sultaun has enjoyed a state of 
internal tranquillity nearly uninterrupted. While our allies 
have been distracted and exhausted by faction, rebellion, 
revolution and war, he has been employed in improving the 
discipline of his armies, and in repairing the vigour of his 
resources; he has alternately endeavoured, but without suc- 
cess, to gain the Peishwa and the Nizam to his cause; he 
however possesses a considerable influence at the Court of 
Hyderabad, in consequence of his connections with the corps 
of Raymond, and with other factions adverse to’ the British 
interests at that Court. It is also known, that he despatched 
an embassy to Zemaun Shah, whose design of invading Hin- 
dostan has been recently announced in a formal manner to 
this Government, and to the Nabob Vizier. 

That Zemaun Shah really entertains the romantic project 
of invading Hindostan cannot admit of a doubt; this was the 
opinion of the late Governor General, in which I entirely 
concur. 

It has been supposed that Zemaun Shah, in his late march 
towards Hindestan, was recalled from Lahore into his own 
dominions, either by some domestic dissention, or by the 
apprehension of an attack from some of the States in the 

‘neighbourhood of his Kingdom. And it was hoped that the 
Same.causes might for some time obstruct the. execution of 
his declared project, but the last despatches from the Acting 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. ' 189 


Resident at the Court of Scindiah state a report, that Ze- 
maun Shah is now relieved from all apprehensions, either of 
internal rebellion or of foreign invasion; and his inclination 
as well as his ability, to move his army towards the frontier 
of Hindostan, at the close of the rainy season, are now uni- 
versally credited. It must be recollected, that upon a recent 
occasion, Zemaun Shah advanced to Lahore without meeting 
any formidable opposition from the Seiks; although it had 
formerly been asserted, that the country of the Seiks would 
always prove an insuperable obstacle to his progress. Be- 
tween the country of the Seiks and the frontier of Oude no 
barrier exists to check the motions of the Shah, excepting 
the power of Scindiah. The dominions of Scindiah at pre- 
sent are so weakened by internal dissentions as to be in a 
state nearly defenceless, while Scindiah continues at Poonah 
with the main body of his army, and while his tributary 
Chiefs, remaining in Hindostan, are notoriously disaffected to 
his cause, and are prepared to seize any favourable opportu- 
«nity of annihilating his power. 

Zemaun Shah cannot be ignorant of these advantages, and 
if they should tempt him to invade Hindostan, the diversion 
of our force which would be occasioned by such an event, would 
offer the most favorable opportunity to an attack from Tippoo 
upon the Carnatic, it is not improbable that the object of the 
intercourse between Tippoo and Zemaun Shah was, (on the 

.part of the former at least) some such plan of joint operation. 

The present position of Dowlut Rao Scindiah’s army, 

operates as a double advantage to the cause of Tippoo. The 
absence of Scindiah from his dominions in Hindostan, invites 
the invasion of Zemaun Shah and favours its success; while 
-the presence of Scindiah’s army at Poohah holds both our 
-allies in check. The weight of Tippoo’s power in the gene- 
.ral balance, must therefore be considered to have received an 
-Augmentation, not only by the declared projects of Zemaun 
‘Shah, and by the possibility of their (at least limited) success, 
but by the operations of Scindiah in addition to all the other 
-events which have concurred to impair the efficiency of our 
defensive alliance. 

In the mean while, the Government of Fort St, George, 
whose peculiar duty it is to watch the operations of Tippoo 

-Sultaun, and to communicate to me every circumstance re- 


190 MINUTE OF Augast, 


lating to the growth of his power, have distinctly stated in 
their letter of the 10th of July, that “‘ his resources are more 
prompt than our own, and that a great part of his army is 
supposed to have long been in a state of field equipment.” 
So sensible indeed is the Government of Fort St. George to 
the terror of Tippoo Sultaun’s arms, as to be apprehensive of 
making any effort for resisting their progress, lest Tippoo 
should anticipate the tardiness of our preparations by the ra- 
pidity of his own, and should overrun the Carnatic, before 
our army could even move for its defence. 

It is difficult to describe the pain and regret, which that 
letter from the Government of Fort St. George occasioned in 
my mind; nor can I conceive that it is calculated to raise 
any other emotions in the mind of any friend to the prosperi- 
*y of the British interests, or to the honour of the British name 
in India. If the facts and arguments stated in that letter be 
correct, it must now be admitted, that the glorious successes 
of the last war in Mysore, the wisdom which balanced the 
relative interests and forces of the belligerent powers at the 
conclusion of Peace, and finally the great expense incurred 
by the Company in the progressive increase of their military 
establishments on the coast, have terminated in no better re- 
‘sult, than to render Tippoo’s power absolutely invincible, and 
to place the disposal of our fate in his hands. For if the 
sentiments of the Government of Fort St. George, be founded 
upon a just estimate of the relative conditions of Tippoo Sul- 
‘taun and of the Company in India, he possesses the ready 
‘means of attack, while we cannot venture to resort even to 
those-of defence ; but, with a full knowledge of his hostility, 
of his offensive alliance publicly concluded with the enemy, 
and of his continual and advanced preparations for war; we 
“must submit to remain unarmed, because any attempt to 
‘counteract his design might possibly accelerate its execution. 
This argument against the prudence of preparing for our de- 
‘fence would become stronger every day in proportion to the 
progress of Tippoo’s hostile preparations ; until at length, we 
should be reduced to the alternative either of implicit sub- 
mission, or of incurring a much greater risk than any, which 
‘can now -be apprehended from assembling our defensive 
force. Although I am not disposed to adopt the sentiments 
of the Government’ of Fort St. George on this subject, I ac- 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 191 


knowledge with great concern those defects in the military 
establishments on the coast, which will not admit any large 
proportion of that army to move for several montlis; those 
defects certainly constitute so many additional advantages in 
the scale of Tippoo’s power; and in this view, they become 
objects of the most serious consideration, and form a princi- 
pal feature of the danger which it is the duty of this Govern- 
ment to avert, by counsels of another spirit, than that of des- 
pondency, and by measures of another character, than that of 
inaction, or of implicit submission to the will of the enemy. 

I have now examined the principal causes of that danger, 
as they are to be traced in the variable course of events since 
the peace of Seringapatam; the nature of our actual situa- 
tion, arising from the combined effects of these causes, ‘will 
best appear, by a summary review of the facts which I have 
already enumerated in detail. 

Tippoo Sultaun having manifested the most hostile inten- 
‘tions towards us, possesses an army of which a considerable 
‘portion is now in readiness to take the field for purposes of 
‘offence; he has increased the number of his French officers, 
and has solicited, and may possibly receive further assistance 
from the French; he may also receive assistance from the 
several corps commanded by French officers in'the service of 
the Nizam, of Scindiah, and of many other native powers. 
‘He may be assisted by the invasion of Zemaun Shah, and by 

‘the direct cooperation of Seindiah. On the other hand, our 
protecting force upon the coast of Coromandel cannot be put 
‘in motion within a shorter period than three, (or according to 
the Adjutant General Lieutenant Colonel Close, than six) 
months, even for the purpose of defending the Carnatic; out 
‘allies in the mean while, are utterly unable to-fulfil their de- 
fensive engagements with us; the Peishwa being depressed 
‘and kept in check by ‘the ‘intrusion of Scindiah, and the 
Nizam by ‘the vicinity of that chieftain’s army, and by ‘the 
overbearing influence: of an army commanded by French offi- 
‘cers, and established in the center of the Deccan. ‘While 
"we remain in ‘this situation, without a soldier prepared to 
take the field in the Carnatic, and without an ally to assist 
‘our operations in :the event of an attack from Tippoo, we 
leave the fate of the Carnatic to the discretion of Tippoo; 
we suffer the-cause of France to acquire hourly accessions of 


192 : MINUTE OF August, 


strength in every quarter of India; we abandon our allies the 
Nizam and the Peishwa to the mercy of Tippoo and of Scin- 
diah in conjunction with the French; and we leave to France 
the ready means of obtaining a large territorial revenue, and 
a permanent establishment in the Deccan, founded upon the 
destruction of our alliances. 

Under all these circumstances the situation of the British 
empire in India is, without doubt, extremely critical, but in 
my opinion, by no means alarming. For in the very diffi- 
culties of our actual situation are to be found the means, not 
only of averting the danger of the present moment, but of 
providing permanent security against the future return of a 
similar crisis. A common apprehension of the designs of 
Scindiah has fortunately produced an union of interests 
between the Governments of Poonah and Hyderabad; and 
notwithstanding some occasional symptoms of that spirit of 
duplicity and imtrigue which marks the character of every 
Asiatic Court, Azim ul Omra and the ministers of the Peish- 
‘wa seem to be sincerely convinced, that a renewal of amica- 
ble engagements between the Peishwa and the Nizam is 
equally necessary to the safety of both. On the one hand it 
appears, that the Peishwa cannot expect to be speedily eman- 
‘cipated, or effectually defended from the undue influence of 
Scindiah, without the assistance of the Nizam; and on the 
other hand, it is evident, that the restoration of the just 
power and authority of the Peishwa would operate as a con- 
" stant restraint on the designs of Scindiah, of Tippoo, and of 
the French against the independence of the Court of Hyde- 
rabad. Under these circumstances it appeared to me that 
neither the Peishwa nor the Nizam, would be likely to view 
with jealousy any assistance which we might think it advisa- 
ble to afford to either, for the purpose of reviving the triple 
alliance against Tippoo on its original basis, and of enabling 
the contracting parties to fulfil their respective engagements, 
This expectation constituted.a fundamental principle of my 
instructions to the residents at Poonah and Hyderabad, of 
the 8th of July. Their subsequent correspondence has fur- 
nished abundant proof, that my view of the disposition of the 
two courts was not erroneous; since it appears, that while I 
-was occupied in framing a system of measures for uniting the 
Nizam and the Peishwa upon the firm ground of their reci- 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 193 


procal interests, a treaty was actually concluded between 
those two powers at Poonah, with a view to the same object; 
the ratification of this treaty on the part of the Nizam, has 
been delayed by Azim ul Omra; but there appears every 
reason to hope, that the interposition of our arbitration will 
accommodate every point of difference. Our arbitration has 
already been earnestly solicited by both parties, and I am 
persuaded that it will be both acceptable and efficacious 
whenever it shall be interposed. 

The encreasing alarm excited at the Court of Hyderabad, 
by the intemperate conduct of M. Piron and of the French 
army, would dispose Azim ul Omra to receive with gratitude 
any offer of assistance towards the destruction of so powerful 
and dangerous a faction; and the existing jealousies between 
the French officers, would facilitate the dismission of the corps. 
Azim ul Omra has recently expressed in the strongest terms 
his wish of being enabled by our assistance, to accomplish 
this most desirable measure. The only obstacles which ap- 
pear likely to occur to a general accommodation, are the im- 
petuosity and violence of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, whose con- 
tinuance in his present position would operate as an effectual 
assistance to Tippoo, and would preclude the possibility of 
restoring either the Peishwa or the Nizam’ to any degree of 
efficiency or consideration. But the absence of Scindiah 
from his own dominions, and the ungovernable excesses of 
his temper, (however to be lamented as having contributed to 
those events which have impaired the power of our allies,) 
have at the same time weakened the sources of his own power, 
have occasioned a spirit of faction and revolt in his own do- 
minions, and have disgusted all the ancient friends and con- 
nections of his family, together with every respectable ad- 
herent to his cause.- His violence towards the female rela- 
tions of his family has raised a considerable party against 
him amongst his own followers; and his signal treachery in 
the imprisonment of Nana, from which he hoped to derive 
the free use of Nana’s treasure, has'terminated in rendering 
that resource inaccessible to him, at the very moment when it 
is most indispensable to his necessities. He is therefore now 
surrounded by an army clamorous for pay, is destitute of pe- 
cuniary resource, and is unsupported by any one respectable 
friend. His principal minister, a person of considerable ex- 

YOL. I. 0 


194 MINUTE OF August, 


perience, and bearing the highest character of any of his fol- 
lowers, has expressed to the Resident at Poonah in the most 
distinct terms an entire disapprobation of Scindiah’s late con- 
duct, and an earnest wish for an accommodation between 
Scindiah and the Peishwa through our mediation, and for 
the peaceable return of Scindiah to his dominions in Hindos- 
tan; Scindiah himself has manifested no disinclination to re- 
ceive the advice of the Resident at Poonah; whose discre- 
tion has hitherto limited the extent of his interference; but 
from what has already passed, it is reasonable to hope, that 
Scindiah, in the present distressed state of his affairs, will 
give a favorable attention to any just and moderate proposi- 
tion, urged with the full authority of his Government. in 
the mean while, the threatened invasion of Zemaun Shah, 
offers a new motive to recal Scindiah to the protection of his 
own dominions, and he must be sensible not only that his se- 
curity, in the event of such an invasion must depend in a 
great measure on the co-operation of the British troops, but 
that in the present disturbed condition of his possessions and 
of his army, we hold his fate in our hands. 

In this posture of affairs, any opposition to our interference 
for the re-establishment of our alliances, would be equally 
ineffectual and unjustifiable on the part of Scindiah; and 
various considerations of policy and interest will concur to 
render him cautious of taking any step, which might afford 
us just cause of offence. The last despatches from Poonah 
afford a hope that Nana, Furnaveese and the Peishwa, may 
find it their interest to forget their mutual animosity; any 
accommodation between them would lead greatly to facilitate 
an arrangement, embracing the respective interests of the 
Peishwa, of Scindiah, and of the Nizam. 

Such are the circumstances of the present moment, which 
appear to me to favor the exeduation of that comprehensive 
system of precaution and defence demanded by the exigency of 
our actual situation, The mode in which I have endeavoured 
to carry this system into effect has been suggested by the 
following considerations. The Court of Hyderabad has re- 
peatedly and earnestly solicited an increase of the British de- 
tachment in the service of the Nizam, under an assurance that 
the French corps of Piron would be dismissed from his High- 
ness’s service immediately upon the arrival of the additional 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 195 


British force. This proposition has hitherto been embarrassed 
by conditions of a nature incompatible with our engagements 
at Poonah, and the late dissentions between the Nizam and 
the Peishwa have precluded all hope of any amicable adjust- 
ment of this difficulty. It was therefore thought advisable by 
the late Governor-General in Conncil to resort to the expe- 
dient of encouraging the introduction of British adventurers 
into the service of the Nizam, for the purpose of counterba- 
lancing in some measure the influence of the French army at 
Hyderabad. With this view, the corps commanded by Mr. 
Finglass has received the protection and encouragement of 
the Acting Resident, and has been augmented to the number 
of 8,000 men. 

The policy of this expedient always appeared to me very 
doubtful, and I have entertained serious apprehensions that 
the measure might ultimately furnish additional recruits to 
the cause of France, instead of counteracting her influence. 
In the most favorable view, however, this expedient could 
only be considered as a palliative of the evil: it could not be 
expected that such a force as that of Mr. Finglass would 
enable the Nizam to disband the corps of Piron; it must 
therefore have been evident at all times, that nothing less 
than a considerable and permanent increase of our regular 
subsidiary force at Hyderabad could empower the Nizam to 
extricate himself from the hands of the French faction, so 
solidly established in his dominions. 

I have already stated my reasons for thinking that the in- 
crease of the British detachment at Hyderabad would no 
longer afford any cause of jealousy to the Peishwa; and 
under all these circumstances, I have .availed myself of the 
- late conduct of Tippoo and of Scindiah, to propose that mea- 
sure, subject in the first instance to the previous consent of 
the Court of Poonah: I hate accompanied this proposition. 
with a condition, that the arbitration of this Government shall 
be accepted for the final adjustment of the points of differ- 
ence still remaining between the two Courts. These points 
are now so few, and the requisitions of the Court of Hydera- 
bad of a nature so just and moderate, that I entertain a con- 
fident expectation of effecting an accommodation upon prin- 
ciples equally advantageous to both parties. 

I have already observed that one of the most dangerous 


196 MINUTE OF August, 


circumstances attending the establishment of the French 
party at Hyderabad, is the influence which they are likely to 
possess in directing the succession to the throne, whenever it. 
shall become vacant by the death of the Nizam. 

Secunder Jah, the eldest son of the Nizam, would be the 
natural successor, unless the regular order of succession 
should be disturbed by domestic faction, foreign intrigue, or 
force; for, although priority of birth may not be considered 
to give the same absolute and exclusive right to succession 
in India as it does in Europe, it is invariably deemed the 
strongest title, and is rarely superseded excepting in case of 
disaffection, or of positive disqualification. So far from these 
or any other objections being applicable to the title of Secun- 
der Jah, it is well known that the Nizam has given the strong- 
est indications of his favorable intentions towards Secunder 
Jah, by entrusting that Prince with the custody of his Seal,. 
and by empowering him to perform certain acts which are re- 
served exclusively for the Sovereign. This admission to the 
personal exercise of a portion of the sovereign authority 
during the life of the Nizam is deemed equivalent to a vir- 
tual nomination to the throne ; and there is no reason to sup- 
pose that the Nizam will nominate any of his younger sons to 
the exclusion of the heir apparent, unless his Highness should 
be prevailed upon in the weakness of Bis last moments to 
commit an act of such flagrant impolicy and injustice. 

Secunder Jah is connected by marriage with the family of 
Azim ul Omra, and his establishment upon the throne would 
give great additional security to the British interests at the 
Court of Hyderabad: on the other hand, none of the younger 
sons can hope to reach the throne by any other assistance 
than that of the French party, and of Tippoo Sultaun. Suffi- 
cient proof has been stated of the interest which Tippoo and 
the French take in the exclusion of Secunder Jah, and of the 
attempts which they have already made to interfere in govern- 
ing the succession. These attempts may be renewed, and 
their success would necessarily involve the destruction of Azim 
ul Omra and of Secunder Jah, together with the consequent 
annihilation of the British influence at Hyderahad ; all hope 
of re-establishing the balance of power in India as it existed 
at the peace of Seringapatam, would then be precluded ; the 
‘ countries of the Nizam would in such an event become in 


1798, TUE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 197 


effect a dependency of France, and the partizans of that na- 
tion, in conjunction with Tippoo, and with the body of their 
countrymen lately received into his pay, would have the 
means of endangering the British power in India. 

Under all these circumstances, the same principles which 
suggested the necessity of increasing the British detachment 
at Hyderabad, demanded that it should be employed to sup- 
port the succession of Secunder Jah, as being essentially con- 
nected with the permanency of our influence at Hyderabad, 
and with the effectual exclusion of the interference of Tippoo 
and of France. 

I have therefore authorised the Resident at Hyderabad to 
employ the British troops in this service, if their assistance 
should hereafter become necessary ; but I am persuaded that 
the mere presence of our force, accompanied by the know- 
ledge of my firm determination to support the regular order 
of succession, will preclude every movement either of foreign 
or domestic opposition. 

The arrangements proposed for the service of the Nizam 
will be very incomplete, unless connected with the restoration 
of the Peishwa to a due degree of authority and power, and 
preceded by the cordial approbation of the Court of Poonah. 
But the great danger to be averted is the growth of the in- 
fluence of Tippoo and of France in India. It is therefore 
evident, that the failure of the proposed plan at Poonah 
would increase the necessity of providing for the safety of the 
Nizam, and of destroying the French party at his Court. If, 
therefore, the Peishwa should either refuse his assent to the 
propositions to be made to him, or if from the success of 
Scindiah’s operations, or from any other cause, those mea- 
sures which relate to the Court of Poonah should be frus- 
trated, I have still deemed it advisable to direct the Acting 
Resident at Hyderabad to,carry into effect the increase of 
the British detachment, and such other parts of my instruc- 
tions as may appear practicable, reserving always to the 
Peishwa the power of acceding hereafter to any treaty 
which we may conclude with the Nizam, and continuing with 
that view the restrictive terms of our present subsidiary en- 
gagements with the latter,.as far as they relate to the interests 
of the Peishwa. The dismission of the French corps at Hy- 
derabad would not fully answer the views with which I 


198 MINUTE OF August, 


have proposed that measure, if the officers or European pri- 
vates were permitted to enter into the service of any other 
native power although I should think them less dangerous 
in any service than in that of the Nizam. I have endea- 
voured not only to secure the expulsion of the French from 
Hyderabad, but also their immediate return to their native 
country. I have therefore required that the French officers 
and privates should be delivered up to the Government of 
Fort St. George, in order that they may be immediately con- 
veyed to Europe; the Nizam is under no engagements either 
with the Government of France or with the French officers 
to continue them in his service, and he possesses the full right 
to dismiss them whenever he shall think fit. The exorbitant 
power which M. Piron and his army have acquired at Hydera- 
bad, as well as their immoderate abuse of it, will justify the 
Nizam in taking whatever measures may appear most effec- 
tual for the purpose of securing himself against a faction so 
formidable not only to the independence of his Government, 
but to the safety of his own person, and to the existence of 
his throne. With the same view, I have made it a prelimi- 
nary condition of the whole plan, that the Nizam, his heirs 
and successors shall for ever exclude the French from their 
armies and dominions. 

The corps of Mr. Finglass, after the establishment of a con- 
siderable British force at Hyderabad, will no longer be liable 
to the full force of the objections which I have stated against 
the policy of encouraging such a body of adventurers in the 
service of the Nizam; this question, however, does not re- 
quire an immediate decision; we shall possess ample means 
of deciding it according to our discretion,.if our propositions 
to the Court of Hyderabad should be attended with success. 
The consent of the Nizam to such parts of the proposed 
arrangements as relate to the re-establishment of the Govern- 
ment of Poonah is required as a necessary preliminary to the 
increase of the British detachment at Hyderabad. My inten- 
tions being to take no step in the first instance at either 
Court without the- fall knowledge and concurrence of the 
other; a p¥inciple, the strict observance of which to every 
degree | of practicable extent, appears to me to be the only 


“effectual mode of removing all causes of jealousy, of uniting 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 199 


the confidence of both parties, and of bringing them to a dis- 
passionate consideration of their mutual interests. 

The parts of the proposed arrangement which relate to the 
re-establishment of the Government of Poonah were sug- 
gested by Colonel Palmer's letter of 1st of June, in which he 
states “that the authority of the Peishwa would be restored 
by the appearance of a strong British force at Poonah, and 
that Scindiah, under the circumstances of Tippoo’s recent 
aggression, could on no just pretence object to such a move- 
ment of our troops, nor in his present condition be able to 
oppose it.” 

The whole tenor of the subsequent advices from Poonah 
tended to confirm this opinion: for while it appeared evi- 
dently impossible that the authority of the Peishwa could be 
restored otherwise than by foreign assistance, there seemed 
to be every rational ground of expectation, that the mere ap- 
pearance of our troops would induce all the leading Chieftains 
of the Mahratta empire to unite in support of the Peishwa, 
and that such an event would not be unacceptable even to 
the followers of Scindiah. The Peishwa himself has ear- 
nestly solicited the aid of a body of our troops, and has ex- 
pressed the fullest sense of the necessity, as well as reliance 
on the efficacy of such a measure for the restoration of his 
authority and for the protection of his person. 

On the other hand, the danger of the Peishwa increased 
from day to day; the assistance which he had solicited from 
the Nizam was not likely to reach him before his fate had 
been decided; and the expectation even of any assistance 
from the Court of Hyderabad, notwithstanding the conclusion 
of the late treaty, appeared to rest on a very precarious foun: 
dation. In this situation, the direct interposition of this Go- 
vernment by moving a detachment of troops to Poonah was 
the only measure on which we could rely with any degree of 
certainty for averting the immediate destruction of our in- 
terests at that Court. 

The Resident at Poonah was therefore authorized to re- 
quire a detachment of troops from Bombay, but previously 
to so decided a step, it was deemed proper that the Resident 
should require of the Peishwa his consent to the increase of 
the British detachment at Hyderabad, his acceptance of our 


200 MINUTE OF August, 


arbitration between the Courts of Poonah and Hyderabad, 
and his exclusion of the French from his armies and doni- 
nions. 

With a view of securing the lasting benefit of this arrange- 
ment at the Court of Poonah, it is intended that a proposal 
shall be made to the Peishwa to enter into permanent subsi- 
diary engagements with us of a similar nature and extent 
with those which shall be concluded at the Court of Hyder- 
abad. 

With the same view, the Resident at Poonah has been 
directed to take such measures as may appear to him most 
likely to interest Nana Furnaveese in the success of this 
general arrangement of the affairs of the two Courts. 

The last despatches from Poonah afford every reason to 
hope, that the abilities and experience of Nana may be suc- 
cessfully employed by Colonel Palmer in effecting the return 
of Scindiah to his own dominions, and the consequent res- 
toration of the Peishwa. 

The impediments which Scindiah opposes to the success 
of this arrangement will probably disappear whenever the 
union of the two Courts, cemented by our interposition, shall 
become a matter of public notoriety. 

The treasure of Nana is the only resource in which Scin- 
diah can find the means of appeasing the clamours of his 
discontented army ; and Colonel Palmer will avail himself of 
any favorable opportunity of connecting the interests of Nana 
with those of Scindiah and of the Peishwa, in such a manner 
as shall enable Scindiah to retire with safety into his own 
dominions, without affording him the power of effecting any 
other military movement. 

Being desirous of conciliating the real interests of all par- 
ties, I have instructed Colonel Palmer to make the most 
amicable propositions to Scindiah, and to urge the policy of 
his return to his own dominions by pointing out their actual 
danger during his absence, by offering our co-operation 
against the menaced invasion of Zemaun Shah, and our me- 
diation with the Courts of Poonah and Hyderabad; and I 
have made the ¢onsent‘of those Courts to our mediation of 
their respective differences with Scindiah an indispensable 
preliminary of the arrangements which regard the restoration 

. of their own independence. Scindiah cannot reject our pro- 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 201 


positions on any ground which would not immediately place 
him in the rank of a declared enemy to us, and of an avowed 
auxiliary to Tippoo Sultaun. 

In this case, therefore, we must have recourse to compul- 
sion; and J have authorized the Resident at Poonah to use it 
in the last and, I trust improbable, extremity. 

Such are the measures which I have proposed, with a view 
to restore the efficiency of our alliances, and to check the 
growth of the French party in the Deccan. 

I have already stated the reasons which convinced me 
(against the opinion of the Government of Fort St. George) 
that the assembling the army on the coasts of Coromandel and 
Malabar, and at Bombay, was absolutely indispensable to the 
dlefence of the Carnatic, under the circumstance of Tippoo’s 
declared designs and acknowledged preparations for war. 

The fatal policy of neglecting to keep pace with the for- 
wardness of the enemy’s equipments has been felt more than 
once on the coast of Coromandel, and, L repeat it, I cannot, 
consistently with any sentiment of duty, consent to rest the 
security of the Carnatic, in the present crisis, on any other 
foundation than a state of active and early preparation for 
war. But if I had looked only to the success of those mea- 
sures which are now depending at the Courts of Poonah and 
Hyderabad (measures essentially involving our present and 
future means of checking the implacable enmity of Tippoo), 
I should on that ground alone have proposed to assemble the 
army upon the coast of Coromandel, at Bombay, and upon 
the coast of Malabar. 

It is impossible to suppose that Tippoo would not employ 
every effort to prevent the revival of our defensive alliances ; 
and it would, therefore, be nearly certain that his advanced 
state of preparation for war, and his renewed connection with 
the French, would tempt him to interfere in the affairs of the 
Nizam and of the Peishwa, and to assist the views of Scindiah 
at Poonah, and of M. Piron’s army at Hyderabad. It there- 
fore became necessary to check the motions of Tippoo Sul- 
taun, by assembling an army upon his frontier during the con- 
tinuance of our negociations with our allies.. 

I have adverted, in the course of this Minute, to those de- 
fects in the constitution of the army upon the coast which 
have impeded its early movement in the present critical con- 
juncture. The measures which I have proposed for the cor- 


202 MINUTE OF August, 


rection of those defects are absolutely necessary, in my judg- 
ment, to our future security in the Carnatic. The detail of 
those measures will appear in my Minute in the Secret De- 
partment of the 20th July, and in the letter to the Govern- 
ment of Fort St. George of the same date.* 

TI am fully aware of the expense to be incurred in establish- 
ing any improved system, which shall enable the army on the 
coast to keep pace with the promptitude of Tippoo’s resources, 
and to move with an alacrity and expedition equal to his. 

If, however, the proposed increase of our subsidiary en- 
gagements at Hyderabad should take place, it is my intention 
that the whole detachment, consisting of three regiments, 
should be furnished from the establishment of Fort St. George. 
The force thus stationed at Hyderabad will afford an effectual 
security to the northern Circars against Tippoo Sultaun, or 
against any other foreign enemy. The duty of the Circars 
will then require no larger a proportion of troops than may 
be sufficient to maintain the internal police and good order of 
the country. It will not therefore be requisite, in the event 
of peace, to raise more than than one regiment at Fort St. 
George, to replace those serving with the Nizam. This arrange- 
ment will operate as a saving of the expense of two regiments 
upon the establishment of Fort St. George, and will furnish 
a fund at least adequate to the permanent charges of the new 
establishments of artillery, draft cattle and grain, which our 
recent experience has proved to be indispensable for the 
purpose of enabling the army on the coast to take the field 
expeditiously, on any sudden emergency. 

In this view, the restoration of our defensive alliances 
against Tippoo is essentially connected with the improvement 
of our system of defence in the Carnatic; and the assistance 
afforded to the Nizam will become (without any increase of 
expense) the source of additional vigour and activity to our 
army upon the coast. 

Deeply as I lament the obstacles: which have prevented us 
from striking an instantaneous blow against the possessions 
of Tippoo, I expect to derive considerable advantage from 
the success of that system of precaution and defence which I 
have been compelled to substitute in place of an immediate war. 
poe Ares 


* These measures are detailed in the Governor-General’s letter to Ge- 
neral Harris, of the 18th July, 1798.—See page 135. 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 203 


The enlargement of our subsidiary engagements at the 
Court of Hyderabad, combined with the establishment of 
similar engagements at the Court of Poonah, will become a 
great augmentation of our strength, attended by no increase 
of charge, and possibly by a diminution of our military ex- 
penses. 

The two detachments will form a considerable army, sta- 
tioned on the most vulnerable part of Tippoo Sultaun’s frontier, 
in a position which will at all times facilitate our approach to 
his capital, by securing the protection of our convoys of pro- 
visions. A force so stationed: will operate as a perpetual 
restraint upon any movements which Tippoo might be dis- 
posed to make towards the frontier, either of the Carnatic, of 
the Northern Circars, or of Malabar. It will also impede 
any cooperation between the armies of Scindiah and of 
Tippoo; and will induce the former to remain within his own 
dominions, where his motions will again be checked by the 
vicinity of our army on the frontier of Oude. 

In such circumstances, it must always be the interest of 
Scindiah to cultivate our friendship in preference to that of 
the French, or of any native power. Thus he may become 
an useful ally to us in the event of Zemaun Shah’s approach 
to the frontier of Hindostan; and the prospect of that event 
must render him anxious to secure our protection. On the 
other hand, the success of his present ambitious and unjusti- 
fiable views against the Peishwa would fix him in the interests 
of Tippoo Sultaun and of France, with the accession of what- 
ever strength he might be able to collect from the remnants 
of the empire which he would have overthrown. 

The influence which we shall naturally derive, both at Hy- 
derabad and Poonah, from the presence of so large a body 
of our troops, will enable us to prevent any aggression on 
either side, by the constant interposition of our good offices 
with both parties, to restrain every symptom of a revival of 
their former spirit of jealousy and contention. 

Our endeavours may then be successfully directed to the 
desirable object of preserving unimpaired the strength and 
resources of the two powers, on whose cooperation we must 
rely for assistance in the event of any war with the state of 
Mysore; and while we prevent our allies from weakening 
themselves by repeated contests, we may expect that such an 


204 MINUTE OF August, 


interference in the disputes of the native powers, so far from 
tending to foment divisions, and to occasion war, will prove 
the best security for the general tranquillity of India, as well 
as the most solid pledge of our disposition to preserve that 
blessing from interruption. 

However comprehensive and intricate the proposed system 
may appear at the first view, it will soon be evident to all the 
powers of India, that the fundamental principle of our policy 
is invariably repugnant to every scheme of conquest, exten- 
sion of dominion, aggrandisement, or ambition, either for 
ourselves or for our allies. Consistently with this principle, 
it is our right and duty to restore the vigour and efficiency of 
our defensive alliances; but beyond the limits of this prin- 
ciple, we entertain no project of altering the condition, of 
reducing or of raising the power of any established state in 
India. On the other hand, the same principle justifies and 
demands our firm resistance to the intrusion of any foreign 
power which shall attempt to acquire a preponderant influence 
in the scale of Indian politics, to the prejudice of our defen- 
sive alliances, and of our just interests. The establishment 
of our subsidized force at Poonah and Hyderabad will afford 
effectual means of guarding, not only against any such intru- 
sion, but against the undue growth of any native power. 
While we possess so formidable a force in the center of 
India, no such event can happen without our knowledge and 
consent, 

The last question which remains for consideration is, what 
shall be the nature and extent of that demand of satisfaction 
which we shall make from Tippoo Sultaun, whenever we 
shall have completed the system now depending at the Courts 
of our Allies, and shall have brought our army in the Carnatic 
to a state of preparation for the field? 

It is evident from the facts which have come under my 
observation in the course of this discussion, that our safety 
requires a further reduction of the relative power of Tippoo 
Sultaun. 

The policy of the Treaty of Seringapatam certainly was not 
to maintain Tippoo’s power upon such a scale as should leave 
him a constant object of alarm and apprehension to the Com- 
pany. That he has been so for some years past cannot be 
denied by any person acquainted with the records either of 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 205 


this Government or of that of Fort St.George. The present 
is the second crisis within the last two years, in which this: 
Government has thought it necessary to assemble the army 
on the coast, for the sole purpose of checking his motions. 

The vague and inaccurate nature of our intelligence with 
respect to the extent of his force and to the state of his pre- 
parations, added to the facility which he possesses of receiv- 
ing emissaries and succours from France by Sea, have con- 
* tributed to encrease the anxiety of the Company’s Govern- 
ments; and our intercourse with him has been of an unsettled 
and ill defined character, destitute of the advantages either 
of peace or of war. Under such circumstances, the continu-. 
ance of Tippoo’s power in its actual state, must prove to the 
Company a perpetual source of alarm, vexation and expense. 

The reduction of his means of offence might be effected, 
either by a positive diminution of his territory and resources, 
or by a proportionate increase of power and efficiency on our 
side of the balance, accompanied by such additional securities 
as might enable us to ascertain at all times the nature of his 
intentions, as well as his power of carrying them into effect, 
and to restrain, if not wholly to preclude, his intercourse with 
France. 

The diminution of his territory on the coast of Malabar, 
would certainly be the most effectual mode of precluding his 
intercourse with France, as well as of preventing his move- 
ments towards the Carnatic. But it does not appear proba- 
ble that this most desirable security can ever be obtained by 
the mere terror of our arms. It must be purchased at the 
expense and hazard of war. Any considerable reduction of 
his resources must probably be purchased at the same price. 

I have already stated the nature and tendency of those 
steps which have been taken, for confining the power of 
Tippoo within narrower limits by the operation of the pro- 
posed system of alliance, of subsidiary engagements, and of 
improvement of our defences in the Carnatic. 

The success of this system will unquestionably operate as 
an effectual restraint upon the power of Tippoo, and will so 
strengthen our barriers against him as to afford a rational ex- 
pectation, that we may be enabled to obtaip from him with- 
out incurring the hazard of war, a very considerable aug- 


208 MINUTE OF - August, 


mentation of security with respect to all those points, which 
now form the most alarming features of his power. 

T have already stated those points to be, the secresy of his 
operations; his continual intercourse with the French, and 
constant state of equipment for war. 

Our demand of satisfaction for his late infraction of treaty, 
should be so framed as to apply correctives to each of these 
evils; and such a demand might be founded on principles of 
moderation and justice so clear and indisputable, as would 
place the refusal of Tippoo in the most odious light, and in 
that event prove to all India the necessity of our resorting to 
arms. 

We might distinctly state to Tippoo, that we entertain no 
view of encroaching upon his territory or of diminishing his 
resources; and we might appeal to the late restoration of the 
district of Wynaad, for an unequivocal proof of this disposi- 
tion, 

We might declare, that after a most unprovoked violation 
of treaty on his part, we do not intend to demand any cession 
of dominion or payment of money ; but will content ourselves 
with obtaining those ordinary pledges of an intention to ab- 
stain from hostilities, which all civilized nations in a state of 
peace, are in the established habit of requiring reciprocally 
from one another; we might insist on an unequivocal and 
final explanation of the real nature of our relation with him ; 
declaring, that we will no longer submit to that ambiguous 
and anxious state, in which the allies have been placed by 
his conduct for some years past; we might signify our deter- 
mined resolution, either to establish with him a real and ef- 
fectual peace, accompanied by the customary intercourse, by 
the mutual exchange of good offices, and by all other secu- 
rities which maintain the continuance of that blessing, or to 
wage war upon him, until we have removed the causes of our 
apprehension and danger by the entire destruction of his 
power. 

This declaration might be made jointly by all the allies, 
and it might be followed by requiring Tippoo to receive at 
his Court an established Ambassador from each of the allies, 
aceording to the practise of all civilized nations in a state of 
peace, offering at the same time to admit Ambassadors from 
him on: equal terms. 


1798. THE GOVERNOR GENERAL. 207 


\ 


The force levied by him under his offensive alliance with 
France, having been raised for the express purpose of ag- 
gression upon the Company, can be considered in no other 
light than that of a signal of hostility, while it shall remain in 
his service. He must therefore be required to disband it 
without delay, and to remove it from his dominions. 

The anxious desire of the French to destroy the British 
power in India, the nature of Tippoo’s acknowledged connec- 
tion with them, and the interest which they must always feel 
in instigating him to war, demand the further requisition, that 
he should enter into an engagement for himself, his heirs and 
successors, to exclude the French from his armies and domi- 
nions for ever. 

The advantages resulting from these concessions on the 
part of Tippoo, would be very considerable. 

The residence of an Ambassador at his Court, would not 
only restrain the execution of any hostile designs which he 
might hereafter form, but would provide an authentic source 
of intelligence, from which we might always derive timely in- 
formation of his motions. This measure might also ultimate- 
ly lead to the establishment of an amicable intercourse with 
Mysore; for Tippoo may perhaps at length be convinced, 
that his wisest policy would be to rest satisfied with the un- 
disturbed possession of his present dominions, rather than to 
risk the loss of what he still retains, by attempting to regain 
what he has lost. 

The dismission of the French corps raised at Mauritius 
would discourage other adventurers of that nation from at- 
tempting to engage in the service of the Sultaun; and with a 
British Ambassador on the spot, it would be difficult for him 
to evade the engagements by which he would have bound 
himself to exclude jhe French from his armies and dominions. 

The combined effeet of these two measures would there- 
fore be, if not wholly to preclude, at least to embarrass to a 
very great degree his intercourse with our enemy. He may 
also at length perceive that he never can hope to make any 
lasting impression upon the British power, without the aid of 
a large French force; and that he never can admit such a 
force into his dominions, without the utmost danger to his 
own independence. 

The revival of our alliances, the appearance of our armies 


208 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON August, 


in the field, and the presence of a part of the British squadron 
on the coast of Malabar, will probably incline Tippoo to listen 
to requisitions of this nature. He will soon perceive that we 
possess ample means of annihilating his military force, and 
I trust he will also be convinced, that we have no object 
in view beyond our own security, and that we are really de- 
sirous of maintaining the relations of amity and peace with 
him, as long as he shall rest contented with his present demi- 
nions, and shall relinquish his vindictive projects against 
ours. 

If Tippoo should accede to the substance of the requisi- 
tions which I have suggested, I entertain a sanguine hope, 
that with the efficiency of the triple alliance not only restored 
but considerably strengthened, with a large army at Hydera- 
bad, and another at Poonah, with a Resident established at 
Seringapatam, and with the exclusion of the French from the 
dominions of Tippoo Sultaun, of the Nizam, and of the 
Peishwa, we may be enabled to look confidently toa long 
continuance of tranquillity in India. The growth of the 
French power in India, would no longer be a matter of ap- 
prehension, Scindiah (or whoever shall succeed to his domi- 
nions in Hindostan), would become an useful auxiliary against 
the threatened irruption of Zemaun Shah; the military 
charges on the coast of Coromandel, might then safely admit 
of reduction; this Government would not then be perpetually 
alarmed with rumours of Tippoo’s equipments, and of im- 
pending invasions of the Carnatic. We should no longer 
suffer in time of peace all the solicitude, and hazard, and much 
of the expense of war; and the continuance of tranquillity 
would be ensured not more by the predominance of our 
power, than by the moderation manifested in using it for the 
sole purpose of obtaining permanent security, and genuine 
peace.* . 

Iam, &c. Mornineron. 


* The letter from the Government of Fort St. George of the 10th July, 
1798, (referred to at page 178) is grounded on Mr. Webbe’s memoran- 
dum of the 6th July, (see page 72) namely, that the Madras army was in- 
capable of any offensive operations, and barely adequate to the defence of 
our own territory; it deprecated also any demonstration which might in- 
duce Tippoo to invade the Carnatic. The letter is inserted as a note at 
page 214. 


1798. TO CAPTAIN KIRKPATRICK, 209 


No, XLIX. 
The Earl of Mornington to Captain Kirkpatrick. 


Sir, Fort William, 14th August, 1798. 

I have received your private letter of the 30th ult. Your 
communications relating to Colonel Kirkpatrick give me great 
pleasure, and I am happy to find that the situation in my 
family which I have left open for him is likely to prove ac- 
ceptable to him. 

Azim ul Omra’s reception of my propositions has afforded 
me the highest satisfaction; nor could it be expected that he 
should pledge himself to a greater extent on the first com- 
munication of a plan embracing so many complicated inte- 
rests. 

In directing the Government of Fort St. George to hold 
two regiments in readiness to march at your requisition to 
Hyderabad, I desired that those regiments might be accom- 
panied by the ordinary proportion of field artillery; and my 
intention is, that the artillery which may be sent with those 
regiments shall be permanently stationed with the Nizam, he 
of course paying the charge attending it. If the proportion 

- of artillery sent with the detachment from Fort St. George 
should appear insufficient, Azim ul Omra will find me sin- 
cerely disposed to accommodate that point to his wishes, by 
making any addition which may be deemed requisite. 

I shall hereafter take into consideration your observation 
respecting the exchange at which the pay of the Bengal 
troops serving at Hyderabad is now issued. I think it proper 
at the same time to acquaint you, that it is my intention ulti- 
‘mately, that the corps stationed with the Nizam shall be com- 
posed entirely of troops from the establishment of Fort St. 
George. 

The total inability of the Nizam to extricate himself from 
the power of the French party without our assistance formed 
one of the primary considerations, which induced me to pro- 
pose to him the extension of our subsidiary engagements. 

The anxiety with which Azim ul Omra presses for the ar- 
rival of the additional subsidiary force from Fort St. George 
as an indispensable preliminary to the destruction of the 
French party, is a sufficient confirmation of the opinions 
which I had formed of the dangerous strength of that party, 

VOL. I. P 


210 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO August, 


and of the absolute necessity of our interference for the pur- 
pose of restraining its overbearing influence. 

It could never have been expected by me that the Minister 
should take any other step towards the dismission of Peron’s 
army previously to the arrival of our regiments, than that of 
dispersing the corps of which it is composed, so as to pre- 

‘vent their forming a junction either with a view of exciting a 
commotion in his Highness’s dominions, or of retiring: into 
the territories of any other power. It is indispensably ne- 
cessary indeed that the intended dismission of the French 
party should be kept secret until the Minister shall possess 
the means of attempting it with a certainty of success. With 
the aid of the additional force which we have agreed to fur- 
nish, I should hope that he will be enabled to carry this part 
of the plan into execution without any material difficulty. 
Perhaps even a smaller British force might be deemed ade- 
quate to this service; if you should be of opinion that it 
can be successfully accomplished by the Bengal troops now 
serving at Hyderabad, and a part of the additional force 
ordered to march thither on your requisition, (supposing that 
any unforeseen obstacle should impede the immediate march 
of the whole of the two regiments from Fort St. George) you 
have my sanction to make the attempt with the smaller force. 

For the reasons however stated in my letter to you of the 
25th ultimo, it is indispensably necessary, at all events, that 
the Nizam should, without delay, formally bind himself by a 
written engagement to my propositions respecting the French 
party, as well as to every other preliminary condition of the 
proposed arrangements, leaving the mode and time of carry- 
ing those arrangements into effect to be determined by the 
arrival of our additional subsidiary force. 

I consider such preliminary articles to be the basis of a 
definitive treaty which shall comprehend the general interests 
of each branch of the Triple Alliance. On the signature of 
such articles you must insist, before you despatch your orders, 
for the march of the additional detachment. The actual 
disbanding of Peron’s corps will, of course, follow the esta- 
blishment of our troops at Hyderabad. 

The nature of these measures requires great despatch, the 
ordinary delays of an Asiatic Court would defeat the whole 
system. Tam, &c. 

Mornineron. 


798. GENERAL HARRIS. 211 


No. L. 
The Earl of Mornington to General Harris. 
My Dear Sir, Fort William, 16th August, 1798. 


I have just now received your express of the 30th July, to 
which [ return an answer without delay. 

The despatch of the La Virginie has been delayed by the 
sudden death of my poor friend Captain Hunt, who died to 
the unspeakable grief of all his acquaintance, on Friday last, 
after an illness of a few days. 

The charge of the ship is entrusted to Mr. Evans, the first 
lieutenant, who will sail in the course of two or three days at 
farthest, and will convey to you a supply of money to the 
amount of not less than ten nor more than fifteen lacs of 
rupees. I trust that this supply will reach you within fifteen 
days from the departure of La Virginie. 

A part of the 33rd regiment, with my brother, Colonel 
Wellesley, embarked the day before yesterday for Fort St. 
George, and the remainder is to follow to-morrow. 

If the force which I have directed to be assembled shall 
really be ready to move from the Circars towards Hyderabad 
before the end of August, I trust it will be in time to accom- 
plish the important objects which 1 have in contemplation. 

The Marine battalion will be embarked for Masulipatam, 
partly on board the Bombay frigate, and partly on a ship 
freighted for the purpose on the 25th of this month. 

Upon consulting with the Commander-in-Chief, we are of 
opinion that the defence of these provinces, under all the 
circumstances of the present moment, absolutely requires that 
the men of the 36th regiment should be embarked for Fort 
William immediately upon the arrival of the 33rd at Fort St. 
George, and I therefore request that the execution of this 
suggestion may not be suspended, but as I am anxious to 
afford you every possible assistance, I this day signified in 
Council my intention to authorize you to detain the 29th re- 
giment of dragoons, which must soon arrive at your Presi- 
dency from England; you will not attempt to mount the men, 
but I trust that you will find this regiment in its dismounted 
state useful for the purpose of garrison duty. 

You will consider this as a formal authority for the deten- 
tion of the 29th regiment. 


212 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO August 


{ take this opportunity of replying to such parts of your 
letters of the 12th and 14th July as have not been noticed in 
my public despatches. 

The mode of obviating the inconvenience likely to arise 
from the number of your French prisoners has been antici- 
pated by my proposition made through Mr. Wellesley, and 
I trust you may already have found some means of conveying 
‘them to Europe. 

I do not think that the regiment of Meuron would be a 
very safe guest in Bengal if its disposition should be what 
‘you apprehend; should your apprehension prove well founded, 
I would recommend it to you to devise some means of sending 
it to Europe. 

The 29th will make a very safe part of the garrison of Fort 
St. George. 

Your letter of the 14th July suggests some doubts of Tip- 
poo’s participation in the proclamation issued in the Isle of 
France. I have had the means of ascertaining from a variety 
of respectable evidence, as well as from an examination of 
the collateral circumstances of the case, that Tippoo was un- 
questionably a party to the proclamation. 

The motives of Monsieur Malartic are more ambiguous, 
but I am persuaded you will not think this circumstance any 
palliation of the conduct of Tippoo. 

Tippoo certainly expected very considerable assistance 
from the Isle of France, and he would probably have obtained 
it if his Ambassadors had carried with them a sufficient trea- 
sure to advance bounty money to a large number of recruits; 
but an apprehension of the English cruizers prevented the 
embarkation of treasure, and to this defect more than any 
other is to be imputed the failure of the whole plan. The 
ship which conveyed to the Mauritius the first intelligence of 
the last revolution in France, and of the violence intended 
against that Island, did not arrive until after the departure of 
Tippoo’s vakeels. This intelligence occasioned ‘the disturb- 
ance in the Island; the proclamation, therefore, did not origi- 
nate in any intention to quell those disturbances by relieving 
the Island of the restless spirits concerned in them. It is an 
incontrovertible fact (on which I leave you to make your own 
comment) that no rumour or notion of a war between Tippoo 
and the Company, or of a levy of men for his service, existed 


1798. GENERAL HARRIS. 213: 


in the Island of Mauritius previously to the arrival of Tip- 
poo’s Ambassadors, and that the proclamation issued a few 
days after their arrival. 

I have detailed the whole of this argument in a minute re- 
corded in the Secret Department, which I will forward to you 
for your private perusal, and for that of Lord Clive.* 

Tippoo’s letters to the Executive Directory of France, so- 
liciting their aid against the Company, were despatched from” 
the Mauritius in the month of March; you are aware that the 
general expectation in that Island is, that a force will soon 
be sent from France for the purpose of reducing the Island 
to obedience. Such an expedition may easily be connected 
with the plan of affording succour to Tippoo, and I think it 
highly probable that a part of the great naval preparations 
now making in France may be destined for this rational pur- 
pose, rather than to the impracticable project of invading 
England; in this opinion Sir Hugh Christian and Lord 
Macartney entirely concur with me. 

Captain Malcolm’s report of the state of Tippoo’s prepara- 
tions leaves no doubt on my mind that the Sultan expected 
to have derived from the French such succour as would have 
enabled him immediately to commence active operations 
against us. It does not appear to me that the Sultan yet 
despairs of the aid of France. 

With regard to the effect which our preparations may have 
upon Tippoo’s mind I have sufficiently expressed my opinion 
in my private letter to you of the 16th July. That opinion 
has been confirmed by every subsequent event; and I should 
be ashamed to hold for one hour the post which I now fill, 
if I had been so weak as to suffer any vague apprehension of 
the possible effect of our preparations on the capricious tem- 
per of the Sultan, to deter mé from taking effectual measures 
for our permanent security against his declared designs. 

Your letter of the 6th July enclosed a memorandum,+} which 
I should not have thought deserving of my notice if you had 
not called my particular attention to it, as containing the ar- 
guments which were likely to be urged with virulence by the 
opposition at home, in the event of our being engaged in a 
war with Tippoo. 


* Vide Minute of the 12th August, 1798, p. 159. t See p. 72. 


214 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO August, 


Although no man accepts with more gratitude any: correc- 
tion of his own opinions, .I feel an instinctive repugnance to 
any remarks evidently originating in a spirit of discontent and 
faction; I therefore read in a very cursory manner the memo- 
randum which you had so justly described; I leave you then 
to judge with what astonishment and concern I found the 
whole substance of that memorandum recalled to my memory 
by your public letter of the 10th July ;* to that letter my pub- 


* The following is the letter referred to :— 
From the Secret Department to the Earl of Mornington, K.B. 


My Lorp, Fort St. George, 10th July, 1798. 

We have had the honour to receive your Lordship’s letter of the 20th 
ultimo,* directing us to take measures, with the utmost degree of expe- 
dition, for assembling the army, under this Government, at such a situa- 
tion as we may judge most convenient for its marching against Seringa- 
patam; if such a measure should, hereafter, be found necessary. 

Upon this most momentous question we shall wait, with the utmost 
solicitude, the result of your Lordship’s final deliberation. Mean while, 
we beg to assure you of our most cordial cooperation, in any system of 
measures which you may judge expedient, to frustrate the designs of the 
enemy. 

With this view, we have taken the measures immediately necessary for 
assembling such part of our troops, as can be spared from the defence of 
our forts, and the protection of our districts; of this force we inclose a 
return amounting to 14,144 rank and file, including gun Lascars and 
pioneers. 

The Commander-in-Chief has recommended Walajahbad, as the most 
convenient place at which to assemble the army, with a view either to of- 
fensive or defensive operations ; and, in compliance with his recommend- 
ation, we have accordingly fixed upon that situation, as the general ren- 
dezvous of the troops. 

We shall issue immediate orders for providing a sufficient quantity of 
draft and carriage cattle for the camp equipage, and field train of this 
army, but as the equipment of a battering train, sufficient for the siege of 
Seringapatam, must be attended with an immediate very heavy expence, 
we shall postpone any orders for this purpose, until we receive your 
farther directions. 

In the mean time, we consider it our duty to suggest the ideas to which 
the immediate performance of your orders has given rise. 

The army which it is possible for us to draw together, is incapable of 
offensive operations ; and must receive very large reinforcements from 
Bengal, before it can be in @ condition to make any serious attack upon 
the Mysore country. The time and extent of those supplies depend upon 
your Lordship in council, but the assistance which we require in troops 


* See p. 64. 


1798. GENERAL HARRIS. 215 


lic duty compelled me to return an answer which it was very 
painful to me to dictate. ,I can only repeat my sincere as- 
surances already offered to you on a similar occasion, that no 
unfavourable impression of your intentions, nor abatement of 


is so great, as must necessarily fix the period of our offensive operations 
to a very distant day; and, as the demolition of Ossoor and Bangalore, 
leave us no object of intermediate attack; we can have no means of 
making any formidable impression upon Tippoo Sultaun, but by the 
siege of his capital itself. This from the circumstance we have already 
stated, as well as from the experience of the last war, must, inevitably, 
be a work of time. : 

Mean while our preparations shall go on, with every precaution to pre- 
vent the discovery of their object ; yet we cannot be sanguine that a mat- 
ter of such necessary publicity as the march and equipment of an army, 
which can have no object but hostility against Tippoo, could escape that 
prince’s vigilance. 

If, upon this discovery, he should pursue the line of policy pointed out 
by his father, (and there is too much reason to expect, from the demoli- 
tion of Bangalore and Ossoor, that this will be his future system of war- 
fare) we apprehend that an immediate invasion of the Carnatic may be 
expected ; and, as his resources are much more prompt than our own, and 
as a great part of his army is supposed to have long been in a state of 
field equipment, we fear that his attack upon us may be expected, before 
we shall be in a condition to meet him. 

Our own army, when equipped, can, from its number, be only defen- 
sive, and its operations confined to the Company’s territories ; while the 
enemy, from the rapidity of his movements, and the superiority of his 
cavalry, will carry devastation throughout the Carnatic, until we may be 
able to fix his attention to his own dominions. Meanwhile the loss of 
revenue in our central districts and the Baramahal is inevitable; while 
the ravage of the country, in the neighbourhood of this presidency, with 
the destruction of the November crop in the Baramahal, will oppose very 
serious obstacles to the equipment of our troops for the invasion of. 
Mysore. ‘ 

Having made the most urgent and repeated applications to you, upon 
the state of our finances, it is unnecessary to recapitulate the subject 
here, but in the discussion of war, a matter of so much moment as 
money, cannot be omitted. It is our duty therefore to apprize you, in 
the most explicit manner, that we must rely, solely and unequivocally, 
upon your Government, for supplies in specie. The official statements 
with which you have been already furnished, shew a very considerable de- 
fect in our resources compared with our expenses, for the current year ; 
and any diminution of our current revenue, by the depredations of the 
enemy, must be followed by the utmost inconvenience, the discount upon 
every species of our paper leaves us to expect no assistance, upon our 
own credit ; and the scarcity of money here, compels us to repeat, in the 
most unequivocal manner, that our means for equipping, as well as for 


216 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO August, 


personal regard and esteem for you, suggested my answer to 
your public letter of the 10th July.. 

I beg you will return my thanks to Captain Malcolm for 
his very able and satisfactory report respecting the state of 
Tippoo Sultaun’s force and preparations for war.* 

I must also request you.to express my gratitude to Major 
Allan for the valuable communications which I have received 
from him on the subject of the passes into the Carnatic. 

Major Beatson has been here for some time, I have re- 
ceived great satisfaction from his knowledge and ability, and 
I feel very much obliged to you for having afforded me the 
opportunity of forming so useful and amiable an acquaint- 
ance. 

I am very sorry that it will not be in my power to spare 
the Bombay frigate for the purpose mentioned to you by 
Admiral Rainier. That ship will be employed in convoying 
the troops to Masulipatam, and when that service shall have 
been accomplished, my intention is to order her to cruize in 
company with the Nonsuch off the Sand heads, for the pro- 
tection of the trade of Bengal during the north-east monsoon. 

I shall give an early consideration to the affairs of Tanjore ; 
I have not yet been able to form my opinion on that subject. 


I have the honour to be, &c. 
Mornineron. 


paying the army, must depend upon the supplies of treasure which your 
Lordship in council may be able to send from Bengal. 

We shall do ourselves the honour of enclosing, for your information, 
as soon as it can be prepared, a statement of the monthly expense of our 
own army in the-field, together with a statement of the balance of cash 
in our treasury. 

Though we have thought it our duty to represent the difficulties in 
which we may be involved, by the immediate execution of your Lordship’s 
orders, we beg leave to repeat our assurances of the most hearty co- 
operation, in any plan which you may determine to adopt, in the present 
conjuncture, 

We have the honour to be, 
My Lord, your Lordship’s, 
Most obedient, humble servants, 
GeonrcE Harris. 
Epvwarp Saunvers. 
E. H. FAuLorirenp. 


* See Appendix. 


1798. GENERAL HARRIS, 217 


No. LL 
The Earl of Mornington to General Harris. 


My Dear Sir, Fort William, 19th August, 1798. 
I have just now received your letter of the 7th of August,* 
with the extracts inclosed ;+ and I am anxious to avail myself 


* See page 155. 
t The following is the Minute of General Harris, referred to :— 


Secret Department, 31st July, 1798. 

The President lays before the Board a letter from Bengal, which he 
recommends may not at present be entered on the records, directing that 
immediate orders may be issued for assembling, with all practicable des- 
patch, two native regiments of infantry, with field pieces, each battalion 
completed to the war strength of 1,000 men, and intimating that it is 
probable this force will shortly be required for the service of the Nizam. 

The President delivers in the following Minute :— 

If the present order had been given after the receipt of our letter to the 
Supreme Government of the 10th instant, there would have been no cause 
to doubt what conduct we ought to pursue, because the Governor General 
in Council would have issued his directions under a knowledge of the dif- 
ficulties in which we should be involved by the execution of his first in- 
structions for assembling the coast army, with the ultimate view of march- 
ing to Seringapatam. 

In that letter we stated our utter inability to undertake any offensive 
operation; that our whole collected force was barely sufficient to repel 
any invasion of our own territories; and that, without large and imme- 
diate supplies of money, we could not put it in a state of field equipment, 
it follows, then, that by preparing and detaching so large a part of our 
army (and which it is probable will shortly be entirely withdrawn from 
our protection) as 4,000 effective native infantry, with their complement 
of field artillery, that a very serious reduction is made from our means of 
defence, and that the very measure which we were before scarcely i ina 

condition to repel is proportionably provoked. 

The question, therefore, for our consideration is, whether these conse- 
quences shall be risked by the execution of the present order. 

If I believed that the stipulated force was required only for the ordi- 
nary service of the Nizam, I would not hesitate to recommend that the 
execution of the order should be suspended until a reply was received to 
the representation which has been made to the Supreme Government of 
our difficulties; but, judging from the very pressing. private request of 
the Earl of Mornington, that the detachment may be equipped with the 
utmost promptitude and caution, that its formation is of great importance 
to the British interests in India, I should deem myself culpable if I 
thwarted any general plan which may have been formed by the Supreme 
Government, by delaying, for a moment, to propose to the Board the mode 


218 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO August, 


of the earliest opportunity to return you my most cordial 
thanks for the zeal and resolution with which you have car- 
ried my suggestions into effect; my letter of the 16th July 
will have informed you how essential a plan to the very exist- 
ence of the British empire in India would have been defeated 
if your honorable firmness had not overcome the suggestions 
of an opposition, which would have persuaded you to violate 
the law under the specious pretence of executing the spirit 
by disobeying the letter of the orders of the Governor-General 
in Council. This opposition I am résolved to crush; I pos- 
sess sufficient powers to do so; and I will exert those powers 
to the extreme point of their extent, rather than suffer the 
smallest particle of my plans for the public service to be frus- 
trated by such unworthy means. With this view, my earnest 
request to you is, that you will communicate to me without 
delay the names of those who have arrogated to themselves the 
power of governing the empire committed to my charge: the 
ignorance and weakness of this self-created government have 
already appeared to you from the papers which I transmitted to 
you on the 18th July. In addition to that information, I have 
now the satisfaction to tell you, that the Nizam has agreed 
unequivocally to cooperate with us in the event of a war with 
Tippoo, and has also cordially united in all the measures 
which I have proposed for the relief of the Peishwa. In the 
meanwhile a revolt in the army of Scindiah has so reduced 
his power, that there remains no doubt of the complete resto- 
ration of the Peishwa, and consequently of the immediate 
revival of our defensive alliances against Tippoo in (at least) 


which I deem most proper for the speedy and effectual accomplishment of 
the part with which we are charged. 

Iam aware that difficulties of great magnitude oppose the arrangement 
I shall propose, but feeling that they ought to yield to the more imme- 
diate object in view, it would be superfluous to dwell upon them, and cul- 
pable to shrink from the responsibility which may attach to us in meeting 
them, 

The public and private promise of a supply from Bengal in specie 
lessems, my apprehensions on this account; and as I have again, in the 
most urgent terms, pressed the immediate necessity of its performance, 
I am congjdent that his Lordship in Council will -be as forward to afford 
effectual telief to our particular difficulties, as we may be to: manifest a 
cordial cooperation in his plans for the general safety. 

Geo. Harris. 


1798, COLONEL WILLIAM PALMER. 219 


their original vigour. The dismission of the French corps at 
Hyderabad will take place immediately after the arrival of 
our increased subsidiary force. I leave it to you to judge 
whether this state of the Courts of Poonah and Hyderabad, 
cemented by my authority and power, is more likely to tempt 
Tippoo to move into the Carnatic, or to turn his eyes seri- 
ously to the danger of his own dominions. It is extremely 
necessary that you should not divulge this information, until 
I am enabled to transmit you a more exact state of our nego- 
ciations, which I will not fail to do by the first favourable op- 
portunity. The Virginia will sail to-morrow or the next day 
with about 13 or 14 lacs of rupees. The marine battalion 
will embark in a day or two. You may rely on my employing 
every exertion to send you a further supply of treasure and 
of men, if the latter should become necessary. 

I am not aware of having omitted any point of importance 
on which you appear to desire my opinion, excepting that 
part of your letter which relates to the necessity of the Com- 
mander-in-Chief and myself visiting Fort St. George in the 
event of a war; the Commander-in-Chief long ago expressed 
to me his intention to take the command on the coast in that 
event; and I shall not hesitate one moment (if necessity 
should require such a step) in carrying to the coast such 
power as shall soon repress the faction, which I perceive is 
already formed for the purpose of embarrassing my Govern- 
ment. Indeed I will not wait the moment of war (which I 
trust is distant), if the spirit which has arisen at Madras 
should appear to gain strength; the activity of that spirit will 
very soon bring me to Fort St. George. 


Tam, &c. Morninoton, 
No. LII. 
The Earl of Mornington to Colonel William Palmer. 
Sir, August 19th 1798. 


Your letter No. 31, dated the 26th July, reached me 
yesterday. The present situation of Scindiah, will probably 
dispose him to consider our interposition rather in the light 
of a friendly and seasonable assistance, than in that of. an 
authoritative act of compulsion. 


220 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO August, 


Under such circumstances, which I am. persuaded you will 
improve to the utmost possible degree of advantage, I think 
it might be practicable to enter into details with respect to: 
the precautions, which become every day more necessary for 
the defence of Scindiah’s dominions, against the threatened 
invasion of Zemaun Shah. You are aware, that the injustice 
and violence of Scindiah have disgusted the Rajahs of Jyna- 
gur and Joodipour, and other Chiefs of the Rajahpoot tribe, 
who would form most useful allies to Scindiah and to the 
Company, in the event of the Shah’s approach. I wish you 
to endeavour to convince Scindiah of his deep interest in 
making such early concessions to the Rajahpoots, as may 
conciliate them towards him; at present I am afraid that his 
outrages have thrown them into the scale of their natural 
enemy Zemaun Shah, and have entirely separated them from 
the Mahratta interest, to which they are attached by every 
natural tie. I enclose a paper of intelligence respecting Ze- 
maun Shah, which appears more authentic than any which 
has hitherto reached me. By a copy which I have received 
of the Persian paper, delivered by Captain Kirkpatrick to 
Azim ul Omra, I find that Captain Kirkpatrick has departed 
very widely both from the spirit and letter of my instructions 
to him. Not having yet received from him any explanation . 
of the motives of his conduct, I cannot yet form my judgment 
upon it; but it is necessary that you should take the earliest 
precautions against the effect to be apprehended from two 
passages in the Persian paper, to which I have adverted. 
The first relates to Tippoo Sultaun, with whom it would be . 
supposed from the tenor of that paper, that war was in my 
opinion become not only inevitable, but desirable. The pri- 
mary object of all my present measures is to prevent war, by 
convincing Tippoo on the one hand, that we are perfectly 
prepared to meet him in the field, and on the other, that we 
are equally ready to accept of a just and moderate satisfac- 
tion for his late infraction of treaty. 

The second passage in Captain Kirkpatrick’s paper, from 
which I apprehend mischief, is that, which states in such 
strong terms, my determination to use compulsory measures 
against Scijndiah; my instructions on this head appear to me 
to be sufficiently intelligible. My wish and expectation al- 
ways has been, that measures of conciliation might effect all 


1798. CAPTAIN KIRKPATRICK. 221 


that I require from Scindiah, with considerable advantage to 
his own genuine interests; and I have authorized you to re- 
sort to compulsion in the last, and I trust improbable, extre- 
mity. 

You will bear these observations in your mind, in whatever 
conversations or papers shall pass during the course of this 
negociation. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 
Mornineron. 


P.S. I have just now received Captain Kirkpatrick’s ac- 
count of his motives for varying and extending my proposi- 
tions. He has judged rightly in extending the exclusion of 
the French to all Europeans excepting the British. You 
will advert to this circumstance with reference to the state of 
Poonah. 


No. LI. 
(By Express.) 
The Earl of Mornington to Captain Kirkpatrick. 


Sir, Fort William, 20th August, 1798. 

I have received your letters of the 31st July, and 2nd of 
August. 

I shall forward to you by the next post, a public letter con- 
taining my observations on their contents. But I cannot 
delay the communication of my anxiety on some points, con- 
tained in the Persian paper, delivered by you to Azim ul 
Omra. 

From the tenor of that paper, it would be supposed, that 
war with Tippoo was in my opinion, become not only inevita- 
ble but desirable. 

The primary object of all my present measures is to pre- 
vent war, by convincing Tippoo, on the one hand, that we 
are perfectly prepared to meet him in the field; and on the 
other, that we are equally ready to accept of a just and mo- 
derate satisfaction for his late infraction of treaty. 

The manner in which that paper states my determination 
to use compulsory measures against Scindiah, is very different 
from the spirit of my instructions to Colonel Palmer. My 
wish and expectation always has been, that measures of con- 
ciliation might effect all that I require from Scindiah, with 


222 LORD CLIVE TO ° August, 


considerable advantage to his own genuine interests; and I 
have authorized Colonel Palmer to resort to compulsion in 
the last, and I trust improbable, extremity. But from your 
Persian paper it would be inferred, that I expected a contest 
with Scindiah, and that [I was not desirous of conciliating 
that Chief. 

You will bear these observations in mind, and you will en- 
deavour to remove impressions from which I apprehend the 
most serious mischief. 

Without at present adverting to the propriety of your hav- 
ing made any alterationin the propositions, which I directed 
you to make to Azim ul Omra, I shall confine myself to ap- 
prizing you, that I do not feel any material objection to any 
alterations which you have made in the substance of those 
propositions, excepting that which respects the permanency 
of the new subsidiary engagements. Such a proposition ap- 
pears to me likely to create jealousy in the mind of the 
Nizam, without securing any possible advantage to us. You 
will therefore withdraw it, if it should have occasioned any 
objection. 

I do not yet think it prudent to disclose the nature of the 
‘demand of satisfaction, which I have it in contemplation to 
make from Tippoo; and I am therefore anxious, that you 
should take an early occasion of removing any impression, 
which may have been made by your suggestions on that 
subject. 

You will not delay your application for the force from Fort 
St. George, in consequence of any difficulty which may have 
arisen, respecting the security for the pay of the new subsi- 
diary force; the great object is to effect the dismission of the 
French force as speedily as possible. 

Tam, &c. 
MornincTon. 


No. LIV. 
Lord Clive to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Lorn; + Fort St. George, 22 August, 1798. 


Having barely had time, under the circumstances of my 
recent arrival, te read your Lordship’s confidential: letters of 


1788. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, 293 


the 16th ultimo, to General Harris, and of 29th* to myself, 
I shall not now presume to enter upon the very important 


* The following is an extract from the letter referred to :— 
The Earl of Mornington to Lord Clive. 


(Most private and confidential.) 
My Lorp, Fort William, July 29th, 1798. 

‘Although I have not the honour of your Lordship’s personal acquaint- 
ance, I trust that my public situation and my anxiety to discharge its 
duties in a satisfactory manner will be a sufficient apology for the liberty 
which I take in troubling you with this letter. 

I learnt the intelligence of your Lordship’s appointment to the Govern- 
ment of Fort St. George with very great pleasure, being convinced that 
the affairs of that Presidency require the vigorous control of a person of. 
your Lordship’s rank and character, and that you will have it in your 
power (as I am persuaded it is your inclination) to render essential ser- 
vice to the interests of the Company, and to confer considerable benefits 
upon the people committed to your peculiar charge. 

For the system of measures which I think it advisable to adopt in the 
present crisis with regard to the defence of the Carnatic, and to the re- 
storation of our alliances, I refer your Lordship to my private correspond- 
ence with General Harris, and to the papers accompanying my last letter 
to him. 

Having frequently considered the state of the Presidency of Fort St. 
George previously to my departure from Europe, and having had the op- 
portunity of correcting, by personal observation, the opinions which I 
had formed at home, I think it my duty to lay before your Lordship, 
without reserve, the final result of my deliberate judgment upon asubject 
equally interesting to yourself and to me. In pursuing the various topics 
connected with this subject, I shall communicate my ideas to your Lord- 
ship with the same degree of confidential freedom which I should use to 
my most intimate friend; being satisfied that your Lordship will not 
suffer communications of so secret a nature to pass beyond your own 
mind; and being assured that you will receive them as the most unequi- 
vocal testimony of my cordial zeal for the prosperity of your administra- 
tion, and of my disposition to afford you every assistance towards the 
maintenance of the dignity, authority, and vigour of your Government. 

The Civil service of the Presidency of Fort St. George is unfortunately 
in a condition very far removed from perfection, and inferior in every re- 
spect to that of Bengal. 

The deficiency of most of the Civil servants at Madras, in the depart- 
ments of revenue, is to be ascribed in a great measure to the system so 
long prevalent of administering the revenues through provincial Chiefs 
and Councils, whose policy it was to confine the means of acquiring a 
knowledge of the nature of the collections within the most narrow chan- 
nels, and who were themselves almost universally under the dominion of 
the Native agents and servants. The whole administration of the Revenue 


224 LORD CLIVE TO he August, 


topics they contain, but content myself for the present, with 
expressing the grateful sense I entertain of the friendly and 


was a scheme of mystery, calculated to embarrass inquiry, and to skreen 
peculation from justice. 

The provision of the commercial investment upon the coast of Coro- 
mandel has also been managed almost exclusively by Native agents and 
contractors ; and while their management shall continue, it cannot be 
expected that the servants of the Company will become conversant with 
the details of the several manufactures, or with the minute circumstances 
which affect the quality of the different fabries. This defective mode of 
administering the revenue and commerce of the Company on the coast 
rendered the study of the languages, customs and laws of the country a 
superfluous, if not an useless, labour; since a servant of the Company 
might reach the most arduous trusts, and might discharge them with as 
much credit as his predecessors had ever enjoyed, without the previous 
application necessary for acquiring any of those branches of knowledge. 
On the other hand, the ignorance of the Company’s civil servants neces- 
sarily threw them into the hands of the native Dubashes, whose destruc- 
tive influence soon produced embarrassments, which led to the sacrifice 
of public trust and duty, and ultimately to the utter subversion of every 
principle of integrity and honour. To these causes must be added the 
continual operation of the intrigues of the Durbars of the Nabob of Arcot 
and of the Rajah of Tanjore. The junior servants I trust, under your 
Lordship’s superintendence, may be encouraged in the study of the 
native languages ; a knowledge of which is indispensably necessary to 
enable them to discharge any important public trust with advantage to 
their employers, or with honour to themselves. With this view, I most 
earnestly recommend it to your Lordship to direct your most vigilant 
attention to the conduct of the junior writers from the earliest period of 
their arrival at Madras. Too many of them fall into early habits of ex- 
travagance, in which they are encouraged by the native Dubashes; and I 
declare to your Lordship my deliberate conviction, that this evil cannot 
be remedied in any other manner than by the personal exertions of the 
Governor himself. 

Lord Cornwallis watched over the conduct and morals of the junior 
servants of the Company in Bengal with the anxiety and solicitude of a 
parent; and the beneficial effects of his laudable care are now visible in 
in every department of this Government. To a person of your Lordship’s 
disposition, this duty will not be irksome. Various opinions have been 
stated to me with respect to the salary of the writers; some persons seem 
to think its present amount sufficient, and that any increase would lead to 
extravagance; while others are of opinion, that it does not afford the 
means of maintaining the writers in a situation of competent affluence. 
I confess that I was not able, during my continuance at Madras, to form 

_a decided opinion upon this important question. I therefore refer it to 
your Lordship’s judgment, being persuaded that you will concur with me 
in feeling that the source of many of the defects in the civil service at 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 225 


unreserved manner, in which you have done me the honour 
to open your correspondence; and with assuring your Lord- 


Madras is to be discovered in the original condition of the writers sent 
out from Europe, and that from the same source must be derived any 
permanent system of improvement. 

I should have observed to your Lordship, that I believe a proper public 
building for the reception of the writers upon their first arrival at Madras, 
would be a very desirable object ; the buildings at present used for that 
purpose are extremely contracted, and, as I was informed, absolutely un- 
inhabitable by any but those of the most vigorous constitution. I would 
also suggest to your Lordship’s consideration, whether it might not be 
proper to increase the salaries of the present offices of Mahratta and 
Persian Translator, and to found offices of a similar description for the 
translation of the various languages, in which the public business is trans- 
acted in different parts of the country subject to your Presidency. A 
measure of this nature would operate as a great encouragement to the 
study of the native languages upon the coast. Your Lordship will per- 
ceive by the directions which I shall speedily forward to you in Council, 
that it is my wish to introduce, in all those countries subject to your Go- 
vernment, which are now in a state to receive such an improvement, that 
system of permanent settlement of revenue, connected with a speedy and 
regular administration of justice, from which such essential benefits have 
been derived in Bengal. I conversed very fully with all the Members of 
the Board of Revenue at Fort St. George on this most interesting subject, 
in which the prosperity and happiness of the whole people committed to 
your particular charge is deeply concerned; and I was convinced by the 
information I received from those respectable Gentlemen, that the sys- 
tem, to which I have adverted, might immediately be introduced into al- 
most every part of your Lordship’s Government with infinite advantage, 
not only to the Native inhabitants, but to the civil service of the Com- 
pany. Iam aware that, at the first institution of the courts of justice, 
it may be very difficult, in the present state of the civil. service of Fort 
St. George, to find a sufficient number of persons properly qualified for 
the several judicial oftices ; but, on the other hand, the institution of such 
offices will open new channels for the ambition, industry and talents of 
your civil servants. The study of the manners, languages, customs, and 
laws of the natives will then become general, and the beneficial effects of 
such an additional incitement to the activity of your servants will soon he 
widely extended, and will gradually produce a supply of persons equal to 
all the duties of the Company’s civil service. 

Before I quit the subject of the state of the civil service at Madras, I 
must beg leave to call your Lordship’s attention to the revision of your 
civil establishments, as directed in my letter in Council of this date, ad- 
dressed to the President in Council of Fort St. George. Every practicable 
reduction of your expenses and augmentation of your revenue will be of 
importance in the present distressed state of the finances of the, Company 
in India, If my information be correct, the proposed establishment of 


VOL. I. Q 


226 LORD CLIVE, TO August, 


ship that [ am entering upon the important duties of my sta- 
tion, with a mind fully impressed of the great advantage 


the courts of justice will not ultimately prove any additional burthen 
upon your finances. 

With respect to the military establishments at Fort St. George, I have 
the satiscfation to declare to your Lordship, that I do not believe there 
‘exists in any part of the world an army more distinguished for its high 
state of discipline, or for the activity, gallantry, and skill of its officers, 
than that which will be under your immediate direction. 

In the ranks of Colonel, Lieutenant-Colonel, and those still inferior, 
you will find many excellent officers. 

The defects in your military establishments, which impede the power 
of putting any considerable portion of your army in motion at a short 
notice, are considered in my letter to your Presidency of the 20th July, 
and in my minute, recorded in the Secret Department at Fort William, 
of the same date, of which I will soon transmit a copy to your Lordship. 

I most earnestly entreat your early and serious attention to the very 
alarming considerations which arise from the view which I have taken of 
this important subject. Your Lordship will receive a more full detail of 
my sentiments on this head from General Harris, who will communicate 
to you all my private correspondence relating to it. I must also take the 
liberty of requesting that you will allow my brother, Colonel Wellesley, 
(whose regiment is now under orders for Fort St. George,) to have the 
‘honour of stating to your Lordship at large my opinions with respect to 
the defence of the Carnatic. 

Your Lordship will have learnt previously to your departure from Eu- 
rope, that I was charged by the Court of Directors to attempt, by means 
of persuasion and advice, to induce his Highness the Nabob of the Car- 
natic to agree to the same modification of the treaty of 1792, which had 
been propesed to him by Lord Hobart. General Harris, and Mr. Lush- 
ington, who acted as my interpreter, will state to your Lordship the means 
‘which I employed to endeavour to accomplish the object of my commis- 
sion; in which I entirely failed: I was equally unsuccessful in my en- 
‘deavours to prevail upon his Highness to make provision for the liquida- 
tion of any part of his debt to the Company ; I am persuaded that it will 
‘ever be wholly impracticable to induce his Highness the Nabob (by means 
of conciliation) to surrender the management of any part of his country 
into the hands of the Company; and I am satisfied that any other means 
would be as foreign to your Lordship’s disposition as they are to mine. 
My fixed rule during my continuance at Madras was, to treat the Nabob 
with the respect due to his rank, with the kindness due to the ancient 
friendship between his family and the Company, and with the delicacy 
demanded by his dependent situation. At the same time I avoided all 
familiarity with him; and I animadverted very fully upon the defects of 
his administration, and upon the extreme impropriety of his late conduct 
with relation te the interests of the Company. I never allowed him to 
utter any invective against Lord Hobart, notwithstanding his various at- 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 297 


which must result from mutual confidence and co-operation, 
and with the intention of shewing the highest deference, and 


tempts, both in public and private, to induce me to listen to a vein of 
abuse, in which his Highness is too apt to indulge himself on that sub- 
ject. You will find his Highness’s disposition to be very far from amiable 
or respectable; he is insincere, mean, and timid; he is however said to 
be humane in his temper; although Lord Hobart has recorded instances, 
which impute to him the guilt of very great cruelty. He is by no means 
deficient in his understanding; I have met with few men who possess 
more address; his abilities however were always exhibited to me in the 
form of low cunning, artifice, and subterfuge. You will find a most viru- 
lent party formed against his Highness amongst a certain description of 
the Company’s servants, civil and military, at Madras. The persons con- 
cerned in this party preserve no bounds of moderation or of decency in 
their public language concerning his Highness’s conduct and character ; 
and if their opinion were suffered to guide the councils of the Govern- 
ment of Fort St. George, there is no degree of public humiliation or dis- 
grace to which his Highness would not be subjected, and scarcely an ex- 
cess of compulsion and violence, which would not be attempted, to extort 
the surrender of his country from him. I must here take the occasion of 
assuring your Lordship, that the character of those measures is wholly 
inconsistent with the acknowledged temper and disposition of Lord Ho- 
bart, whom I have known with the utmost degree of intimacy for many 
years. I shall forward to your Lordship shortly copies of the papers 
which passed between me and the Nabob, together with my observations 
upon them. In the meanwhile, I offer it as my sincere advice to your 
Lordship, not to attempt any immediate negociation with his Highness 
for the surrender of his country; I found his mind in a state of great 
irritation and alarm ; and although I flatter myself that those emotions 
were in some degree abated by my intercourse with him, I can hardly ex- 
pect that he is yet inclined to give favourable attention to any proposition 
for a modification of the treaty of 1792. For my own part, notwithstand- 
ing the anxiety of the Court of Directors upon the subject, I entertain 
very serious doubts whether the Company would gain considerably by the 
surrender of the mortgaged districts. This however is a point, upon 
which I have not yet formed a decided opinion. I must therefore entreat 
your Lordship to turn your attention to it; and as I'am persuaded that 
you will consider the question without passion or prejudice, and that no 
virulence of party will be suffered to warp your judgment, I expect to 
derive considerable advantage from receiving the honour of your opinion. 
With regard to the Nabob’s debt to the Company, I think the present 
moment of general voluntary contribution might offer a favourable oppor- 
tunity for persuading his Highness to pay the whole or part of the new 
cavalry loan ; and I shall speedily forward to your Lordship a letter for 
his Highness, suggesting the propriety of so seasonable a step in the pre- 

sent moment. 
I should here observe, that his Highness expressed great anxiety to be 


228: LORD CLIVE, TO August, 


giving the most cordial support to the measures, of the 
supreme Government. With great consideration and esteem, 


My Lord, &c. 
CLIve. 


allowed to correspond privately with me, but I declined the proposition; 
and your Lordship may be assured, that I will admit of no other mode of 
communication between his Highness and me than the regular channel of 
your Government. 

It is very necessary that we should be prepared to decide the eventual 
question of the succession to the Nabobship in the probable event of his 
Highness’s early death. Your Lordship will have the goodness to ascer- 
tain, with as much accuracy as possible, tlie respective pretensions of 
those who might lay claim to the Musnud in such an event. Upon such 
information as I shall receive from you, we may be enabled to anticipate 
the mischiefs of a disputed succession, and to avoid the disgrace of adopt- 
ing a premature decision, which we might afterwards be compelled to re- 
voke, General Harris will have communicated to you the directions of 
this Government with respect to the succession to the Musnud of Tanjore ; 
aad you will have learnt the manner in which those directions have been 
executed. 1 shall be extremely anxious to receive the report of the com- 
mission, which is to be appointed for enquiring into the real state of Tan- 
jore. Untill that report shall be received, it will be impossible to form a 
permanent system for the improvement of the interests of the Rajah or of 
the Company in that fertile, but harrassed country. I think it necessary 
however to apprize your Lordship, that such information, as I have al- 
ready been enabled to obtain upon this subject, Jeads me to hope that the 
most advantageous arrangement for the interests of the Company will 
prove to be that, which would evidently most redound to their honour, 
and would place the .character of their justice on the most substantial 
foundations. Your Lordship will have anticipated my idea, that the re- 
storation of the whole country to Serfogee under an improved system of 
management, checked by the superintendence of the Government of Fort 
St. George, would produce the most beneficial permanent consequences 
to both parties. It was with this express view that I suggested the policy 
of endeavouring to persuade Serfogee to make a temporary cession of his 
Kingdom to our management; in order that we might provide for him 
(during our temporary possession,) not only such a permanent system of 
administration, as should enable him hereafter to govern his people with 
justice and mildness, but also such funds, as should admit of his making 
the necessary advances for the cultivation of the country, and of his se- 
-curing the regular discharge of his subsidy to the Company. 

A now proceed to that part of my communication with your Lordship, 
whigh,lthough the most delicate and invidious, is perhaps the most ur- 
gently femanded by my public duty, and by the real interest which I take 

in the success of your oe s administration. 

With these sentiments, I shall deliver my unreserved opinion of the 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 229 


characters of such persons as J had an opportunity of knowing at Madras ; 
and I must observe that, although any continuance at Madras was but 
short, I had very frequent opportunities of seeing all the persons of whom 
I shall speak to your Lordship. 

Mr. Webbe, the Secretary of the Government, appeared to me to be a 
man of talents and knowledge ; his integrity I believe to be unblemished. 

Your Lordship will find all the Members of the Board of Revenue 
worthy of confidence ; Mr. Cockburn however deserves particular notice; 
he bears the highest reputation for integrity, talents, and knowledge of 
the business of the country; and I found him fully answerable to his ge- 
neral character. I have very seldom met with a more valuable man in any 
part of the world ; and I take the liberty of recommending him most ear- 
nestly to your Lordship’s attention, as a person upon whom you may rely 
for the most accurate information, and for the soundest and most honest 
opinions, entirely exempt from any taint of passion, prejuttice, or self- 
interest. 

Mr. White is a very deserving and useful man; I understand that he is 
not likely to remain at Madras beyond the present season. 

Mr. Harrington is a gentleman of the highest character for integrity 
and diligence. Your Lordship will find him‘a very valuable public ser- 
vant. His brother is the ablest officer in the Court of Sudder Dewannee 
Adaulut in Bengal, and a person who possesses just pretensions to an 
eminent station in the Judicial Department at this Presidency. Mr. 
Lushington, Secretary to the Board of Revenue, and Private Secretary to 
General Harris, although a very young man, ought to be particularly 
mentioned to your Lordship, as possessing very considerable talents and 
knowledge, united with an uncommon degree of discretion and prudence, 
and with a peculiar propriety of manners. He has paid great attention 
to the study of the Persian language, in which he is a considerable profi- 
cient. He is without exception the most promising young man I saw at 
Madras, and as far as I could judge from continual intercourse with him 
during my stay there, I believe him to possess the soundest principles of 
‘integrity and honour. 

Mr. Nathaniel Kindersley’s character for integrity, ability, and general 
knowledge, is universally established. He appeared to me to stand next 
to Mr. Cockburn in point of consideration at Fort St. George. He has 
however lately adopted the business of agency and private trade, and 
therefore has relinquished to a certain degree the service of the Company, 
and has relaxed that minute attention to the details of business, which 

you will find to be the peculiar characteristic of Mr. Cockburn. 

Colonel Close, the Adjutant-General, is a very able and intelligent man, 
and is perfectly conversant with the Persian language. He is reputed to 
be of a vehement and ardent temper, and inclined to promote measures 
of that character; but I saw no symptom of any such disposition in him. 
The reputation of his integrity is unblemished. 

Captain Malcolm, the Town Major, deserves every degree of counte- 
nance and protection. He is an officer of great worth, of extremely good 
sense, and well acquainted with the country languages; he has turned his 
attention particularly to the study of the political system of India, and to 


230 LORD CLIVE, TO August, 


the relative situations and interests of the several native powers; on this 
subject he is capable of furnishing your Lordship with useful information; 
and you will find him remarkably diligent, active, and zealous in the exe- 
cution of any service with which you may entrust him. He has also the 
advantage of very pleasing and amiable manners. 

In this place I take the liberty of mentioning to your Lordship the 
name of Captain Montgomery, who commands your body guard; he is a 
very worthy and intelligent man. 

Major Allan was a particular friend of Lord Hobart, and I believe him 
to be an intelligent and honourable man: 

The administration of the Company’s Jaghire, under Mr. Lionel Place, 
has been a subject of great animosity and party at Fort St. George. Your 
Lordship’s notice will, of course, be immediately directed to it. Mr. Place 
(whom I did not see at Madras) as I am informed, is a man of considera- 
ble talents, and of great diligence and zeal in the public service. He cer- 
tainly has been engaged in a most invidious and difficult duty, in the 
execution of which he has encountered with great spirit and perseverance 
the combined influence of all the Dubashes of Madras, and has succeeded 
in effecting a considerable augmentation of the produce of the Jaghire. 
On the other hand, I should apprize your Lordship, that repeated com- 
‘plaints were stated to me of his rigorous treatment of the renters and 
cultivators of the soil subject to his authority ; and doubts were suggested 
with réspect to the justice of his settlement of the land revenue. 

T had not sufficient time at Madras to enable me to enter into the in- 
vestigation of the charges against Mr. Place ; and my intention in what 
I have said upon this subject is merely to draw your Lordship’s notice to 
it. The general impression upon niy mind is, that the introduction of 
the Mocurrery system of land revenue would be more desirable, as well 
as more speedily practicable in the Jaghire, than in any other part of the 
Company’s territories on the coast. Having troubled your Lordship with 
so much detail upon the subject of the internal Government of Fort St. 
George, I shall proceed to state some considerations with regard to the 
nature of the relation between that Government and the Governor General 
in Council of Bengal. Your Lordship is, I doubt not, perfectly conver- 
sant with the provisions of the law on this point; I shall therefore advert 
merely to the practical principles resulting from those provisions; and I 
am anxious to explain my sentiments to your Lordship upon this head in 
the earliest period of your Government, not only because the greatest in- 
conveniences have resulted to the public service from misunderstandings 
of the distinct practical duties of the two Governments, but because I, 
know‘that a faction exists at Madras, whose constant endeavour has been 
and will be assiduously employed to foment those misunderstandings into 
a systematic spirit of jealousy and contention. 

All measures relating to the general defence and protection of India, 
to the system of our alliances, and of our negociations or intercourse 
with the native powers, to the levying war or making peace, to the general 
administration of the revenues of all the Presidencies, to the employment 
of the military force, and finally to every point affecting the general in- 
terests whether civil, military, or political of the Company’s possessions, 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, 231 


form the exclusive duties arising out of the superintending power of the 
Governor ‘General in Council. For all measures of this description, he 
alone is responsible; and therefore the duty of the other Presidencies, 
with regard to such measures, consists in a cordial cooperation in the 
execution of that, which it is the peculiar province of the Governor Ge- 
neral in Council to determine. The Governor General being in posses- 
sion of the whole superintendence and control, as well as of the means 
of comprehending in one view the entire state of the Company’s empire 
and trade, and of all the various considerations and circumstances which 
may affect either, must frequently issue instructions, the fundamental 
principles and final scope of which cannot at first sight be fully under- 
stuod by the other Presidencies: in such cases (as well indeed as in 
any of those already described), I am persuaded that your Lordship will 
concur with me in thinking that the duty of the other Presidencies can 
never be to mix direct or indirect censures with their formal obedience 
to the legal authority of the Governor-General in Council: Still less can 
it be their duty, to anticipate his decisions by the premature interpo- 
sition of their opinions and advice in any quarter, where such interfer- 
ence may counteract the success of his general plans, and may introduce 
all the mischiefs and confusion of divided councils, and of conflicting 
authority. The examination of the records of the late Government of Fort 
St. George, will manifest to your Lordship a constant tendency towards 
this fatal error; and even since my arrival in Bengal, I have found it 
necessary to restrain the symptoms of the same disposition in two in- 
stances ; the one a letter written to Admiral Rainier, without any previous 
concert with me, suggesting a plan of operations for his Majesty’s 
squadron entirely incompatible with my views for the general protection 
of our possessions. The other, a letter to me in Council, containing both 
direct and indirect censures of the orders which I have lately issued for 
assembling the army on the coast; a measure indispensably necessary, 
and founded on a variety of reasons, of which the Government of Fort 
St. George could not at that time comprehend either the nature or 
extent. 

Under your Lordship’s administration, I am confident that no such 
embarrassment can ever occur. With the same freedom which I have 
used throughout this letter, I will state to you distinctly the mode in 
which I propose to conduct the intercourse between the two Govern- 
ments, with a view to secure their cordial cooperation, and to preclude 
the possibility of distraction. Every endeavour shall be used on my 

¢ part to communicate to your Lordship the fullest and earliest intelligence 
of the nature and object of any measure which I may have in contempla- 
tion, either with relation to your particular Government, or to the general 
interests of the whole British Empire in India. These communications 
will be made to your Lordship through the channel of my private corres- 
pondence. On the other hand, I make it my earnest request to your 
Lordship, that whenever any such communication shall be delayed, you 
will attribute the delay either to the absolute necessity of the case, or to 
my views of the public service; and that you will therefore have the 


232 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO August, 


goodness to prevent the Government of Fort St. George from proceeding 
to take any steps upon matters belonging to my exclusive responsibility, 
without a full previous communication with me, and without being ap- 
prised of my concurrence. In your Lordship’s private correspondence, I 
trust that your Lordship will permit me to hope for the advantage of your 
unreserved opinion, not only with respect to all matters within your own 
peculiar charge, but to any point which you may think essential to the 
general interests of the British Empire in India; and I assure your Lord- 
ship most sincerely that I shall always receive your private suggestions 
as personal favours. In regulating your public correspondence, I request 
that your Lordship will advert to the suggestions contained in this letter, 
and that you will exclude from the public records every indication of . 
jealousy and counteraction. On my part you will always find a sincere 
disposition in every transaction, both public and private, to consider your 
Lordship’s authority as a part of my ae and to repel every attempt to 
disunite the two Governments. 

By these means I flatter myself that I may be enabled to contribute 
effectual assistance to your Lordship in promoting those important in- 
terests, in the prosperity of which you must feel a natural and hereditary 
concern. It would give me great satisfaction to have the honour of a per- 
sonal interview with you in the early period of your government; such an 
event would greatly contribute to forward the public service. Perhaps 
your Lordship may feel a disposition to visit Plassey during the approach- 
ing cold season in Bengal; if you should find yourself at leisure to make 
such an expedition, I can assure your Lordship that you will be received 
here by the whole settlement and by myself with the marks of distinction 
and respect to which you are on every account entitled, and that you will 
find in the mind of all those entrusted with the administration of these 
opulent and flourishing provinces, a grateful remembrance of the exertions 
to which the Company is indebted for this valuable possession. 

This letter has been copied from my original draft by my brother,* 
who is my private secretary. I would not entrust a paper of so confi- 
dential and secret a nature to any other hand. 


I have the honour to be, with great respect and esteem, 
My Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient and faithful Servant, 
Mornineron. 


* Mr. Henry Wellesley. 


+ 


1798. THE COURT OF DIRECTORS. 233 


‘ No. LV. 
The Earl of Mornington to the Honourable the Court of Directors. 
Hon. Sirs, Fort William, 23d August, 1798. 


I have the honour to inform you, that I have addressed to 
Mr. Secretary Ramsey by this despatch, for the use of your 
Honourable Court, several printed copies of the proceedings 
of a meeting of the British inhabitants at Calcutta, assembled 
on the 17th July, for the purpose of expressing, in an humble 
and dutiful address to his Majesty, their loyalty and attach- 
ment to his royal person and government at this important 
crisis, and also of considering the best mode of promoting 
voluntary contributions in these provinces and their depen- 
dencies, and of remitting the same to Great Britain, in order 
that the amount thereof may be there applied to the public 
service, in such manner as Parliament may direct.* 

In addition to the meeting which has taken place at 
Calcutta, I have the satisfaction to acquaint your Honourable 
Court, that a similar spirit has manifested itself in every part 
of these provinces, not only amongst his Majesty’s troops 
and every description of your civil and military servants, but 
amongst all the Europeans residing under the protection of 
the Company. 

Several of the most respectable native inhabitants of 
Calcutta having signified an earnest desire to take this op- 
portunity of proving their attachment to the interests of the 
British empire, I did not oppose the public expression of 
sentiments so honourable to the reputation of your Govern- 
ments in India. At the same time I think it necessary to 
assure you that the subscription of the natives originated in 
their own spontaneous solicitude for the safety of the British 


* Among the sums subscribed on this occasion at and above 1,0002. 
Sir R. Chambers, Mr. J* Hare, Mr. W. A. Brooke, Sir J. Craig, Major G. 
R. Stuart, 10002. each ; Sir Charles Cockerell, Mr. P. Speke, Mr. W. John- 
son (for W. Cowper), Mr. Stephen Bayard, 10002. annually during the 
war; Sarkis Johannes, 1,200/; Corps of Engineers, 1,250/. annually 
during the war; Lieut.-General Sir A. Clarke, 2,0007. and the Governor 
General 3,000/. annually during the war. Subscriptions from 500/. up- 
wards were very numerous from Natives as well as Europeans; the total 
amount being 130,785/. The Presidencies of Madras and Bombay exhi- 
bited a similar spirit of noble and patriotic feeling. 


234 | THE GOV.-GENERAL IN COUNCIL, TO August, 


empire, and was not suggested by any interference of your 
: servants.- ‘ 

Being persuaded that you would feel great satisfaction in 
receiving these unequivocal testimonies of the,loyalty and 
public spirit of every class and description of the inhabitants 
of these provinces, I thought it my duty to avail myself of the 
earliest opportunity of forwarding an account of the whole 
transaction in the most convenient form. It is my intention 
to transmit the original address to His Majesty by the ship, 
Eurydice, which will be despatched in a few days. By that 
opportunity I propose to submit to your Honourable Court a 
more detailed report of all the circumstances relating to the 
subject of this letter. 

Your Honourable Court will probably have received from 
Fort St. George, and from Bombay, accounts of the proceed- 
ings relative to a voluntary contribution at those Presidencies, 
at both of which it has given me great pleasure to observe 
the prevalence of the same laudable disposition yhich exists 
in every part of these Provinces. : 

T have, &c. 
MornineTon. 


No. LVI. 


To the Government of Fort St. George. 
Fort William, 29th August, 1798. 
We have received your letter of the 3rd instant, in reply 
to our orders of the 13th ultimo,* for assembling a detachment 
.of four thousand men for the service of the Nizam. 
Our Secretary has also laid before us your Secretary’s let- 


* The following is the order from the Governor-General in Council :— 


To the Government of Fort St. George. 
Fort William, 13th July, 1798. 

We think it proper to acquaint you that we deem it probable that a 

. military force will shortly be required from your establishment for the 
service of the Nizam, in addition to the Bengal regiment now stationed 
at Hyderabad. 

You will accordingly give immediate orders for assembling, with all 
practicable despatch, two native regiments of infantry, with field pieces, 
each battalion completed to the war establishment of 1,000 men. 

We must particularly request that an able and experienced officer may 
be selected for the command of this force. 


1798. TIIKE GOVERNMENT OF FORT ST, GEORGE. 935 


ter to him of the same date, enclosing a copy of a minute 
from your President on the subject of that detachment. | - 

The zeal and public spirit which distinguish the sentiments 
of your President, in expressing his anxiety for the speedy 
execution of our orders, demand our warmest acknowledge- 
ments. 


The force should be collected in whatever station in the Company’s 

territories you may deem most eligible for enabling it to reach Hyderabad 
’ with all possible expedition. : 

It is at the same time desirable that the station to be selected for 
assembling the troops should be such as, consistently with the considera- 
tion stated in the preceding paragraph, may be least likely to excite any 
suspicion of their destination. 

We have empowered the Acting Resident at Hyderabad to call for this 
force whenever he may judge it expedient; and you will instruct the 
officer who may be appointed to command it, to hold it in constant readi- 
ness to march to Hyderabad at the requisition of the Acting Resident 
signified to the Commanding Officer. 

On the arrival of the detachment in his Highness’s territories, Lieut.- 
Colonel Hyndman will place himself under the orders of the Commanding 
Ofticer, who will, of course, be a senior officer to Colonel Hyndman. 

The Commanding Officer is to be instructed to conform to all such 
further directions as he may receive from the Acting Resident, as soon as 
the troops shall have entered his Highness’s territories. 

It is of the greatest importance that the object of collecting this force 
should not transpire, you will therefore take such precautions for this 
purpose as you may judge advisable. 

In the event of the two regiments being called for by the Acting Resi- 
dent, we authorize you to take immediate steps for raising two additional 
native regiments of infantry at your Presidency. Should you have reason 
to apprehend any difficulty in furnishing a sufficient force for the per- 
formance of the local military duties in the northern Circars during the 
interval of time which must elapse previously to the completion of the 
new regiments, you will apprize us of your opinions in this respect, and 
if you should express a wish for an additional military force, we propose 
to despatch our marine battalion by sea to the northern Circars: you will 
inform us at what port, in such case, the corps could most conveniently 
be landed. It is likewisé our intention to embark his Majesty’s 33d regi- 
ment for your Presidency, and we direct that you take the earliest oppor- 
tunity after its arrival of sending the men of the 36th regiment to Bengal 
to be drafted into the 76th. It is our intention to communicate to you, 
by an early opportunity, the circumstances which have induced us to issue 
the orders contained in this despatch. 

We are, &c. 
MornincTon. ALURED CLARKE. 
P. Speke. W. Cowper. 


236 THE GOV.-GENERAL IN COUNCIL, TO * August, 


It is matter of great satisfaction to us that the result of your 
deliberations terminated in the necessary steps for assembling 
the force which we had directed you to detach to the northern 
Circars, as any delay in the execution of our orders might 
have occasioned consequences injurious to the British interests 
in India, 

We are, however, concerned to remark the terms in 
which you have expressed your letter of the 3d instant, and 
particularly the 5th paragraph.* In our letter of the 10th 


* The following is the letter :-— 
From the Secret Department to the Earl of Mornington, K.P. 


My Lorn, Fort St. George, 3rd August, 1798. 

We have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter, dated 
13th ult., containing your orders for assembling 4,000 men, in sucha 
situation as we may judge most convenient for their marching to Hyder- 
abad, upon the requisition of the Acting Resident. 

If the representation which we have judged it our duty to make, in our 
letter of the 10th ult., upon the state of our means for military equipment, 
could have come under your Lordship’s consideration, before the issne of 
the present orders, we should have been relieved from a very considerable 
degree of embarrassment, which cannot now but attend our compliance 
with your directions. 

By your Lordship’s letter of the 20th June, we are directed to assemble 
the army under this Presidency, with a view to offensive operations against 
Tippoo Sultaun ; in our reply to that letter, we have shewn that the whole 
force we can assemble is barely equal to defensive operations, in the 
event of a war with Tippoo; and that we are destitute of means for equip- 
ping it, without large supplies from Bengal. 

‘ By your Lordship’s present orders, we are directed to assemble a body 
of 4,000 men in the Guntoor Circar, which we have not the means of 
doing without detaching a very considerable proportion of our defensive 
army. 

On the one hand we have your Lordship’s positive orders for assembling 
an army for defeating the hostile designs of Tippoo, for the execution of 
which he appears to the Supreme Government to have taken preliminary 
measures ; on the other, we have also your Lordship’s positive orders for 
furnishing a large proportion of our force for the service of his Highness 
the Nizam. As your Lordship’s last orders do not advert to the object 
of the first, we conclude you look upon them as distinct objects ; but, 
being committed to the first by the designs of the enemy, as well as our 
own preparations, we are reduced to the necessity either of crippling those 
preparations, which cannot be done without considerable danger, or of 
disobeying your positive orders, and thereby defeating perhaps your object 
in equipping a detachment fer Hyderabad. 

_ If we believed that this force was required only for the ordinary service 


1798. THE GOVERNMENT OF FORT ST. GEORGE. 237 


instant, we have already declared our determination to exclude 
from the correspondence between the two Governments all 


of the Nizam, we should not have hesitated to postpone the execution of 
your orders until] you should have determined upon our representation 
of the 10th ultimo; but having reason to believe, from the urgency with 
which our President informs us, that Lord Mornington has pressed the 
equipment of this detachment, that the formation of it is of great im-. 
portance to the British interests in India, and being satisfied, at the same 
time, upon the opinion of Lieutenant General Harris, that our remaining 
force is still equal to cope with the army of Tippoo in the field, we have 
chosen to risk the diminution of that force, rather than disappoint your 
Lordship’s arrangements of the Soubah’s Court. 

We have accordingly issued the necessary orders for assembling four 
battalions of native infantry completely equipped for field service, in the 
neighbourhood of Innacoondah in the Guntoor Cirear ; which situation 
we have selected as most suited to the directions of your Lordship in 
Council, and as soon as it may be in a condition to move, we shall issue 
the further orders requisite for the object of its destination. 

Having thus complied with the orders of your Lordship in Council, we 
deem it our difty to apprize you that the arrangements which have in 
consequence become necessary, have deprived us of three battalions of 
native infantry which we had destined for field service, in event of war 
with Tippoo Sultaun ; and which we have not the immediate means of 
replacing ; we shall hereafter forward an exact return of the troops which 
are about to assemble at Wallajabad, for the formation of our defensive 
army, as soon as it can be prepared. 

Having repeatedly and unequivocally urged upon your Lordship’s con- 
sideration our financial embarrassments, we shall not now revive the sub- 
ject farther than by informing you that the whole of our present arrange- 
ment has been made upon the confident assurance of a very large supply 
of specie by his Majesty’s ship La Virginie in the course of this month; 
and that any disappointment of those hopes must put a stop, if not to the 
military pay of our troops, at least to every exertion for their equipment. 

Having detached so considerable a part of our army, we have judged it 
necessary to the safety of these territories, that the remainder should in- 
stantly be put in a state to take the field at a moment’s warning, we have 
therefore issued the orders necessary for providing draft and carriage 
cattle for the field train, for the provisions, for the stores, and for the 
camp equipage of the centre army; and though it is not our immediate 
intention to encamp them, we shall yet make such a disposition as to ad- 
mit of their junction without danger or delay. 

These several measures have considerably enhanced the expenses of our 
military establishment ; we have, in consequence, stopped all further ad- 
vances for the investment, and have ordered the greatest part of our civil 
revenue and commercial establishments to be discharged by bills on 
Bengal. 

We shall hereafter avail ourselves of the latitude you have left us for 


238 THE GOV.-GENERAL IN COUNCIL, TO * August, 


discussions of the nature contained in that paragraph, and 
we trust that our suggestions on this subject will be observed 
in your future correspondence with us. 

We have now to acquaint you that we have embarked for 
your Presidency on his Majesty’s ships La Virginie the sum 
of thirteen lacs of rupees, and it is our intention to send you 
a further supply in specie of not less than seven lacs by the 
Bombay Frigate. 

His Majesty’s 33rd regiment has been embarked in the 
Fitzwilliam, Busbridge, Camden, and Henry Dundas. 

Our marine battalion will embark for Masulipatam on the 
Bombay Frigate, the Peggy and Princess Charlotte, country 
ships; we have further resolved to send you a detachment of 
artillery, consisting of one company of Europeans, and two 
companies of Lascars, with six field pieces. This detach- 
ment will be embarked on the Caledonia, and will also be 
landed at Masulipatam. 

The ships with the marine battalion and the detachment of 
artillery will, we trust, be clear of the river by the Ist of next 
month. 


raising two additional regiments on the establishment ; meanwhile we 
have ordered our revenue corps in the northern Circar to be completed 
to 600 men each; and we beg leave to apprize you that, if it should here- 
after be judged advisable to send round your marine battalion, it will be 
most convenient to us that they should be landed at Masulipatam. 

In the present circumstances of our army, we think it our duty to state, 
in the most explicit manner, that we could not part with his Majesty’s 
36th regiment without the most positive” injury to the public service. 
His Majesty’s 12th and 33d regiments, and 25th dragoons, being new re- 
giments, and unused to the climate, cannot be expected to escape the 
invariable condition of all new levies upon taking the field; the expe- 
rience, therefore, of the officers, with the hardiness and discipline of the 
men, of the 36th regiment, are now become inestimable, and we have no 
hesitation in saying that,-under the appearance of impending hostility, 
the loss of that gallant and efficient corps cannot be replaced. 

Agreeably to the intimation contained in our letter of the 10th July, 
we have now the honour to enclose a statement of the monthly expense 
of our centre army, and of the balance of cash this day in our Treasury. 
Your Lordship will observe, that the expenses of the army at Wallajabad 
are calculated upon the returns transmitted to you on the J0th ult. 

We have the honour to be, my Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient humble Servants, 
Geo. Harais. 
Epwon. SaunpEps. 


1798. “THE GOVERNMENT OF FORT ST. GEORGE. 239 


We entirely approve of your having determined to put 
your army in a state to take the field at a moment’s warning, 
and of your making such a disposition of the several corps as 
will enable them to form a junction without danger or delay. 

We also approve of the temporary suspension of your ad- 
vances for your investment, of the provision which you have 
made for discharging a part of your civil revenue and com- 
mercial establishments by bills on Bengal, and of the orders 
which you have given for completing your revenue corps in 
the northern Circars to the establishment of 600 men. 

We think it indispensably necessary to desire that the men 
of the 36th regiment may be sent to Bengal, agreeably to our 
former directions, by the first opportunity which may offer 
after the arrival of the 33d at Fort St. George, and that the 
other directions given respecting the remainder of the 36th, 
may be complied with. 

We are perfectly sensible of the long and gallant services 
of the 36th regiment, but adverting to the period of the 
arrival in India of the 12th and the 33d regiments, and to the 
services on which they have been repeatedly employed in 
various parts of the world, with credit to themselves and 
benefit to their country, we are of opinion that those corps 
cannot justly be considered as new levies unused to the cli- 
mate of India. 

In order, however, to afford you every practicable degree 
of assistance in the present moment, we authorize you to de- 
tain his Majesty’s 29th regiment of dragoons on its arrival at 
Fort St. George, if you "should deem its services absolutely 
necessary. This regiment may be employed on garrison duty, 
and will enable you to add the greater part of the European 
regiment now in garrison to your force in the field. 


We have the honour to be, &c. 


[The letter of the 10th August, with the Enclosures referred 
to, is as follows :— 


240 THE GOV.-GENERAL IN COUNCIL, TO August, 


No. LVII. 


From the Governor-General in Council to the Hon, Lient.-General Harris, 
Governor in Council, Fort St. George. - 


Hon. Sir, Fort William, 10th August, 1798. 

We have had the honor to receive your letter of the 10th 
July, in answer to ours of the 20th June.* 

We approve the assurances which you have expressed of 
your disposition to cooperate cordially with us in such mea- 
sures as we may judge expedient for frustrating the designs 
of the enemy, and we have no doubt that you will discharge, 


* The following is the letter of the 20th June :— 


From the Governor General in Council to the Hon. Lieut -General Harris, 
Governor in Council of Fort St. George. 


Hon. Sir, Fort William, June 20, 1798, 

The Governor General having communicated to us an authenticated 
copy of a proclamation, published by the Governor of Mauritius during 
the residence of two Ambassadors from Tippoo Sultaun at that island, 
we now transmit you a copy of the same. 

From this proclamation, combined with every circumstance attending 
its publication, it appears that Tippoo Sultaun has not only openly avowed 
a design of commencing offensive war against the British possessions in 
India, but has actually taken the preliminary steps for putting that design 
into execution. 

The Governor General in Council is at present occupied in deliberating 
upon the general system of measures which it may be advisable to adopt 
for the purpose of frustrating the united efforts of ‘Tippoo and of France, 
the result will be communicated to you by the earliest opportunity. 

In the meanwhile, however, it is a requisite precaution to make such 
seasonable preparations as may enable us to act with effect under any 
circumstances which may arise. 

We therefore direct that the army under the orders of your Govern- 
ment be assembled with the utmost degree of expedition, at such station 
as you shall judge most eligible for the. purpose of proceeding directly to 
Seringapatam, if such a measure should hereafter be deemed necessary. 

You will be careful not to disclose the object of the preparations which 
we have hereby directed you oo make, until you shall receive further in- 
structions from us. 

It is ony intention to forward a supply in specie to Fort St. George by 
His Majesty’ sship, LaVirginie, as soon as that ship shall be ready to sail. 


We have the honour to be, &c. 
Morwnineton. A. CLARrKg,' 
P. SpEKE. W. Cowren. 


1798. GENERAL HARRIS. eo, RA 


with alacrity and zeal, this indispensable part of your public © 
duty. 

In our letter of the 20th July,* we have adverted to those. 
causes which jmpede the movement of your army in a con- 


* The following is the Minute and Letter of the 20th July, 1798 :-— 
Minute of the Earl of Mornington. 


Fort William, July 20, 1798. 

When the proclamation published by the Governor of Mauritius made 
its first appearance in Bengal, I thought it my duty to apprize the Go- 
vernor of Fort St. George, that if that extraordinary publication should 
prove authentic, it must lead to discussions of a serious nature between 
this Government, and Tippoo Sultaun; and I suggested the necessity of 
taking the earliest DISPEL. steps towards the assembly of the army 
upon the coast. 

When the authenticity of the pivelamation became established, I 
thought it my duty not only to direct the assembly of the army, but to 
ascertain how soon that force might be enabled to move, either for the 
purposes of offence or defence. 

With this view, I transmitted several questions to the Governor of Fort 
St. George, upon which I desired to obtain his opinion, as well as that 
of the principal military authorities upon the coast, and I requested that, 
an officer of experience and ability, might be despatched to this Presi- 
dency with the answers to my several questions, and with such further 
information, as might tend to throw light upon the subject. 

The Governor of Fort St. George, without delay, returned the answer 
to my questions by the Bombay frigate, and an officer was directed to ac- 
company the despatch, but he was prevented by an accident, from em- 
barking on that ship. 

The substance of the communications received from the Governor of 
Fort St. George, is of a nature .so important, and alarming, that I have 
felt it my indispensable duty to lay it immediately before the board. 

From these communications, it appears to be the opinion of the Adju- 
tant General, Lieutenant Colonel Close, that the force which could be 
assembled immediately upon the coast, could not be equal to more than 
defensive operations, and that the cattle necessary to enable that force to 
move, even for purposes of defence, could not be collected before the 
commencement of the ensuing year. 

The opinions of the Governor of Fort St. George, and of other respect- 
able authorities at that Presidency, differ materially from that of Colonel 
Close, in stating, that sufficient cattle might be procured to enable the 
army to move for defensive purposes, within three months. 

Thus it appears, that the shortest period of time within which the army 
on the coast can be put in motion, even for purposes of defence, is three 
months, according to some respectable authorities, and six months accord- 
ing to that of the Adjutant General ; whose official situation, must render 
him peculiarly competent to form a judgment on the question. 


VOL. I. R 


249 THE GOV.-GENERAL IN COUNCIL, TO August, 


juncture, when, according to your information, a great part 
of the army of Tippoo Sultaun has long been in a state of 
equipment for the field. We expect to receive from you, with 


It is impossible for any human foresight to ascertain the precise time, 
when an attack from Tippoo may be expected. 

But it is a matter of public notoriety, that he will attack the Carnatic, 
whenever circumstances shall appear to favour his design. 

If in consequence of his alliance with the French, he had received the 
aid of one or two regiments, either from the Mauritius, or from France, 
there is every reason to suppose, that he would immediately have attempt- 
ed an irruption into the Carnatic, with the whole strength of his regular 
cavalry, which although diminished, is still considerable. 

To this force would pfobably have been added numerous bodies of irre- 
gular troops. : 

The peculiar character of this force has always been the rapidity of its 
movements; and it is well known that a large portion of Tippoo’s army, 
is constantly maintained in a state of preparation for the field. 

To counteract such an enemy, and to avert the devastation which must 
attend the first inroad of his army, our protecting force should be so con- 
stituted, as to be capable of meeting his attack by movements equally 
rapid. 

The present constitution of our force upon the coast, does not appear 
to be founded on this principle. 

Tippoo’s preparations are believed to be such as to enable him to move 
at any time with facility and celerity, even for the purposes of offence, 
while the condition of our protecting force, will not admit of its moving 
éven for purposes of defence, within a shorter period of time than three, 
or according to the Adjutant General, than six months. 

Our army upon the coast under suck circumstances, must be deemed, 
notwithstanding its high state of discipline, and the acknowledged gal- 
lantry, activity and skill of its officers, nearly disqualified for the primary 
object of its institution—~ The defence of the Carnatic, against a sudden 
invasion.” 

It is now evident, that if Tippoo had succeeded in obtaining the object 
of his late Embassy to the Isle of France, no obstacle could have been 
opposed to his progress in the Carnatic for many months. 

My enquiries have naturally been directed to ascertain the causes which 
oceasion so alarming a difference between the state of our army upon the 
coast, and of that of Tippoo; with relation to their respective powers of 
moving at a short notice. The result of the consideration which I have 
given to this subject, leads me to believe that the radical defects in the 
constitution of the army on the coast, which must always retard its 
equipment Yor the field, are these ; the want of a permanent establish- 
ment of draft bullocks ; the want of a regular system for the speedy col- 
lection of carriage bullocks from the country, the want of established 
stores of’grain, and of other supplies necessary for the provision of an 
army in the field; the want of proper regulations for providing camp 


1798. GENERAL HARRIS. 2A3 


as much despatch as the nature of the subject will admit, 
such further advices as may enable us, in concert with you, to 
frame a permanent system for the correction of those defects 


equipage; and lastly, the want of a regularly established train of artil- 
lery, with all its proper equipments. 

The motives which prevented Government from providing the army 
upon the coast, with the several establishments in which it is now defi- 
cient, have certainly proceeded from an anxiety to limit the military 
charges of the Presidency of Fort St. George. 

It cannot be denied that any effectual improvement of these deficient 
establishments, would necessarily he attended with a very heavy expence. 
But it is equally certain, that until that expence be incurred, the army on 
the coast never can possess the power of making a forward movement at 
a short notice ; under these circumstances, it is a most improvident sys- 
tem of economy, to submit to the expence of maintaining so large an 
army, while we withhold the necessary means of putting a proportion of 
it in motion upon any sudden emergency. 

The policy has been quite different in Bengal, where the part of the 
force destined for the immediate protection of the country, is always con- 
sidered as actually in the field, and is equipped for undertaking at the 
shortest warning any operations either offensive, or defensive; yet Ben- 
gal is undoubtedly the part of our possessions in India, the least exposed 
to any sudden attack. 

The nature of our establishment in India, and the rapid changes which 
arise in the political situations of the Native Powers, have been generally 
acknowledged to require that we should constantly be in a state of pre- 
paration for war; this acknowledged principle has evidently formed the 
basis of the whole system of our military establishments in India, which 
it has been our fixed policy to maintain upon a seale in point of numbers, 
greatly exceeding a peace establishment. 

The same principle necessarily demands that a large proportion of our 
army should be always in readiness for active service ; but that principle 
applies with peculiar force te our army upon the coast, which is destined 
to oppose the attacks of our most active and implacable (if not our only) 
enemy, amongst the native powers of India. 

These considerations have determined me to encounter the expense 
which must be incurred in providing a lasting security against the future 
return of that danger to which the Carnatic is now, and for some time 
past has been, exposed. 

The measures which are now taking for the assembling of the army 
will contribute to lay the foundation of a permanent system for the cor- 
rection of the defects in the several departments of the military establish- 
ments upon the coast. 

Although my opinion is already in a great measure formed with respect 
to the nature of the obstacles which impede the movement of the army 
upon the coast, F do not think it advisable to propose any detailed plan 


244. THE GOV.-GENERAL IN COUNCIL, To August, 


in your military establishments which induce you to appre- 
hend that an attack from Tippoo Sultaun may be expected 
before you can be in a condition to meet him, even for the 
purpose of defending the Carnatic. 


upon that subject untill I shall have received the formal opinion of the 
Government of Fort St. George. , 

I therefore propose that the President in Council at Fort St. George be 
directed to prepare and transmit to me in Countil, with all practicable 
despatch, a plan for enabling a large proportion of the army on the coast 
to be in constant readiness to move against an enemy on a sudden emer- 
gency. 

That he be further directed to frame that plan with a view to every de- 
gree of economy which shall appear to him consistent with the attainment 
of the principal objects in contemplation. 

In communicating the details of this plan, the Governor of Fort St. 
George will necessarily enumerate the circumstances which now impede 
the movement of the army on the coast. 

T also propose that the President in Council of Fort St. George be di- 
rected to report the actual state of the frontier garrisons and fortresses 
of the Carnatic, and what improvements or repairs may be necessary to 
place them in a respectable posture of defence ; and lastly, I propose that 
the President in Council of Fort St. George be directed to report the pre- 
sent condition of the stores, and magazines of grain, and other provisions, 
as well as of the field and battering train of artillery upon the coast. 

Mornineron, 


The Governor General in Council to Lieutenant General Harris. 


Hon. Sir, Fort William, 20th July, 1798. 


The Right Honourable the Governor General in Council having brought 
under our consideration the defective state of certain branches of your 
military establishments, and the consequent necessity of correcting those 
defects, by the adoption of such permanent arrangements as will at all 
times afford you the means of putting your army in motion at a short no- 
tice, we request that you will prepare and transmit to us, with all practi- 
cable despatch, a plan for enabling a large portion of the army on the 
coast to be in constant readiness to move against an enemy on a sudden 
emergency, and that you will frame that plan with a view to every degree 
of ecqnomy which shall appear to you to be consistent with the attain- 
ment of the principal object in contemplation. 

In cominunicating the details of this plan you.will of course enumerate 
the circumstances which now impede the movement of your army. 

We have also to request that you will report to us the actual state of 
the frontier garrisons and fortresses of the Carnatic, together with such 


1798. GENERAL HARRIS. 245 


You have further considered it to be your duty to suggest 
the ideas to which the immediate execution of our orders has 
given rise in your minds. 

The course of those ideas has led you to suggest to us the 
prudence of remaining unarmed, lest any attempt to counter- 
act the avowed hostility and acknowledged preparations of 
Tippoo Sultaun should draw down his immediate resentment 
upon our unprotected possessions. 

With these views, you have urged a variety of arguments 
against the policy of those measures of precaution “and de- 
fice which we have ordered you to pursue for the purpose 
of enabling your army to meet Tippoo Sultaun in the field, 
and to act “with effect under any circumstances which may 
arise. 

If we thought it proper to enter wifh you into any discus- 
sion of the policy of our late orders, we might refer you to 
the records of your own Government, which furnish more 
than one example of the fatal consequences of neglecting to 
keep pace with the forwardness of the enemy’s equipments, 
and of resting the defence of the Carnatic, in such a crisis as 
the present, on any other security than a state of early and 
active preparation for war. 

But being resolved to exclude all such discussions from 
the correspondence of the two Governments, we shall only 
repeat our confidence in your zealous and speedy execution 
of those parts of the public service which fall within the di- 
rect line of your peculiar duty. 

The assembling the army upon the coast is a measure in- 
dispensably requisite with a view to any system of seasonable 
precaution against the declared projects of ‘Tippoo Sultaun. 
Although we directed that the first station of the army should 


improvement and repairs as may be necessary to place them in a respect- 
able posture of defence. 

We further desire that this report may be accompanied by a statement 
of the present condition of the stores, and magazines of grain, and other 
provisions, as well as of your field and battering trains of artillery. 

We have the honour to be, &e. 
Morninoron, 
ALURED CLARKE, 
Peter SPEKE, 
Witiiam Cowrer. 


246 THE GOV.-GENERAL IN COUNCIL, TO’ August, 


be that which you might judge most eligible for the purpose 
of ptoceeding directly to Seringapatam, if such a measure 
should hereafter be deemed necessary, it does not follow that 
our determination was to undertake the immediate siege of 
that city—such an operation, however, was necessarily to be 
considered among the earliest objects of any war with Mysore. 

In our letter of the 20th June, we enjoined you to conceal 
not the march or equipment, but the destination of your army; 
the sixth paragraph of that letter does not express any ex- 
pectation on our part, that the march or equipment of your 
army could be a matter of secrecy. We trust, however, that 
the object of your preparations has been concealed, being 
persuaded that you will have taken every proper precaution 
for preventing its disclosure. 

We now proceed to give you our instructions with regard 
to the equipment of a battering train sufficient for the siege 
of Seringapatam. 

We are of opinion that it would be advisable at all times 
to hold in readiness, at some advanced station near the fron- 
tier of the Carnatic, the ordnance, ammunition and stores, and 
all other necessary equipments (excepting the cattle) of a train 
of artillery sufficient for the above mentioned purpose; and 
we are further convinced of the necessity of establishing some 
permanent system for collecting the supply of cattle requisite 
for putting such a train of artillery in motion at a short notice. 

At present we desire that all such preparations should be 
made at Fort St. George as may be necessary for placing the 
ordnance in the most perfect state of equipment; timely mea- 
sures should also be taken for securing a supply of cattle 
sufficient for moving the battering train to Seringapatam, if 
such a movement should hereafter form a part of our plan of 
military operations. But we do not propose that the esta- 
blishment of cattle for that purpose should be immediately 
entertained. 

» In our letter of the 20th June, we informed you of our in- 
tention to forward a supply of specie to Fort St. George by 
his Majesty’s ship La Virginie, as soon as that ship should be 
ready to sail; and the state of your finances has occupied a 
considerable portion of our deliberations since the arrival of 
the Right Honourable the Governor General, who directed 
our particular attention to that subject. It was therefore with 


1798. GENERAL HARRIS. 247 


great concern and surprize that we found, in your letter of the 
10th July, your representations on the subject of your pecu- 
niary distresses expressed in a manner tending to convey an 
impression of our having overlooked your embarrassments. 
We are aware that in the event of war your supplies of trea- 
sure must be drawn from Bengal, and in that event you may 
rely on gur omitting no effort to furnish you with the neces- 
sary means of supporting your increased charges. 

With respect ta your representations ropeiding your want 
of troops, we have already informed you of our determination 
to send you immediately his Majesty’s 33d regiment, as well 
as our marine battalion, if you should require it; and it is 
our intention alsa to assist you, if necessary, with an addi- 
.tionai reinforcement of native troops, as soon as the season 
will permit. 

When we shall have received a particular account of the 
expense of your present equipments, we shall provide for 
-defraying it in such a manner as circumstances may appear 
to require. 

The La Virginie will probably sail in the course of ten 
days, and we expect to be able to embark on that ship, a 
sum not exceeding fifteen and not less than ten lacs of rupees. 
The season becoming daily more favourable for the passage 
to Madras, we trust that the unforeseen and unavoidable de- 
lay in the departure of that ship will not ultimately retard her 
arrival at Fort St. George. 

We avail ourselves of this opportunity to acknowledge the 

‘yeceipt of your letter of the J6th ultimo, and shall take mea- 
sures for forwarding the supply of rum, rice, and gunnies, 
which you have desired, with as large a quantity of salt pro- 
visions as it may be possible to procure. 

We have the honour to be, 
Honourable Sir, 
Your most obedient, humble Servants, 
Mornineron, 
ALURED CLARKE, 
Peter SPEKE, 
Wiiiam Cowper, 


248 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO August, 


No. LVIII. 
The Earl of Mornington to his Excellency Rear-Admiral Rainier. 


SIR, Fort William, August 29th, 1798. 


It affords me great satisfaction to learn that my endeavours 
to promote his Majesty’s naval service have been acceptable 
to your Excellency, and I trust that I have been able to give 
material assistance to Captain Cooke in forwarding the re- 
pairs of La Sybille. 

I forward to your Excellency by this despatch the latest 
accounts which I have received from Europe; and I wish to 
call your particular attention to the preparations making by 
the French in the Mediterranean for fitting out a considerable 
naval force with transports for the embarkation of troops. 
This force it was supposed would be ready for sea by the end 
‘of the month of April last. Various accounts are given of 
its destination; the strange report of its being destined for 
the conquest of Egypt, and after the ‘success of that wild 
adventure, for the more extravagant project of conveying aid 
by Suez to Tippoo Sultaun, will not produce much impres- 
‘sion upon a person of your Excellency’s experience. But 
some of my letters state an opinion, to which I am much in- » 
clined to give credit, that at least a part of this force is pro- 
bably destined for an expedition to India by the ordinary 
passage round the Cape of Good Hope. A variety of cir- 
cumstances combine to render it probable that the French 
“may attempt to send a force to India for the joint objects of 
‘reducing the Mauritius, and of aiding Tippoo Sultaun. With 
these sentiments I take the liberty of requesting your Excel- 
lency to direct your most serious attention to the coast of 
Malabar, as soon as you shall deem it expedient to detach 
any part of your squadron to that quarter. 

It would give me great pleasure to assist your Excellency 
in inducing the subscribers to the voluntary contribution at 
this Presidency to appropriate their subscriptions to the dis- 
charge of the expenses of his Majesty’s squadron on this 
station; but.I know that it is the general wish of the sub- 
scribers that their contributions should be sent directly to 
England; and although I concur with your .Excellency in 
thinking that the good of the publie service would be equally 


1798. ADMIRAL RAINIER. ‘249 


‘promoted by applying the money here to the purposes pro- 
posed by you; I fear that any such proposition might be 
disagreeable to the subscribers, and might check the lauda- 
ble zeal which has manifested itself at this crisis.- But your 
Excellency may be assured of my most cordial disposition to 
afferd you at all times every aid which the finances of this 
Government can furnish towards meeting the expenses of 
the fleet. 

I expect every hour authentic information overland with 
regard to the preparations of the French. In the meanwhile 
I request your Excellency to take into consideration any 
mode which might be adopted by me for strengthening your 
force; and I shall be happy to be furnished with your in- 
structions on that subject as soon as possible, in order that 
I may be enabled to take early measures for arming vessels 
or providing stores according to any arrangement which you 
may think fit to suggest. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 
‘ MornineTon. 

P.S. If your Excellency should propose any mode of 
strengthening your force by aid from the Company’s Govern- 
ments, I request you will have the goodness to communicate 
it to the Governments of Madras and Bombay, who will re- 
‘ceive my orders to attend to your Excellency’s suggestions as 
far as relates to their separate Presidencies. 


No. LIX. 


The Earl of Mornington to Captain Kirkpatrick. 

Sir, Fort William, August 31st, 1798. 

The general tenour of the late advices from Europe con- 
vinces me that the rumours of the approach of peace which 
had reached me in the last month were entirely void of foun- 
dation, but my recent intelligence leads me to apprehend that 
the attention of France is now earnestly directed towards 
India, and that at least a part of the armament fitted out in 
‘the Mediterranean may have been destined for an expedition 
to India, not as has been professed, through Egypt and the 
Red Sea, but by the ordinary passage round the Cape of 
Good Hope. With these opinions, I am extremely anxious 


250 _ LORD CLIVE, To Sept. 


for the immediate conclusion of my proposed engagements 
with the Nizam, and for the consequent dismission of M. 
Piron’s corps and the arrest of the officers. If therefore 
any delays at Poonah should have prevented, until this time, 
the termination of the negociation entrusted to you, I desire 
-you will endeavour to conclude it, with all practicable des- 
patch, under the limitations suggested in the 55th paragraph 
of my detailed instructions of the 8th July.* You will, ac- 
cording to the spirit of that paragraph, take care to stipulate 
that the Peishwa shall have an option of acceding hereafter 
to any engagements concluded with the Nizam. 

In the case which I have supposed, of the completion of 
the arrangements at Hyderabad being delayed by the Court 
of Poonah until this letter shall reach you, it will be neces- 
sary to agree to the proposal of Meer Allum, for securing 
the interposition of the Company in all future differences be- 
tween the Courts of Poonah and Hyderabad, under the con- 
dition that the Nizam shall bind himself to fulfil all his en- 
gagements with the Peishwa, and to mbide invariably by the 
award of the Company on every point of dispute which may 
hereafter arise between his Highness and the Government of 
Poonah. 

My letters from Bombay incline me to doubt whether that 
Government will be able immediately to furnish the number 
of troops requisite for the service of the Peishwa. Whenever 
therefore the Peishwa shall have acceded to my propositions, 
and whenever the disbanding of the French force at Hyder- 
abad shall have been accomplished, I desire that you will 
endeavour to prevail upon the Nizam to permit one of the 
British regiments to march directly to Poonah; and I autho- 
rize you to direct the march of a regiment accordingly. The 
regiment sent to Poonah will be replaced as soon as possible. 

The Bombay frigate is to touch at Masulipatam, where 
she is to and our marine battalion, about the middle of Sep- 
tember’y from thence she will proceed to Madras, and will 
return to Masulipatam about the end of September, where 
Captain Sutherland will be directed to remain until he shall 
receive your orders, or shall be driven away by the monsoon. 
My wish is, that all such French officers and privates as may 


* See p. 94. 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 251 


be delivered up to you at Hyderabad, shall be embarked on 
board the Bombay frigate for this Presidency, where they 
can be more securely guarded, and from whence they will 
find a readier passage to Europe than at Fort St. George. 
You will consign the French party to the charge of the com- 
manding officer at Masulipatam in the first instance, and you 
will take care to provide a sufficient escort for their safe con- 
dict to Masulipatam. 

You will direct Captain Sutherland to treat such French 
officers and privates as may be committed to his charge, with 
a due consideration of their respective ranks, and with all the 
attention and kindness consistent with the security of their 
persons; and you will not fail to use all your influence at Hy- 
derabad, for the purpose of securing the property of such 
officers or privates as may be delivered to you from the rapa- 
city of the Ministers, and of preserving it for the use of the 
just proprietors. 

Iam, &c. 
Mornineron. 


No. LX. 
Lord Clive to the Right. Hon, Henry Dundas. 

Dear Sir, Fort St. George, 8th September, 1798. 

My arrival here is too recent for me to hazard opinions 
upon the state of this country, but I think it my duty to bring 
before you a few facts which I judge of the utmost importance 
for you to have the earliest knowledge of the prospect of our 
being engaged in a war with the Sultaun. You have, no 
doubt, been apprized by Lord Mornington of the inadequacy 
of the means which the Carnatic possesses of carrying on an 
immediate war with effect; it is necessary you should know, 
in its fullest extent, our main army consists of not more than 
8,000 fighting men (now in cantonments in the vicinity of 
Walajabad), and cannot be materially strengthened without 
weakening the necessary garrisons, or drawing troops from 
Ceylon. A sufficient reinforcement from Bengal cannot be 
expected before the end of February, a period too late for 
marching to the attack of Seringapatam next spring, the 
time for besieging that place being limited from the middle 
of January to the middle of May. The conclusion drawn 


252 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Sept. 


from these, 1 believe, justly assumed facts is, that Seringa- 
patam is not to be marched against with reasonable grounds 
of success before January 1800. 

The finances of this settlement are in a far more distressing 
situation than you or I had any conception of when I had the 
honour of being with you last March. The debt amounts to 
54 lacs, the interest to above 4 lacs. The last money taken 
up has been by bills upon Bengal at 410 A. Rs. the 100 pa- 
-godas. Twelve per cent. bonds are at 5 per cent. discount; 
8 and 6 per cent. bonds at from 15 to 25 per cent. discount; 
the revenue falling short by at least from 5 to 6 lacs, a de- 
ficit of 13 lacs, an investment of 12 lacs to be provided, our 
credit nearly gone, and an empty Treasury. In this state of 
things we must evidently depend upon supplies from Bengal 
and from Europe in the event of war, and I doubt not but 
every effort will be made to assist us with specie from Leaden- 
hall Street. The facts I have stated are certain, the opi- 
nions are those of the best informed in this place. In the 
event of war my utmost endeavours will be uniformly and 
cordially employed in cooperation with the views of the Su- 
preme Government. More I shall not presume to offer, were 
I to say less Ido not conceive that I should have done my 
duty. 

I have the honour to be, with respect, 
Your faithful and obedient Servant, 


CuiveE. 
No. LXI. 
The Earl of Mornington to Lieut.-Col. W. Palmer, Resident at Poonah. 
Sir, Fort William, September 9, 1798. 


I have received your several letters of the dates and num- 
bers annexed.* 

On a reference to my instructions of the 8th of July,} to- 
gethér*with my first private letter to you, you will find that 
the restoration of Nana to power was never considered by me 
to be essential to the attainment of any of the objects which I 
had in view, although I felt that great advantages might be 


* August 7. No. 34; Aug. Il, No. 35; Aug. 15, No. 36, 
+ See p. 113. 


1798. COLONEL PALMER. 253 


derived from the abilities and experience of Nana, if his in- 
terests could be connected with the success of the proposed 
arrangement, and if his return to power could be rendered 
acceptable to Bajee-Row. 

The communications in your letters, numbered 34, 35 and 
86, leave no doubt on my mind that the abrupt manner in 
which the Peishwa rejected the assistance and mediation, 
which he had before so repeatedly and earnestly solicited, is 
to be ascribed entirely to the jealousy occasioned by the mea- 
sures in which you had engaged for obtaining the release of 
Nana. 

Your negociation with Nana having preceded your first in- 
terview with the Peishwa, and having been made a preliminary 
step to the introduction of my propositions to the Court of 
Poonah, was certainly calculated to excite in the Peishwa a 
suspicion that it was my primary object to restore Nana to his 
former power, and by supporting that minister, to exercise an 
undue influence in the affairs of the Mahratta empire. 

With this impression, and considering the enmity which 
Bajee-Kow and his brothers must bear to Nana, added to 
Emrut Row’s well known jealousy of that minister, it is not 
at all surprising that the Peishwa should have been readily 
induced to risk the issue of his present contest with Scindiah, 
rather than agree to an arrangement which promised to de- 
prive him at once of all authority, and to throw him again 
into the power of his implacable enemy supported by the in- 
fluence of the Company’s Government, and by the presence 
of a large British force. 

I think it necessary, therefore, to desire that you will lose 
no time in endeavouring to remove the jealousy which appears 
to exist on this subject in the Peishwa’s mind. For this pur- 
pose you will state to him expressly that in becoming security 
for Nana’s payment of the ntoney to Scindiah, you were ac- 
tuated solely by your personal respect for that minister. That 
you had received no instructions whatever from me which 
could authorise such an interference in the internal affairs of 
the Peishwa’s Government; and that although I certainly 
should view the restoration of Nana (if effected with the full 
concurrence and cordial consent of the Peishwa), as a mea- 
sure which would tend tu secure the effectual re-establish- 


254 LORD CLIVE, TO Sept. 


ment of the Peishwa’s authority and power, I had never con- 
sidered the interests of Nana to be necessarily connected with 
the propositions which I had directed you to make to the 
Peishwa. Under this explanation, I am persuaded the Peish- 
wa will be sensible that my views are directed to the security 
of the general interests and public engagements of both states, 
and not to the support of any particular party, or minister at 
the Court of Poonah. 

The distressed state of the Peishwa’s affairs appears to me 
to offer the strongest reason to induce me to urge, and him to 
accept, in the present moment the propositions contained in 
my instructions of the 8th of July, I therefore desire that you 
will not suspend the negociation, under an idea of my indiffer- 
ence to its successful conclusion in the actual exigency of the 
Peishwa’s condition. His acceptance of my arbitration, and 
of a subsidiary British force would lead to the success of all 
the objects which I deem most important to the interests of 
the Company in the present conjuncture. 

Notwithstanding that the Peishwa had offered to commu- 
nicate to you his ideas of the nature of the demand to be 
made on Tippoo by the allies, I was much surprised to find 
that you had thought it expedient to urge him for his draft 
of a joint letter to Tippoo, or that you could expect any ad- 
vantage from allowing the Peishwa to take the lead in framing 
the application to be made to that Prince. The aggression 
of Tippoo having been directed more particularly against the 
Company, it is properly their right in the first instance to sug- 
gest the nature of the satisfaction to be required. 

The Company has indeed hitherto always taken the lead in 
every case which has called for the co-operation of the several 
branches of the triple alliance. Great embarrassment must 
result from permitting the Peishwa to anticipate my views on 
this most delicate and important part of our present situation. 
It: is therefore my wish that instead of endeavouring to draw 
from the Peishwa an early declaration of his notions in that 

, respect, you will as far as possible discourage any such com- 
muhication. 

I take this early opportunity of forwarding to you my sen- 
timents on such points as appear to me to be of the most 
pressing importance in the present state of the negociation, 


1798. TUE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 255 


intending hereafter to review all the circumstances which 
have attended its progress at the Court of Poonah. 


I have the honour to be, &c. 
*  Mornineron. 


No. LXYI. 


Lord Clive to the Earl of Mornington. 
My Lord, Fort St. George, September 11, 1798. 


I embrace the opportunity which Colonel Kirkpatrick’s 
return to Bengal presents to me of renewing my most sincere 
thanks to your Lordship, for the open and unreserved com- 
munication of your sentiments in your letter of the 29th July,* 
as well as for the assurance of friendly support in the con- 
duct of my government, which you have had the goodness 
to give me. Upon my part your Lordship may rely with con- 
fidence upon my zealous endeavours to meet the views and 
cooperate in the measures of the Supreme Government, for 
the prosperity of the Company. It gives me concern to find 
your Lordship has had any reason to complain of anything like 
counteraction, or party spirit in this settlement. I can ven- 
ture to affirm that any tendency of that kind is foreign to my 
disposition, and do assure you, that should it ever be my mis- 
fortune to differ in opinion with your Lordship, though it 
may become my duty to express my sentiments with freedom, 
I shall never lose sight of the relation in which this Govern- 
ment stands to the supreme Government, nor of the respect 
and obedience which is due to its directions. The point 
which has chiefly absorbed my attention since my arrival, 
and which indeed presses with the greatest urgency, is the 
prospect of a war with Tippoo Sultaun, when. contrasted 
with the means this country possesses of meeting. such an 
event. I cannot view this important object, nor the embar- 
rassment in which the affairs of this country are involved, 
very far exceeding what there was reason to expect when I 
left England, without the most extreme solicitude. 

The particulars of our situation are so well known to your 
Lordship, that I shall have occasion to bring them before 


* See p. 223. 


256 LORD CLIVE, TO Sept. 


you in a general point of view, for the purpose of expressing 
my sentiments upon the subject, and not with the hope of 
being able to convey information upon what has been so much 
the object of your Loydship’s attention. Our main army con- 
sisting of about 8,000 fighting men, being in cantonments in 
the vicinity of Walajabad, is deemed to be a force totally in- 
adequate to offensive operations, and cannot be.strengthened 
from this presidency without materially weakening the neces- 
sary garrisons, or drawing our troops from Ceylon; a suffi- 
cient reinforcement of native corps, to enable our ariny, in co- 
operation with that of Bombay, to undertake the siege of 
Seringapatam, can only be drawn from Bengal; and if reli- 
ance is to be put upon the judgment of the best informed 
persons here, such a reinforcement cannot be expected to 
arrive in the Carnatic before the end of February, or begin- 
ning of March, a period too late for the commencement of 
hostilities with a view.to the taking Seringapatam in the 
course of next year; the time for besieging that place being, 
as I am also informed, limited nearly to the months February, 
March and April. It therefore seems to follow that our army 
cannot be put in condition to act offensively, and with a 
speedy prospect of accomplishing the main object of a war 
with Tippoo, the capture of Seringapatam, earlier than 
January twelvemonth. When to these considerations is added 
the discouraging state of our finances, that our debt amounts 
to 54 lacs of pagodas, that an investment is expected to be 
provided of 12 lacs, that our ordinary expences exceed our 
ordinary revenue by about 13 lacs, that the revenue of this 
year is expected to fall short of what it was estimated at by 
nearly six lacs, that our 12 per cent. bonds are at a discount 
of 5 or 6 per cent., that our treasury is empty, our credit 
nearly gone, that the Government, shortly before my arrival, 
had taken up a lac of pagodas by bills on Bengal at 410 A. Rs. 
the 100 pagodas, and that I have been under the necessity of 
resorting te the same expedient,—your Lordship will not 
be surprised at my viewing the situation of this country with 
extreme anxiety; nor at my expressing an earnest hope that 
the calamity of a war, for which we are so ill prepared, may be 
averted. 

Having expressed what my feelings and my duty have urged 
me to state, I beg to assure your Lordship that in the event 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 257 


of your being forced into a war with the Sultaun, or in that 
of your ultimately determining to attack him, of my most cor- 
dial cooperation to the extent of the means of this presidency, 
and of my most zealous and scrupulous attention to the direc- 
tions of the Supreme Government. In the event of war it 
is to your Lordship and Bengal that we must look for re- 
sources, for I am concerned to say, that I see no prospect of 
our being able to raise any considerable sum in this settle- 
ment, but on the contrary considerable defalcations are to 
be apprehended from the predatory warfare, which the Sul- 
taun may be expected to wage; little, I fear, is to be ex- 
pected from his Highness the Nabob. 

I have to thank your Lordship for the communication of 
the papers relating to the negociations of Poonah and Hydera- 
bad. The restoration of the triple alliance to the situation 
in which it stood when Lord Cornwallis left India, is an ob- 
ject of the first importance, and the measures which your 
Lordship has pursued with so much energy for its attain- 
ment appear to me decisive and highly judicious: that you 
may succeed and reap the applause due to your exertions, 
must be the wish of whoever has British glory and British 
interests at heart. The reinforcement destined for Hydera- 
bad, with the views of overthrowing the French party there, 
of securing the succession to Secunder Jah, and of establish- 
ing a permanent influence in the councils and conduct of the 
Nizam’s Court, has been contemplated by me with peculiar 
satisfaction. Should this decisive measure be crowned with 
success, and be properly followed up, it will, without doubt, 
tend more than any other event to fix the British power in 
India. 

I have the honor to be, with sincere esteem and respect, 

My Lord, Your Lordship’s most faithful Servant, 


Cuive. 
No. LXIII. 
The Earl of Mornington to Lieut. Col. John Collins, Resident with Dowlut 
Row Scindiah. 
Sir, Fort William, 15th Sept. 1798. 


You will certainly have felt some degree of anxiety to re- 
ceive the letters, which I had promised to despatch to you 
VoL. I. s 


258 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Sept. 


by the earliest opportunity, and I should have forwarded 
them some time ago, if [had not waited in hourly expectation 
of being able to communicate to you the intelligence of Scin- 
diah’s departure from Poonah, and retreat towards his own 
dominions. But the actual state of affairs at Poonah, still 
leaves the motions of Scindiah, in the greatest degree of un- 
certainty; although the necessity of his return to Hindostan 
for the preservation of his own existence seems to encrease 
every day, and the means of effecting that retrograde move- 
ment without either disgrace or danger, are now placed 
within his reach by the liberation of Nana, by my offer of 
mediation between Scindiah, the Peishwa, and the Nizam, as 
well as by my proposal for the conclusion of a treaty of gene- 
ral defensive alliance against Zemaun Shah. 

My conversation with you, at Barrackpore, apprized you of 
my ideas with regard to the objects of your mission. 

The question which will demand your immediate atttention 
will be, the best mode of securing the strongest barriers 
against Zemaun Shah, not only with a view to the present 
moment, but to all future contingencies. 

No policy could be so weak, even if the Shah had not con- 
descended to explain his intentions, as to suppose that he could 
enter Hindostan, without the design of plundering the most 
opulent part of it. His ultimate objects must be Lucknow 
and our provinces. 

But he has spared me the pains of any argument on this 
subject, having plainly apprised the Nabob Vizier and me, 
that his object is to restore Shah Aulum, and to drive the 
Mahrattas out of India, and having called for our joint ser- 
vices in a tone of command for the prosecution of his project. 
He has added, that our answer will determine, whether he is 
to consider us to be his friends or his enemies. As it would 
be utterly inconsistent with every principle of policy and faith 
to assist the Shah in the prosecution of his declared pur- 
poses,"it follows, that we must expect to be ranked in the 
number of his enemies, and our possessions will be treated 
accordingly. It is, therefore, necessary to provide every de- 
fence, which can obstruct the Shah’s approach to our boun- 
dary. 

The principal powers, whose resistance might offer a seri- 

-ous obstacle to the advance of the. Shah’s army, are the Seiks, 


1798. LIEUT.-COL. JOHN COLLINS, 259 


the Rajpoots, particularly the Rajahs of Jyenagur and Jud- 
‘poor, and the Mahrattas inhabiting the dominions of Scin- 
diah. 

The return of Scindiah to that quarter, attended as such 
an event must be by the restoration of his power to a. consi- 
derable degree of efficiency, appears to me to be the best 
possible means of checking the motions of the Shah; espe- 
cially as it must ever be the interest of Scindiah (within his 
own dominions) to cultivate our friendship, and to cooperate 
with us in opposing any invader, and above all a Mahomedan 
plunderer. Scindiah, therefore, has been the object of my 
unremitting attention. If he should return to Hindostan, 
you will immediately apply yourself to the commencement of 
negociation with him, for the purpose of framing a defensive 
treaty against the Shah. 

The precaution to be observed in framing such a treaty is 
principally to avoid any engagement, which might draw our 
army too far from the boundary of the Vizier’s dominions. 

On the other hand, it cannot be expected, that other 
powers will engage with us for the common defence, if we 
insist absolutely upon limiting the operations of our force, to 
the exclusive protection of the provinces of Oude, or of our 
own possessions. 

The point therefore to be ascertained is this; the utmost 
‘limit to which our force can be advanced for the common 
purposes of a general defensive alliance without danger to 
Oude, or to our own provinces, or to the force so advanced. 
In proportion to the number of our allies, the difficulty of 
fixing this point in a manner satisfactory to them would ne- 
cessarily be augmented; it will, however, be desirable to 
unite as large a body as can be brought to cooperate against 
the Shah; and with this view, I wish you to endeavour to 
conciliate the interests of such of the Seik Chiefs and Raj- 
poots, as may be disposed to resist the Shah, with those of 
Scindiah. JI am aware of the obstacles which you will find to 
such an union in the impetuosity and violence of Scindiah’s 
character, on the one hand, and in the recent memory of his 
oppression and injustice on the other. The Rajahs of Jye- 
nagur and Judpoor will not easily forget the injuries which 
he has committed against them, and this bitter recollection, 


260 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Sept. 


may throw them into the scale of their natural enemy Zemaun 
Shah. It is, however, to be hoped, that the imminent danger 
which Scindiah has lately escaped, as well as that which still 
threatens his dominions; may bring his mimd to a sober sense 
of his real interests, and may induce him to afford to the 
Rajahs, some such effectual protection against future ‘oppres- 
sion on his ‘part, as shall unite them with him against the 
Shah. Hitherto I have supposed the case of Scindiah’s re- 
turn to Hindostan; if, however, that event should not take 
place, a very different scene will open. 

The entire destruction of Scindiah’s power (in Hindostan 
at least) must be the inevitable and speedy consequence of 
his continuance at Poonah. 

Whether he will be able to establish any considerable 
power in the Deccan, on the ruins of the Peishwa’s authority, 
may perhaps admit of some degree of question. The incli- 
nation of my opinion is, that his whole power will be dis- 
solved irretrievably unless he shall return to his own doni- 
nions without delay. In the event of the dissolution of his 
power in Hindostan, your attention will be directed to the 
state of affairs which shall arise out of his destruction. My 
wish is to abstain from all such interference in any confusion 
which may follow the annihilation of Scindiah’s power, as 
might involve us either now or hereafter in hostilities. Nor 
would I engage in any measures, which had a tendency either 
in the first mstance to accelerate the ruin of Scindiah, or 
finally to exclude the revival of his authority. Consistently 
with these principles, my endeavours would be directed to 
frame out of the new order of things, a system of defensive 
alliance against the approach of the Shah, by entering into 
engagements, for that purpose, with whatever Chief should 
have succeeded to the largest portion of Scindiah’s power. 
Ambajee seems to me to be the most likely to stand at the 
head of any new system in the event of Scindiah’s fall. 

Your particular attention will be given to the conduct of 
M. Perron, and of other Europeans now in the service of 
Scindiah, we must counteract any attempt from them to esta- 
blish themselves in the form of a state in Hindostan; they 
would undoubtedly assist Zemaun Shah, and perhaps enter 
into his service in the event of Scindiah’s fall. 


1798. LIEUT.-COL. JOHN COLLINS. 26f © 


I enclose a letter for Sir James Craig, whom I wish you to 
consult on the important military question, the decision of 
which must form the governing principle of any defensive 
treaty against the Shah. Sir James will transmit his sentiments 
to me, in order that I may consult further with the Comman- 
der-in-Chief, and endeavour to fix the limit of the operations 
of our army, whenever the Shah shall approach Hindostan. 

You will be so good as to report to me without delay, any 
information which you may be able to collect, with relation to 
the European officers in the service of Scindiah, or of any 
native power on the North Western frontier of India. I am 
informed that Somroos Begum, has a considerable ia of- 
ficered by Frenchmen in her service. 

Our intelligence of the motions of Zemaun Shah is very 
defective. It is always vague as well as tardy. I desire 
that you will earnestly apply yourself to the speedy cor- 
rection of this defect, it is of the utmost importance to us to 
obtain the earliest and most accurate information of the 
Shah’s designs. On this point, you will find it useful to con- 
cert some regular and permanent system with the Resident at 
Lucknow. I have the honour to be, &c. 

MornineTon,. 


No. LXIV. 


The Earl of Mornington to Major General Sir James Henry Craig, KB. 
(Enclosed in the foregoing letter to Lieut.-Col. Collins.) 


Sir, : Fort William, Sept. 16, 1798. 

This letter will be delivered to you by Lieut.-Col. Collins, 
who having been appointed Resident at the Court of Scin- 
diah, is proceeding to take charge of the interests of the 
British Government at that Court. 

The continual reports of the approach of Zemaun Shah to 
Hindostan engaged my attention at the earliest period of my 
arrival in Bengal, and I have already taken every step (which 
appeared to me justifiable in the great uncertainty of the 
prevailing rumours) for checking the motions of the Shah, in 
the event of his advancing towards our frontier. 

It could not be supposed that such an expedition, as that 
meditated by the Shah, would be planned without any view 


262 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Sept. 


to the plunder of the most opulent and flourishing parts of 
Hindostan; I have, therefore, always considered that he 
must intend to advance to Lucknow, and to our provinces, if 
eircumstances should favour his progress. And with this 
opinion, I have thought that his march ought to be opposed 
at the earliest possible period, and his operations checked at 
the greatest possible distance from our frontier. 

But if I had ever entertained any doubt of the tendency of 
the Shah’s operations, it would have been removed by his 
own distinct declaration to the Vizier and to me. “ That he 
should consider our not joining his royal standard, and our 
not assisting him in the restoration of Shah Allum, and in the 
total expulsion of «the Mahrattas in the light of an act of 
disobedience and enmity.” As it is utterly impossible for me 
to aid the Shah in such a project,.or to submit the honour 
and faith of the British Government to such conditions, I 
must suppose that the Vizier and this Government, will be 
treated as enemies by him, whenever he shall have an oppor- 
tunity of bringing his army to act on our frontier. ‘The most 
useful barrier against this invasion, in the first instance, 
would be the resistance of the Seiks, of the Rajpoots, espe- 
cially the Rajahs of Jyenagur and Judpoor, and of Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah. 

My attention has been directed to a system of measures, 
the effect of which, (if successful) would have occasioned the 
immediate return of Scindiah to his dominions in Hindostan, 
and have given us the benefit of a defensive alliance with him 
against the Shah. I cannot yet ascertain, what the motions 
of Scindiah are likely to be, or what may be the ultimate 
_turn of his fate. But at all events, it will be necessary to 
consider the terms of a defensive league to which, whether 
Scindiah shall be a party or not, the Rajpoots and Seiks 
must be invited. 

The md&st ‘difficult question in the formation of such a 
treaty, will be of a military nature. It may~be thus stated. 
What is the extreme limit beyond the frontier of the Vizier, 
to which the operations of the British force could be ad- 
vanced, without danger to that frontier, and to the force so 
advanced. On the one hand, it would certainly be desirable 
to restrain the operations of our army, as nearly as possible, 
to the exclusive protection of the Nabob’s and Company's pos- 


1798, SIR JAMES HENRY CRAIG. 263 


sessions. But on the other hand, it could not be expected, 
that any efficient or cordial assistance could be derived from 
any practicable system of defensive alliance, if our army was 
to be exclusively exempted from any share in the common de- 
fence of the dominions of the contracting powers. 

I am aware of the difficulty under these circumstances of 
fixing such a point for the extreme advance of our army, as 
shall relieve us from both of the embarrassments which I 
have stated. 

But as I am persuaded, that the question which I have 
proposed in this letter, must frequently have occurred to you 
in all its military bearings and consequences, I take the liber- 
ty of requesting, that you will have the goodness to favour 
me with your opinion upon it, in order that I may hereafter 
be enabled to enter upon the consideration of it more advan- 
tageously and accurately, whenever it shall become necessary 
to discuss it with the Commander-in-Chief. 

I shall also esteem it as a favour, if you will state your 
ideas on this subject to Lieutenant Colonel Collins, who will 
be employed in the negociation of any defensive engagements 
which it may be deemed advisable to contract. 

If any other suggestions, with regard to the defence of our 
North Western frontier, should appear to you important to 
the public service, I should be happy to receive them. One 

. defect has necessarily attracted your notice; the useless, or 
rather the dangerous condition of the Vizier’s. own army. 
This subject is at present under my consideration; and I 
confess I see but one effectual:-mode of obtaining a servicea- 
ble army in the Vizier's pay. The substitution of regular 
regiments from the Company’s service, in place of the Nabob’s 
own troops; or in other words, such an increase of our force 
in Oude, as would warrant nearly a total reduction of the 
Nabob’s present army. I believe that this measure might be 
accomplished not only with infinite advantage to the external 
defence, but also to the internal tranquillity of the Nabob’s 
dominions, to the safety of his person, to the stability of his 
authority, and to the order of his finances. 

I have the honour to be, Sir, with great respect, 
Your most obedient and humble servant, 
Mornineton. 


264, 


THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Sept. 
No. LXV. 
The Earl of Mornington to Captain Malcolm. 
Str, . Fort William, Sept. 20, 1798, 


‘The office of Resident at Hyderabad having become vacant 
by the resignation of Colonel Kirkpatrick, I have this. day 
appointed Captain Kirkpatrick to succeed him ; and it afforded 
me gieat satisfaction at the same to have it in my power to 
nominate you Assistant at that Court, having learnt from ny 
brother * that, in a letter to him, you had stated that such 
an appointment. would be acceptable to you. 

In: conferring this appointment upon you, I have been 
governed by, no other motive than my knowledge of the: zeal, 
activity, and diligence with'which yow have pursued the study 
of the native languages, and: of the political system of India; 
and I take this opportunity of - ‘expressing my’ satisfaction at 
your having’ maile choice of a-situation in which I am. per- 
suaded you will render essential: service to the- public, and 
satisfy your honourable desire of distinction. 

I wish to see you previously to your proceeding to Hyder- 
abad,.and as soon as it may be convenient to you after you 
shall ‘have received this letter. There are many circumstances 
rélative to the political system of India, which it is proper 
you should learn from me as early as possible ;- it will also be 
advantageous to the public service that you should thoroughly 
understand my opinion, on various points, with a degree of 
accuracy which cantiot be conveniently stated in writing. 
I therefore hope that you will contrive to visit Calcutta soot 
after the receipt of this letter. 

‘I shall by this day’s: post apprize Lord Clive of your ap- 
pointment, in order that the necessary steps may be taken 
for procuring you leave of absence rom the establishment of 
¥ ort St. George. 

Iam, &e. &c. 


Morwnineron. 


* The Duke of W elliagton, then Lieut.-Col. ‘Wellesley: 


1798. LORD CLIVE. 265 


No. LXVI. 
The Eurl of Mornington to Lord Clive. 


My Lorp, Fort William, 20th Sept. 1798. 

,L have received your Lordship’s obliging letter of the 1ith 
of Sept.* this morning, for which I return you my sincere 
thanks. I shall reserve my answer on most of the important 
topics to which you have adverted until I have been enabled 
to give them a more deliberate consideration; but I am 
anxious to communicate to your Lordship, without delay, my 
sentiments with respect to the mission of M. Du Buc. Your 
Lordship is probably apprized that a very large portion of 
the national troops, which were expelled from the Isle of 
France a few months ago, was sent to Batavia, where it is 
said that they are become very sickly. It appears to me pro- 
bable that Monsieur Du Buce’s dernier destination, of which 
he speaks in his despatch to Tippoo of the 25th of August, 
may be to Batavia, for the purpose of inducing the French 
troops to take service in the Sultaun’s army, and to obtain for 
him the cooperation of the French frigates also upon that 
station. Your Lordship appears to me to have taken every 
precaution for the arrest of Monsieur Du Buc’s person, as 
well as for the interception of his correspondence: I think 
both of very great importance with a view to the discovery 
of Tippoo’s immediate plans and means of carrying them into 
effect. I think it would be very advisable also, that the 
Admiral should station a force off Tranquebar at the period 
when M. Du Buc may be expected to embark for his ultimate 
destination; and your Lordship will have the goodness to 
communicate this suggestion to the Admiral, if you should 
concur in my opinion. 

If M. Du Buc should proceed to levy a force for Tippoo 
at Tranquebar, with the connivance of the Danish Govern- 
ment; or still more, if that Government should actually assist 
him, by convoying supplies of money from Mysore (according 
to the plan stated in the postcript of M. Du Buc’s letter of 
the 7th Sept.) your Lordship will meet with my warmest 
support, either in any representation which you may think fit 


* See p. 246. 


266 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Sept. 


to make upon the subject, or in any more active measures for 
seizing the person and papers of M. Du Buc and his suite. 
The proclamation of Monsieur Malartic, under which M. Du 
Buc took service with Tippoo, would clearly justify such a 
representation. I am in possession of positive evidence upon 
oath, which proves that M. Du Buc avowed, in the Isle of 
France, that he had engaged with Tippoo’s Ambassadors for 
the express purpose of immediate war against the Company. 
Indeed the terms of his despatches to Tippoo furnish suffi- 
cient evidence of the hostile tendency of his mission. Your 
Lordship will judge according to circumstances, whether 
M. De Buc’s designs will be best frustrated by watching his 
motions, or by interrupting them. 

I trust that you will shortly receive the supply of 20 lacs 
of rupees, in specie, from on board the Virginia and Bombay, 
which will prove a seasonable relief to your finances. The 
subsidy from the Nizam will also operate to alleviate your 
burthens for the present. 

Believe me, with great esteem and respect, 
My Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient and faithful Servant, 
MorntincTon. 


No. LXVI. 
The Earl of Mornington to the Resident at Lucknow. 


Sir, Fort William, 21st Sept. 1798. 

I have received your letter of the 27th August and Ist 
instant, and approve the measures which have been taken for 
the support of Nussun Ulla Khan’s authority, and for obtain- 
ing possession of the family and treasure of Golaum Mahomed 
Khan. To the general assurance of indulgence and pro- 
tection which you have given to his family, you may add an 
engagement that they shall not be delivered into Golam 
Mahomed Khan’s hands, should he hereafter demand them. 

With regard to your conduct towards Golam Ahmed Khan, 
said 'to be charged with an embassy from Zemaun Shah, if, 
upon his arrival at Lucknow, he shall appear to be properly 
accredited from the Shah to the Governor General, you will 
permit him to proceed to Calcutta, but otherwise you will 
take no notice of him. 


1798. THE RESIDENT AT LUCKNOW. 267 


The doubtful character of Golam Ahmed Khan will not 
justify any acknowledgment of his pretended commission; 
you will therefore take no notice of him, unless his conduct 
should appear to lead to a suspicion of his being employed as 
a spy, in which case he should be required to depart from the 
Vizier’s dominions. 

This direction will serve equally to guide the Vizier’s con- 
duct towards Golam Ahmed. 

It is much to be lamented that the intelligence from 
Zemaun Shah's country should be of so vague and uncertain 
a nature, that no dependance can at any time be placed upon 
it; it appears to me an object of the first importance to esta- 
blish some regular channel for the transmission of intelligence 
from that quarter. I request, therefore, that you will imme- 
diately turn your particular attention to this point, and omit 
no effort for obtaining more correct information of Zemaun 
Shah’s motions than we have hitherto been in the habit of 
receiving. 


Iam, &c. 
Mornineron. 
No. LXVIII. 
Lord Clive to the Earl of Mornington. { Extract.) 
My Lorp, Fort St. George, 22d Sept. 1798. 


I cannot express to your Lordship the satisfaction I feel in 
the arrival of Colonel Wellesley. I find him so easy in his 
manners and friendly in his communications, that I cannot 
doubt but that the more I have the opportunity of cultivating 
his intimacy, the more I shall rejoice at the presence of a 
person so nearly connected with your Lordship, and so en- 
tirely possessed of your views and intentions. The informa- 
tion which Colonel Wellesley has communicated to me, of the 
very moderate terms of satisfaction which it is your Lordship’s 
intention to demand of the Sultaun, has relieved my mind 
from much of the solicitude which the appearances of an 
immediate rupture had excited. We have intelligence from 
Major Doveton of the Sultaun having raised a forced loan, 
for the purpose of discharging the arrears due to his troops; 
and of an irruption of banditti into Dindigul, from Mr. Hurdis, 
which appears to be of a predatory nature. It however ex- 


268 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Sept. 


cites attention from. the circumstance of all communication 
between Tippoo’s ryots and those of the Company having 
been lately prohibited. 

I have the honour to be, &c. &c. 


CLIVE. 
No. LXIX. 
1° The Earl of Mornington to Lord Clive. 
My Lorp, Fort William, 24th September, 1798. 


My last advices from Hyderabad afford every reason to 
hope that the dismission of the French party will be accom- 
plished without difficulty or danger. 

The accounts from Poonah are much more favourable than 
any I have received from thence. The Resident has cor- 
rected his error, and is now proceeding in a right course. It 
appears highly probable, that-Nana will be restored to power 
under a reconciliation with Emrut Rao, negociated through 
Colonel Palmer. The effect of this will be the success of my 
propositions to the Peishwa. Scindiah has received my letter 
with great good will, and now seriously turns his thoughts 
towards his own dominions, where his presence is required to 
compose thé revolt of his tributary chiefs, as well as to pre- 
pare a defence against the eventual approach of Zemaun 
Shah. The rumours are still various with regard to the state 
of the Shah’s kingdom; if his army should not be at Pesha- 
wur early in October, he cannot attempt his projected expe- 
dition this year. The return of Scindiah to Hindostan would 
be a very advantageous circumstance for us in the event of 
the Shah’s approach. 

I cannot express to your Lordship more ale than I 
feel it, my earnest anxiety that the preparations for war should 
be carried on with unremitting alacrity and despatch. We 
have no other security against the designs of Tippoo; my 
object and my expectation is peace, and I think nothing can 
frustrate my hopes and wishes but the arrival of a French | 
force in India, or the relaxation of our preparations for war. 

I feel the greatest satisfaction in your cordial concurrence 
in the measures which I have pursued at Poonah and Hy- 
deérabad ; and I accept with much gratitude your Lordship’s 


1798. LORD CLIVE, 269 


suggestion respecting the addition of a body of cavalry to 
the subsidiary force in the pay of the Nizam.* No measure 
could be more wise nor better calculated to give additional 
effect to the principles on which my whole system is founded. 
Such a body of British cavalry (I mean commanded by British 
officers) would for ever secure the facility of our convoys of 
provisions in the event of a rupture with Tippoo. I shall 
instruct the Resident at Hyderabad to avail himself of the 
first favourable moment for this improvement of our force at 
Hyderabad. 

But your Lordship is aware that the proposition must be 
managed with caution, and, if possible, rather encouraged 
from the Nizam, than directly offered by us. 

For it cannot be denied that what we have already gained 
in point of influence was rather to be desired than expected ; 
and if the moment had not been peculiarly favourable, we 
could not safely have ventured even so far as the limits of my 
instructions of the 8th of July. 

To propose any further augmentation of our force at this 
juncture might perhaps create alarm in the wavering and 
irresolute mind of Azim ul Omra, who even now is almost 
afraid of what he has done, and who still doubts whether he 
has enslaved himself or established his power on permanent 
foundations. But, although I feel the necessity of manage- 
ment, and perhaps of delay, in the introduction of any addi- 
tional force at Hyderabad, I have little doubt that such a 
measure will ultimately succeed, and I trust that your Lord- 
ship and I shall witness its success long before we return to 


Europe. * 
I have the honour to be, &c. 
Moknineron. 
No. LXX. 


Major General Sir J. H. Craig to the Governor General. 


My Lorp, Cawnpore, 26th September, 1798. 


A good deal of leisure time, and a solicitude upon the sub- 
ject, that will not appear unnatural,. have given rise to some 


* This was a suggestion of Lord Clive’s, in a former letter, for the 
raising a regiment of cavalry, to be paid by the Nizam, 


270 THE NIZAM, TO Sept. 


reflections upon the very probable event of the invasion of 
Hindostan by Zemaun Shah, which I have committed to 
paper, and I do myself the honour of transmitting them en- 
closed to your Lordship ;* I have not a doubt that the subject 
has met with every attention that it requires, and that the 
necessary steps to be taken will have been determined by 
higher experience and better judgment than I can lay claim 
to.. It is not, therefore, in any view of dictating,—when I 
am conscious that my part is to concur, to the best of my 
abilities, in executing, that I take the liberty of offering these 
observations. I request that they may be only considered as 
a private communication, of the value of which nobody can 
have a lesser idea; but from which, if one serviceable hint 
can be drawn, none will feel a higher gratification—than him 
who has the honour to be, with great respect, 


My Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient and humble Servant, 
J. H. Crate. 
LXXI. 


From the Nizam to the Earl of Mornington. 
(Received 27th September, 1798.) 


What your Lordship has written respecting the affair in 
agitation is from first to last strictly true. For it is a fact 
known to all the world, that since the conclusion of the peace, 
and the execution of the treaty between the allied powers 
and Tippoo, every possible degree of regard has been inva- 
riably shewn by the three States to the principles of good 
faith and the obligations of friendship, actuated by a purity 
of.design and a wish to preserve the general tranquillity. 
The three States have constantly pursued the enlightened 
path of truth and sincerity, and strictly adhered to the laws 
of amity and concord. But as Tippoo has now at once 
thrown off the mask, and, according to the contents of the 
proclamation issued by the Governor of the Mauritius (of 
which a translation has, word for word, been submitted by 
Captain Kirkpatrick to me) has publicly deputed Embassa- 
dors to that island, solicited an offensive and defensive alli- 


* See Memoir of Sir James Craig in the Appendix. 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 271 


ance with the French against the English Company (which 
is, in fact, a declaration of enmity against the three States) 
received a body of French, furnished by his own desire and 
fixed the monthly pay of that force; each of these acts is 
specifically and individually a flagrant instance and an incon- 
trovertible proof of his violation of treaty and of his hostile 
intentions, it therefore becomes absolutely necessary to take 
measures to meet the occasion, and oppose a barrier to the 
turbulence and restlessness of his disposition; and as it is 
possible that when called wpon, he may have recourse to his 
usual subterfuge, disavowal, his voluntary consent to that 
which may afford ample security to the three States against 
his inimical designs for the future, cannot be expected. But 
as your Lordship, actuated by the best intentionsy and by a 
solicitude to preserve the general tranquillity, has deemed it 
advisable in the first instance to call upon him for the above 
purpose merely that he may have an opportunity of restrain- 
ing the violence of his designs before he involves himself in 
the calamities of war, there is no objection; and, accordingly, 
the draft of a demand to that effect has been delivered to 
Captain Kirkpatrick, by whom your Lordship will be inform- 
ed of the contents should it be thought proper ; a letter to 
Tippoo, conformable to the terms of the draft, may be pre- 
pared and delivered to Captain Kirkpatrick so as to accom- 
pany those from your Lordship and the Peishwa, and in the 
event of his failing to return a satisfactory answer, that is to 
say, should he refuse to concede that which may afford ample 
security to the three allied powers against his inimical designs 
for the future, what doubt is there but that my forces will be 
ready to cooperate agreeably to the stipulations of the exist- 
ing treaty ? 

With respect to what your Lordship writes, that “ sfhilet 
subjects of difference subsist between me and the Peishwa 
and Dowlat Row Scindiah, it will be altogether impossible to 
make the necessary exertions upon this occasion, and there- 
fore Captain Kirkpatrick had your Lordship’s instructions to 
communicate several propositions on this important subject.” 
Captain Kirkpatrick, for the better consideration and com- 
prehension of those important propositions, committed your 
Lordship’s instructions, fully and particularly, to writing, and 
submitted them to me. By that writing your Lordship’s 


272 THE NIZAM, TO Sept. 


sentiments have been fully developed, while it evinced your 
Lordship’s extreme interest in the welfare of my Government, 
as well as your anxious desire to establish the tranquillity of 
India on so firm a basis as to preclude the danger of its being 
disturbed by those who hope to establish their own power on 
the ruin of all the States of the Deccan and Hindostan, 
These sentiments I conceive to spring from the most honour- 
able intentions, the deepest penetration, the soundest wisdom 
and understanding in your Lordship—in particular; to know 
that since your arrival in India, your Lordship has felt the 
deepest regret that, from various detrimental causes, such 
powerful States should, in a short space of time, have lost 
their former splendour and greatness, and have been brought 
to their present situation; but that it was some satisfaction 
to your Lordship to reflect that an important medium may 
now arise by which all these injuries may be repaired, in such 
a manner as to give increase to the weight and importance 
which those States formerly possessed—that in promoting the 
interest and welfare of such a powerful State, the world will 
have the most evident testimony of that love of justice, pub- 
lic faith, goodness of intention, and disinterestedness which 
are among the characteristics of the English, and which are 
equally enjoined by the orders of the Company and the prin- 
ciples of the British Government in Europe. These just 
sentiments (I say) shew your Lordship to be endowed with 
the truest sense of honour, and the highest degree of under- 
standing and magnanimity. I entertain the fullest conviction , 
that your Lordship has, in the highest degree at heart, the 
prosperity, splendour, and due arrangement of the affairs of 
my Government, and what your Lordship and I thus make 
the mutual object of our views, through the grace of Provi- 
‘dence, will be satisfactorily and fully accomplished. Accord- 
ingly in the spirit of great foresight, a treaty, consisting of 
various articles, for the increase of the detachment, has been 
entered into and authenticated under my hand and seal and 
that of the Nabob Aristo Yah (Azim ul Omra) and delivered 
to Captain Kirkpatrick, and a counterpart under his hand 
and seal, as plenipotentiary on the part of your Lordship, 
has been delivered to me. It being my first wish and object 
to cement the bonds of union and attachment between my 
Government and that of the Company in the most public 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, 273 


manner, and to shew that no division of interest subsists be- 
tween them; and it being likewise my full intent and resolu- 
tion to avoid all aggression and encroachment upon those with 
whom I am connected by treaties and engagements, far from 
seeking to protract the execution of the treaty in question, I 
have deemed it most advisable to hasten its conclusion. I 
am confident that from the knowledge your Lordship will 
acquire of my sentiments so fully laid open by the report of 
Captain Kirkpatrick and the execution of the treaty, your 
mind will be completely satisfied that far from having any 
wish or design to aggress or trespass upon the engagements 
subsisting with any of my friends and allies, I have no other 
view than to adhere to the dictates of good faith and equity. 
In pursuance of these sentiments I have signified to Captain 
Kirkpatrick my desire for the immediate assemblage of the 
proposed detachment upon the frontier, the adjustment of 
many concerns depending upon its arrival at the Presence, 
and it will, no doubt, very shortly be collected there accord- 
ingly, and proceed without delay to the capital, so that the 
most effectual means may be at hand, both for cooperation in 
the possible event of a war, and for removing the impedi- | 
ments that may present themselves (to that cooperation). 
Particulars will be fully made known to your Lordship by 
Aristo Yah and Meer Allum, and Captain Kirkpatrick will 
also write to your Lordship very fully. 
A true Copy, N. B. Epmonstons, 

Persian Translator to Govt. 


No. LX XII. 


From Tippoo Sultaun, dated 2d September, 1798. 
[Received 28th September, 1798. ] 

I have had the pleasure to receive your Lordship’s friendly 
letter,* purporting that you had received the final opinion of 
the Malabar Commissioners upon the subject of Wynaad ; 
after a full examination of every circumstance that your Lord- 
ship was now convinced that Wynaad belongs to me—that 
therefore you had directed the Commissioners to make a for- 
mal acknowledgment of my claim to that Taalook; but that 


* See p. 154. 
VOL. I. T 


Q74 . THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Oct. 


some doubts yet remained with respect to the pass (vide letter 
written 7th August 1798), Tambercherry, which is below the 
Ghauts, by the Treaty.of Peace came into the Company's 
possession ; above the Ghauts is Wynaad, which consisted 
of a few habitations, and has for a long time been desolate. 
The Ghauts are situated between, and also belong to me; 
it (Wynaad) consists of nothing but forests and heaps of 
‘stones. Accordingly, long ago this fact came repeatedly 
under peculiar inspection, at the time when measures were 
taken for the settlement of the Malabar districts; and what- 
ever doubts there may be upon this head, will be solved by a 
reference thereto, In like manner the right to the Taalooks of 
Ameera and Saulea, which appertain to Cauriaul (Mangalore) 
is proved by the records of a century, in which are inserted 
‘the names of the collectors and defrayers of the land tax; 
nay, a copy of the parts of those records shall be sent, when 
‘by referring thereto, the circumstances respecting Ameera 
and Saulea, Eeserawaraseenny, &c. will be ascertained and 
laid open. Mischief-makers, by starting empty disputes and 
altercations, hope to accomplish their own purposes, but by 
the favour of God, the fountains of union and harmony be- 
tween the two states possess too much purity and clearness 
to be sullied by the devices of self-interest persons. Con- 
tinue constantly to gratify me by letters denoting your Lord- 
ship’s welfare. 

P.S. Sewarasemy* also belongs to me. The Taalooks 
which were ceded to the Company are particularly enume- 
rated in the Treaty of Peace. I beg you will refer thereto 
for information, 

A true Copy, N. B. EpmonsTone, 

Persian Translator to Govt. 


No. LXXIII. 
The Earl of Mornington to the Chairman of the East India Company. 
Sir, Fort William, October, 1798. 


You will perceive that I have been called upon very early 
to make a vigorous exertion; if I have failed to deserve your 
approbation, my failure cannot be imputed to negligence or 
to want of zeal in your service. 


* This stands for Eeserawaraseenny. 


1798. THE CHAIRMAN OF THE E. I. COMPANY. 275 


‘Lord Clive’s appointment will, I trust, prove advantageous 
to the public service. I have entered into the most unre- 
served private correspondence with him, and I have found 
him cordially disposed to cooperate with me. His letters are 
very creditable to his understanding and disposition: he will 
have great difficulties to encounter at Fort St. George, where 
much reform is required, and where the. management of the 
Nabob and Rajah of Tanjore (even under the newly established 
Government), will demand a considerable degree of skill. 

I trust that Tippoo will not venture to move without having 
obtained a more effectual succour from the French than-they 
have yet afforded to him; and I am equally confident that the 
vigilance of our Government at home, and of our fleets, will 
oppose every possible obstacle to the approach of the French 
towards this quarter of the globe. But I still feel the neces- 
sity of active and early preparation for war, as being the only 
security against all contingencies. Such preparations must 
occasion expense: this is a severe disappointment to me, but 
my duty demands that I should encounter it with firmness. 
I trust that the Court of Directors will feel a correspondent 
disposition, and that they will-be ready to sacrifice with 
cheerfulness something of present commercial profit to the 
Company for the preservation of the main sources of our 


wealth and strength. 
I have the honor to be, &c. 


MorwnineTon. 


No. LXXIV. 


The Governor General in Council to the Secret Committee. 
Fort William; Ist October, 1798. 

In our letter of the 4th of July, despatched overland, we 
had the honour to inform you that the Right Hon. the Go- 
vernor General had failed in his endeavours to induce his 
Highness the Nabob of the Carnatic to accede to the modi- 
fication of the treaty of 1792, formerly proposed to his High- 
ness by Lord Hobart. 

The Governor General was equally unsuccessful in his 
attempt to persuade his Highness to agree to any plan for 
the liquidation of his debt to the Company. 

During his continuance at Madras, his Lordship employed, 


276 THE GOV.-GENERAL IN COUNCIL, TO Oct. 


for the accomplishment of both objects, every exertion com- 
patible with the extent of the powers entrusted to him by the 
Honourable the Court of Directors, in their orders of the 
18th October, 1797. 

Both the spirit and letter of those orders required that his 
Lordship should manifest to the Nabob every possible mark 
of respect and kindness, and should endeavour to gain his 
Highness’s confidence by every conciliatory measure. 

The tenor of the accompanying papers will afford to your 
Honourable Committee the means of framing a judgment of 
the effect produced upon the Nabob’s mind, by his inter- 
course with the Governor General. 

From these papers it appears that, although the Nabob 
.professed satisfaction in the manner in which the Governor 
General had executed the orders of the Honourable the 
Court of Directors, his Highness continued to oppose a de- 
termined resistance to the proposed modification of the treaty 
of 1792. 

The Governor General is convinced that, in the actual 
state of the Nabob’s temper, and of the influence of those 
who surround him, no hope can be entertained of persuading 
his Highness, in the present moment, to conclude any arrange- 
ment of the nature proposed to him by Lord Hobart. 

His Lordship is further of opinion that, under all the cir- 
cumstances of the Nabob’s affairs, the most prudent course 
would be to suspend for the present all negotiation with his 
Highness for the cession of any part of his territory to the 
management of the Honourable Company’s servants. 

It is however to be hoped, that the discussions which have 
taken place between the Governor General and the Nabob 
may hereafter furnish* the foundation of a more beneficial 
arrangement of the Honourable Company's interests in the 
Carnatic; and the attention of the Governor General will be 
constantly directed to that desirable object. 

The Governor General thought it advisable to conduct the 
negociation principally by the means of personal intercourse, 
with a view of avoiding a controversial correspondence, which 
would have been managed on the part of the Nabob by the 
European adventurers who still find aecess to his Highness’s 
durbar. 

His Lordship therefore addressed no other proposition in 


1798. THE SECRET COMMITTEE. 2° 


writing to the Nabob than the note of the 8th of May,* con- 
taining a summary statement of the propositions made to the 
Nabob, with relation to the modification of the treaty of 1792. 

Your Honourable Committee will observe, that his Highness 
-has distinctly acknowledged that he is in the practice of 
raising money annually, by assessments of the revenues of 
those districts, which form the security for the payment of 
the Honourable Company’s subsidy. 

This practice is unquestionably contrary to the letter and 
subversive of the spirit of the treaty of1792; and it is for the 

serious consideration of the Honourable Court of Directors 
what operation this voluntary acknowledgment on the part of 
his Highness, shall be allowed to have in any future nego- 
ciation with him. 

With respect to the liquidation of the sums due to the 
Company from the Nabob, his Highness appeared disposed 
to dispute every branch of the debt, excepting the new cavalry 
loan, for the liquidation of which he seemed to think he had 
already given sufficient security, by having charged it upon 
the funds now appropriated for the payment of the consoli- 
dated debt. 

The Governor General has, however, endeavoured to per- 
suade his Highness of the propriety of his advancing, at least 
a considerable portion of the new cavalry debt, for the aid 
of the public service, in the present exigency of the Honour- 
able Company’s affairs. 

His Highness has not yet returned any answer to the letter 
addressed to him on this subject by his Lordship. 

The Government of Fort St. George, under their’ instruc- . 
tion from us, will have informed your Honourable Committee 
of the deposition of Ameer Sing, and of the establishment of 
Serfogee upon the musnud of Tanjore. 

We propose by the next despatch to submit to your con- 
sideration our sentiments at large with regard to the arrange- 
ments which appear to us most advisable for the final 
security of the interests of the Honourable Company in 

Tanjore. We have the honour to be, &c.' 
Mognineton and Councit. 


a nA ge nn ee 
* See p. 39. 


278 ‘SIR J. H, CRAIG, TO Oct. 


No. LXXV. 
Major General Sir James H. Craig to the Earl of Mornington. 
My Lorp, Cawnpore, 6th October, 1798. 


I am sure your Lordship will believe that it is not without 
giving it every attention in my power, that I sit down to lay 
before your Lordship the various considerations which have 
presented themselves to my mind, on the subject of the ques- 
tion upon which your Lordship has honoured me with your 
commands that I should give you my opinion. 

In the consequence which your Lordship is pleased to 
‘attach to any opinion of mine, your Lordship has certainly 
manifested that confidence in my judgment which I should 
have felt to have rested upon a better merited claim had it 
been applied.solely to my ambition of being useful to the 
‘service of my country; but whatever may be the sense that 
I entertain of my capacity to do it fully, I feel at the same 
time the force of the demand on me which your Lordship has 
-established, that I should make the best return that is in my 
power to, the confidence that your Lordship places in me; 
and it appears to me that I should ill discharge that obliga- 
tion were I to confine myself to the considering the question 
as a mere abstract. proposition, and did not enter into it more 
fully as connected with the probable circumstances of our 
situation, in the event: ‘from whence alone can arise the neces- 
sity of your: Lordship’s. decision upon it. 

I have' already had the honour, on another occasion, to 
explain to ‘your Lordship my idea upon the nature of our 
frontier, which I shall request that your Lordship will have 
the goodness to carry in. your mind in what I may now have 
" oceasion -to. offer te Your Lordship. It is singularly unfor- 
tunate, and surely. nmuch “to be regretted, that in the thirty 
odd years that we may he. said to have been in possession of 
this country, it has, I should suppose, never been considered 
in a military point of view-as being within the possibility of 
attack; hence it arises, that except Allahabad, which hardly 
yet deserves the-name,. there: is not a single fortress or place 
of strength in- the whole..country. It is not necessary to 
enter into the various- inconveniences, and indeed essential 
circumstances of danger, whieh may arise from this deficiency. 
It is here alluded, to .principally as connected with and cer- 
tainly very materially affecting the object in question. 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. - 279 


However such as is the natural barrier which limits our 
frontier, and with every inconvenience which we might expe- 
rience from the deficiency to which I have adverted, I have 
not a doubt but that if the army in the field is carried to 
20,000 men, the position that I have pointed out in the memoir, 
which is already in your Lordship’s hands, and the other 
measures of precaution that are there recommended to be 
‘adopted, would be equal to our security, although I have laid 
it down as an axiom, that it can be endangered only under 
circumstances of previous advantage to the enemy, by which 
his numbers will be increased to almost any extent to which. 
he may wish to carry them; but were we to confine ourselves 
thus solely to our own defence, however successful we might 
at present be in that object, I for my own part have scarcely 
a doubt, that a new and formidable power would establish 
itself in our nearest neighbourhood, a power which would 
overset the whole political state of Hindostan, would require 
an unremitting vigilance and constant state of preparation on 
our part, attended with an enormous expense, and that at last 
we should have to contend for our existence, under circum- 
stances of infinitely greater difficulty and embarrassment than 
those which will now attend our opposition to its first esta- 
blishment. I ought to apologize to your Lordship for thus 
obtruding an opinion which has not been called for, but I 
have been led to it by the view of acceding, most fully, to 
the wisdom of the measure of a junction with the Mahrattas, 
and as pointing out the grounds on which I may allude to the 
expediency of doing it with cordiality and effect. 

It appears to me to be impossible to point out any precise 
bounds at which danger commences to the army that quits a 
frontier, and to the frontier which is left by it. Its commu- 
nication, indeed, becomes more and more precarious in pro- 
portion as it abandons the country with which it is to be 
preserved, but in all situation, with respect to action, it is 
equally liable to the fate of war; and with respect to the 
frontier, it is impossible, except under local circumstances of 
peculiar advantage, very rarely to be met with, that it can be 
covered by any army that is advanced before it. The true 
question, however, that I think arises is, how far the object 
in view will justify the possible danger that may attend the. 
movement, and the principal circumstance of consideration 


280 SIR J. H. CRAIG, TO ; Oct. 


should be, to adopt the. best measures that human wisdom 
can devise, to lessen of to meet the danger, with the best 
means within our command. 

The expediency of a defensive alliance with the Mahrattas 
being admitted, it follows of course that as the object must 
be their defence as well as ours, the operations of the armies 
employed must be directed by what appears to be the best 
means of accomplishing that end. It is not to be supposed 
that the Mahrattas would sacrifice a part of their country in 
order to contract the line of defence to what may lessen the 
danger to ours. Their object will be to meet the enemy on 
their frontier; and it will scarcely be practicable to make 
them comprehend that they can receive any advantage from 
an alliance with us, unless we join them there. Fortunately 
every step we take to defend their dominions is equally 
‘applied to the protection of our own; their frontier becomes, 
in fact, ours, which is truly and effectually covered by it; 
and having once quitted the precise line which would be 
obviously marked out by our confining ourselves solely to our 
own defence, it matters, I think, very little whether we are 
50 miles farther from or nearer to that line. 

At the same time that I hazard this idea, for it will, Jam 
persuaded, meet many opponents, I beg your Lordship to be 
assured that I by no means overlook the consequences that 
may attend its being adopted in its fullest extent. I am well 
aware of the difficulty of communication, I am fully sensible 
of those that may be experienced with respect to subsistence, 
and I feel all the dangers and hazards that would attend us 
in the unfortunate event of a defeat, when, unquestionably, 
every mile we should have advanced would increase the peril 
of retreat. I am even inclined to give additional weight to 
these circumstances, because it is my decided and fixed opi- 
nion, that our enemies are as numerous as the inhabitants of 
the country; and I have not a doubt but that a reverse of 
fortune would exhibit them starting from every tope and from 
behind every bank. But all these inconveniences and dangers 
commence, to a certain degree, the moment our army quits 
the banks of the Ganges, It is to the greater or less extent 
to which they may be carried that my reasoning applies; and 
it is under the conviction, that the benefits to be derived from 
a junction with the Mahrattas will be found to justify and to 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 281 


overbalance them all, that I observe that their being more or 
less increased by a greater or less distance from our frontier 
is of no weight when put in competition with the expediency 
of acting with the strictest cordiality, and in the closest union 
with those people. It is not to be imagined that they will 
give up Delbi without a contest: their first position will cer- 
tainly be beyond it. Their frontier extends to Carnaul, which 
is 60 coss, perhaps something better than 100 miles from 
Delhi. I should have no hesitation to recommend that there 
should be no restriction to our advancing so far in co- 
operation with them. The only condition that I would annex 
to the permission would be, that they should put into our 
hands some place of strength between Anopsheer and the 
army, to serve as a depot and magazine. The question, in 
short, appears to me to be reducible to this: Whether we 
shall meet the enemy and oppose him, though at a distance, 
under every advantage of the assistance to be derived from a 
numerous and powerful body of friends, equally interested in 
the cause with ourselves, and masters of the intermediate 
country between our own frontier and the scene of our opera- 
tions, by which the danger, which might otherwise arise from 
that distance, will be very considerably lessened; or whether 
we shall wait to be attacked at home, when we shall be de- 
prived of that assistance, and when our enemy will himself 
have acquired all the advantage to be derived from increased 
resources, augmented numbers, and established authority, 
exerted with the ardour and enthusiasm usual in a career of 
victory and conquest, and with our own native troops, per- 
haps, labouring under all the effects of a contrary im- 
pression 2 
But in viewing the subject of the danger attending our ad- 
vancing, it is necessary that we should advert to the numbers 
of which the army will consist that may be applied to the 
defence of our north-western frontier. I have ventured to 
suppose that that number may be carried to 20,000 men, but 
as I am entirely ignorant of the services for which, inde- 
pendent of the internal security of our provinces and the 
necessary attention to Fort William, the remainder of our 
army may be required, I may err very considerably in my 
calculation on this subject. One circumstance is, how- 
ever, clear to me, and that is, that if we cannot command 


282 SIR J. H. CRAIG, TO Oct. 


that number at least, independent of the garrison of Alla- 
habad,, our’ means of defence will be scarcely propor- 
tionate to the magnitude of the danger with which we are 
‘ threatened. 
- After détermining the actual strength of the army that can 
be collected for the whole of the service required, it will then 
remain to proportion its several parts into the different 
branches into which that service will divide itself. For if it 
is judged expedient that the principal corps should be carried 
beyond the frontier to any distance, that a cordial cooperation 
with our allies may require, I believe there is no one will 
doubt the necessity of leaving no very inconsiderable force in 
these provinces, as well to assist in guarding the passes on 
the-tiver as to insure to us that command and influence, and 
those services, that may be indispensable to our safety. 
Your Lordship judges most rightly that, in its present shape, 
no sort of service can be expected from the Nabob’s army, 
and I am confident that without a total change in the policy 
of the Court and the manners of the people, there exists no 
possible means by which it can ever be rendered such as can 
merit that the smallest degree of confidence should be placed 
in it. The money now expended on them is thrown away, 
and can only be rendered subservient to the object of general 
defence, by being appropriated to the increase of the Com- 
pany’s army. But I much fear that it is too late to adopt such 
a measure, with the hope that any troops that would be raised 
with this view can be of service if the Shah’s invasion take 
place this season. This consideration should, however, only 
act as a spur to us to begin the attempt as early as possible; 
and it may perhaps be much facilitated by the possibility of 
taking into our service some of his battalions entire. They 
are all, to a certain degree, disciplined, and under the charge 
of a proper selection of officers, might soon become service- 
able. There seems to be little doubt of their willingness to 
engage. 

- With respect to the ntimber of which the corps that is to 
act with our allies should consist, there appears to me to be 
no medium. It should either be a simple detachment of two 
ot thyee battalions, such as was that which, under Captain 
Little from Bombay, accompanied a body of the same people 
during the Mysore war,.and that which was on the same 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. - 283 


occasion attached to the Nizam’s army, or it should consist 
of the utmost strength that can be collected, with .a. due 
regard to other services. I hold it for certaiii, that i in. all - 
situations in which we are to aet with any.of the | eountry ° 
powers, the whole brunt of the operations will rest with, us; ; 
nor will our particular safety ever be considered -by ‘them: as 
an object that can be put in-competition with, any’ ‘danger { that. 
a regard to, it might entail.-upon themselves. “Qui: fosée : 
should, therefore, be such that any misfortine that. might’ 
befall it could have no sensible influence 1 upon: the generat 
state of our affairs; or it should be such as.is stifficient for, 
its ewn defence as" ‘can, if necessary, act: upon the means: 
which it possesses within itself, and as can give’ us that in-' 
fluence, and entitle us to that pre-eminence, which: it: is. sO. 
essential for us on all occasions to preserve. A medium force. 
would only expose us to insult from our arrogant and selfish 
friends, and to defeat.and ruin from our more‘open enemies,. 
whilst the deficiency which might be ocegsioned in our general 
means of defence, by.a-less which as such would. be consi- 
derable, might very materially cripple, perhaps render vain, 
our further efforts. Could, by. any. means whiatever, the 
acting army be carried to any thing near the strength I have 
proposed, and could a corps.of five .or six thousand men be 
formed at the same time in these provinees, and provided. 
- decisive measures for the tranquillity of Rohileund be adopted, 
T should certainly imagine that we might hope to give the. 
Shah such cause to repent. his ineursion as would secure the 
future tranquillity of Hindostan, at least from foreign invasion, 
for some time. 
I feel, my Lord, that in what I have’ hitherte had the 
‘ honour of offering to your Lordship, I haye in some shape 
departed from the datum. upon which your Lordship’s ques- 
tions seems in.some degree to be founded. Your Lordship 
observes, that it will be necessary-to consider the terms of a. 
defensive league, to which, whether Scindiah shall be a party. 
er not, the Rajpoots and Seiks must be invited, whereas I 
have confined myself entirely to.the supposition of un alliance 
and. hearty cooperation with the Mahrattas ;. that is, I pre- 
sume, with Scindiah, without once adverting to either the 
Rajpoots or the Seiks. 
The truth is, my Lord,. that, with all deference to-better 


‘ 


284 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Oct. 


information, and still greater to better judgment, it does not 
appear to me that it can be practicable for us to enter into 
any alliance with either of the Powers mentioned, but through 
the Mahrattas, if I may use the expression. I mean by it 
that it is utterly impossible that we can join or cooperate with 
the former but by the concurrence and in concert with the 
latter, for we cannot even communicate but through the do- 
minions of Scindiah. Exclusive of the geographical difficulty, 
there would, I apprehend, be found a much greater in the 
inveterate hatred that exists between the two people. Any 
communication between us and the Seiks, without the parti- 
cipation of Scindiah, would excite a jealousy that would, I 
fear, be fatal to our friendship with the latter. The same 
circumstances exist with respect to the most powerful of the 
Rajpoots, the Rajahs on the western frontier of Scindiah’s 
.territory. It appears, therefore, to me, that if we cannot form 
an alliance.with Scindiah, it will be difficult, if not impossible, 
to form any other. If, indeed, we can convince him of his 
true interests, I believe it will be an easy matter to engage 
the Rajah of Jynajur, and others whose territories are adja- 
-eent to his, for it is impossible that they can be desirous 
that the Shah should establish himself in these parts. With 
respect to the Seiks, the task may be more difficult. What 
advantages can we hold out to induce them to act in co- 
operation with us? They will naturally ask if we expect that 
they should abandon their country and possessions to join us, 
and of what use we can be to them while posted on the fron- 
tiers of the Mahratta dominions? The answers to these 
questions seem difficult. , 

Another consideration arises, however, upon this subject. 
Suppose the Seiks were found to be cordially disposed to join 
in the league, and should the Mahrattas on their part be 
equally willing, would it be expedient that we should carry 
our operations to the length of advancing into the country of 
the former, upon which terms alone it would be possible to 
bring into action the united forces of the three Powers? 
I do not, indeed, think the case is likely to occur, in which a 
decision may be necessary dn this question, at least beyond a 
certain degree. If the Shah carries his intentions into effect, 
he is probably at this moment on his march, and the fate of 
the Seik frontier, most likely of Lahore itself, will be decided 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 285 


long before we can possibly be at hand to take a part in the 
contest. Our movement, therefore, to that extent,-cannot in 
any case be necessary; but the Rajah of Patiala is repre- 
sented to be a powerful prince, commanding at all times a 
force of 10,000 horse, and as many footmen, and capable of 
raising many more in case of necessity. His territories border 
on those of the Mahrattas: and should the Seiks have re- 
mained disunited and separate, or should he by any means 
have escaped the effects of any- defeat which his countrymen 
may have suffered on the frontier, so that his force may 
remain entire, and probably increased by the junction of such 
as may have escaped the Shah’s army ;—I think such an ad- 
dition of strength would be an object, and would justify a 
further advance; but certainly not unless our force were ‘such 


as would command the respect of both parties, and place us: 


in the light of umpires, capable of enforcing our wishes on 
either. * 

Ihave no doubt of the Mahrattas readily acceding to any 
alliance your Lordship may propose; and Scindiah’s return 
seems more probable now than it did when your Lordship’s 
letter was written, but even should that event not take place, 
though it will be a circumstance much to be regretted, as 
crippling the energy with which his strength might be exerted 
under his own direction, yet it would appear that the ap- 
proach of so manifest a danger must unite all parties to avert 
it, which they would be perhaps more inclined to do under 
our controlling influence than if they were left to themselves. 

I have the honour to be, with great respect, 
My Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient and 
Most humble Servant, 


J. H. Craic. 


286 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Oct. 


No. LXXVI. 
The Earl of Mornington to the Hon. Jonathan Duncan. 
Sir, Fort William, 8th October, 1798. 

I concur with you in thinking that the services of the na- 
tive agent whom you have appointed to reside at Bushire 
may be usefully employed for the purpose mentioned in that 
letter ; and as the probability of the invasion of Hindgstan 
by Zemaun Shah seems to increase,* J am of opinion ‘that 
Mehdy Ali Khan cannot too ‘soon commence his operations at 
the Court of Baba Khan, or of whatever person may be in the 
exercise of the sovereignty of Persia. It would certainly be 
a very desirable object to excite such an alarm in that quar- 
ter as may either induce the Shah to relinquish his projected 
expedition, or may recal him should he have actually em- 
barked in it. 

J am not possessed of sufficient information respecting the 
state of Persia, or the views of the ruling power in that coun- 
try, to enable me at present to furnish Mehdy Ali Khan with 
any specific instructions or powers for the attainment of the 
object in contemplation. Until, therefore, his future commu- 
nications shall have opened a more distinct view of the sub- 
ject, we can only be authorized to offer to the Persian Go- 
vernment, in return for any efficient measure which it shall 
take for the purpose of diverting Zemaun Shah from his 
designs against Hindostan, such supplies of arms and military 
* stores as may be required, and as you may be able to furnish. 

If the credentials already provided for Mehdy Ali Khan by 
your Government should appear insufficient to procure him 
due attention from the ruling power in Persia, on the more 
important points now proposed to be committed to his ma- 
nagement, it will be proper to furnish him with such addi- 
tional letters and powers as may be suitable to this object. 
These instruments may at present proceed from your Govern- 
ment; hereafter it may be necessary that they should issue 
from myself. 

It has been suggested to me, and I understand it was the 
opinion of Sir Charles Malet, that a further diversion of the 
Shah’s force might be created by our affording certain en- 
couragement to the nations occupying the Delta and lower 


* See letters of Zemaun Shah in the Appendix. 


1798. THE RESIDENT AT LUCKNOW. 287 


parts of the Indus, who have been stated to be much dis- 
affected to the Government of the Shah ; I wish you to give 
this point the fullest and most serious consideration ; to state 
to me your ideas upon it; and in the mean while to take any 
immediate steps which shall appear proper and practicable to 
you. 

TI have the pleasure to inform you that Admiral Rainier has, 
at my recommendation, resolved to proceed with the principal 
part of his squadron to the Malabar coast, as soon as possible 
‘after the change of the monsogn.- This arrangement will, I 
trust, relieve you from the apprehension of any material in- 
convenience under the unavoidable detention of the Bombay 
frigate in this quarter. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 
Mornineron. 


No. LXXVII. ; 
The Earl of Mornington to the Resident at Lucknow. 


Sir, Fort William, October 10, 1798. 

I shall be glad to receive your promised suggestions re- 
specting the means of obtaining early and correct intelligence 
from Zemaun Shah's country, but I desire you will not delay 
the execution of any practicable plan for this purpose, to so 
Jafe a period, as the time when you could receive my appro- 
bation of your ideas. Some time since [ ifistructed the Resi- 
dent with Dowlut Rao Scindiah, to take an early opportunity 
of concerting measures with you and Sir James Craig, with a 
view to the attainment of this desirable object. 

It has occurred to me that it may be possible for an agent 
established at Cabul to open with Surat and Bombay, by the 
route of Bikher and the Indus, a communication which would 
be more secure, and, perhaps, more expeditious, than any at 
present in use. A trial of this route might at least be made, 
by transmitting through it duplicate despatches only in the 
first instance. I shall request Mr. Duncan to consider this 
suggestion, and I desire you will also examine how far it may 
be likely to lead to a practicable and beneficial plan. 

I approve of the measures which have been adopted for the 
purpose of reinforcing the troops in Rohilcund, and when the 
whole shall have Been assembled under Major General Stuart, 


288 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Oct. 


I direct that every proper and necessary step to be taken in 
order effectually and speedily to crush every remaining seed 
of commotion in that country. 

To this end it is, no doubt, a measure of primary necessity 
that all the sons of Fyzoollah Khan, now at Rampoor, should 
be removed without delay to Lucknow. I shall be glad to 
learn that they have acquiesced without difficulty in the 
Vizier’s requisition to this effect. But if they should mani- 
fest a disposition to resist his authority, they must be com- 
pelled to yield to it. 

It is, for the same reason, highly expedient that the Ris. 
salhdars Omar Khan, Ghulam Hussain Khan, Sunnoo Khan, 
and Mahommed Syde Khan, should not only be divested of 
their commands, but removed out of the country: and I 
accordingly desire you will take the necessary measures for 
securing as soon as possible the persons of these officers, who 
must in the first instance be sent to Benares, whence they may 
afterwards, if requisite, be ordered to Calcutta. I have given 
this direction under the supposition that you are possessed 
of sufficient proofs to warrant a belief that the Rissalhdars 
have entered into engagements inconsistent with their duty 
towards the Vizier and the Company; under this supposition 
the Rissalhdars are not entitled to the benefit of. the obliga- 
tion signed by Sir Robert Abercromby and Mr. Cherry. 

If the course of affairs should again bring the person of 
Golaum Mahomed Khan into our hands (an event which I 
anxiously desire) he will have no claim to any future indul- 
gence from this Government, and he must, without any stipu- 
lations in his favor, be despatched without delay to Calcutta. 

I am, Sir, &c. MornNINGTON, 


No. LXXVIII. 
The Earl of Mornington to the Right Hon. Henry Dundas. 
My pear Sir, Fort William, October 11, 1798. 
I proceed to submit to you the progress which I have 
been able to make in my proposed measures for frustrating 
the designs of Tippoo and of France. My objects, as already 
described to you,* have been to assemble the army on the 


* See p. 80. 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 289 


coasts of Coromandel and Malabar; to revive our defensive 
alliances against Tippoo, and to check the growth of the 
French influence in the Deccan; to secure the presence of 
the fleet on the coast of Malabar at the earliest possible 
period ; and to lay the foundations of a permanent improve- 
ment of the military establishments of Fort St. George, and 
of the defences of the Carnatic. 

From my private correspondence with General Harris, and 
from the letter of the Government of Fort St. George ad- 
dressed to me in Council, under the date of the 10th of July, 
you will learn the counteraction which I have met in my en- 
deavours to place our possessions upon the coast of Coroman- 
del in a respectable posture of defence. | 

From the whole tenor of my correspondence, public and 
private, as well as from every document contained in my des- 
patches since my arrival in Bengal, you will perceive that so 
far from imagining that I can ever be called upon to justify 
my orders for assembling our armies in the Peninsula of In- 
dia, my only doubt has been, whether I ought not to have 
attempted a bolder effort, with a view of anticipating the me- 
ditated attack of Tippoo, and of his French allies. The 
measures of preparation and defence which I have ordered, 
are so evidently essential to the preservation of the British 
Empire in India, that I should have deemed myself absolutely 
unpardonable if I had either neglected to erder them, or had 
been deterred from carrying them into effect by such argu- 
ments as those which you will find in the letter of the 10th 
July, from the Government of Fort St. George. 

The army, however, is assembled on the coast of Coroman- 
del, and although wholly inadequate at present to purposes 
of offence, it at least affords a better protection to the Car- 
natic than when dispersed, and when utterly unable to offer 
any sort of resistance on any part of our frontier. 

I shall be able to reinforce the army in the Carnatic by an 
addition of about 3,000 volunteers from the native regiments 
on this establishment, as soon as the state of the season will 
admit of landing them at Madras. The volunteers have 
offered themselves for embarkation under the proposed 
bounty with very great alacrity, and I am persuaded, if the 
number had not been limited by my orders, it would have 
been much more considerable. The men who have turned 

VOL, I. U 


290 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Oct. 


out for service are chiefly those who have already been on 
the coast and have obtained medals for their services, they 
are in fact the flower of the army. 

At Bombay I have found no obstacles whatever in carrying 
into effect the assembling of the army, and I have every rea- 
son to be satisfied with the zeal and vigilance of Mr. Duncan 
and General Stuart, and with the excellent abilities of the 
latter, I trust that the army at Bombay and in Malabar, is 
now in a forward state of preparation. 

The Government of Fort St. George previously to the 
arrival of Lord Clive (having in their letter of the 10th July* 
deprecated every measure of precaution for the protection of 
the Carnatic against the threatened invasion of Tippoo) ex- 
pressed in their letter of the 3d of August} an equal disincli- 
nation to the orders which J hdd given for assembling a de- 
tachment in the Guntoor Circar with a view to the revival of 
our defensive alliance with the Nizam, and to the destruction 
of the French party at Hyderabad. The opposition pro- 
ceeded in both instances from the same quarter, and was met 
by me with the same determination to pursue the line of my 
duty to the best of my judgment, to enforce the execution of 
my orders, and to reprove the factious spirit which had at- 
tempted to obstruct them. 

In pursuing this course, I have concluded a subsidiary 
treaty with the Nizam, on the principles stated to you in my 
private letter, No. 6,f in my instructions of the 8th July,§ to 
the Residents at Poonah and Hyderabad, and in my minute 
of the 12th August.||_ A copy of that minute, and a transla- 
tion of the treaty for your private use, accompany this letter ; 
you will find some parts of the translation rather awkwardly 
expressed, but as the substance of the stipulations appeared 
to me highly favourable to our interests, and as any delay 
might have hazarded the success of the whole plan, I ratified 
the treaty without alteration. Being satisfied with the manner 
in which Captain Kirkpatrick, the Acting Resident at Hydera- 
bad, had executed my instructions, I have appointed him Re- 
sident at’that Court in the room of his brother Colonel Kirk- 
patrick who has resigned. 

IT am indebted to the firmness and spirit of General Harris 
for having assembled the Guntoor detachment with every 


* See p. 214. + See p. 236. tSee p.80. § See p. 113. |] See p. 159. 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 291 


possible degree of expedition. But you will observe by the 
letters from the Resident at Hyderabad, that whether from 

neglect or wilful omission in some of the subordinate depart- 

ments of office at Fort St. George, the troops had not been 

furnished with money sufficient to enable them to quit the 

Company’s territories. This circumstance must retard their 

advance to Hyderabad. 1 still, however, entertain little 

doubt that I shall soon be enabled to forward to you the in- 

telligence of the complete dismission of the French party. I 

look upon that event to be not only highly desirable on ge- 

neral grounds but indispensable to the possibility of main- 

taining a contest with Tippoo if he should think fit to attack 

us, especially if he should receive any succour from France. 

I refer you on this point to my minute of the 12th of August. 

The transactions at Poonah will show how active Tippoo has 
been at that, Court, and how dangerous an influence he main- 
tains there through the intrigues of Govind Kishen. Although 
it is difficult yet to form any certain judgment of the issue of 
the negociation at Poonah, I am disposed to believe that the 
conclusion of the treaty of Hyderabad, under the circum- 
stances of an opening being left for the accession of the 
Peishwa, will induce him to enter speedily into our views. 
He stated no objection when Colonel Palmer first apprised 
him of our intended arrangements in favour of the Nizam; 
and he has hitherto declared his intention to fulfil his defen- 
sive engagements with us, in the event of hostilities with My- 
sore. If, however, he should prove unfaithful, the affairs of 
the Mahratta empire are still so disordered, that the utmost 
we can now apprehend is the neutrality of the Court of Poonah. 
Under such circumstances it will certainly be a most import- 
ant advantage to have secured the cordial cooperation of the 
Nizam, and to have removed all French influence in the 
Deccan. 

Since I have begun this letter, I have received a despatch 
from Colonel Palmer, giving an account of his having an- 
nounced to the Peishwa the conclusion of the treaty of 
Hyderabad. The Peishwa received the communication 
without the least symptom of jealousy or alarm, expressed his 
own wish to enter into similar engagements with the Com- 
pany, and signified his intention of opening an immediate 
negotiation with Colonel Palmer for that purpose. Colonel 
Palmer, however, does not believe that the Peishwa will enter 


292 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Oct. 


cordially into our views, unless Nana shall be restored to the 
administration, an event which is expected to happen within 
a short period of time. 

If the Peishwa shall ultimately accept my propositions, it 
is my intention to cement the whole of my plan by a new 
treaty of defensive alliance between the Company, the Nizam, 
and the Peishwa; the stipulations of which shall remedy 
every defect in the subsisting treaties, by defining whatever 
is vague, and by explaining whatever is obscure, in our pre- 
sent reciprocal engagements. This was an object which 
Lord Cornwallis endeavoured to accomplish during the last 
months of his continuance in India. It is unquestionably not 
only a desirable, but a necessary improvement of our security 
in the present crisis, the subsisting defensive treaties with the 
Nizam and the Peishwa being very ambiguous and loose, as 
well as defective in many essential articles. 

The circumstances of the moment will probably enable me 
to extend our system of defensive alliance to the case of a 
French invasion in India, whether connected or not with the 
cause of Tippoo. As our treaties now stand, if a French 
army were to land in any part of our territory, we could not 
claim assistance either from the Nizam or from the Peishwa, 
unléss Tippoo had previously avowed a connection with the 
French, or had manifested the existence of it by some overt act. 

Scindiah has received my propositions very favourably, and J 
have every reason to believe that he will endeavour to return 
to Hindostan, ‘where the internal commotions in his dominions, 
and the increasing rumours of the approach of Zemaun Shah, 
render his presence absolutely necessary to his own preserva- 
tion. The situation of Scindiah is at present such that we 
have a good deal to hope and nothing to fear from him. He 
will be useful to us if he should return to his own dominions, 
and if he should not, his power must fall to ruin. 

In my letter, No. 6,* I informed you that I had actually for- 
warded a representation to Tippoo, and had called 6n the 
allies to concur in it, the fact was that I had drawn a paper 
for that purpose, and had prepared it for despatch to both 
the allied Courts; but a more full cohsideration of the whole 
political state of India induced me to think that it would be 
advisable to postpone any remonstrance to Tippoo until our 


* See page, 80. 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS, 293 


preparations should be further advanced, and until I had 
been able to ascertain the disposition of our allies, as well as 
their means of assisting us in the event of a contest with 
Mysore. It appeared also to me that the presence of a Bri- 
tish fleet upon the coast of Malabar might incline the Sul- 
taun to give a more serious consideration to our representa- 
tions. A further advantage which recommended this delay 
was, that it would afford me the opportunity of accommodat- 
ing the nature and extent of my propositions to my means of 
enforcing them. My minute of the 12th of August, will fur- 
nish you with the outline of the remonstrance which I should 
hope we may be enabled to make to Tippoo without the hazard 
of an immediate war, and with the prospect of obtaining from 
him some degree of security against his future machinations. 

The draft of a letter to Tippoo which I have received from 

the Nizam and the Peishwa, (and which forms a number in 
the packet of the 3rd October, addressed to the Secret Com- 
mittee) will serve to prove the sense which our allies entertain 
of Tippoo’s aggression, as well as their concurrence in my 
principles with regard to the general nature of the satisfac- 
tion to be required from him. You will observe, however, 
that I have still reserved to myself the power of framing the 
remonstrance to Tippoo according to the circumstances of the 
conjuncture in which it may be expedient to apply to him. 
The moment I trust is not far distant when the French party 
shall have been expelled from the Deccan, when the fleet 
shall be on the coast of Malabar, and when our military pre- 
parations shal] be sufficiently advanced to enable me to bring 
every point of difference with Tippoo to a distinct issue. 

By my correspondence with Admiral Rainier, you will per- 
ceive that I have induced him to proceed immediately to the 
coast of Malabar, I trust this disposition of the fleet will 
prove an efficient check upon Tippoo’s intercourse with the 
French. 

My instructions to the Government of Fort St. George on 
the subject of the defects in their military establishments were 
despatched on the 20th July.* I have not yet received the 
report which I desired ;* and I have reason to apprehend that 
the necessary preparations for the defence of the Carnatic, 
are carried on with less zeal and energy than the occasion 


* Sce page, 244. 


294. ‘' THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO - Oct. 


requires. Even now that Government appears unwilling to 
push our preparations with the requisite alacrity, lest the for- 
wardness of our defence should invite an attack from Tippoo at 
an earlier period than he would otherwise be disposed to move. 
I know that Tippoo will attack us, whenever he shall imagine 
that he can do so with advantage, but I never can believe that 
his inclination to make the attack will increase in proportion 
to the augmentation of our means of repelling it. In the de- 
fenceless state in which I found our possessions on the coast 
of Coromandel, at a time when a large proportion of Tippoo’s 
army was actually in the field, the Carnatic lay completely at 

_ his mercy: It was, however, probable at that time, as it is 
now, that Tippoo would not be disposed to move previously 
to the arrival of an additional force from France; an event 
which was not to be expected until after the close of the mon- 
soon on the coast of Malabar. Under these circumstance it 
was apprehended by the Government of Fort St. George, that 
any attempt to collect our forces might induce Tippoo to make 
an immediate attack upon the Carnatic. 

I felt at that early period that a moment of hazard must be 
passed during the necessary interval between the commence- 
ment of our preparations, and the time when they would be 
so far advanced as to secure us against the effects of asudden 
blow. The degree of this hazard appeared to me to be in- 
considerable, but if it had been greater, I should have in- 
curred it rather than have relied on the other alternative of 
remaining in 4 defenceless state, and trusting to the forbear- 
ance of Tippoo. 

General Harris’s private letters will shew the duration of 
the period of danger according to his opinion. 

It will not escape your observation, that the argument of 
the Government of Fort St. George against the prudence of 
arming would have been stronger every day in exact propor- 
tion to.the progress of Tippoo’s preparations. The danger, 
therefore, of taking any steps for our defence would have in- 
creased with the probability of the attack; and the moment 
must ultimately have arrived in which we should have been 
compelicd either to assemble our army under circumstances 
of augmented danger, or to abandon all hopes of resistance. 

My judgment clearly was, and is, that the earliest possible 
effort to recover our means of repelling the enemy must be 
at all times the safest step which could be taken. Having 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 295 


held this opinion even before the commencement of our pre- 
parations, I now feel still more strongly the absolute neces- 
sity of urging them with every practicable degree of despatch, 
until we shall be in a state to meet Tippoo in the field either 
for purposes of offence or of defence. 

The engagements which Tippoo has contracted with the 
French, and the public proofs which he has given of his 
readiness to receive in Mysore as large a force as they can 
furnish, are circumstances which form a new feature in our 
political situation in India. The intercepted correspondence 
between M. Dubuc and Tippoo contains an additional proof 
of the nature of Tippoo’s connection with the French, as 
well as of his present views. On their part the French have 
not only manifested every intention to cooperate with Tippoo, 
but I am bound to conclude, from all the intelligence which I 
have been enabled to obtain, that they have actually fitted 
out considerable armaments with a view of reaching India, 
either by the Cape of Good Hope, or through the Red Sea, 
or by a combined attempt through both passages. If they 
should attempt the passage by the Cape, and should succeed 
in eluding the vigilance of our fleets (an event at least possi- 
ble) they might land upon the coast of Malabar a force which 
would become formidable to us in an unprepared condition. 
On the other hand, it is hardly to be supposed that with our 
army in the field, on the coast of Malabar, it would be prac- 
ticable for the French to convey, by the Cape of Good Hope, 
without interruption from our fleets, any force so considerable 
as to be a subject of alarm to us. 

I have just now learnt, though from doubtful authority, 
that the French obtained possession of Alexandria in the 
month of June, combining this report with the news received 
from Europe of the sailing of the fleet from Toulon towards 
the middle of May, the event, however extraordinary, is not * 
improbable. If the French really have taken Alexandria, 
difficult as the attempt may be, I conclude that they will omit 
no exertion to assist Tippoo,* and, at least, will use every 
means to instigate him to war. The terror of their victory 
in Egypt Gghene I hear they have made an immense slaugh- 


* See Napoleon Buonaparte’s letter to Tippoo from Egypt in the 
Appendix. 


296 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Oct. 


ter) will greatly serve their cause in India, and perhaps elate 
Tippoo so highly as to induce him to commence hostilities, 

My information, however, leads me to believe that even 
without meeting any opposition in Egypt, the French could 
not reach India from thence in any numbers for a considera- 
ble time, and that if a vigilant cruize of three or four ships 
could be established off the Straits of Babelmandel, it would 
be nearly impracticable for any vessels which the French 
could collect in the Red Sea to force a passage through the 
Straits. But I am not yet apprized whether the Admiral will 
be able to provide for this object -without abandoning the 
protection of the trade of Bombay and of the coast of Ma- 
labar. It appears possible that a part of the armament from 
Toulon may be destined for India direct, while the remainder 
shall operate in Egypt; a squadron leaving the Mediterra- 
nean with this view before the end of May might have entered 
the Red Sea before the Admiral can have occupied the Straits 
of Babelmandel. This is not, I trust, a probable, but it is 
far from an impossible event, and its consequences would be 
to remove a main obstacle to the operations of the French 
against India from Egypt. Whether, therefore, the operations 
of the French against India be directed through the ordinary 
passage by the Cape of Good Hope, or through the Red Sea, 
or through both, it is equally incumbent on us to maintain 
Bombay and Malabar in a respectable posture of defence. I 
have already suggested the possibility of Tippoo’s mind being 
so elevated by the first account of the French successes in 
Egypt as to break out into immediate hostilities. These con- 
siderations apply not only to the necessity of keeping the 
field in Malabar, but to that of continuing the army in the 
Carnatic in a state of forward preparation. 

On the north-western frontier of India a greater probability 
appears, than has yet existed, of the approach of Zemaun 
Shah. Gholam Mahommed, the Rohilla Chief, who was the 
leader of the rebellion in ‘1794, is returned into Rohilcund 
with a mission from the Shah, and is endeavouring to excite 
the Rohilla Chiefs to commotion. This premature step, al- 
though a strong indication of the serious intentions of the 
Shah, will, I trust, enable me to give an immediate check to 
the spirit of revolt in that quarter, from which he would have 
derived great assistance in any attempt upon the frontier of 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 997 


Oude. With this view, I have invested Sir James Craig 
with the command of the troops in the Vizier’s dominions, 
and I have directed the corps stationed at Futteh Ghur to 
advance into Rohilcund for the purpose of securing the per- 
sons of. the leaders of the projected revolt, and of crushing 
the seeds of commotion before they shall have gained any 
height. Even after this object shall have been accomplished, 
it will still be necessary to maintain a large force on the fron- 
tier of Oude, as long as any danger of Zemaun Shah’s ap- 
proach shall exist. 

The necessity of protecting Ceylon, and also our various 
acquisitions in the Eastern Seas, has diminished our disposa- 
ble force at Madras, and in some degree at this Presidency. 

If the French should be enabled to reach the coast of 
Malabar with any considerable force, I am persuaded that 
one of their first objects would be to seize Goa, as being the 
strongest place and the best harbour in which they could rea- 
dily establish themselves in that part of India. From Goa 
they would have the power, with great advantage, of afford- 

ing assistance to 'Tippoo, as well as of receiving, from time to 
time, whatever succour might be furnished from their newly 
acquired dominions in Egypt. 

Having at a very early period foreseen the importance of 
Goa, I have already obtained much information on the sub- 
ject from Mr. Duncan and General Stuart, and I mean to 
direct them to endeavour to take the most effectual means for 
protecting it against any attempt of the French. This ope- 
ration may possibly require a considerable force. If the 
Peishwa should revert (as I trust he will) to his former wish 
for the aid of a subsidiary force from the Company, this ser- 
vice will also become an additional call upon our army at 
Bombay. The combination of all these circumstances, on 
every side of India, will probably require an increase of our 
force at all the Presidencies. You will observe, however, 
that the greater part of the expense of this augmentation at 
Fort St. George and Bombay will be defrayed by the Nizam 
and by the Peishwa; and by referring to my letter to the 
Secret Committee, under date the 3rd October, you will per- 
ceive that it is my intention to provide for the expense of the 
augmentation of our army in the province of Oude by a pro- 
portionate reduction of the Vizier’s present military establish- 


298 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Oct. 


ment, and by charging with the pay of our increased 
force. 

It is my intention, by the ship which carries this despatch, 
to represent to Lord Macartney and to Sir Hugh Christian 
the necessity of their contributing to the defence of the coast 
of Malabar, provided they shall be satisfied that the efforts 
of the French are directed solely to India, and that no attack 
is to be apprehended against the Cape. I should hope that, 
under such circumstances, we might expect to receive from 
the Cape the assistance of several ships of war, and, at least, 
one regiment of European infantry, before the end of the 
month of February. I also place great reliance on your vi- 
gilance and alacrity, being persuaded that my letters from 
the Cape, M. Malartic’s proclamation, and the movements of 
the French towards India, will have concurred to induce you 
to reinforce the army and navy in this quarter. My endea- 
vours shall be directed to keep our expenses on the lowest 
possible scale consistent with the permanent security of our 
possessions. 

Whatever may be the result of this crisis, I trust that your 
opinion and that of my friends at home will be, that I have 
not been deficient, either in diligence or zeal, for the public 
service. My health is now, and has been throughout the 
whole of the rainy season, much more favourable than I have 
remembered it for some years past in England; a circum- 
stance remarkably fortunate under so great a pressure of 
business. Iam confident that the ultimate issue of this alarm 
will be prosperous to our affairs; but I do not apprehend 
that I shall find myself oppressed by the labour to which any 
turn of our fortune may subject me; my mind would be per- 
fectly composed, if I could expect to meet a correspondent 
disposition in those who must be charged with the execution 
of my orders. I refer you to my secret and confidential let- 
ters for an explanation of my apprehensions on this point, 
the sole object of my anxiety, and the only real peril in the 
present situation of India. 

Believe me, &c. 
MornincTon. 

P.S. I have annexed to this letter two papers drawn up by 
Captain Malcolm, late Town “Major of Fort St. George, one 
on the state of Tippoo’s army and resources, the other a ge- 


1798. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 299 


neral view of our present political situation. The latter is 
curious as Captain Malcolm had not seen any of my letters or 
minutes on the same subject, and only knew that a detach- 
ment was ordered to Hyderabad. I had no knowledge of 
Captain Malcolm, nor was he recommended to me before I 
met him at Fort St. George; he is a very promising young 
man. I have appointed him Assistant to the Resident at 
Hyderabad. 


No. LXXIX. 
Sir J. H. Craig to the Earl of Mornington, 


My Lorp, Cawnpore, 13th October, 1798. 


The letter from my Kurnaul correspondent, to which I have 
alluded to in my public letter, is principally on the subject of 
Gholaum Mahommed, whose motions I have directed him to 
watch. After, however, mentioning the construction of the 
bridge over the Attock, he adds— 

“ A constant intercourse is maintained between the Chiefs 
of the Siek nation and those of the Mahrattas. The former 
are all at their stations.” 

I have written to him for a further explanation, and have 
directed him to make particular enquiry, as far as may be in 
his power, as to the probability of the two people entering 
into an alliance to oppose the Shah; and more especially as 
to the disposition of the Seiks, and how far they are united 
among themselves, for that purpose. I have also written in 
the same terms, on the latter subject, to my friend at Amrut- 
sir. In the meantime I have forwarded the account to Co- 
lonel Collins: as, if these people should really have an inten- 
tion of entering into a defensive league against the common 
enemy, it may be much facilitated I think by its being known 
that your Lordship is willing to be a party in it, whilst that 
circumstance will undoubtedly have a tendency to inspire 
them with a little more confidence in the force of any treaty 
that may take place between them, than is otherwise likely to 
exist betwixt inveterate enemies, each knowing the other to 
be capable of every treachery. 

Not having the honour to be known to your Lordship, it 
may now be necessary that I should assure you that I am not 


300 SIR J. H. CRAIG, TO Oct. 


apt to obtrude opinions, or to step out of my sphere in the 
presumption of offering advice. The only merit to which I 
lay any claim is that of an ardent zeal in the service of my 
country, but I wish not that it should be intemperate, and if 
I assume the liberty, on this occasion, of continuing a private 
correspondence with your Lordship, you owe it to the honour 
which you did me in your first letter: by the frankness of 
which I was led to believe that it would be received by your 
Lordship precisely in the light in which alone I can assure 
you it is ventured upon. 

I have not heard from Colonel Collins since he left this for 
Futtyghur. In the conversation that I had with him here I 
endeavoured to impress him with a conviction of the neces- 
sity of his losing no time in entering into the negociation with 
which he is charged, and I am sure he was himself sensible 
of it; but since we have such good reasons for believing that 
the Shah has actually begun his march, so far as to be on 
the banks of the Attock upwards of twenty days ago, I now 
feel it to be of double importance that he should proceed 
without an instant’s delay. I am concerned to have to say, 
that from all the information I can get, and I have made 
every inquiry in my power, I am led most firmly to believe 
that the Seiks, if left to themselves, will not make any oppo- 
sition at all to the Shah’s approach; or if they do, that it 
will be very feeble. I believe, indeed, that the power of the 
Seiks rests very much upon opinion, and that in the day of 
trial the delusion will appear. I neither believe them to be 
so numerous, or so hardy, as they have been represented, 
although sufficiently so to lord it over.the real inhabitants of 
the country, for I make no doubt that your Lordship is aware 
that the Seiks are not the fortieth part of the inhabitants of 
the district over which they have established their dominion. 
The mass of these are a mixture of Mussulmen and Hindoos; 
the former of which from every motive, and the latter in de- 
testation of the oppressions of their present Lords, will re- 
joice in thé Shah’s approach. Nothing I believe can produce 
any important exertion from the Seiks but a junction with 
the Mahrattas; and giving even credit to the letter from 
Kurnauk, whatever appearance it may carry of the probability 
of sucly an event, I still imagine it will be with difficulty ac- 
complished, but under your Lordship’s auspices; but I much 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 301 


doubt the ability of the Mahrattas themselves to assemble in 
time such a force as will give confidence to the others. There 
is no appearance of it that I can yet hear of; they are quarel- 
ling among themselves at Delhi, without seeming much to 
think of the danger with which they are threatened. The 
Attock is but a little better than 400 coss from Delhi, a space 
that may with the utmost ease be marched in six weeks, and 
that without adverting at all to the celerity with which the 
Shah’s army is reported to move. If, (and it is no very im- 
probable supposition) despising the Seiks, whose behaviour 
in 1796 was no ways such as to give him cause to hold them in 
high estimation, the Shah should adopt a bold step; and, 
leaving a corps of troops to keep them in awe, he should move 
on with rapidity, in the view of anticipating the Mahrattas at 
Delhi, he may be there in a time, that I almost tremble to 
think of. It is not utterly impossible, my Lord, that he might 
anticipate our preparations ; though it is indeed hardly to be 
expected that, entertaining the same opinion of the Mahrattas 
as that which I have supposed him to do of the Seiks, he should 
venture to leave them behind in order to attack us, especially 
before the fords of the Ganges are open. However, I wish to 
shew the expediency of exertion and activity on our part. The 
extent to which it is meant to carry the army being ascertained, 
the troops that are to compose it should be immediately assem- 
bled, not in the slow progress of the ordinary relief, when batta- 
lion relieves battalion, but the utmost expedition should be used 
in it. The ordnance and stores should be hurried up in some 
very unusual way, unless it can be furnished from Chunar, as 
I have suggested to the Commander-in-Chief; and, above all, 
some steps should be adopted, with respect to further arrange- 
ment, that might preclude the necessity of a daily reference 
to the present seat of Government. 
I know not what to say with respect to the Nabob’s troops, 
I would be content that they should be useless, but J dread 
their being dangerous, unless some step is taken with regard 
to them. I should be almost as unwilling to leave them be- 
hind me as I should be to leave a fortress of the enemy. The 
Nabob is highly unpopular, and of all his subjects, I believe he 
would least expect attachment from his army. I fear much that 
it is too late to reap any benefit from the arrangement which 
your Lordship proposes with respect to them; and if we 


802 SIR J. H. CRAIG, TO Oct. 


should be called to the frontier I doubt whether it may not 
be hazardous to attempt to reduce them. We shall have of 
ourselves too many recruits in our ranks, indeed, a number 
that will very much weaken the dependence to be placed in 
our battalions. On this subject I feel that I tread on tender 
ground; but I write to your Lordship in the confidence of a 
private communication. Neither the discipline of the army, 
or the knowledge of the officers, are such as to admit of our 
being insensible to other disadvantages. We are to expect a 
numerous and ferocious enemy, undisciplined and disorderly, 
but impetuous in their attacks, and rapid in their movements, 
—abounding in cavalry, and acting in a country the most 
favourable to that arm, where, if we can secure one flank, it 
will be a fortunate position. Against them our reliance must 
be on our artillery, and on the steadiness of our infantry,— 
where discipline should keep them firm in their ranks, and 
where confidence in their advantages should teach them not to 
shrink under the impression of a tumultuous charge of ca- 
valry, the circumstance of all others the most likely to affect 
the mind of a young soldier, while the knowledge of the offi- 
cers, and the previous training of the corps, should ensure 
the ability of moving with the utmost precision and rapidity, 
and of forming in every direction, to resist a surrounding 
cavalry. Battalions, with full one-third of recruits, are little 
equal to this description in its first part, and truth compels 
me to say that I have not yet seen one that came any where 
near it in the latter. 

Your Lordship will do me justice in believing that I do not 
mean to hold out discouragement by this description. We 
must act, and we must make the best of the tools in our 
hands. My viewis, that your Lordship may be aware of the 
true state of the army, which it is at least possible that you may 
not become through any other channel ; three-fourths of them 
with whom your Lordship may converse do not themselves 
know it, and the other fourth will not confess it. There is a 
third class of ffeople which your Lordship may meet,—and it 
is a numerous one, even in my own profession,—who either 
do, or affect to, hold in contempt the idea of the necessity of 
its being otherwise. It is a fact, however, past controversy, 
that within these four years, and owing to these very circum- 
stances of want of discipline and knowledge, the fate of our 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 303 


Empire in India probably hung by a thread of the slightest 
texture; since even the impetuosity of the enemy ought na- 
turally to have led to the very advantage which his ignorance 
would not permit his being sensible of. 

Our stores are utterly incompetent to any forward move, 
such as I have ventured to suggest as justifiable, if coopera- 
tion with the Mahrattas can be purchased by it. Our pro- 
portion of musquet ammunition is 120 rounds per man, and 
that for the small arms of the cavalry is 40; with this I most 
certainly would not venture to stir a step from the Ganges, 
and how we are to get up more, in the time in which I think 
it is probable that it may be requisite for us to do so, I know 
not; I have written in strong terms to the Commander-in- 
Chief upon the subject. For our artillery we have 300° 
rounds, but that is, if possible, still less equal to what we 
ought to have, at least in a depét, to which we could have a 
much more ready access than we have to Chunar or Allaha- 
bad. The latter should be our grand depét, in which should 
be lodged a quantity of stores of every species, equal to every 
possible emergency; while a field depdt fed continually from 
it, should move successively from post to post as we advance, 
and be always at hand to renew our deficiencies. Upon the 
whole, do not, my Lord, consider it as presumption if I say 
that I feel a great deal more arrangement to be necessary 
than appears to me to occur to others as such. It is an easy 
thing to put the whole upon the issue of one battle, and un- 
fortunately it is the mode which is attended with the least 
trouble. ' 

I really beg your Lordship’s pardon for this long and very 
free intrusion; but my apology is already offered in the fore 

--art.of my letter, and I shall therefore say no more, but that 
Fhe honour to be, 


Sir, My Lord, 
In Cour Lordship’s most obedient and humble Servant, 
derak J. H. Craie. 


fiel€ 


a. 


304 SIR J. H., CRAIG, TO Oct. 


No. LXXX. 


Sir J. H. Craig to the Earl of Mornington. 
My Lorp, Cawnpore, 13th October, 1798. 


On the 10th inst. I forwarded to the Commander-in-Chief 
the original of a letter which I received from a correspondent 
at Amrutsir, which tends to corroborate the information which 
Colonel Collins received from Delhi, and forwarded to your 
Lordship by express on the 6th, and yesterday I had another 
letter from a man who I have stationed at Kurnaul with an 
establishment of hurcarrahs, who also confirms that account, 
with the addition that a bridge was constructing over the 
Attock. 

Considering the fact as established, for I can see no reason 
to doubt it, that the Shah is on the banks of the Attock, I 
should feel myself extremely happy if I had any instructions 
by which I could guide myself on the occasion. Your Lord- 
ship and the Government have done me the honour to vest 
me with the general command of the army in the field, but I 
must request the permission to observe, that it has been 
without one line of direction by which I can form a judgment 
of the extent to which I may use my discretion in that com- 
mand, or of the powers with which it was intended to entrust 
me in the exercise of it, I feel myself to be so totally inca- 
pable of starting difficulties for the purpose of embarrassment, 
that I am unwilling even to be exposed to the suspicion of it. 
I therefore most solemnly assure your Lordship that in 
making this observation, my sole view is, to point out the ex- 
pediency of guarding against the possibility of my counter- 
acting the views of Government, through ignorarcen* 
possibly from over zeal, at the same time feeling may 
moment to be of the utmost importance, in the presenthem 
I should regret exceedingly to find that I had negle¢yes 
measure from not knowing that it was intended to vestg 
with the power of adopting it. Iam far, my Lord, fr 
shrinking from responsibility, but I wish not to be chargea 
with it, at so great a hazard as must be incurred, under the 
total ignorance of what is expected from me. 

I have just written to the Commander-in-Chief to acquaint 
him, that if I got any intelligence upon which I can rely, that 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 305 


the Shah has actually marched from the Attock towards La- 
hore, before I am honoured with any instructions from him or 
from your Lordship, I shall immediately march with every thing 
I can collect, except General Stuart’s corps, to Anopsheer. 
As I take for granted that the Commander-in-Chief will com- 
municate that letter to your Lordship, it is scarcely necessary 
that I should enter into any detail of the reasons upon which 
I have judged it expedient to adopt this resolution. 

I have already written several letters to the Commander- 
in-Chief, on the subject of the deficiencies under which we 
should labour in the event of our taking the field. All those 
that regard cattle and camels, I believe, I could supply here, 
but I have felt myself restrained by the Commander-in-Chief, 
having observed in one of his letters that measures were 
taking on that subject at the Presidency. Ihave also applied 
to Mr. Lumsden to ask the assistance of the Nabob in the 
article of elephants, and though I have not yet received any 
official answer, yet I have had great satisfaction, in a private 
letter, in which he tells me he thinks he can prevail upon 
him to give it us to some extent. Other deficiencies of am- 
munition and stores, particularly musquet cartridges, must 
come from below, and I very much fear can scarcely arrive in 
time to be of any use. 

I have the honour to be, with great respect, 
, My Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient and 
Most humble Servant, 
J. H. Craic, 


No. LXXXI. 
From the Earl of Mornington to the Resident at Lucknow. 

Sir, Fort William, 18th October, 1798. 

In consequence of information I have received of a consi- 
derable deficiency in the carriage-cattle of the army in the 
field upon the frontiers of his Excellency the Nabob Vizier’s 
dominions, I have deemed it expedient to apply to his Excel- 
lency for his assistance in this respect, and have accordingly 
addressed a letter to him for that purpose, which will be for- 
warded to you by the Persian translator. You will lose no 
time in ascertaining the number and description of deficient 

VOL. I. x 


306 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Oct. 


carriage-cattle from the Commander-in-Chief in the field, and 
apply to his Excellency the Nabob for them accordingly. 
I understand that the deficiency is principally in elephants. 
No arguments ‘can be supposed necessary to obtain this 
aid from his Excellency, in promoting an arrangement of 
which the immediate object is the protection of his country. 
You will, however, assure him, that the same or an equal 
number of elephants and bullocks shall be restored to him 
when no longer required for the present service. 
Iam, &c. 


MornineTon. 
T 


No. LXXXII. 
From the Earl of Mornington to the Hon. Jonathan Duncan. 


Sir, Fort William, 24th October, 1798. 

_ [have had the honour to receive your letter of the 25th 
September, and although the measures which you adopted 
in consequence of your late advices from Suez, and the Gulph 
of Persia, have already obtained my public approbation, yet 
it is with great pleasure that I embrace the present oppor- 
tunity of repeating the high sense which I entertain of the 
activity and judgment which have marked your proceedings, 
not only in this instance but on occasion of the preparations 
which had been previously rendered necessary by the conduct 
of Tippoo Sultaun. 

Although I hope we may still be able to avoid a war with 
that Prince, yet I continue to be of opinion that we must 
persevere in our preparations, and take all our measures as 
if that calamity were inevitable. With these sentiments I 
have determined not to relax my endeavours for reinforcing 
the army of the Carnatic from Bengal as speedily and to as 
great an extent as possible; and the Commander-in-Chief is 
now employed in framing a plan of eventual operations against 
the Sultaun, of which the imniediate attack of Seringapatam 
must constitute the main object. "This plan will be commu- 
nicated to you, as soon as it shall be formed; in the mean- 
while I request that, having ¢onsulted General Stuart on the 
subject, you will as soon as possible let me know to what 


« 


extent of force, dt what period, and. from what points it will . 


be in your power to cooperate with the army in the Carnatic 
in such an attack on the capital of Mysore. 


1798. THE HON. JONATHAN DUNCAN. 3807 


Adverting to the dispersed state of his Majesty’s squadron 
in India, to the indispensable necessity of vigilantly guarding 
the Malabar coast during the present monsoon, and to the 
possibility of our experiencing some disappointment with re- 
spect. to the arrival of the naval reinforcement proniised from 
home; I consider it to be our urgent duty to make every 
practical effort for the purpose of increasing the Admiral’s 
means of frustrating effectually the designs of the enemy in 
the Red Sea. I shall accordingly endeavour to equip and 
despatch immediately some armed ships from this port, which 
I shall place at his disposal; and I desire that you will apply 
yourself to the same object without delay: I should hope that 
the port of Bombay, with proper exertion, might contribute 
materially to the augmentation of the Admiral’s force. It has 
occurred to me that gun-boats might be usefully employed 
against any small craft which the enemy may have collected 
in the Red Sea; and if the Admiral (whom you will consult 
on this point) should be of the same opinion, I should hope 
you would not have much difficulty in supplying him. I also 
wish you to consider, in concert with him, whether it would 
not be advisable, with a view to the more effectual security 
of the Straits of Babel Mandel, to possess and fortify the 
small island of Pereim, which I understand to be uninha- 
bited. 

I approve of your proposed mission of Captain Wilson, but 
not having yet seen your instructions to that gentleman, I 
shall only observe that, in the event of his destroying any of 
the shipping or craft in the Red Sea, it will be necessary to 
satisfy the proprietors of our determination to indemnify them 
faithfully for all losses so incurred. 

Our latest accounts of Zemaun Shah scarcely leave a doubt 
of his having actually marched towards Hindostan. It is my 
intention to suggest to his Majesty’s minister at Constantinople 
the expediency of his endeavouring to engage the Porte to 
concur with us in exciting the ruling power of Persia to such 
measures as may alarm Zemaun Shah for-the safety of his 
hereditary dominions, and may recall him from the prosecution 
of his designs against the tranquillity of India. In the mean- 
while it is my wish that you should take the earliest oppor- 
tunity of suggesting the same considerations and objects to 
the English minister with the Porte, or through any other 


308 LORD CLIVE, TO Oct. 


more expeditious channel. If I am rightly informed, a brother 

of Zemaun Shah is now at the Court of Persia: this Prince 

took refuge there not long since, and he might possibly be 

found an useful instrument in forwarding a plan of the nature 
‘in question. 

Should you be of opinion that any advantage can be derived 
from the local knowledge or qualifications of Mr. Manesty, 
the Company's Resident at Bussorah, you have my permission 
to employ him in the negotiations in Persia, either separately 
or in conjunction with Mehdy Ali Khan, as you may judge 
most advisable. 

In order that this: business may be impeded as little as 
possible by the delays necessarily arising from reference to 
me, I authorize you to furnish Baba Khan, or whoever may 
be the reigning sovereign of Persia, with any number of field- 
pieces, as well as any quantity of military stores, which you 
can safely spare, whenever the communications of Mehdy Ali 
Khan, or of Mr. Manesty, shall afford you reason to believe 
that the Government of Persia is sincerely disposed to make 
a serious diversion in our favour, by menacing the dominions 
of Zemaun Shah. 

With a view to the same object, I must repeat my desire 
that you will immediately employ all practicable means of 
exciting the people of Sinde, and any other tribes occupying 
the countries which border on Moultan and Candahar, to 
alarm Zemaun Shah for the safety of his possessions in those 
quarters. These people have been stated to be generally 
ripe for revolt against the authority of the Shah; and possibly 
they might be induced, by a liberal supply of arms and am- 
munition, and by the countenance of this Government, to 
take advantage of his absence in Hindostan. I understand 
that such supplies might be conveyed to them through Kutch 
and up the river Indus, but you will, of course, be in posses- 
sion of the best information on this head. 

You will easily judge how anxious I must be in the present 
crisis to obtain the fullest and earliest advices from Europe, 
as well as from your side of India. I hope, therefore, that 
you will have the goodness to forward to me, as speedily as 
possible, whatever newspapers or other accounts may reach 
you; and I request that you will always send, not extracts, 
but the whole of the despatches and letters on public affairs 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 809. 


from the several ministers, agents of the Company, or other 
officers with whom you correspond. 
Iam, &e. &e. 
Mornineron. 


> 


“No. LXXXIII. 
Lord Clive to the Earl of Mornington. 


(Privateg 
My Lorp, Fort St George, 24th October, 1798. 

It being the wish of this Government, in making the revi- 
sion of its establishments, according to your Lordship’s orders 
of the 6th August, to follow as nearly as circumstances will per- 
mit, the mode of proceeding fixed upon in Bengal for effecting 
the same object; and doubts having arisen in the Council with 
respect to the powers intended to be given to the Committee 
appointed by your Lordship, I have heen desired to request 
you will have the goodness to acquaint me whether it was your 

Lordship’s design to confine the Committee, of which you are 
the President, in its report to the rise, progress, and pre- 
sent actual state of establishments and resources, or whether 
it was your intention that the Committee should, in addition 
to this labour, report its opinion upon such reduction of ex- 
pense in the present existing establishments, as may be 
thought salutary and advisable, or upon such increase of re- 
venue and resource as may be deemed practicable; and far- 
ther, whether, under any apparent circumstances of advantage 
to the service, or of able and laborious exertion, it is under- 
stood the Committee may recommend any increase of salary 
or expense. In consequence of the settled state of the wea- 
ther, and of the disappearance of all signs of the breaking of 
the monsoon, General Harris, yesterday, gave it as his opi- 
nion in Council, that the battering train might be ordered to 
set out for Vellore. Directions;have been accordingly given, 
and I have been assured by some of the gentlemen of the 
military board, who I met this morning at the arsenal, that 

the first division of six eighteen pounders, with a quantity of 
ammunition, will be ready to move on Friday evening or 

Saturday morning, and a second division in about three days 

afterwards. His Highness the Nabob lends four elephants, 

which may prove of great use in case there should he a heavy 


310 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Oct. 


fall of rain before the guns reach their destination. The im- 
portant and glorious news of Sir Horatio Nelson having, with 
thirteen sail of the line, totally defeated the Toulon fleet of 
the same number of ships of the line under Admiral de Brueys, 
in the Bay of Beguier, near Rosetta, taking nine, two having 
blown up, and two only with two frigates, having effected 
their escape, has filled this settlement with joy. With cordial 
congratulations, and with the greatest respect and esteem, 
I have the honor to be, my Lord, 
-Your LotUship’s most faithful Servant, 
Crive. 


No. LXXXIV. 
From Tippoo Sultaun to the Right Hon. the Governor General. 
[Received 24th October, 1798, 

The Talooks of Ameera and Soula, in which Cauntmungle 
and Coloorbachee are situated, have belonged to Couryal 
‘(Mangalore) from the year Rajah 1070 Mohummuddee to the 
end of the year Shadab 1226, a term of 156 years. Thirty- 
six years ago a body of 2,000 Coorga peons were employed 
in service of the State, and some villages in the Talooks above 
mentioned, yielding 3,423 pagodas, continued for a short time 
to be assigned for their pay, but since six and thirty years 
that even has ceased. This trivial affair can only be ascribed 
to the turbulent disposition of interested men, who by nature 
‘are ever seeking opportunities of sowing the seeds of dissen- 
‘tion. . Of this I am confident your Lordship must be well con- 
, vinced the person who is now in Coorga is not of the posterity 
‘of the Coorga Rajahs but of a different stock. 

Constantly gratify me with friendly letters. 

P.S. Mr. Duncan, the Governor of Bombay, has wiitten 
to me, that two persons of integrity and ability, frowi among 
the civil officers (Talookdars) on the coast of Malabar, have 
-been deputed to inquire into the claims of: the above-men- 
tioned Talook, and will shortly arrive. Orders have been 
‘issued from my Sircar also, nominating Shaikh Shahaubuddien 
and Meer Mohummed Ally, persons of integrity and honour, 
to negociate with the deputies above-mentioned, and ascer- 
tain, from records and facts, the dependency of the above- 
mentioned Talooks on Couryal. 


A true Copy, N. B. Epmonstone, 
. Persian Translator to Govt. 


1798. COLONEL COLLINS. 311 


No. LXXXYV. 


The Earl of Mornington to Lieut.-Colonel John Collins, Resident with 
Dowlut Row Scindiah. 


Sir, Fort William, October 26, 1798.. 
I have received your letters of the dates referred to in the 
margin.* 


Ifcircumstances admitted of our forming a defensive alliance 
with Dowlut Row Scindiah against Zemaun Shah, it would 
not be difficult to convince Scindidh of the expediency of in- 
ducing the Rajepoots and Seiks io join in the league; and it 
might not be impossible to persuade him to offer to them ad- 
vantages of some importance, either in the form of a remission 
of tribute or of an extension of territory. Some concession 
of this kind on the part of Scindiah, joined to a promise of 
our employing our friendly offices to compose any differences 
which might hereafter arise between him and the Rajepoots or 
Seiks, would constitute as great a benefit as these powers 
could reasonably expect from a political connection with the 
Company, the immediate object of which is no other than to 
repel a common danger, or rather a danger much more formi- 
dable to their ihterests than to ours. 

Unfortunately, however, the circumstances of the moment 

~ afford but a faint prospect of our being able to effect such an 
arrangement. The probability of Scindiah’s early return to 
Hindostan is increased, but it is still uncertain whether his 
arrival within his own dominions will be early enough for our 
purpose; and (notwithstanding my expectations expressed in 
a former letter, I am now inclined to think that) it is still more 
‘doubtful whether, at the moment of his return, the state of 
‘his authority and resources will be such as to warrant any 
great hope of advantage to the Company from a formal de- 
fensive alliance with him against Zemaun Shah. 

Under these circumstances, the utility of formal defensive 
‘engagements, even with Scindiah himself, cannot be deter- 
mined without a full knowledge of the actual state of his 
authority at the time of his return from the Deccan. The 
alternative which I had considered in my former despatches 
was, that either of the total ruin or of the effectual restoration 


* Sth, 7th, 11th and 15th October. 


312 ; THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO “Oct. 


of Scindiah’s power. But the existing case is of a nature dif- 
ferent from either of those which I had foreseen, and, in the 
present crisis, the uncertainty of Scindiah’s affairs suspends 
the situation of every Mahratta chief now remaining in his 
dominions. Although Ambajee appears to possess a consi- 
derable degree of present weight and power, and of the con- 
fidence of his master; he is still no more than the chief of 
one division of Scindiah’s army engaged in open war with 
another, which he, Ambajee, must reduce completely under 
his authority before he canbe in a condition to cooperate with 
us against the common enemy, with such a force as would 
justify us in ponning separate defensive engagements with 
him. 

By the latest accounts from the Resident at Poonah, it 
seems probable that Dowlut Row Scindiah will find it expe- 
dient to reinstate Baloo Tantia in the chief management of 
his affairs; in such an event, the authority at present exer- 
cised by Ambajee would be superseded by a new commission, 
which would probably be granted to his most active oppo- 
nents, the partizans of Baloo Tantia. Such a resolution must 
occasion fresh dissenstons among the officers of Scindiah in 
Hindostan, and the invasion of the country by Zemaun Shah 
would not tend to favour the arrangement of such a scene of 
confusion. 

In this state of things, I see no ground to hope for any 
advantage from defensive engagements with Ambajee, even 
concluded under the approbation of Dowlut Row, who, how- 
ever, has never notified (to my knowledge) the delegation of 
his authority in Hindostan to Ambajee. For the present, 
therefore, in the event of the Shah’s approach to the frontier 
of our ally the Vizier, we must confine our military operations 
‘to a system of defence, and we must in no case pass beyond 
the limits of his Excellency’s dominions, unless such a forward 
movement should be deemed, by the Commanding Officer of 
our army, necessary for the protection of the frontier, either 
of Oude or of our own provinces. 

I do not mean by this determination to preclude myself, in 
the event of Scindiah’s return to Hindostan, from entering 
into such defensive engagements with him against the Shah 
as may consist with the principles on which my overture to 
him at Poonah was founded, and with the actual state of his 


1798, COLONEL COLLINS. 313 


authority and resources at the time of his return; on the con- 
trary, whenever I shall learn that Scindiah has moved towards 
his own dominions, I shall instruct you how to proceed with 
him according to the state of his affairs at the moment. In 
the meanwhile I desire that, in communicating with Ambajee 
or with any other person exercising the powers of Dowlut 
Row in the absence of the latter, you will not proceed farther 
than to encourage and advise him to oppose the most effectual 
resistance in his power to the threatened invasion, acquainting 
him with the determination of this Government, to omit no 
effort or precaution necessary to the defence of the Vizier’s 
dominions. I think it proper also, that you should for the 
present confine yourself in your correspondence with the 
Seiks and Rajepoots to the same general principles. To 
satisfy them that the Shah will meet with the most steady op- 
position from us in the prosecution of his ambitious projects 
may produce the effect of stimulating them to an equally 
vigorous resistance. 

I cannot believe that M. Perron would be likely to give a 

cordial support to any cause which we might favour. We 
must never forget that he is a Frenchman, and that many of 
the officers in command under him are of the same nation. 
In the event of our negotiating hereafter any defensive en-. 
gagements with Dowlut Row, leading to a cooperation or 
junction of our forces, the necessity which I should feel for 
providing against any treachery on the part of the French in 
his service, would constitute a principal embarrassment in the 
conduct of the treaty, and would form an object of the first 
consideration. 

I approve of your having declined to comply with the wish 
of Shah Allum, and I wish you to avoid all intercourse with 
his Majesty during the absence of Scindiah from Hindostan. 

I am, &c. 
MorninerTon. 


31t THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Oct, 


No. LXXXVI. 
(Private.) 
The Earl of Mornington to Sir J. H. Craig, A.B. 


Sir, Fort William, October 27, 1798. 


; 

I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your 
letters of the 26th September, and 2nd, 3rd, 6th, and 13th 
instant, and also of a memoir containing much valuable infor- 
mation, and many judicious and forcible remarks. The whole 
tenor and spirit of your private communications, manifest a 
zeal and anxiety for the public interests, which demands my 
unqualified applause, and which cannot fail to prove highly 
beneficial to any service on which you may be employed. As 
‘you must be aware of the great extent and variety of my nu- 
merous public duties, I am persuaded, that you will accept 
my cordial thanks for your suggestions as a sufficient testi- 
mony of my: real sense of their importance and value; and 
that you will not suppose me either indifferent to their merit, 
or unprepared to avail myself of their utility, because I am 
not at liberty to enter into a detailed review of the facts 
which you have collected, or of the able conclusions which 
you have drawn from them. I am particularly anxious to 
assure you, that nothing can be more acceptable to me, than 
the continuance of a free communication of your opinions 
‘with the same unreserved confidence, which appears in your 
private correspondence with me. 

The uncertainty of Scindiah’s return to Hindostan, as well 
as of the condition of his authority and power whenever that 
event shall take place, renders it impossible at present to 
contract any formal engagements with any of the. powers on 
the north western frontier of India. Unless we could secure 
the efficient cocperation of Scindiah’s army, we should not be 
warranted to conclude engagements with him tending to 
draw our troops beyond the limits of the position required 
for our own exclusive defence. The same principle applies 
with additional force to the precarious state of the Mahratta 
Chiefs now exercising the Government, or contending for it, 
during the absence of Scindiah. 

The suggestions stated in my former letter, with regard to 


1798. SIR J. H. CRAIG, B15 


the Seiks and Rajpoots, were not intended to refer to the 
possibility of any regular treaty with them, unconnected with 
Scindiah; but merely to such general encouragement as (in 
the absence of Scindiah) might be offered to those powers by 
our advice and amicable communication, and by the appearance 
of our army in the field; until the ruin or the restoration of 
Scindiah shall have been finally decided, our intercourse with 
these powers must be confined to such communications as I 
have described. 

The progress of the French arms in Egypt, our actual 
situation with Tippoo, and the doubtful posture of affairs at 
Poonah, must contract our means of reinforcing -the army 
under your command. We must therefore be satisfied, in 
the event of Zemaun Shah’s approach, with a system of 
operations strictly defensive. I have, however, no reason to 
doubt, that your army will very soon be augmented to the 
number of nearly 20,000 men. With this force, (which I 
will encrease if other calls should permit) I rely on your abi- 
lity to afford a complete protection to the dominions-of the 
Vizier, as well from internal commotion, as from foreign inva- 
‘sion. If any circumstances should hereafter arise favorable to 
the extension of our system of defence, you will receive timely 

notice of the change (most earnestly desired by me) either 
from the. Commander-in-Chief, Mr. Lumsden, or Colonel 
Collins. The present state of affairs does not require me to 
‘trouble you with any more particular instructions; you are 
the best judge of the position most eligible for the defence of 
the Vizier’s frontier; I will notembarrass your judgement by 
any further limitation of your discretion, than must result 
from a strict adherence to the defence of the Vizier’s frontier, 
leaving it to you to decide, whether that object will be best 
attained by remaining within the Vizier’s boundary, or by a 
, -more advanced position. 

The Commander-in-Chief has apprized you to what extent 
I have been enabled to authorize him to adopt a part of the 
very useful suggestions contained in your memoir. 

With your private communication of the 13th, I had the 

honour of receiving from you a letter of the same date,* which, 


* See page, 304, 


316 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Oct. 


although not addressed to me in council, I understand to be 
intended by you to form a public document. 

‘It is difficult to express the concern. and surprize with 
which IJ read that letter. 

My confidence in your talents, activity, and public spirit, as 
well as my knowledge of your readiness to take the general 
command of the army in the field, induced me to entrust that 
charge to you. This trust was accompanied by a discretion- 
ary power of suspending the general relief of the army, ac- 
cording to the exigency of the.case; and you had been ap- 
prized, that the defence of the country in which you com- 
manded, was to supersede every other consideration. Under 
these circumstances, I was not aware, that you could feel any 
difficulty in determining what would be expected from you; 
nothing more could be expected, than a defence of the fron- 
tier of Oude, compatible with the extent and condition of the 
force under your command. Less could not be expected 
from such an officer; and I had hoped that the anxiety which 
I have manifested to facilitate the exertion of your talents, 
might have satisfied you, that I was neither disposed to ex- 
pect from you any effort beyond the means which you pos- 
sessed, nor to charge you with any responsibility beyond the 
limits of your military duty. No special instructions there- 
fore were given to you; . because none were requisite to enable 
you to act in the event of Zemaun Shah's approach. The 
only case in which special instructions to you could become 
necessary, was that of our having formed defensive engage- 
ments with the bordering powers. This case has not yet oc- 
curred, and my private correspondence as well as the com- 
munications of Colonel Collins, enabled jou to ascertain the 
state of that question with an accuracy, which could not have 
been derived through any other channel. With regard to 
that part of the letter in question, which refers to the defi- 
ciencies of bullocks,. camels, elephants, and ammunition, I 
know that the Commander-in-Chief, had actually taken the 
earliest possible steps for your speedy supply, and I had 
written to the Vizier for the express purpose of urging him 
ta furnish you with whatever aid his establishment can afford. 
With this view of the subject, I trust, that the letter to which 
I refer was not the result of your deliberate consideration ; 
and I have therefore considered it as a private letter; I have 
not recorded it; and I have entered into a free discussion of 


1798. SIR J. H. CRAIG. 817 


its contents with the facility of a confidential communication. 
If, however, I should have mistaken your intentions, you will 
correct my error; and I shall then be reduced to the neces- 
sity of entering the letter on the records, with the observa- 
tions which my public duty will, in that case, demand. 

A variety of concurrent accounts leads me to believe, that 
the French fleet off Alexandria, has suffered a severe blow 
from our squadron; and that the army has been checked in 
Egypt by a Turkish and Arab force. My last despatches 
overland, dated the 22nd of June, promise a very considera- 
ble naval and military reinforcement in India; the arrival of 
this force may be expected very soon. It does not appear 
probable, that in the advanced state of our preparations on 
the coast, and in the present condition of our alliances, 
Tippoo will venture to move without the actual cooperation 
of a French force. If the French should even surmount their 
difficulties in Egypt, the navigation of the Red Sea and of 
the Indian ocean at this season is so tedious, that it appears 
highly improbable that they should anticipate the vigilance 
of our squadrons. If I should learn the news of the defeat 
of the French in any authentic form, I will despatch it to you 
by express. 
I have the honour to be, &c. 

Mornineton. 


No. LXXXVII. 
Lord Clive to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Lorp, Fort St. George, 29 October, 1798. 
Mr. Petrie having communicated to me the contents of a 
letter of the 22nd instant, by the desire of Captain Kirkpatrick, 
from that gentleman to him, which brings the information of 
Monsieur Perron’s corps being disarmed, and the French 
officers who lately commanded it being in the power of Colonel 
Roberts, I do not wait for an official confirmation to offer 
to your Lordship my hearty congratulations upon events so 
. fortunate for the British interest, and so honourable to your 
Lordship’s administration. ‘The happy issue of this decisive 
measure will have relieved your mind, as it has mine from a 
very considerable degree of anxiety, and will enable me to 


318 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Oct. 


turn my attention without embarrassment to the execution of 
your Lordship’s orders for urging on our warlike preparations 
with the utmost zeal and alacrity. 
I have the honour to be with sincere respect and esteem, 
My Lord, your Lordship’s, 
Most faithful servant, 


Cuive. 
No. LXXXVIII. 
General Harris to the Eari of Mornington. 
My Dear Lorn, Madras, 29th October, 1798. 


Your kind favour of the 18th ultimo, would have been ac- 
knowledged the moment it was received, if I had only attended 
to the grateful feelings it occasioned, but convinced as I am 
how precious every moment of your Lordship’s time is to the 
public, I should not even now have interrupted you if the 
great and important news from Hyderabad did not compel 
me to congratulate you on it. Never. was any event more 
completely the work of an individual, than that has been your 
Lordship’s, and much am I flattered, that you should think 
the part you consigned to me was performed with zeal and 
alacrity, which it certainly was, and will ever continue to be, 
while executing orders so pleasantly and clearly detailed. 

It is a grand stroke, and I think will ensure all the rest of 
your excellent plan in the same bloodless style. We are 
going on with even encreased vigour for this fillip. The 
second ten battery guns sets off this day for Vellore, and as 
the Monsoon still holds off, I am in hopes they will get there 
without being stopped by it. Lord Clive is very zealous, 
ard only wants to know your Lordship’s wishes to have them 
executed. With my warmest congratulations once more and 
those of my whole family added, on the complete success of 
your Lordship’s policy, 

I am with great sincerity, my dear Lord, 
Your faithful and obliged servant, 
Gerorce Harris. 


1798. ROBERT BROOKE, ESQ. 319 


No. LXXXIX. 
The Hon. Frederic North to the Earl of Mornington, 
My Dear Lord, Colombo, October 29, 1798. 


Lhave already had the honour of referring you for informa- 
tion concerning Ceylon to my friend Lieut.-Colonel Agnew, 
late Adjutant General on this Island, and member of the Com- 
mittee of Revenue. He has lately been recalled to his duty on 
the coast, to my very great sorrow; for he was really my greatest 
comfort and assistance’in this place. His talents have been 
long distinguished in his own profession, and they are univer- 
sal as they are eminent—indeed it will be difficult to find any 
one who possesses abilities, civil, military, financial, commer- 
cial and diplomatic, in the degree which he does, and though 
I shall always most sincerely regret his loss, it is a great satis- 
faction to me that he is recalled to the coast at a time when 
your Lordship is at Madras, that his merit may be directly 
under your eye. Adieu, my dear Lord, 

Believe me, with the greatest respect and regard, 
Your most obedient and faithful Servant, 
Freperic NortH. 


No. XC. 
The Earl of Mornington to Robert Brooke, Esq. St. Helena. 
Sir, Fort William, 30th October, 1798. 

I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your let- 
ters of the 4th of April, and 10th of June, and [ return you 
many thanks for the care you have taken of my several des- 
patches and private letters by the Albion. 

Your representations respecting the Lascars serving on 
board ship are perfectly proper, and are now under my con- 

sideration. : 

I am-much obliged to you for your suggestions with regard 
to the Sepoy Regiments. 

I perfectly concur with you in opinion as to the advantages 
which might be derived from the possession of Monte Video. 
But besides the difficulty of transporting a large body of 
native troops to such a distance, the present state of affairs 
in this quarter renders the detachment of any part of our 
force wholly impracticable. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 
MornineTon, 


320 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Nov. 


No. XCI. 
The Hon. Jonathan Duncan to the Earl of Mornington. — 


My Lorp, Bombay, October 31, 1798. 
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your 
Lordship’s letter of the 8th instant, and beg, to assure your 
Lordship that I shall strictly observe the line therein indi- 
cated in respect to Mehndi Alli Khan’s intended negociations 
with the ruling power of Persia; and endeavour, also, to dis- 
cover the means of exciting the natives occupying the Delta 
and the lower parts of the Indus towards a further diversion 
of Zemaun Shoah force, in the view of counteracting his 
intentions respecting India. 
I have the honour to be, 
My Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient humble Servant, 
JONATHAN Duncan. 


No. XCII. 


The Earl of Mornington to Captain J. A. Kirkpatrick, Resident at 
Hyderabad. 

Sir Fort William, November 2nd, 1798. 

I consider it as an object of the utmost importance, that 
every practicable precaution should be taken to prevent any 
jealousy from being conceived by the Court of Hyderabad, 
in consequence of the great increase of our subsidiary force. 

For this purpose it is extremely desirable, that the conduct 
of our troops in their intercourse with the natives of the 
country, and particularly with the officers of his Highnesses 
Government should be of the most conciliatory nature, and 
should be so regulated as to form the strongest contrast with 
the arrogant and contumacious spirit of the French corps. 
You will, therefore, apprize Lieut.-Colonels Roberts. and 
Hyndman of my particular anxiety on this subject; and you 
will signify to them my expectations, that they will take ef- 
fectual measures to prevent any such irregularities or mis- 
conduct in the officers or men under their respective com- 
mands, as might tend to create distrust and jealousy. My 


1798. CAPTAIN KIRKPATRICK. 321 


wish is that the Company’s army in his Highnesses service, 
should conduct itself with the utmost degree of mildness to- 
wards his subjects, and of respect towards himself and his Mi- 
nisters; and that it should manifest the most prompt obedience” 
to his orders, according to the tenor of the late subsidiary 
treaty. 
: Tam, &c. 
MornincrTon. 


XCIIl. 
The Eart of Mornington to Tippoo Sultaun. 


Fort William, 4th November, 1798. 

You have doubtless received information of another excess 
of that unjustifiable ambition and insatiable rapacity, which 
have so long marked the conduct of the French nation. 
They have invaded Egypt, a country, from which they were 
in no danger of molestation, and from whose Government, 
they could not even pretend to have received the slightest 
provocation. They have committed this act of violence in 
contempt of the treaties subsisting between France and the 
Porte, and without any regard to the acknowledged authority 
of the Grand Seignor, so long established in Egypt. Nothing 
can more clearly expose their total disregard of every prin- 
ciple of public faith and honour, than this unprovoked and’ 
unjustifiable aggression; and it will no doubt afford satisfac- 
tion to every friend to justice and good faith, and particularly 
to every friend of the British nation, to hear, that by the 
success of his Majesty’s arms, the French have already suf- 
fered for their injustice and temerity. Certain intelligence 
has just been received, that 13 sail of the line, which had 
been employed in the expedition against Egypt, mounting 
1024 guns, and carrying about 10,000 men, being at anchor 
in the port of Bekir, near Rosetta, at the mouth of the Nile, 
were attacked by an equal number of his Britannic Majesty’s 
fleet; an engagement took place, which terminated in the 
capture of nine ships of the French line; two more were 
blown up, one of them of 118 guns, the French Admiral’s, 
and only two made their escape from the valour and skill of 
the British Admiral. All communication being thus cut off 

VOL. I. Y 


322 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Nov. 


between Egypt and Europe, the troops who have landed in 
Egypt must in all probability perish, either by famine or by 
the sword. This very signal victory.is to be ascribed to the 
justice of the British cause, and to the aid of divine provi- 
dence, favouring the gallantry of our forces, and punishing the 
injustice and impiety of our adversary. On the same assist- 
ance IJ rely with confidence for a continuation of similar suc- 
cesses, and for the final triumph of his Majesty’ arms over 
a nation which has shewn itself to be the general enemy of 
mankind. Confident from the union and attachment subsist- 
ing between us, that this intelligence will afford you sincere 
satisfaction, I could not deny myself the pleasure of commu- 
“nicating it. 


A true Copy, N. B. Epmonsrone, Tam, &c. 
Persian Translator to Govt. Morwiweron. 
No. XCIV. 


The Earl of Mornington to Lord Clive. 


My Lorp, Fort William, 5th November, 1798. 
The events of the last three weeks have afforded matter 
first of great alarm, and ultimately of satisfaction and proba- 
ble security. Your Lordship found the report of my Mou- 
lavi upon his return from the prophet’s tomb, confirmed by 
the intelligence from Bombay. My subsequent enquiries 
' eave no room to doubt, that if the French could have 
reached Suez early in August, they might have found craft 
in the Red Sea for the conveyance of a large body of troops, 
and the passage from Suez to Mocha, and from thence to 
the coast of Malabar, would not have been difficult at that 
season. The brilliant victory of the 1st of August, (a good 
day for such a deed) probably checked their career, and 
saved Tippoo from the perilous consequences of their active 
support. But I do not yet think it impossible that the des- 
perate and enterprizing spirit of Buonaparte, exasperated by 
the new and increasing difficulties which surround him, may 
attempt to push forward a force to Malabar; nor is the suc- 
cess of such an attempt impossible, if it be not frustrated by 
the vigilance and power of our fleet. Under this impression, 
1am now fitting out the Earl Howe, and Princess Charlotte, 


1798, LORD CLIVE. 323 


and a large country ship, to act as armed ships under the | 
orders of the Admiral, and I jntend to despatch them, as soon” 
as they shall be compleatly equipped, together with the 
Bombay frigate, to Malabar. 1 have ordered the Bombay 
Government to fit out such ships as they may be able to’ col- 
lect for the same purpose. To your Lordship I have sent no 
public communication on this subject, apprehending that at 
this season, you possess no means of contributing any assist- 
ance. If, however, I shofild have been mistaken, you will 
have the goodness to arm whatever vessels you can furnish, 
and send them to the coast of Malabar, to be there placed 
under the orders of the Admiral. ne 
The secret despatch from England* must have afforded 
your Lordship great satisfaction, in as much as it tended to 
shew the indispensable necessity of the measures, in the exe- 
cution of which you have borne so cordial and ready a part. 
To me it is a matter of no disagreeable reflection to retrace. 
all my late orders, and to find that I had not only antici- 
pated every point of the commands of my friends at home, 
before their despatch had left England, but that my reason- 
ing, and all the variations and shades of my opinion, which 
have followed the changes of circumstances in this quarter, 
have corresponded in the most minute manner with their sen- 
timents and views. In addition to this source of satisfaction, 
I now have the pleasure to know, that I have removed one 
of those great obstacles to the vigorous prosecution of war 
against Mysoré, of which the Secret Committee express a 
just apprehension ; I mean the French army at Hyderabad. 
The treaty of Hyderabad, and the first secret article were 
carried into full effect on the 22nd of October. This is a 
most fortunate event, and will produce ‘an encreased effect 
coming so close upon the steps of the recent victory at Bekir. 
The last despatch from Colonel Palmer, opens a favourable 
prospect of the probable issue of affairs at Poonah. On the 
' other hand, my last advices from the northwestern frontier of 
Hindostan, encourage an expectation that the threatened in- 
vasion of Zemaun Shah, will not take place this year; even 
if it should, we are well prepared to meet it. 
Your Lordship will perceive, that my object is to circum- 
vent Tippoo on all sides; by our alliances at Hyderabad and 


* See page, 61. 


324 SPENCER SMITH, ESQ, TO Nov. 
bree 
Poonah; by our fleet on the coast of Malabar; and by our 
armies on that coast, and on the frontier of the Carnatic, 
carrying the strength of both to the greatest practicable ex- 
tent. Every effort has been and will be employed by me to 
augment those armies, so as to enable them to undertake the 
siege of Seringapatam, within the course of the approaching 
season, and to convince Tippoo of their ability to accomplish 
that important operation. By these means, I trust to bring 
him to reason; all others are hopeless; and if we should not 
be disappointed in our reinforcement from home, and if the 
fleet should not fail in vigilance, I think we may hope to sur: 
mount all our difficulties without the hazard of war, and with 
the certainty of a considerable ultimate improvement of our 
security. 
I have the honour to be, &c. 
MorNINGTON. 


No. XCV. 


Spencer Smith Esq. to the Earl of Mornington. 
My Lorp, Constantinople, 7th November, 1798. 


In my past negotiations here, you have ere this some proof 
in your hands, that I have not been inattentive to the interests 
of your Lordship’s Government; and you may be assured of 
my constant vigilance to keep the different presidencies in 
India informed of all that passes hereabouts, which it may be 
interesting for them to know. As such, I now enclose to 
your Lordship the best account we have of the position of 
Buonaparte and of our fleet. The former in the form of his 
own despatches intercepted on the coast of Syria, the latter 
by Captain Hood’s despatch to myself, to which I have thought 
it worth while to add some of my latest English news-papers. 

I am negotiating a. treaty of defensive alliance with this 
court, upon the basis of that concluded with Russia, accord- 
ing to a counter project sent out to me in answer to the over- 
tures of the Porte, made to me on the 28th July, and then 
sent home. My brother Sir Sidney Smith, is named to suc- 
ceed Admiral Nelson in the Levant; and is moreover joined 
with me in the full power to sign the treaty if he arrives in 
time, as it is probable he may, being to communicate verbally 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 325 


with the Porte, before he attacks the French in Egypt, which 
he will do in the most vigorous and comprehensive way. 

The French Chargé d'affaires here, Ruffin, is with all his lega- 
tion in the Seven Towers. The different consuls, including 
Jambon St. André, from Smyrna, with about 40 of the most 
dangerous demagogues and apostles, have been dispersed in 
the several fortresses of Amasia, Sinope, Samsoon, Tre- 
bisond, and Anapa, on the Black Sea. The Turkish and 
Russian fleets combined Have reduced Cerigo, accepted the 
submission of Zante, and garrisoned Cephalonia; while Ali 
Pasha, governor of Yanina has purged the slip of Ex-Vene- 
tian terrritory, on the coast of Albania, by the well timed and 
suceessful attack with 10,000 men of all the French ports, 
such as Prevesa, Parga, &c., including the capture of the 
active emmissary General Rosa, one of Bonaparte’s’aid-de- 
camps in Italy, and commandant at Prevesa, with several 
other officers, and about 250 men saved from the slaughter. 
I shall say nothing of English news, referring your Lordship. 
for that to the enclosed. Qur spirits are raised high by 
Nelson’s incomparable victory, and our resources are great. 
If. the powers of the Continent can but be roused from their 
stupid supineness, we may yet overthrow the monster that 
has threatened us with general destruction. Naples pro- 
fesses itself to be ready, and even impatient to renew hosti- 
litiess The Court of Vienna begins to acknowledge the. 
necessity of a new war. ‘The Russian auxiliaries are ordered 
to march. From Prussia I fear little good is to be expected. 
We may be even satisfied if no mischief be experienced. 
From the Germanic body no vigor is to be hoped for, such. is 
their pusillanimity, that they submit without a remonstrance 
to the repeated insults, and threats of France, whose con-: 
tempt for them is manifested by every new: note iz crescendo. 

I hope your Lordship approves my idea of the grand 
Signor’s and Vizier’s amicable exhortation to Tippoo, anything 
of this kind that I can render more to the purpose, I should 
rejoice to accomplish according to your ideas. 

I have the honour to be, with perfect truth and regard, 

My Lord, your Lordship’s, 
Very obedient humble servant, 
SPENCER SMITH, 


326 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Nov. 


No. XCVL 


The Earl of Mornington to Tippoo Sultaun. 
Fort William, 8th November, 1798. 


It affords me sincere satisfaction to learn that you have 
nominated two persons of integrity and honour to meet and 
confer with the Deputies appointed, under my orders, by Mr. 
Duncan (the Governor of Bombay), for the purposes of inves- 
tigating the question regarding the Talooks of Ameera and 
Soulea. It is only by means of regular enquiry, and amicable 
discussion, that such questions can be adjusted among inde- 
pendent powers. My determination, in the case of Wynaad, 
was dictated by those principles of justice and moderation, 
which always direct the Company’s Government, nor shall my 
scrupulous adherence to the same principles be less manifest 
in my decision on your claim to the districts at present in 
question, the possession of which shall not be withholden from 
you for an instant if, after full investigation, I shall be satis- 
fied of the justice of your title to them. 

It is a well known truth, that they are always the most 
ready to respect the just rights of others who are the most 
vigilant and resolute to maintain their own. 

T have understood your sentiments concerning the “ turbu- 
lent disposition of interested men, who, by nature, are ever 
seeking opportunities of sowing the seeds of dissension.” For 
the happiness of mankind it is to be lamented that these 
authors of confusion are too numerous, assiduous and success- 
ful, in all parts of the world. In no age or country were the 
baneful and insidious arts of intrigue cultivated with such 
success as they are at present by-the French nation. I sin- 
cerely wish that no impression had been produced on your 
discerning mind by that dangerous people; but my situation 
enables me to know that they have reached your presence, 
and have endeavoured to pervert the wisdom of your councils, 
and to instigate you to war against those who have given you 
no provocation. 

It is impossible that you should suppose me to be ignorant 
‘of theintercourse which subsists between you and the French, 
whom ‘you know to be the inveterate enemies of the Company, 
and te be now engaged in an unjust war with the British na- 


1798. TIPPOO SULTAUN. 327 


tion. You cannot imagine me to be indifferent to the trans- 
actions which have passed between you and the enemies of 
my country; nor does it appear necessary or proper that 
I should any longer conceal from you the surprise and con- 
cern with which I perceived you disposed to involve yourself 
in all the ruinous consequences of a connection, which threa- 
tens not only to subvert the foundations of friendship between 
you and the Company, but to introduce into the heart of 
your kingdom the principles of anarchy and confusion, to shake 
your own authority, to weaken the obedience of your subjects, 
and to destroy the religion which you revere. 

Immediately after my arrival at Bengal, I read your corres- 
pondence with the late Governor-General, Sir John Shore, 
and with the Acting Governor General Sir Alured Clarke; 
and I perceived with great satisfaction, that in all your letters 
you constantly professed a disposition to strengthen the 
bonds of sincere attachment, and the foundations of harmony 
and concord established between you and the Honourable 
Company. I received particular pleasure from reading your 
last letter to Sir John Shore,* in which you signified your 
amicable desire that he should impress me with a sense of the 
friendship and unanimity so long subsisting between the two 
States. Your subsequent letters to me have abounded with 
professions of the same friendly nature. 

Combining these professions of amity on your part with the 
proofs which the Company’s Government have constantly 
given of their sincere disposition to maintain the relations of 
friendship and peace with you; and adverting, at the same 
time, to your reputation for wisdom and discernment, it was 
natural for me to be extremely slow to believe the various ac- 
counts transmitted to me of your negociations with the 
French, and of your military preparations; but whatever my 
reluctance to credit such reports might be, prudence required 
both of me and of the Company’s allies, that we should adopt 
certain measures of precaution and self defence, and these 
have accordingly been taken, as you will no doubt have ob- 
served. The British Government and the allies, wishing 
nevertheless to live in peace and friendship with all their 
neighbours, entertaining no projects of ambition, nor any 
views in the least incompatible with their respective engage- 


* See Introduction. 


328 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Nov. 


ments, and looking to no other objects than the permanent 
security and tranquillity of their own dominions and subjects, 
will always be ready, as they now are, to afford you every de- 
monstration of their pacific disposition. 

The Peishwah, and his Highness the Nizam, concur with 
me in the observations which I have offered ‘to you in this 
letter; and which, in the name of the Company, and of the 
Allies, I recommend to your most earnest consideration; but 
as I am also desirous of communicating to you, on the behalf 
of the Company, and their allies, a plan calculated to promote 
the mutual security and welfare of all parties; I propose to 
depute to you, for this purpose, Major Doveton, who is well 
known to you, and who will explain to you more fully and 
particularly the sole means which appear to myself, and to 
the allies of the Company, to be effectual for the salutary pur- 
pose of removing all existing distrust and suspicion, and of 
establishing peace and good understanding on the most dur- 
able foundations. 

You will, I doubt not, let me know at what time and place 
it will be convenient to you to receive Major Doveton; and 
as soon as your friendly letter shall reach me, I will direct 
him to proceed to your presence. 

I shall expect your answer to this letter, with an earnest 
hope that it may correspond with the pacific views and wishes 
of the allies; and that you may be convinced that you cannot 
in any manner better consult your true interests than by meet- 
ing, with cordiality, the present friendly and moderate ad- 
vance to a satisfactory and amicable settlement of all points 

- on which any doubt or anxiety may have arisen in the minds 
either of yourself or of the allies. 


A true Copy, N. B. EpmonstTone, 
Persian Translator to Govt. 


No. XCVIL. 
The Earl of Mornington to Captain J. A. Kirkpatrich, Resident at 
Hyderabad. 
Sir, Fort William, 9th Nov. 1798. 


I am happy to express my entire approbation of the judge- 
mengt,,firmness and discretion, which you have manifested dur- 
ing the important transactions which have passed since the 
ratification of the new subsidiary treaty with the Nizam, and 


1798. . CAPTAIN KIRKPATRICK. 329 


which have terminated so satisfactorily in the compleat exe- 
cution of the secret and separate articles of that engagement. 

Your conduct in the negociation of the treaty has already. 
received my approbation. 

I desire you will signify to Lieutenant-Colonel Roberts, and 
to the officers and men under his command, the high sense 
which J entertain of the important service which they have 
rendered to the British interests, and to the Honourable the 
East India Company, by the prompt execution of your in- 
structions. 

To Lieutenant-Colonel Roberts the greatest degree of 
public gratitude and applause is due for his skilful and judi- 
cious disposition of the troops under his command, and for 
the temper and humanity of his conduct towards the French 
officers in his custody. 

You will also express my approbation of the service ren- 
dered by Captain Scohy, in obedience to the orders of Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Roberts. 

The entire reduction of the large French force lately in the 
service of the Nizam, and the complete subversion of the 
dangerous influence of that nation at the Court of Hyderabad, 
place his Highness at length in a position which will enable 
him, in the event of a war between Tippoo Sultaun and the 
allies, to cooperate in the vigorous prosecution of it with con- 
siderable efficacy ; but though neither the ability nor the dis- 
position of the Court of Hyderabad to contribute materially 
to the support of the common cause can any longer , be 
doubted, yet it must bd obvious that without a full and pre- 
cise knowledge of the extent and nature of the assistance 
which we may confidently rely on receiving from the Nizam, 
it will be impossible for us to concert with his Highness any 
plan of general operations, or even to decide satisfactorily on 
the practicability of attacking Seringapatam in due season 
should the refusal of Tippoo to comply with the demands 
which may be made by the allies, render that measure ex- 
pedient. - 

For this reason it is of the utmost importance to ascertain 
without delay, and with every possible degree of correctness 
and certainty, the following points :— 

1. The greatest amount of the force in cavalry, infantry, 
and field ordnance, which the Nizam will positively furnish ; 


330 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO ~ Nov. 


not as an army to act separately, or in the way of diversion, 
but to join ours, and to proceed with it directly against the 
capital of the enemy. 

2. The earliest period at which the force to be so furnished 
can move from Hyderabad. 

3. The place where the Nizam may desire that this force 
should effect a junction with our army. 

4, The route by which the Nizam would wish this force to 
march, for the purpose of effecting such junction with the 
greatest facility and despatch. 

5. The speediest period at which we may safely expect the 
junction to take place. 

6. The person to whom the command of his Highness’s 
forces is to be entrusted. 

7, The means or resources applicable by the Nizam to the 
due and regular supply of provisions, whether for the con- 
sumption of his own forces, or for the use of the united 
armies. : 

These are the principal heads of enquiry to which it is ne-_ 
cessary to direct your immediate attention. 

Upon these points I*am anxious to obtain the earliest and 
most accurate information. 

From these leading points arise several questions of amore 
minute description, to which it will also be proper to give due 
consideration. I proceed to state the most important of these 
in the order in which they result from the preceding propo- 
sitions. 

As the reduction of Sernigapatanitt in the event of a war, 
must constitute the sole object of the allies, it is impossible 
not to feel a desire that the whole of our subsidiary troops 
should be comprehended in the contingent to be furnished 
by his Highness for the purpose of acting with our army. 
These, with the addition of 6,000 of Mr. Finglass’s corps, 
and a suitable train of field ordnance, and joined by a body 
of from 8,000 to 10,000 of his Highness’s best cavalry, under 
the command of Rissalahdars, of approved zeal and fidelity, 
would form as large a force as it would, perhaps, be neces- 
sary to require from him. But if any of the Company’s sub- 
sidiary troops are to be -withholden, although their place will 
be ill supplied by any others in his Highness’s service, the 
number of the latter must be proportionably augmented. 


1798. CAPTAIN KIRKPATRICK. 331 


When you are informed, however, that the army before 
Seringapatam in February, 1792, amounted to 30,000 fighting 
men (exclusive of five native battalions in different parts of 
the enemy’s country, and four battalions with the Nizam and 
the Mahrattas), that an equal force is now deemed requisite 
for the siege of ‘this place; and that even with the aid of the 
whole of the subsidiary troops now at Hyderabad, we should 
with difficulty draw together so considerable an army, you 
will perceive the necessity of urging the Nizam by every argu- 
ment in your power, to acquiesce in the arrangement here 
suggested. 

In the last war with Tippoo the whole of the subsidiary 
British force was absent from Hyderabad. No reason occurs 
to me which should induce his Highness on this occasion to 
retain any part of it about his own person: nor am I aware 
of any other ground of objection to the employment of the 
whole of it against the common enemy, which must not equally 
have existed in the last war. I therefore entertain a sanguine 
expectation of his Highness’s ready consent to the proposed 
measure. . 

I must‘not dismiss this article without instructing you to 
be particularly careful, as far as may be in your power, to 
obtain the exclusion from every sort of command or trust in 
the Nizam’s contingent force of all those Sirdars whose con- 
duct during the last war furnished a just suspicion of trai- 
terous correspondence with the enemy. If necessary you 
must formally protest against the employment of those indi- 
viduals on the present o€casion. 

With regard to the second object of enquiry, or, the period 
at. which the Nizam’s contingent can move, I need only ob-. 
serve that, as it will have a considerable distance to proceed 
before it can effect a junction with the army of the Carnatic 
(whatever place of junction may be appointed), it is absolutely 
necessary that it should commence its march as soon after 
your receipt of this as possible, observing, however, the cau- 
tion that it shall not any where in its progress pass into the 
dominions of Tippoo Sultaun without further notice from me. 
The interval, 1 trust, will not be long; since no doubt his 
Highness’s preparations for enforcing the demand of satisfac- 
tion and security, which it was agreed by the allies to make 


332 | THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Nov. 


upon Tippoo Sultaun, have kept pace with those of the Com- 
pany’s Government. 

As to the third point which relates to the place of the junc- 
tion, although it is necessary to consult the pleasure of the 
Nizam upon the subject, yet I am willing to believe you will 
have no difficulty in proving to him the expediency of leaving 
this article to be ultimately adjusted between the Commander- 
in-Chief of the Company’s army and the commanders of his 
Highness’s contingent force, including the commanding officer 
of the subsidiary troops. 

With respect to the route to be taken by the Nizam’s 
troops, although this cannot be completely ascertained until 
the place of junction with our army be determined, and there- 
fore must be left in a great measure to the discretion of the 
Commander-in-Chief, exercised in concert with the officers 
commanding his Highness’s division, yet there appears to be 
no difficulty in’ fixing some general direction during the earlier 
stages of the march. Thus, whether the place ‘of junction 
should hereafter be appointed in the vicinity of Amboor, 
Ryacottah, or Coveriporum, it will be equally convenient that 
his Highness’s troops should proceed by Kurpah. To this 
point, therefore, it cannot move too soon: and before it can 
arrive there, the Commander-in-Chief will be able to deter- 
mine on the best direction for its further progress. 

It is of peculiar importance to ascertain the fifth point, or 
the ‘speediest period at which the junction can be effected, 
with the utmost accuracy possible. 

It being understood that unless the S united armies could ar- 
rive at Seringapatam by the middle of February, the siege 
and capture of that place before the setting in of the mon- 
soon, would hardly be practicable: to guard against such a 
disappointment it is absolutely requisite that the army, with 
its battering train, should not be later in moving from Amboor 
than the end of January; of course the Nizam’s force ought 
to reach that place (supposing it to be the appointed rendez- 
vous) not later than the middle of that month. For this pur- 
pose it is stated to me that his Highness’s troops should -be 
in motion by the 5th of December: but as, in order to render 
the junction as secure as possible, a circuitous route from 
Kurpah to Amboor (probably by Dalmacherry and Chittoor) 


1798. CAPTAIN KIRKPATRICK. 333 


may be deemed advisable, it is evident that they cannot com- 
mence their march too soon. 

It is certainly extremely desirable that Azim ul Omra 
‘should put himself at the head of the Nizam’s forces; and if 
no substantial objection should arise to his leaving the person 
of his Highness, I wish you to urge Azim ul Omra, by every 
possible argument, to proceed with the army. It is not, per- 
haps, of much consequence whether he is accompanied by 
one of the princes or not: but in this arrangement I see no 
necessity for your interference. If any solid reason should 
arise for the minister’s remaining with the Nizam, or if he 
cannot be prevailed on to proceed with the troops, care must 
be taken to select for the command a person whose zeal for 
the common cause shall be accompanied by a due share of 
personal weight and authority. These qualities in the com- 
mander of the Nizam’s forces are to be sought in preference 
to military knowledge and experience, which, perhaps, it 
would be difficult to find in any considerable degree among 
the Omras of the Court at Hyderabad. 

In the case of Azim ul Omra’s proceeding with the Nizam’s 
fdérce, I should think it advisable for you to accompany him; 
leaving your assistant to attend on his Highness. But in the 
event of the minister’s remaining behind, it will be proper 
that you should continue at your station; and that Captain 
Malcolm should accompany the troops, according to the same 
arrangement under which Lieutenant Stewart was employed 
in the last war, when assistant to Sir John Kenneway. 

Although I fear that* the declining state of the Nizam’s 
health, joined to his increasing years, is but too likely to ob- 
struct the measure, yet I cannot help expressing a wish that 
his Highness may be able, if not immediately, yet early in 
January, to advance in person to the banks of the Kishna, 
where his position during the last war, if it no otherwise con- 
tributed to the success of the general operations, tended to 
inculcate the belief of his serious disposition to second them. 

With regard to the point remaining to be considered, 
namely, the regular supply of provisions, it appears to me 
that no time should be lost in storing as large quantities of 
grain as possible in Ganjecottah, Sedhout, and all the other 
forts on the southern frontier of his Highness’s. dominions in 
which such supplies may be safely deposited. It is also ex- 


334 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Nov. 


tremely desirable that the minister should give the most effec- 
tual encouragement to the Brinjaries to accompany and follow 
the army; and I should think you could not better inculcate 
the great advantages of a liberal arrangement with those 
people, than by referring him to the result of Lord Corn- 
wallis’s proceedings on this subject, of which he was himself 
an eye witness. I likewise authorize you to cooperate with 
Azim ul Omra in the useful measure of engaging the cordial 
services of the Brinjaries, by making such advances of cash 
on behalf of the Company as you may judge advisable or ne- 
cessary for this purpose; not exceeding, however, the sum of 
50,000 rupees, and taking sufficient security frgm them for 
the repayment of the same within a reasonable time. ' 

- As in the event of Tippoo Sultaun’s compelling the allies 
to attack him, by refusing the security proposed to be de- 
manded of him, the immediate siege of his capital will con- 
stitute the sole object of their operations; the consequence 
of this plan must be, that all the supplies for the army to be 
drawn from the Nizam’s country, must, for greater security, 
pass from Kurpah through the Carnatic, by the way of Da- 
malcherry, Chittoor, Amboor, &c.; or such other routes &s 
may best suit with the circumstances of the moment. It will 
not be necessary, however, to communicate this arrangement 
to the Brinjaries who, when they perceive that it is not our 
intention to occupy any posts in Tippoo’s country, on the di- 
rect line between Kurpah and Seringapatam, will naturally 
follow the army by the route just mentioned, as the only one 

_affording them equal security. 

The actual state of the Company’s troops serving in the 
Nizam’s country, with regard to field equipment of every de- 
scription, is a subject which demands immediate attention. 
Whatever deficiencies may exist, no time should be lost in 
supplying them. You will, therefore, ascertain these imme- 
diately, and as soon as possible, privately advise Lord Clive 
of them, who will have my instructions to issue the necessary 
ordéts for forwarding in due time, to the place of rendezvous, 
of the allied army, whatever articles shall be wanting to com- 
plete. the equipment of the subsidiary troops for actual ser- 
vice.” » 

Having in a former part of this letter supposed Mr. Fin- 
glass’s corps to form part of the Nizam’s contingent, and not - 


1798. CAPTAIN KIRKPATRICK. 335 


having hitherto in any of my letters to you touched on the 
subject of that party, I will now give you my sentiments 
and instructions respecting it. 

On general principles of policy I am sensible of the danger 
of admitting the establishment of corps of this description 
among the country powers, even under the command of Bri- 
tish subjects; but the numerous military establishments of 
French adventurers in the service of the different States of 
India suggested the. necessity of opposing some counterpoise 
to their dangerous influence and growing power. Hence 
arose the introduction of Mr. Finglass into the service of the 
Nizam, and the subsequent augmentation of his corps. This 
however was a very inadequate security against the danger 
which existed at Hyderabad, and which ‘could never have 
been averted by any other means than the complete subver- 
sion of the French army in the service of the Nizam. 

This object having been happily accomplished, it becomes 
a question how far it is advisable for this Government to per- 
mit or countenance the continuance of Mr. Finglass’s corps. 
Our right under the treaty lately concluded between the Com- 
pany, to require the dismissiun of all the Europeans in his 
Highness’s service is unquestionable: but would it be prudent 
or politic, or even just, to exercise it in this instance. 

It would perhaps be unjust, because the dismission of M. 
Piron’s corps, and the articles of the new treaty under which 
the restrictions of the former subsidiary troops still remain in 
force, joined to those stipulations which limit the use of the 
Company’s troops to cases of important service, have abso- 
lutely deprived the Nizam of all means of executing a variety 
of military duties of an indispensable nature ; unless his High- 
ness be allowed to retain Mr. Finglass’s corps in his service. 

It would be impolitic, first, because it would naturally ex- 
cite great dissatisfaction in the mind of the Nizam; and se- 
condly, because it would deprive the common cause, at a very 
critical period, of a body of troops, which, though not to be 

- compared with the Company’s, may be capable of rendering 
considerable service in the event of war. 

On the whole, therefore, my opinion is, that it is expedient 
to encourage and support this corps (Mr. Finglass’s) to such 
an extent as may place it in a condition to act with effect in 
conjunction with our own troops. 


336 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Nov. 


For this purpose I mean to permit Mr. Finglass (on the 
usual application from the Nizam) to purchase from time to 
time, at Fort St. George, any quantity of ordnance, ordnance 
stores, and muskets, which shall appear to you necessary to 
the efficient equipment of his corps for actual service. But 
as the opportunities of procuring such articles are precarious, 
I am also willing that any moderate supply of them which 
may be required for the use of any division of the corps, ac- 
tually proceeding as part of the Nizam’s contingent to join 
our army, should be issued at your requisition from the Com- 
pany’s Arsenal at Fort St. George; and I shall instruct the 
Government of that Presidency accordingly. ‘The Govern- 
ment of Fort St. George will, however, be empowered to 
exercise its discretion with regard to the quantity of the 
several articles above mentioned, which can at any time be 
spared with safety from the demands of their own military 
service; I think it probable, however, that the magazines be- 
longing to the late French corps may be found sufficient to 
the supply of most of the articles in which Mr. Finglass’s 
corps is now deficient. 

But while I consent to extend to this corps the degree of 
encouragement which I have described, I must particularly 
enjoin you to use the utmost vigilance for the purpose of pre- 
venting the admission of any others than British subjects, 
not only into commands, but into any rank or station in the 
corps. You will also take care that such British subjects 
retain their attachment to their native country, and to its laws 
and constitution ; and that they shall not, under the shelter 
of their British origin, protect the growth of French influ- 
ence at the Court of the Nizam. 

The sixth article of the late treaty furnishes you with 
ample means of obtaining the dismission from this corps of 
any individual whose conduct or principles may render him 
a just object of suspicion. I conceive, however, that the 
commanding officer of this party is not likely in any such case 
to reduce you to the necessity of asserting the right of the 
Company tnder the treaty. 

It is proper you should be particularly careful so to regu- 
late your pccasional intercourse with the corps of Mr. Fin- 
glass, as to prevent its exciting any jealousy or dissatisfaction 
in the mind of the Nizam or his ministers. On this principle 


1798... THE RESIDENT AT POONAH. 337 


it is peculiarly necessary that, except when your opinion or 
interference shall be expressly desired by his Highness or by 
Azim ul Omra, you should avoid taking part in any discus- 
sions which may arise between that corps and the Durbar, 
whether relating to the pay of the party, to the nature of the 
duties and services required of them, or to any other point 
whatever. 

I must except, however, from this general instruction, the 
case of any division of Mr. Finglass’s corps which shall hap- 
pen to compose part of the Nizam’s contingent, acting with 
the Company’s army: for it will at all times be incumbent on 
us to see that due measures are taken by his Highness’s mi- 
nisters for securing the regular payment of whatever troops 
may form that contingent, whether they shall be those of the 
Nizam, or the Company’s subsidized force ; I accordingly de- 
sire that you will exert yourself to effect a satisfactory ar- 
rangement for this purpose with Azim ul Omra. 

My anxious desire that Azim ul Omra, in person, should 
accompany the Nizam’s contingent, is founded on my opinion 
that, from his presence a greater degree of security would be 
derived, not only for the punctual payment of the troops, but 
for the prompt obedience, and efficient cooperation of their 
commanders. 

I am, &c. 
MorninerTon, 


No. XCVIII. 
The Earl of Mornington to the Resident at Poonah, 


Sir, Fort William, 10th Nov. 1798. 

I have viewed with particular concern the encreasing em- 
barrassments of Doulut Rao Scindiah, and the slow progress 
made by the Peishwa in the final arrangement of his govern- 
ment. The former by obstructing the return of Scindiah to 
Hindostan, and by tending to weaken his authority, and di- 
minish his resources, threatens to deprive us of the assistance 
of a power, whose cooperation under other circumstances, 
might have been of the greatest advantage, in the event of an 
invasion from Zemaun Shah. The latter by disclosing the 
weakness and irresolution of the Peishwa’s mind, and by leav- 
ing me in doubt, whether his councils will ultimately be 

VOL, I. Z 


338 TIE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Nov. 


* 
‘guided by an influence friendly or hostile to his connection 
with the Company, makes it impossible for me to judge with 
any confidence, what his conduct is likely to be in the event 
of a rupture between the Company and Tippoo Sultaun. 
But, whatever may be the ultimate determination. of the 
Peishwa, the period is arrived, when it is become necessary 
to call upon him in the most explicit manner, for the faithful 
performance of the engagements contracted by his predeces- 
sor and recognized by himself. 
I enclose you the copy and translation of a letter, which I 
have thought proper to address to Tippoo Sultaun.* You- 
will without delay communicate this letter to the Peishwa, 
who will no doubt perceive that the terms of it are in exact 
conformity to the spirit of his own declarations, and to his 
proposed draft of a letter on the same subject. You will at 
the same time point out to him the necessity of moving his 
forces immediately towards the frontier of Tippoo, as well 
for the purpose of giving weight to the negociations of the 
allies, should Tippoo consent to treat; as in order to be ina 
proper state of forwardness for cooperating with the armies of 
the Company and of the Nizam, in the event of the allies be- 
ing reduced to the necessity of enforcing their just demands. 
I shall be satisfied if the Peishwa’s contingent shall amount 
- to 20,000 horse; provided this body of cavalry shall be of 
the best description belonging to the state, and shall be com- 
manded by Sirdars, and by a principal Chief, well affected to 
the cause, my confidence on this last subject would be consi- 
derable, were Emrut Row to be selected for this important 
charge; but I should feel very differently were either Gobind 
Kishen himself, or any other person closely connected with 
him in politics or otherwise, to be appointed to it. You 
will, therefore, be particularly careful to prevent by every 
means in your power, any nomination of this dangerous 
nature; since such a disposition of the Peishwa’s contingent 
-would make it questionable, whether its presence at Seringa- 
patam, in the event of hostilities, might not be of more detri- 
ment than benefit to the general interests. 
It is proper to mention in this place, that the Peishwa’s con- 
tingent must not pass the frontier of Tippoo Sultaun, until 


* See page, 326. 


1798. THE RESIDENT AT POONAH. 339 


duly advised (in the manner to be hereafter specified) of the 
failure of the negociations, or until required to move either 
by the Commander-in-Chief of the Company’s army in the 
Carnatic, or by the officer in Command of our forces on the 
coast of Malabar. 

The requisition for the advance of the Mahratta contingent 
into the enemy’s country, will be accompanied by a communi- 
cation of the route which it may be deemed advisable for it to 
pursue, for the purpose of effecting a junction, either with 
the army of Malabar, or with that of the Carnatic. 

You will advise Mr. Duncan confidentially, from time to 
time, of the progress of your negociations with respect to the 
Mahratta contingent; the better to enable him, and General 
Stuart, eventually to establish every degree of practicable 
concert between the movements of our army in Malabar, and 
those of the Mahratta forces. 

If the Peishwa after having read my letter to Tippoo Sul- 
taun, and in consequence of the proposed military movements, 
should require to know the nature and extent of the security 
which I propose hereafter to demand from Tippoo, you will 
answer, that this is a point on which I shall not be able en- 
tirely to make up my mind, until I see what impression is 
produced on Tippoo by the letter which I have sent him on 
behalf of the allies. In the mean while the Peishwa may rest 
assured, that I feel no desire to exact any concessions from 
Tippoo, beyond the objects avowed in my letter to him, or 
inconsistent with the Peishwa’s own sentiments, as expressed 
to yourself, and in his proposed draft of a letter to Tippoo, 
and that no settlement of any kind shall ever be made by me 
with Tippoo, in which the Peishwa and the Nizam shall not 
participate equally in all respects with the Company. 


Iam, &c., 
Mornineron. 
, No. XCIX. 
The Lari of Mornington to the Right Hon. Henry Dundas. 
My Dear Sir, Fort William, 12th Nov. 1798. 


My last private letter to you was closed on the 11th of 
October.* On the 18th, I received the despatch of the secret 


* See p. 288, 


340 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Nov. 


committee dated the 18th of June,* and forwarded overland, 
and on the same day, a confirmation of the reports of the 
progress of the French arms in Egypt. 

It is difficult to express the satisfaction which I derived, 
from finding that the measures which I had taken, in conse- 
quence of the alliance formed between Tippoo and the 
French, corresponded so happily with your principles and 
views on the same-occasion. You will observe by a reference 
to my several despatches, that I had not only anticipated all 
your orders before the overland despatch had left England, 
but that the whole course of the ideas which passed through 
my mind during the late critical conjuncture of our affairs in 
this quarter, coincided entirely with the tenor of your opi- 
nions. ; 

On the only point which you have thought too delicate to 
decide at home, I am happy to be able to remove your appre- 
hension, 

My former letters will have apprized you of the signature 
of the treaty of Hyderabad, and of the approach of the British 
detachment towards that city. The detachment under the 
command of Lieutenant Colonel Roberts, arrived at Hydera- 
bad on the 10th of October, and on'the 22nd of October, the 
British troops under the orders of the Nizam, and with the 
-cooperation of a body of 2000 of his cavalry, surrounded the 
camp of the French army, disarmed all the Sepoys, and se- 
cured the persons of all the French officers then in camp. 
This operation was happily effected without bloodshed, and 
without contest. A mutiny having broken out in the French 
camp on the preceding day, and the Sepoys having imprison- 
ed their officers, the Resident at Hyderabad, and Lieutenant 
Colonel Roberts, with the consent of the Nizam, judiciously 
availed themselves of this favorable opportunity to execute 
this important measure, without difficulty or danger. 

The French officers by my particular orders, were treated 
with every practicable degree of attention and humanity ; at 
the period of their arrest by our troops, their persons were in 
confinement, and their lives in danger from the mutiny pre- 
vailing in their camp; and the greatest difficulty which 
Colonel Roberts encountered, was that of rescuing the im- 


- 


* Bee page, 61. 


1798. THE RT. HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 341 
a 


prisoned officers from the violence of their own Sepoys. 
Particular care was taken to save the property of the officers 
_ for their use, as well as to obtain for them such arrears of 
pay and allowances, as were due to them from his Highness ; 
Captain Kirkpatrick informs me, that he has been completely 
successful in effecting both these desirable objects. The 
French officers are now on their passage to this Presidency 
on board the Bombay frigate, which I had previously sta- 
tioned at Masulipatam for their accommodation. On their 
arrival at Calcutta, it is my intention to receive them with the 
consideration due to their respective ranks, and to allow them 
every indulgence compatible with the security of their per- 
sons. I propose to send them to Europe by the earliest op- 
portunity, using the precaution of dispersing them in different 
ships. On their arrival in England, I have engaged that 
they shall not be treated as prisoners of war, but shall be im- 
mediately transported to France, without suffering any deten- 
tion for an exchange of prisoners. 

I am persuaded, that you will consider this event as a cir- 
cumstance of peculiar good fortune in the present moment. 
The effects of it must be to secure to us, whatever benefits 
can be derived from the cordial cooperation of the Nizam, in 
the event of a war with Tippoo, and, in the meanwhile, so 
considerable a reduction of the French influence in India 
must be viewed, as an important benefit, at a moment when 
the adventurous and enterprizing spirit of that nation is di- 
rected to the object of erecting an Empire in India, on the 
ruin of ours. 

With respect to the Court of Poonah, our affairs in that 
quarter also have taken a very favourable turn. Nana Fur- 
navese has been restored to the Ministry, and has publicly 
taken charge of the affairs of the Government. I have al- 
ready informed you, that the Peishwa had concurred without 
hesitation in all my arrangements at Hyderabad, and had uni- 
formly professed his determination to abide by his defensive 
engagements with us, in the event of hostilities with Tippoo. 
The restoration of Nana, secures the Peishwa’s faithful exe- 
cution of those engagements, and affords a strong ground of 
expectation of further improvements in the nature of our con- 
nection with that state. Neither Tippoo nor the French will 

ever acquire any influence at Poonah, while Nana shall hold 


342 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, To Nov. 


the reins of power. Nana has too much wisdom to involve 
the Mahratta Empire in such desperate connections. 

On the 31st of October, we learnt the satisfactory intelli- 
gence of the glorious victory at Bekir, which I immediately 
announced by a circular letter to all the Princes of India, not 
omitting Tippoo Sultaun. Being still uncertain of the fate of 

‘the French army, I have not relaxed any part of our military 
or naval preparations, for the nature of which I refer you to 
my letters to the secret committee. But I have deemed this 
a favorable opportunity for opening a negotiation with Tippoo 
Sultaun, which you will observe the state of affairs at Hydera- 
bad and Poonah, now admit of my commencing in conformity 
to my original view of the subject. A copy of my letter to 
Tippoo, forms a number of the secret packet.* 

I wish it were in my power to express my satisfaction in 
the alacrity with which the Government of Fort St. George, ° 
have executed my orders for the defence of the Carnatic. 
But I am concerned to state, that notwithstanding the cor- 
dial disposition of Lotd Clive to second my exertions in the 
public service, unnecessary and unwarrantable delays have 
prevailed in the military equipments in that quarter, and the 
movement of the battering train towards the frontier, (a mea- 
sure absolutely necessary for the purpose of giving effect to 
our negotiations with Tippoo), has been delayed several 
weeks, until at length no alternative was left, but that of de- 
ferring the movement altogether until after the monsoon, or 
of attempting it during the monsoon at the hazard of inter- 
ruption from the bad weather. The latter alternative after 
much hesitation was adopted. 

You will perceive by the secret despatches, that J have 
taken measures for embodying the Calcutta European militia. 
I expect that their number will not fall short of 1500 men. 
This useful institution had grown obsolete; as I conceive 
that great advantage might be derived from it in any case of 
sudden emergency, I have availed myself of this opportunity 
to revive it, intending to place it on a permanent foundation. 

Our acéounts of Zemaun Shah, are still extremely vague 

.and contradictory. I have, however, thought it prudent to 
continue our preparation on the north western frontier, where 


* See p. 326. 


1798. THE RT. HON, HENRY DUNDAS. 343 


I trust our defences are perfectly secure. My letters to the 
Secret Committee contain so full a detail of all the circum- 
stances of our present situation, and of the steps which I 
have taken for the purpose of meeting the exigencies of the 
moment, as they have arisen, that I do not feel it necessary 
to trouble you with any further particulars in this letter. 

I have received the military regulations, and I have already 
given the necessary orders for carrying into execution, that 
part of them which relates to the promotion by regimental 
rank; with respect to the reduction of the allowances, it is a 
question which I have not yet decided, whether it might not 
be advisable to postpone, for a time, a measure which would 
necessarily tend to slacken the zeal of the officers who may 
be called into the field in the present crisis; but this is a con- 
sideration merely of time, and of prudence; for the temper 
of the army is such, and I trust my authority so firmly esta- 
blished, that I have no expectation of meeting with any diffi- 
culty or danger in carrying the orders of the Court into effect; 
I may hereafter suggest some observations on some parts of 
those orders. 

The despatches to the Secret Committee, and to the Court 
of Directors, will shew you the amount of the voluntary con- 
tributions within these provinces, when you will recollect, that 
the greater part of it is furnished from the annual income of 
the subscribers, I think it will appear a sufficient testimony of 
their zeal and public spirit. The same spirit has appeared on 
the occasion of the calling out the militia; all descriptions of 
the European and Armenian inhabitants of Calcutta having 
manifested the utmost degree of alacrity in offering their per- 
sonal services. 

I am, &c. 
MorninoTon, 


344 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Nov. 


No. C. 
The Earl of Mornington to Lord Clive. 
* 


My Lorp, Fort William, 14th November, 1798. 


I am most happy to learn that your battering train is in 
such forwardness, and if the same spirit of alacrity and des- 
patch can (through your Lordship’s means) be infused into all 
the departments of your Government, you will hereafter have 
the satisfaction to reflect, that you have contributed most 
effectually to the preservation of that Empire, which was ac- 
quired by the strength of our arms, and must be maintained by 
the same means. For my own part I declare to your Lordship, 
that I deem myself bound by every principle of duty and cha- 
racter to suspend every other consideration as secondary to 
the indispensable object of providing a large force in the field, 
and aneflicient system of alliance; and so entirely devoted 
am I to the exigencies of this duty, that my estimate of cha- 
racters, and my sentiments of respect, and even of affection in 
this country, are regulated absolutely by the degrees of zeal 
and alacrity which I find in those who are to assist me in this 
great struggle. Nor can I conceive a more firm foundation, 
or a more honourable bond of friendship than a common 
share inthe labours, difficulties, and honour of defending and 
saving so valuable a part of the British Empire. This is the 
nature of the connection which I seek with your Lordship, 
and these are the sentiments which render me so averse to 
those men who appear negligent, or reluctant, or irresolute 
in a conjuncture which ought to extinguish all partialities, all 
private resentments and affections, and to unite and animate 
all talents and exertions in one common cause. In this effort 
your Lordship and I have the satisfaction to know that we 
have the most strenuous support of the whole Government at 
home, and that we must have that of every man acquainted 
with the real interests of India and attached to those of Great 
Britain. In such a cause, and with such support, we may 
safely tread with a firm step, and proceed steadily in a for- 
ward course; and I trust the moment is not distant when we 
may look back with mutual satisfaction and approbation to 
every step of the course we have pursued, and may claim 


1798. LORD CLIVE. 345 


with justice and with success the gratitude of our country, 
and the best rewards of. honest ambition. I am extremely 
happy to learn that your Lordship continues to approve the 
conduct of my brother,* it does not become me to say with 
how much safety you may repose implicit confidence in his 
honour and discretion. You will, 1 hope, have understood 
from him my cordial wish to conduct my intercourse with 
your Lordship upon a footing of the most unreserved free- 
dom, without a sensation of jealousy, or with any other object 
than that of a sincere union for the purpose of first preserv- 
ing, and finally of improving, the interests committed to our 
joint charge. 
1 have the honour to be, &c. 


Mornineron. 
No. CI. 
Major General Sir J. H. Craig: to the Earl of Mornington. 
My Lorp, Cawnporé, 15th November, 1798. 


I cannot refrain from taking the liberty of congratulating 
your Lordship, which I do with very great satisfaction, upon 
the successful issue of your Lordship’s measures to extirpate 
the French influence at the Court at Hyderabad. Nothing 
struck me more forcibly, upon my arrival in this country, than 
the extent of the mischief which might be created by that 
baneful and inimical ascendency. It was reserved for your 
Lordship’s firmness and political wisdom to remove an evil of 
so dangerous a tendency. I very sincerely hope that the de- 
cision and energy, which have soeminently characterized this 
the first step of your Lordship’s administration, will produce 
the effect of restoring our national character for vigour and 
spirit, upon which points I fear it has suffered much of late 
years in the opinion of the natives. 

I have the honour to be, 
My Lord, 
your Lordship’s most obedient Servant, 
J. H. Craie. 


* The Duke of Wellington, then Lt. Col. Wellesley, who had been sent 
by the Governor General to Madras with his regiment, the 33d infantry. 


346 SIR J. H. CRAIG, TO Nov. 


No. CII. - 
Major General Sir J. H. Craig to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Lorn, Cawnpore, 15th November, 1798. 


Our intelligence continues unvaried in confirmation of the 
Shah’s determination to attempt the invasion of Hindostan, 
and of his being on the point of crossing the Attock for the 
purpose. I have no doubt that Col. Collins will have trans- 
mitted to your Lordship the report of his cassids, the account 
of which I received from him yesterday evening, and which 
was at the same time confirmed, in all its material parts, by a 
letter that I received from one of my own people, a copy of 
which I sent to the Commander-in-Chief last night ; this letter, 
which by the bye, ought to have reached me at least three 
days sooner than it did, contained the report of two of my 
hircarrahs, who returned direct from the Attock. The part 
of it which I saw with the greatest regret has been the confir- 
mation, as far as such can be deduced from public report, of 
the opinion I have for some time past held, that little or no 
resistance would be made by the Seiks, and I fear as little is 
to be expected on the part of the Mahrattas. Seeing no reason 
to doubt the Shah’s advancing soon, it would at any rate now 
be my wish to assemble the army at Anopsheer as soon as cir- 
cumstances will admit. I feel however an additional inducement 
to the doing it, in the hope that it may give encouragement 
to the latter to attempt something at least. In their present 
divided and distracted state, I fear the offering any direct op- 
position to the Shah’s approach to Delhi is more than can be 
expected from them; but ifthey should assemble any body of 
troops with a view of protecting their nearer frontier from his 
incursions, and could be prevailed upon to act with a little 
vigour on his flank and in his rear, which will be open to them, 
if he advances towards the boundaries of the Vizier’s domi- 
nions, it might be useful; and I shall be glad to be honoured 
with your Lerdship’s instructions how far I may proceed, in 
concert with Colonel Collins, in suggesting the idea to them, 
or in listening to any overtures that they.might make for a 
junction of forces, under circumstances that would not carry 
us far from our own frontier, or create any disadvantage as to 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 347 


the local situation of an action. A reference to the map will 
point out to your Lordship that if the Shah should advance 
from Delhi, on this side the Jumna, it may equally be in the 
intention of pursuing his conquests over the Mahrattas, or 
of turning his arms against us. We should, therefore, be 
equally concerned in opposing his progress; and though, un- 
able to accomplish this of themselves, yet such of the Mah- 
ratta chiefs, as remain united and attached to Scindiah, might 
be willing to join and assist us in an attempt, in which there is 
not a doubt but they must consider themselves as interested, 
even in the great stake of their existence as a nation in these 
parts, The distance from Anopsheer to the nearest part of 
the Jumna does not exceed forty miles, and if the aid of any 
tolerable body of the Mahrattas can be procured at the risk 
of advancing a part of that distance, instead of waiting for 
the enemy something nearer our own frontier, I should 
presume that your Lordship will think it advisable to adopt 
the measure. At the same time it appears to me that it must 
depend upon a knowledge of the extent of the assistance that 
is to be expected from them; and if your Lordship should 
think it preferable, it might, if expedient in other respects, be 
brought about as a sort of military agreement between the 
leaders of the respective armies without the intervention of 
Government in a formal treaty. I have confidence in assuring 
your Lordship that you may rely on my prudence in the ex- 
ercise of any discretionary latitude, with which your Lordship 
may think proper to entrust me in this respect. 
I have the honour to be, 
My Lord, 
your Lordship’s most obedient 
and most faithful humble Servant, 


J. H. Crate. 


No. CIII. 


Tippoo Sultaun to the Governor General. 
20th November, 1798. (Received 15th December, 1798). 


It has lately come to my ears from report, that in conse- 
quence of the talk of interested persons military preparations 


348 THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS, TO Nov. 


are on foot. Report is equally subject to the likelihood of 
being trué or false. I have the fullest confidence that the 
present is without foundation. By the favour of God, the con- 
ditions (or obligations) of peace established (between us) have 
obtained the utmost degree of strength and firmness; under 
the circumstances of their having been firmly observed and 
adhered to, of the daily increasing union and friendship, and 
of the constant intercourse of correspondence, it (the report) 
cannot possibly be entitled to credit; but the promulgation 
of such reports excites my surprize. My friendly ‘pen writes 
this; I hope your Lordship will be pleased to gratify me by 
writing of it. From a desire to maintain the obligations of treaty 
and engagement, I have no other intention (or thought) than 
to give increase to friendship, and my friendly heart is to the 
last degree bent on endeavours to confirm and strengthen 
the foundations of harmony and union. ; 

Let your Lordship always continue to gratify me by glad- 
dening letters, notifying your welfare. 


A true Translation, N. B. Epmonsrone, 
Persian Translator to Govt. 


No. CIV. 


The Right. Hon, Henry Dundas to the Earl of Mornington. 


‘ Wimbledon, 16th June, 1798. 
My pear Lorp, (Received 20th November, 1798). 


Having been unwell for a considerable part of this spring, 
and particularly distressed with a weakness in my eyes, I 
have been obliged chiefly to make use of a Secretary's hand. 
Perhaps you may tell me that this does not require much 
apology. 

The subject of this letter arises from recent despatches 
from the Cape of Good Hope, and the state of affairs in the 
Mediterranean, in consequence of a French fleet and a great 
armament being fitted out from Toulon, and having actually 
sailed upon some secret expedition under the conduct of their 
favourite General, Buonaparte. The intelligence we have 
received from the Cape must have reached you either from 


the Mauritius itself, or from the Cape of Good Hope, long be- 
be 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 349 


fore you can receive this. I think it however right to send 
the copy of a proclamation said to be issued by the Governor 
of the Mauritius, and if it speak true, we are probably at this 
time at war with Tippoo Sultaun. If we are not, it must have 
arisen either from his name being introduced into the procla- 
mation without his authority, or from his having in conse- 
quence of proper representations from our Government in 
India, disclaimed and disavowed the whole in such a manner 
as to set your mind at ease upon the subject. When I speak 
of disclaiming what is imputed to him, I mean that his con- 
duct should be such as to evince the sincerity of his profes- 
sions, for if he contents himself with a mere denial, and is at 
the same time, by preparations and hostile movements, de- 
monstrating his real intention of breach of treaty with this 
country, your Lordship’s wisdom and vigilance will not be 
lulled asleep or trifled with, but will, when you think it 
the proper moment for doing so, bring him to an explana- 
tion in the only way such conduct merits, and I am per. 
suaded that it will be your peculiar care so to act with re- 
gard to other allies, as to induce them to cooperate with us 
in chastizing so notorious a breach of faith, not only to us, but 
to all those who were united together in that war which led to 
the peace concluded under the auspices of Marquis Corn- 
wallis. 

I likewise send to your Lordship the most recent intelli- 
gence we have received relative to the expedition fitted out in 
the Mediterranean. 

, Fora long time it was rumoured that Buonaparte wasintended 
to lead the threatened invasion against Great Britain and Ire- 
land, but whether it has proceeded from the irresistible supe- 
riority of our fleet, or from the great preparations which the zeal 
and loyalty of his Majesty’s subjects has enabled him to make 
throughout the Kingdom, I cannot pretend with certainty to 
know, but it does appear that of late.they have been more 
reserved in their menaces, and less forward in their prepara- 
tions in the ports opposite to our coasts; and the great ex- 
ertions of the Republic appear to have been made to fit out 
the present armament from the ports of the Mediterranean. 
The destination of this expedition has been matter of va- 
rious conjecture. It was for some time supposed to be des- 

tined against Naples, or Portugal, or, under cover of the latter, 


350 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Nov. 


to lay the foundation of revolutionizing the Spanish monarchy. 
By the latest intelligence transmitted to me by Lord Gren- 
ville, the copies of which are herewith inclosed, it would ap- 
pear that Egypt and India are the ultimate object of this great 
preparation. We have intelligence of the armament having 
actually sailed upon the 19th day of May, and we entertain 
sanguine hopes that, whatever the destination of it may be, the 
design of the enemy will be frustrated, and the armament it- 
self destroyed by a powerful squadron acting in the Medi- 
terranean, under the command of Sir Horatio Nelson, the ob- 
ject of which is to watch and to pursue it, wherever its 
course may be directed. If it actually is destined for Egypt, 
it appears fo me to be a great and a masterly stroke; and if 
successful, would be attended with very pernicious consequences 
to the interests of this country. In order to avoid entering 
into a long detail at present upon that view of the subject, 
I shall content myself with sending your Lordship a copy of 
a letter written to Lord Grenville* two days ago, in conse- 
quence of the intelligence communicated to me by his Lord- 
ship. "We expect soon to receive certain advice both of the 
object of the expedition from Toulon, and of the success of the 
force which has been detached to counteract it; but with the 
intelligence before us to which I have referred in this letter, 
His Majesty's servants would be culpable in delaying a mo- 
ment to inform you of-what is at present known to them, and of 
the measures which they have in consequence resolved upon. 

It is intended, with as little delay as possible, to send a 
very respectable reinforcement of European force for the ser- 
vice of India. First, a body of about 1,500 troops from the 
Cape of Good Hope: that settlement to be strengthened by 
‘other force as soon as circumstances will allow of it. Se- 
eondly, it is proposed to send 1,500 newly recruited troops 
to the garrison of Gibraltar, and to forward from thence to 
India an equal number of troops which have been seasoned 
there; and lastly, there are above 1,500 European troops 
now serving in Portugal, which it is likewise intended to or- 
der for India. These different detachments, from the flower 
of the British army, will tend to put his Majesty’s European 
forces in India upon a respectable footing. By the arrange- 


* Vide Appendix. 


1798. THE COURT. OF DIRECTORS. 351 


ment with the East India Company, his Majesty’s European 
regiments of infantry are to be 1,200 strong. His Royal High- 
ness the Duke of York will accordingly issue his orders to 
the Commanders-in-Chief at the different settlements, to draft 
the regiments into each other in such a manner as not to in- 
crease the expense agreed upon in the arrangement with the 
Company. 
. My dear Lord, 

With sincere regard, and with every wish for the success 
of your Administration, your’s very faithfully, 
Henry Dunpas. 


No. CV. 
The Earl of Mornington to the Court of Directors. 
Hon. Sirs, Fort William, 21st Nov. 1798. 


By my letter despatched overland from Fort St. George, I 
had the honour to inform you of my arrival at that Presidency 
on the 26th April. 

I lost no time in endeavouring to execute your commands 
with respect to the propositions, which you had directed me 
to make, to his Highness the Nabob of the Carnatic. 

I am concerned to inform you that the conciliatory measures, 
which, in conformity to the spirit and letter of your instruc- 
tions, I employed, in the hope of persuading his Highness to 
agree to a modification of the treaty of 1792, produced no 
more favourable effect upon his Highness’s mind than to draw 
from him repeated acknowledgments of your moderation and 
justice. 

I was equally unsuccessful in my endeavours to persuade 
his Highness to enter into any adjustment of his debt to the 
Company. 

By my letter of the 23rd of June, despatched overland, I 
had the honour to inform you of my arrival at Calcutta on 
the 17th May, on the 18th of which month I took charge of 
the Government General of your possessions in India, Soon 
after my arrival I despatched to the Government of Fort Se. 
George my final directions for carrying into effect the orders. 
of your Secret Committee with regard to the deposition of 
Amer Sing, the late Rajah of Tanjore, and to the establish- 
ment of Serfojee upon the throne of that kingdom.* 


* See p. 41. 


352 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Nov. 


It was a great satisfaction to me to learn from the Govern- 
ment of Fort St. George that this signal act of justice took 
place without occasioning any disturbance at Tanjore. 

The state of your finances at this Presidency demanded 
my earliest attention. 

The enquiry which I proposed to institute* into the various 
branches of expenditure and revenue, as well at this Presi- 
dency as at your other settlements, is commenced in Bengal, 
at Madras, and at Bombay. 

At this Presidency I have no doubt that the result of the 
enquiry will lead to a reduction of expense, and to an aug- 
mentation of your resources. 

The detail of my proceedings on this subject shall be for- 
warded to” you as soon as the enquiry shall have been com- 
pleted, but in the interval I shall not delay the adoption of 
such measures as shall appear to promise any substantial and 
speedy benefit to your affairs. 

The state of your public buildings, and of the allowances 
to your servants, under the head of house and office rent, has 
formed one branch of my investigations, and I hope to be 
able to effect a considerable permanent~reduction in the 
charges on that head, accompanied by an improvement of 
your estate at Calcutta, as well as by an addition to the ac- 
commodation of your servants, and by other arrangements 
tending to facilitate the despatch of public business in all the _ 
principal departments of your civil service. 

While I was engaged in considering the means of improving 
the internal order and management of your finances, I re- 
ceived intelligence which led me to apprehend the approach 
of a war with Tippoo Sultaun, aided by a French force. Your 
Secret Committee is in possession of this intelligence, of which 
the result on my mind was, a firm conviction that the safety 
of your possessions in the peninsula of India demanded that 
your armies should be placed in an active and early state of 
preparation for war. Accordingly having apprized the Go- 
vernor of Fort St. George as early as the 9th June,} of my 
apprehensions of the designs of the enemy, and having di- 
rected his attention to the probability of our being involved 
in hostilities; on the 20th Junet I issued my final orders to 


* See Minute of 12th June, 1798, p. 54. 
t See p. 54. t See p. 240. 


1798. JHE COURT OF DIRECTORS. 353 


the Governments of Fort St. George and Bombay for calling 
your armies into the field on the coasts of Coromandel and 
Malabar. These orders have been executed; and I trust 
that the subsequent disclosure of the projects entertained by 
France against the British empire in India, and the adven- 
turous and daring spirit with which those projects have been 
prosecuted, will sufficiently justify to your Honourable Court 
the measures of precaution which I deemed it my duty to 
. adopt for the defence of your territories; although the im- 
mediate effect of those measures has necessarily occasioned a 
large increase of your expenses, a diminution of your com- 
mercial investment, and a suspension of the improvements 
which I had hoped to have accomplished in the state of your 
pecuniary affairs. 

It would have been a most improvident and mistaken eco- 
nomy to have hazarded the permanent safety of the British 
empire in India, and to have abandoned the sources of your 
commercial prosperity without defence to the attack of the 
enemy, for the purpose of preserving a specious and delusive 
appearance of security in a conjuncture of real danger. 

I am persuaded that the wisdom and justice of your Ho- 
nourable Court will readily approve the policy of sacrificing 
a degree of temporary advantage to the important object of 
providing an effectual protection for the foundations of your 
trade and revenue, and for the lasting tranquillity of your 
possessions in India. 

Under the expectation of an approaching war with Tippoo 
Sultaun, aided by the French, the state of our alliances with 
the country powers became an anxious object of my consi- 
deration. 

I have submitted a full detail of my opinions and proceed- 
ings upon this subject to your Secret Committee, but it is my 
duty in this place to request the attention of your Honourable 
Court to the condition in which I found our alliance with his 
Highness the Nizam, and to the happy improvement which 
circumstances have enabled me to effect in the nature of our 
connection with that prince. 

The corps commanded by French officers in the service of 
the Nizam, which, during the last war with Mysore, amounted 
to no more than 1,500 men; and was at that period of time so 
defective in point of discipline as to be rather an object of 

VOL. I. ZA 


354 .' THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Nov. 


contempt than of jealousy to your Governments. in India, had 
gradually augmented its numbers and improved its discipline 
under the command of the late Monsieur Raymond, until at 
the period of my arrival in India it had nearly reached the 
number of 14,000 men, and had attained a degree of disci- 
pline superior in every respect to that of any native infantry 
in India, excepting the sepoys entertained in your service. 

This corps formed the largest and most efficient branch of 
the military establishment of his Highness, and the French 
officers had acquired a considerable ascendancy in his domi- 
nions, and had manifested, on several occasions, the symptoms 
of a disposition so arrogant, overbearing, and adventurous, 
as to excite alarm in the minds of his Highness and of his 
ministers. Although his Highness had entered into no en- 
gagement or obligation which in any degree bound him to 
retain this party in his service, and although their sudden 
dismission would at any moment have been warranted by 
every principle of justice, and their continuance at Hyderabad 
threatened the independence, if not the existence of his High- 
ness’s throne, yet the Nizam and his ministers confessed their 
inability to check the growth of a power, of which they ac- 
knowledged the dangerous influence and dreaded the destruc- 
tive effect. 

The principles of the French officers commanding this army 
were avowedly the same with those of the persons who for 
some time past have exercised the powers of Government in 
France, and their enmity to the British interests was declared 
on all occasions. While this army, commanded by French- 
men of such principles and views, and of such uncontrolled 
power, remained in the service of the Nizam, his Highness’s 
alliance must have proved a source rather of danger than of 
advantage to the Company, in the event of a war with Tippoo 
Sultaun; and that danger would have been greatly aggra- 
vated by any cooperation which might have been afforded to 
Tippoo from France. Various other considerations will oc- 
cur to the wisdom and experience of your Honourable Court, 
to prove the direct and collateral effects which the existence 
of a numerous armed French party in the centre of the Dec- 
can must have produced, whether in time of war or of peace, 
upon the whole frame of your political interests in India. 


r these circumstances, the expulsion of the French party 
od « 


‘ 


1798. THE COURT OF DIRECTORS. 855 


from the Court of Hyderabad appeared to me to be @ neces- 
sary part of that system of precaution and defence by which 
I hoped to be enabled either to encounter the pressure of 
war, or to secure the advantages of peace. 

With these views on the 8th July, I instructed the Acting 
Resident at Hyderabad to open a negociation with his High- 
ness the Nizam, proposing an addition to the British detach- 
ment serving at Hyderabad, and stipulating for the dismission 
of the corps commanded by French officers in his Highness’s 
service. 

A new subsidiary treaty, founded on this basis, and em- 
bracing other collateral arrangements (particularly such con- 
ditions as appeared necessary for the removal of all causes of 
jealousy, and for the restoration of union and concord be- 
tween our two allies, the Peishwa and the Nizam), was signed 
by his Highness at Hyderabad on the Ist of September, and 
ratified by me in Council on the 18th of the same month. 

By this treaty an increase is made in the British subsidiary 
force serving with his Highness of 4,400 men, and an increase 
in the annual subsidy paid by his Highness, of about nineteen 
lacs of rupees. The former subsidy having been 53,713 Arcot 
rupees per mensem, and the subsidy under the new treaty 
being 2,01,425 Arcot rupees per mensem, or 24,17,100 Arcot 
rupees per annum. 

The substance of this treaty was communicated to the 
Peishwa both previously and subsequently to its conclusion, 
and at both periods he expressed his entire approbation of 
the nature and tendency of the new engagements, as well in 
their operation upon the interests of the Mahratta empire, as 
upon those of the Nizam. 

On the 13th July* I ordered the Government of Fort St, 
George to assemble such a force in the Guntoor Circar as 
might enable me to fulfil the subsidiary engagements of the 
Company, under the new treaty, at the earliest possible period 
subsequent to its conclusion. This measure was executed 

with the utmost degree of promptitude and alacrity by Lieu- 
tenant General Harris (at that time uniting in his person the 
offices of Governor of Fort St. George, and Commander-in- 


* See p. 234. 


356 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Nov. 


Chief on the. coast of Coromandel,) to whose zeal, public 
spirit, and prompt obedience on all occasions wherein I have 
entrusted him with the execution of my orders, I am happy 
to be able to bear this public testimony. 

The British detachment, under the command of Lieutenant 
Colonel Roberts, reached Hyderabad on the 10th October, 
and, on the 22nd October, under the orders of his Highness 
the Nizam, and with the cooperation of a body of his cavalry, 
surrounded the camp of the French army, disarmed all the 
sepoys, and secured the persons of all the French officers 
then in the camp. This operation was happily effected with- 
out bloodshed and without contest. A mutiny having broken 
out in the French camp on the preceding day, and the sepoys 
having imprisoned their officers, the Resident at Hyderabad 
and Lieutenant Colonel Roberts, with the consent of the 
Nizam, judiciously availed themselves of this favourable op- 
portunity to execute this important measure without difficulty 
or danger. 

The amount of the French force disarmed on this occasion 
was about 11,000 men, from which circumstance your Ho- 
nourable Court will observe that a part of the corps was 
absent, on.detachment. Measures have been taken for the 
arrest of those who commanded the detached force. The 
French officers, by my particular orders, were treated with 
every practicable degree of attention and humanity; at the 
period of their arrest by our troops their persons were in con- 
finement, and their lives in danger from the mutiny prevailing 
in their camp; and the greatest difficulty which Colonel Ro- 
berts encountered was, that of réscuing the imprisoned offi- 
cers from the violence of their own sepoys. Particular care 
was taken to save the property of the officers for their use, 
as well as to obtain for them such arrears of pay and allow- 
ances as were due to them from his Highness; Captain Kirk- 
patrick informs me, that he has been completely successful in 
effecting oth these desirable objects. The French officers 
are now on their passage to this Presidency on board the 
Bombay frigate, which I had previously stationed at Masuli- 
patam for their accommodation. On their arrival at Calcutta 
it is my intention to receive them with the consideration due 
to their respective ranks, and to allow them every indulgence 
compatible with the security of their persons. I propose to 


* 


1798. THE COURT OF DIRECTORS. 357 


send them to Europe by the earliest opportunity, using the 
precaution of dispersing them in different ships. 

On their arrival in England I have engaged that they shall 
not be treated as prisoners of war, but shall be immediately 
transported to France, without suffering any detention for an 
exchange of prisoners. 

The treaty under which this measure was executed has 
been already forwarded overland to your Secret Committee, 
and it now forms a number of the secret despatch by the 
Eurydice. 

The effect of the measure will, I trust, be highly favourable 
to your political interests in the peninsula of India. The 
British subsidiary force now stationed in the dominions of his 
Highness the Nizam, while it must tend to cement the con- 
nexion between the Company and that Prince, and to render 
him a more useful and efficient ally in the event of war, will 
operate at all times as an effectual protection to your posses- 
sions in the Northern Circars; and the total subversion of 
the French influence in the Deccan, under all the circum- 
‘stances of the present. moment, is an event from which I ex- 
pect to derive additional security, not only for your territories, 
but for the general tranquillity of India. 

Among your Servants who have been concerned in the exe- 
‘cution of my orders, on this occasion, I have already recom- 
mended Lieutenant General Harris to your favourable notice. 
To his name it is my duty to add those of Captain Kirkpa- 
trick and of Lieutenant Colonel Roberts. I found the former 
in the situation of Acting Resident at Hyderabad, and to his 
zeal, address, discretion, and firmness, I attribute the early 
success of the negociation entrusted to his management. 

Upon the resignation of Colonel Kirkpatrick, I took occa- 
sion to manifest my sense of Captain Kirkpatrick’s merits, by 
appointing him Resident at the Court of the Nizam. 

To the ability and-temper of Lieutenant Colonel Roberts, 
acting under the judicious instructions of the Resident, I at- 
tribute the complete and satisfactory execution of the articles 
of the treaty relating to the dismission of the French army; 
and his conciliatory and humane conduct towards the officers 
deserves the highest commendation. 

The rumours which have prevailed of the intended ap- 
proach of Zemaun Shah to the frontier of Hindostan, although 


358 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Nov. 


of a vague and contradictory nature, appeared to me not 
wholly undeserving of attention ; and I have the satisfaction 
to inform you that every possible precaution has been taken 
for the effectual defence of the frontier of Oude. 

I am happy to be able to inform you that, although I found 
the subsidy of the Nabob Vizier considerably in arrear, I 
have succeeded in persuading his Excellency to discharge a 
large part of it; and in justice to his Excellency, I am bound 
to declare, that I have found him sincerely disposed to fulfil 
his engagements under the treaty concluded by Lord Teign- 
mouth, and to manifest on every occasion a cordial attach- 
ment to the interests of the Company. ‘The situation of 
affairs on the coast of Coromandel, and the necessity of pro- 
viding against the possible event of a war with Tippoo Sul- 
taun, have hitherto prevented me from visiting the upper 
provinces. But I have not been unmindful of the affairs of 
Oude, and I trust that I shall soon be able to turn my undi- 
vided attention to the improvement of the civil and military 
establishments of the’ Nabob Vizier. 

Although I have deemed it my duty to call your armies 
into the field in every part of India, my views and expecta- 
tions are all directed to the preservation of peace, which in 
the present crisis cannot otherwise be secured than by astate 
of forward preparation for war. In the mean while you may 
rely on my unremitting efforts to confine your expenses 
within the most narrow limits, and to raise your commercial 
investment to the highest scale compatible with the indispens- 
able necessity of providing for the security of your pos- 
sessions. 

In the execution of my orders for the protection of your 
territories on the coast of Malabar, I am much indebted to 
the zeal and diligence of Mr. Duncan and General Stuart, 
and the vigilance and firmness manifested by the Government 
of Bombay on the first intelligence of the progress of the 
French arms in Egypt, have obtained my public and cordial 
approbation. It is also a peculiar satisfaction to me to inform 
your Honourable Court that I have received from Lord Clive 
the most ready and honourable support in the preparations 
for the defence of the Carnatic, and that reposing the most 
implicit confidence in his Lordship’s anxious solicitude for the 
prosperity of the general administration of your affairs en- 


1798. THE COURT OF DIRECTORS. 359 


trusted to my hands, as well as in his assiduous attention to 
the peculiar duties of his own station, I expect to derive con- 
siderable benefit to your service from a sincere union with 
him in the important task of preserving and improving the 
interests committed to our joint charge. 

Notwithstanding the great strength of the military force 
now in India, I have deemed it my duty, for the further secu- 
rity of this Presidency to embody the Militia, composed of 
the European and Armenian inhabitants of Calcutta; and my 
orders for this purpose have been obeyed with an alacrity and 
zeal which strongly indicate the resolution of your civil ser- 
vants, and of all the European and Armenian inhabitants of 
Calcutta, to devote their personal services to the defence of 
the seat of your Supreme Government in any exigency which 
may arise. My intention is to establish this useful corps upon 
a permanent foundation, as an institution from which great 
advantage may hereafter be derived. 

I trust in the course of a few months to be enabled to lay 
before your Honourable Court my observations in detail on 
the great branches of your service, and on the conduct and 
character of your servants acting under my orders. For the 
present I must content myself with submitting to your Ho- 
nourable Courtta general assurance that I have every reason 
to approve (with few exceptions, the particulars of which will 
appear upon the proceedings), the conduct of your servants, 
in all the departments of the Government. 

I have had the honour to receive your commands of the 
6th of June, with respect to the regulation of your military 
establishments at this Presidency, and I have already di- 
rected that your orders with respect to the system of promo- 
tion by regimental rise should be carried into immediate effect. 
In the mean while I have the satisfaction to assure you that 
the general disposition of your army at this Presidency is 
such as to merit your approbation and confidence ; and I en- 
tertain no apprehension of meeting any difficulty in the esta- 
blishment of the regulations, which you have forwarded to me, 
or of any other, which the wisdom of your Honourable Court 
may deem it advisable to enforce. 

By the regular ships of this season, I propose to submit to 
the consideration of your Honourable Court my proceedings 
with respect to the several other parts of your commands. 


360 LORD CLIVE, TO Nov. 


In my letter of the 23d of August,* I had the honour to 
inform you of the proceedings of the British inhabitants at 
Calcutta on the 17th of July, of their having presented to me 
a dutiful and loyal address for transmission to his Majesty, 
and of their having subscribed to a voluntary contribution for 
the public service of Great Britain in the present exigency. 
The details of this transaction will appear in the printed 
papers of which several copies are forwarded by this despatch 
for the use of your. Honourable Court. The amount of the 
voluntary contribution remitted to Great Britain by the ship 
Eurydice is £95,843 7s. 11d. 

I trust that your Honourable Court will sanction the ap- 
probation which I deemed it my duty to declare of the spirit 
of loyalty and attachment towards his Majesty’s person, fa- 
mily and government, and of the affectionate solicitude for the 
safety of the British Empire in Europe, which dictated the 
expressions of the address, and the measure of the voluntary. 
contribution. 

It was my intention to have despatched the Eurydice as early 
as the month of September, but the various important events 
which have successively arisen, and my desire to transmit to 
England the most ample details with respect to the state of 
your affairs in India, have induced me to detain her until this 
time. : 

The original address to his Majesty, with the signatures, is 
forwarded to your Honourable Court by the ship Eurydice. 
I take the liberty of submitting to your Honourable Court my 
request that the address may be presented to his Majesty by 
your Chairman, attended by the whole Court in the most 
public manner. 

It was a great pleasure to me to receive the honour of your 
approbation of the measures which I took at the Cape for the 
detention of the Mildred, and for the despatch of your several 
packets by his Majesty’s ship Crescent. The approbation of 
your Honourable Court will always form a Beamary object of 
my ambition. 

I have the honour ta be, Honourable Sirs, 
with the greatest respect, 
your most obedient and faithful Servant, 
Morwnineron. 


* See p. 233, 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 361 


No. CVI. 
Lord Clive to the Earl of Mornington. 
My Lorp, Fort St. George, 29th Nov. 1798, 


I have the honour to transmit for your perusal a paper of 
intelligence, on the correctness of which, as far as it goes, I 
believe you may with confidence rely. It comes through the 
channel of a friend of the family of the former King of My- 
sore, who had communication and engagements with Lord 
Pigot, Lord Macartney, and Sir William Meadows I believe, 
and whose information during the periods of their govern- 
ments was found to be of importance, and invariably to be 
depended upon. This person, Tremal Row, keeps up a con- 
nection with the old Queen of Mysore, who is confined by 
Tippoo, and whose only hopes of the restoration of her family 
arise from the prospect of a war. Upon this unfortunate 
Lady’s views and wishes, I expect very soon to be able to 
send your Lordship a paper, which in that event may become 
a subject of your consideration. 'Tremal Row is also connect- 
ed with some persons immediately employed in the Sultan’s 
Government, which though it affords him superior means of 
information, places him under considerable alarm for the 
safety of those persons. He has however engaged, upon re- 
ceiving assurances of the strictest secrecy, to furnish me with 
the best information, and that object will be completely se- 
cured to him by his communicating with me through Mr. 
Webbe, whose knowledge of the Mahratta language enables 
him to converse in it without the intervention of dubash or 


interpreter. 
I have the honour to be with the greatest respect and 
esteem, My Lord, your Lordship’s, 
Most faithful servant, 
‘ CLIVE. 
: No. CVII. 


Memorandum in Lord Clive’s Letter. 
28th Nov. 1798. 
[Intelligence by a person who left Seringapatam, 18 days 
since. ] 


Tippoo is extremely uneasy on account of the information 
relative to the defeat of the French fleet at Alexandria, and 


362 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Dec. 


the little prospect he now has of being soon succoured by the 
reinforcements promised him by the French. 

He has positive information of the great military prepara- 
tions going on in the Carnatic, and’is assured in his own 
mind, that the English intend to attack him without delay. 
His own designs not being matured, he is desirous at present 
to avoid war, and on this account he means to put himself in 
a state of preparation only, and wait the motions of the 
English—with a view to this plan, he has taken measures to 
augment his infantry by 8000 men, and to recruit his cavalry 
to the number of 30,000, besides which from the habits of 
friendship, which subsist between him and Rastiah, he ex- 
pects by means of this person to receive the assistance of 
20,000 Mahratta horse. He is also levying 20,000 Peons to 
be used in plundering, and having sent for three principal 
Lumbardies, who frequent the Mysore country, presented 
them each with an elephant, took engagements from them, by 
which they are bound to supply him with 50,000 bullocks. 

For some time past he has been employed in repairing the 
works of Seringapatam, and in consequence the fort is in an 
unfinished state, and -conceiving it might fall, if attacked by 
the English, he has prepared Chittledroog and Pajoonda for 
the reception of his family and treasure, thus meaning to keep 
the field in person should his capital be beseiged. Of his 
family and treasure, however, no part is yet removed from 
Seringapatam. Of late he has with the greatest secrecy, 
issued to the Mint Master at Seringapatam, to be coined, bul- 
lion gold and silver, sufficient for 30 lacs of sultaney pagodas, 
and 20 lacs of sultaney rupees. A Killadar with 200 men is 
again established at Bangalore, and appearances indicate 
that the place will be re-fortified. In order that his troops 
may be ready to act in the event of the English commencing 
hostilities, he has stationed in different places in the Coimba- 
tore about 3000 horse, and a’ few infantry, and a body of 
Peons with orders to enter the southern provinces, and ra- 
vage them from Trichinopoly to Tinnevelly—5000 horse are 
also distributed in the districts of Malwagh, and that neigh- 
bourhood with similar orders for the purpose of plundering 
the Carnatic. Muddoo Chan and Ghazu Chan’s son, who 
command the Beid horse, are particularly cautioned to have 
‘their corps in readiness for predatory service. 


1798. LORD CLIVE. . 363 


No. CVIII. 
The Earl of Mornington to Tippoo Sultaun. 
Fort William, Dee. 10th, 1798. 


I had the honour of addressing a friendly letter to your 
Highness, on the 8th of November* last, in which I stated a 
variety of important points, to which your Highness would no 
doubt perceive the propriety and necessity of giving your 
earliest and most serious consideration. I particularly hope, 
that your Highness will have been sensible of the advantages 
likely to result to all parties, from the conciliatory measure of 
my deputing Major Doveton to you, which J proposed in that. 
letter. 

I expect to have the pleasure of finding your answer to 
that letter on my arrival at Madras, for which place I am on 
the point of setting out from Calcutta. I hope to arrive at 
Madras about the same time that this letter reaches you, and 
should any circumstances hitherto have prevented your an- 
swering my last letter of the 8th November, I assure myself 
that you will immediately, on your receipt of this, despatch a 
satisfactory reply to it, addressed to me at Madras. 

I am, &c. &c. 
MornIncTon. 


No. CIX. 
The Earl of Mornington to Lord Clive. 


My Lorp, Fort William, 10th Dec. 1798. 

I despatch this letter by an express vessel to inform your 
Lordship, that a consideration of the delays which must arise 
from the necessity of a reference to me in the event of Tippco 
Sultaun’s acceding to my proposition for an amicable negoti- 

ation, has determined me to proceed to Fort St. George, on 
board the Sybille; and that I hope to be ae to embark on 
Monday next. 

The Shah has crossed the Attock, and is certainly at 

Lahore with a large army. The Seiks will give every op- 


* See p. 326. 


364 SIR J. H. CRAIG, TO Dee. 


position within their power to his progress, but their in- 
ternal distractions preclude the possibility of their meeting his 
army in the field. The Mahratta power on the north western 
frontier of Hindostan, is nearly in the same state and temper 
as the Seiks, and Scindiah’s return, (the object of my early 
and unremitted endeavours) appears as distant and uncertain 
as ever. In this state of affairs (of which I have received the 
account just now) I have determined that Sir Alured Clarke, 
shall remain here in charge of the Government and of the 
army instead of proceeding to the coast; while I shall en- 
deavour with your Lordship’s assistance, to bring matters in 
your quarter to a distinct issue. 

Under these circumstances the command of the army des- 
tined eventually against Mysore, will remain in the hands of 
General Harris, who will now consider himself at liberty to 
form his plan of general operations, and to direct the move- 
ment of the army according to his judgment. My wish is 
that the battering train should be advanced as near the fron- 
tier as possible without delay. But I am aware, that until 
it can be determined through which pass the army is to pro- 
ceed into Mysore, it may be difficult to fix any forward point 
at which the train should be stationed; and it is impossible 
to determine the route of our army, until we shall have ascer- 
tained the time when we may expect the junction of the 
Nizam’s force. Adverting to these difficulties, I must leave 
it to your Lordship and General Harris to make such ar- 
rangements as may appear most advisable; apprizing you 
that my wish is to advance the train as near as possible to 
the frontier. It is equally an object of my anxiety, that your 
whole army should be advanced in the same manner as 
speedily as may be practicable, consistently with the observa- 
tions which I have applied to the station of the battering 
train, and which are equally applicable to that of the army. — 

' [have the honour to be, &c. 
MorwineTon.. 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 365 


No. CX. 
Sir J. H. Craig to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Lorp, Camp at Futty Ghur, Dec. 13, 1798. 


Since I had the honor of addressing your Lordship on the 
29th ultimo, nothing has occurred, upon which I could deem 
it necessary to intrude upon your Lordship’s time. 

The Commander-in-Chief will have reported to your Lordship 
the march of the last of the troops under my command, with 
which I joined the division under Colonel Clarke, at this place 
yesterday, and shall proceed the day after tomorrow towards 
Anopsheer, where I shall direct General Stuart to join me. 
I hope the whole will be collected by the 26th. 

Your Lordship will be aware, that having left four batta- 
lions under the command of Colonel Russell, to act as may be 
expedient, with a view to the internal security of the Vizier’s 
dominions, we shall have in the field ten native battalions, and 
two of Europeans, with four regiments of cavalry, besides the 
independent regiment under Colonel Bruce. From the great 
length of time which it has required to prepare the artillery 
and stores directed to be sent from Chunar, and which so far 
exceeded what I could suppose to be necessary, that I could 
not think of suffering any further delay on their account we 
are something deficient in these respects; I have however 
made arrangements for sending part after us, and having ap- 
propriated a considerable portion to the service of Colonel 
Russell’s corps, in the confidence that he could not have any 
occasion for them for some time; I hope that in every event 
we cannot suffer much inconvenience on that head. In the 
article of cattle and carriage of every sort, our supply is ample ; 
indeed [ do not believe that any army in India was ever in a 
state more compleat as to the means of movement. 

Being extremely anxious for the junction of the 7th regi- 
ment, which is now on the Lucknow duty, I wrote on the 8th 
to Mr. Lumsden to press the Nabob to come to an immediate 
deterinination relative to his joining the army, and to fix a 
short day for his departure, in case he should ¢ontinue in the 
resolution of accompanying us. The result of a long con- 
ference which he had with the Nabob on the subject was, 
that he would remain at Lucknow, but he was extremely 


366 SIR J. H. CRAIG, TO Dee. 


pressing to have some of the Company's troops left for his 
protection, indeed he made it almost a condition. As he 
would embarrass us a good deal by his presence, I have con- 
sented that a battalion of Colonel Russell’s corps shall remain 
with him, and I had the less difficulty in doing so, from con- 
sidering that in case of any movement on the part of the Ro- 
hillas, capable of exciting alarm, timely notice will always be 
had, and the fears of the Nabob himself will readily suggest 
the expediency of this battalion joining the remainder of 
Colonel Russell’s corps, destined chiefly for the express pur- 
pose of opposing these people. 

Although I have made arrangements upon a very large 
scale, and at a very considerable expence, for procuring in- 
telligence immediately from the Shah’s camp, a sufficient time 
has not yet elapsed, to receive any benefit from them, and at 
present I depend entirely upon the communications made to 
me by Colonel Collins and Mr. Lumsden, which are of course 
regularly transmitted to your Lordship; from the latest it 
would seem, as if the Shah was ‘in the intention of establish- 
ing himself in the Pungab, before he prosecutes his further 
objects, and Colonel Collins informs me, that he has grounds 
for thinking, that with this view, he is using his endeavours 
to conciliate the Seik Chiefs. If this should really be the 
case, it will necessarily occasion his remaining at Lahore 
some time. It appears indeed, that it would be an act of ex- 
treme temerity in him to advance, until he has secured these 
people, either by conquest or conciliation, but at the same time 
must it be confessed, that their resistance both on this and on 
the last occasion, has been so inconsiderable—the opportu- 
nity offered by the divisions in the Mahratta Government is 
so favorable, and the Shah’s wants with respect to money, 
seem to be so pressing, that it is far from improbable, that he 
might determine to encounter all the hazards of the step, to 
reach Delhi, where alone he can look for any possible supply, 
though perhaps he may be sensible, that he must proceed 
further to render it any wise efficient. 

Were the Seiks united as a nation, I should think it 
scarcely possible that they would ever enter into the Shah’s 
interests, they must know that their existence is incompati- 
ble with them, and they must feel that by forwarding that 
Prince’s views, they would only render him the more perfect 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 367 


master of their fate; but in their present distracted and dis- 
united state, where no union or concert is to be expected, 
where no prospect appears of successful opposition, where 
mutual jealousy and distrust must magnify the danger and 
aggravate their fears,—is it not highly probable, that dis- 
tant considerations will be sacrificed to the interests of the 
moment,—is it not likely, that viewing it as the only possible 
means of securing their personal safety, they may be anxious 
to anticipate each other in meeting the Shah’s advances. 
Should this surmise be realised, though the requisite ar- 
rangements may probably delay him some little time at La- 
hore, he will be enabled to advance shortly without the 
risk of leaving an enemy behind him, but on the contrary, 
with encreased strength by the accession of that very enemy. 

The Mahrattas are likewise, it appears, in the determina- 
tion of assembling at Delhi, but of themselves I am convinced 
they will do as little as the Seiks. I am led to believe that 
the appearance of our army assembling on the frontier, has 
been their only inducement for this apparent vigour, which, 
unless supported, will terminate in appearance only. 

These are considerations which, though I assume the li- 
berty of mentioning them as they suggest themselves to my 
mind, I have not a doubt that they have already met with 
every necessary attention from. your Lordship, where they 
will have their due weight in the decision of the question, 
whether to confine our force to the precise defence of the 
Vizier’s dominions, or by advancing to give support to the 
Mahrattas, and encouragement to the Seiks. 

I have the honour to be, 
My Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient and humble Servant, 
; J. H. Crate. 

P.S, Since writing the above, Colonel Collins has commu- 
nicated some intelligence which he has just received from 
Delhi, by which it would appear that the Seiks are actually 
assembled in some numbers, at Amrutsir, that skirmishes have 
taken place between them and the Shah’s troops, but there is 
nothing yet that can lead me to alter my opinion as to what 
is to be expected from these people. Without support, I am 
convinced they will do little that is effectual. 


» 
368 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Dec. 


. 


No. CXI. 
The Earl of Mornington to his Excellency Rear-Admiral Rainier. 


Sir, Fort William, 13th Dec. 1798. 

It gives me great satisfaction to find that Ihave anticipated 
your Excellency’s wishes with respect to arming such India- 
men and other vessels as appeared fit for the purpose. The 
ships Earl Howe and Princess Charlotte, having been armed 
and manned as completely as the circumstances of this port 
will admit, were despatched, on the 12th December, under 
the instructions already forwarded to you. I take this occa- 
sion to recommend to your favourable notice Captain Bur- 
rowes of the Earl Howe, and Captain Prescott of the Princess 
Charlotte; they manifested the utmost zeal and alacrity in 
, Preparing for a service which does not afford the prospect of 
any other reward than the approbation of your Excellency 
and of the public. 

I return your Excellency many thanks for your obliging 
attention in permitting me to exercise my discretion on the 
important question of detaining the Sybille on this station. I 
will state to you, without reserve, the considerations on which 
my opinion has been formed, and on which it now rests. 

, The great object of all our efforts, in the present crisis, is 
to prevent the success of the joint designs of Tippoo Sultaun 
and of the French. On the one hand, we must endeavour to 
intercept all communication by sea between Tippoo and the 
French; on the other hand, it is an equally urgent duty, with 
the same view, to strengthen our army in the Carnatic to the 
utmost possible degree, in order to provide against all contin- 
gencies. To your Excellency, in this confidential communi- 
cation, I will state considerations of a more secret nature, 
which affect my judgment on this question. 

The period of the season, the state of the French army in 
Egypt, and every accompanying circumstance, leave little ap- 
prehension of the approach of any considerable French force 
to the coast of Malabar before the month of March or April. 
In the meanwhile the happy revival of our alliances with the 
native powers, the destruction of the French party in the 
Deccan, the advanced state of our preparations for war on 
the coasts of Coromandel and of Malabar, and the expected 


1798. REAR-ADMIRAL RAINIER. 369 


arrival of large reinforcements from the Cape and from Eu- 
rope, place us in a commanding situation in the peninsula of 
India. Being convinced of the hostile nature of Tippoo’s 
views, I am resolved to avail myself of the present favourable 
moment to reduce his powers of offence, either by the terror 
or by the actual employment of our arms; for it is evident 
that, if we suffer him to continue his preparations for war 
without molestation, the same pressure of danger under which 
we have lately suffered, will come upon us in the next season 
with redoubled force. A blow struck now may save crores 
of rupees and thousands of lives, by rendering Tippoo unable 
to avail himself of the future assistance of Franee whenever 
she may be able to renew her attempts against India. 

With these views, I have ordered a considerable force to 
be embarked for Fort St. George; and large convoys of ar- 
tillery, stores, and provisions, will be constantly passing from 
this port to the coast during the next monsoon. The failure 
of the crops on the coast will render it still more necessary to — 
send constant and ample supplies of rice to that quarter. 

My intention is to try the effect of negociation with the 
Sultaun in the first instance; if that should fail, war will be- 
come inevitable. 

Under these circumstances,. it: is absolutely necessary to 
secure a free intercourse between: this port and the coast of 
Coromandel, and this object is intimately connected with the 
views which the Lords of the Admiralty and your Excellency 
entertain of frustrating the combined projects of Tippoo and 
of France, and of affording defence to the British empire in 
India. , 

If one or two of the enemy’s large frigates from Batavia 
were to enter the bay of Bengal during the present monsoon, 
they would be superior to any opposition which I could pro- 
vide by arming Indiamen, or such other vessels as this river 
affords. 

The Sybille, therefore, is the only force on which I can 
rely at present for securing an intercourse with the coast of 
Coromandel, and I consider her continuance in the Bay of 
Bengal to be indispensably necessary to the public service, 
either with a view to the possibility of an irruption from 
Tippoo into the Carnatic, or to the great object of antici- 
pating his hostilities by our alacrity and firmness. 

VOL. I. 2B 


370 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Dec. 


Your Excellency will, I trust, concur in acknowledging the 
strength of the reasons which have induced me to avail my- 
self of the discretion which you have allowed me, to detain 
the Sybille on this station, until Captain Cooke shall receive 
your further orders. I also trust that the armed Indiamen 
will arrive under your command before you could have ex- 
pected them, and that their presence will prove useful. 

The embarkation of troops to the coast will take place in 
the course of this week, and having consulted with the Ma- 
tine Board and with Captain Cooke, I have judged it advi- 
sable to recommend, for the purpose of despatch, that the 
Sybille should cruize for a short time off the Armegon sand, 
while the Nonsuch shall be stationed at the mouth of the 
Hooghly, and that the transports shall run down to Madras 
separately, as they shall happen to be ready for sea, without 
waiting to sail in one convoy. This arrangement will also 
enable Captain Cooke to receive your Excellency’s final or- 
ders at Madras much sooner than he could have expected, if 
the Sybille had cruized off the Sand heads, 

The situation of affairs rendering it necessary for me to 
proceed to Madras, I have requested Captain Cooke to allow 
me a passage on board the Sybille, and as soon as she can 
be ready for sea, I propose to embark with Captain Cooke 
accordingly. He gives me reason to expect that the Sybille 
will drop down the river to-morrow, and be ready for sea on 
Wednesday next. 

The Presidency of Fort St. George will become the seat 
of the Supreme Government during my residence there; my 
hope is, that I shall not be under the necessity of remaining 
on the coast more than two months. Your Excellency will 
have the goodness to address your commands to me at Fort 
St. George, until further advice. The Cornwallis will convey 
part of my establishment to Fort St. George, and will from 
thence be despatched to join your Excellency, touching at 
Pointe de Galle and Anjengo for your orders. The Bombay 
frigate being employed.on the important’ sérvice of conveying 
the French officers and privates (lately dismissed from the’ 
service of the Nizam under the stipulations of the new treaty) 
to Fort William, is not yet arrived in 'the Hooghly; as soon 

-as she arrives, I shall despatch her to your Excellency, under 
the same instructions as those of the Cornwallis. 


1798. REAR-ADMIRAL RAINIERe o7l 


If your Excellency should still deem it necessary to call the 
Sybille to the coast of Malabar, I must, in that case, request 
that the armed Indiamen and the Cornwallis may be ordered 
to return to this station with all practicable expedition. Iam 
aware that the return of these ships cannot be effected for a 
considerable time, and I have despatched them to the.coast 
of Malabar in the confident hope that the reasons which I 
have urged for the detention of the Sybille will make the 
same impression on your Excellency’s judgment which they 
have produced on mine. 

I entirely concur with your Excellency in opinion that the 
defence of the Company’s possessions on the coast of Malabar, 
and the blockade of Tippoo’s ports, demand your first atten- 
tion. I confess that I do not now see the least prospect of 
any attempt of the French through the Persian gulf; and I 
conclude that you will exercise your discretion (justified by 
the actual state of circumstances) in the execution of such 
parts of the orders of the Lord’s Commissioners of the Ad- 
miralty as relate to the establishment of a cruize in that 
quarter, : 

I shall detain whatever large ships shall arrive from China 
until I shall receive your further commands; but I shall not 
arm them,before I know that you require their assistance. 
On this subject I shall expect your orders at Madras. 

I return your Excellency many thanks for your obliging 
congratulations on the late happy result of my measures at 
the Court of the Nizam. 

I have the honour to be,, &c. 
Mornineron. 


No. CXII. 
Minute in the Secret Department. 


Tue GoveRNor-GENERAL. —_ Fort William, 14th Dec. 1798. 
The military regulations contained in the separate letter 
from the Honourable the Court of Directors, of the 6th of 
June, 1798, having been carried into effect, as far as they 
related to the alterations in the establishments, and to the 
arrangement of regimental rank, J now proceed to explain 
the motives which have determined me to suspend the exe- 


+ 


872 MINUTE OF THE Dec. 


‘cution of the orders of the Court, with relation to certain 
allowances granted by this Government in June, 1796. 

If the present temper of the army at this Presidency af- 
forded any ground to suspect that the execution of the reduc- 
tions ordered by the Court would produce either disrespectful 
remonstrance or intemperate opposition on the part of the 
officers, no crisis, however extreme, would have induced me 
to modify the orders of the Court. In such a case, the power 
‘and authority of the Government and the discipline of the 
army would have been at stake; and every other considera- 
tion must have been superseded by the indispensable neces- 
sity of subduing every remnant of the spirit of insubordination, 
atid of preserving the main spring of our military strength. 
But I am happy to declare my conviction that the army is 
now in a temper to receive, with dutiful submission, whatever 
regulations the Government may chuse to enforce. The ques- 
tion of discipline (which must have precluded all exercise of 
my discretion) now no longer exists. 

On the other hand, I should not have deemed myself at 
liberty to exercise any discretion in the execution of the 
Court’s orders, if the circumstances of the present conjunc- 
ture had not been of a nature not only extraordinary, but 
unknown to the Court at the time of despatching the letter 
of the 6th of June. 

On any occasion of a different description, my duty would 
have been that of implicit obedience, whatever might have 
been my opinion of the policy of the regulations which I had 
been ordered to carry into effect. 

The Court of Directors could not be aware, in the month 
of June, of the dangers which now threaten every part of the 
British possessions in India. 

On every point of our frontier we are threatened by the 
designs of powerful enemies; and the disclosure of those de- 
signs has already compelled us to call a large part of our 
armies into the field, where we have every reason to appre- 
hend that active and arduous operations may soon become 
necessary. As far as we can form any conjecture on the 
course of future events, it is probable that the actual service 
of the whole of our army may be required, at no distant period, 
to contend against the most formidable combination, by which 
the British empire in India was ever menaced. Even in such 


1798. GOVERNOR GENERAL. 373 


@ conjuncture I never would have submitted to make any 
compromise with a disobedient army. I should have consi- 
dered the restoration of discipline and order in the army to 
be the most necessary of all preparations for war. . 

Although submission to a mutinous army is a weak policy 
in any conjuncture of affairs, a crisis, which demands every 
military exertion, is not the season in which any incentive to 
zeal and alacrity can be withdrawn from the army without a 
considerable aggravation of the existing danger ; the conti- 
nuance of a scale of allowance which the officers have en- 
joyed, and which they deem necessary to enable them to meet 
the losses and expenses incidental to actual service in the 
field, must operate as a considerable incitement to the cor- 
dial and willing discharge of duty under the pressure of ac- 
cumulated labour and increased charges; while the reduction 
of such allowances, on the eve of a general war, might be 
expected to throw a damp upon the spirit of the whole ser- 
vice, and to send. our officers into the field in a temper of 
less energy, promptitude and ardour, than might correspond 
with the exigency of the public service. 

It became my duty to enquire whether the immediate exe- 
cution of the orders of the Court of Directors was likely to 
produce this fatal effect, and, in examining this important 
question, I adverted to the several articles of reduction which 
have been ordered, and I considered the allowances of the 
several officers on the reduced scale, with a view to ascertain 
the proportion which their several incomes would bear to 
their respective ranks and duties, and to their expenses in 
the field. 

The first article of reduction is the batta of brevet rank to 
the officers of his Majesty’s regiments serving in India, and 
to the officers of the Company’s army. 

In his Majesty’s army in Europe, officers having rank by 
brevet, when serving in the field with mixed corps, and con- 
sequently doing duty according to their rank in the army, re- 
ceive certain allowances under the denomination of bat and 
forage, correspondent to the rank which they hold by brevet, 
and the reason of this practice appears to be just. The 
officers by brevet partake of the same duties with those 
holding the same ranks regimentally, and, in many cases, 
command those of the same regimental rank ;. the officers by 


874 MINUTE OF THE Dee. 


brevet, therefore, necessarily have occasion for similar conve: 
niences and for similar -means of meeting the expense inci- 
dental to similar duty. 

Batta in India can only be considered as a different deno- 
mination for the allowance of bat and forage granted in the 
manner deseribed to his Majesty’s officers in Europe; and 
the reasons for granting batta to the brevet officers in India 
appears to stand on grounds of equal necessity. 

‘ Although the instances of brevet rank in Bengal previously 
to the arrival. of the late military regulations were rare, his 
Majesty’s officers, serving in other parts of India, have long 
been in the enjoyment of the batta of their brevet rank, 

-If the various advantages gained under the late regulations 
by the Compainy’s officers ought to be considered as sufficient 
to-counterbalance the reduction now ordered as far as it ap- 
plies to their case, it is manifest that his Majesty’s officers 
have not participated in those advantages; the proposed re~ 
duction will, therefore, fall with aggravated force on his Ma- 
jesty’s officers. 

During the war in Mysore, Lord Cornwallis, with a just 
consideration of the expenses of officers incident to their re- 
spective situations, procured for lieutenant colonels, com- 
ridnding wings of the army, the batta of colonel, and a certain 
allowance to officers commanding brigades; Lord Cornwallis 
also permitted the captains performing the duties of field 
officers of the day to receive the batta and prize money of 
majors, though not possessing that rank by brevet, and cer- 
tainly it appears necessary that the income of officers should 
be proportioned to the duty which they are to discharge, and 
the rank which they are obliged to maintain. 

On these grounds it appeared to me, that the officers by 
brevet would suffer a real hardship.when called into service 
in- the field, if not allowed to receive the batta of their brevet 
rank. 

The second reduction is table allowances of one thousand 
rupees per month. to colonels on duty in India, not being 
generals on the staff... 

In order to ascertain the propriety of this allowance, it is 
necessary to state the monthly receipts of a colonel, which are 
1050 Sonaut rupees; to which is to be added the supplies of 
the off-reckoning, not amounting to more than 550 rupees per 


1798. GOVERNOR GENERAL. 875 


month, making in the aggregate a monthly income of 1600. 
Sonaut rupees. Even in time of peace, with the advantage of 
quarters, this income is not more than sufficient to maintain an 
officer in a manner suitable to the precedence which is assigned 
to the rank of colonel in civil society in India, or to enable him 
occasionally to entertain the officers of his regiment; and al- 
though it must be admitted, that the colonel commandant of 
artillery (to whom, and to the colonel commandant of cavalry 
and chief engineer, the table allowance of one thousand ru-~ 
pees per month is continued by the orders of the Court) has: 
the superintendance of..a more extensive corps; yet it can 
rarely happen that so jarge a proportion of officers can be 
present with him as is attached to an European or a native 
regiment. It must also be observed, that upon whatever ser- 
vice the colonel is employed, however expensive and laborious, 
(excepting in the Vizier’s dominions) his income admits of no 
increase. Nor is it less material to remark that, although the 
original regulations were understood to confer upon the 
colonel his regiment for life, even during his residence in 
England, (subject of course to be recalled to India whenever 
his services should be required), it has been subsequently 
explained, that it is the intention of the Honourable Court to. 
subject the colonel of a regiment to the rules of retiring from 
the service in common with other officers. By the late orders, 
the officers of the rank of colonel on actual service would 
suffer a diminution of more than a third of their present in- 
come, and would also be ultimately deprived of an indulgence 
which is considered in his Majesty’s army as the reward of 
past services. 

The third article is the superior batta to any officer. under 
the rank of colonel in command of a regiment or battalion. 

This increase (in some instances only occasional and tem- 
porary) is not positively disallowed by the recent orders, ex- 
cepting in some cases, where the the colonel shall be present 
with the regiment or batttalion. The Honourable Court ap-. 
pears to doubt the necessity of extending this indulgence to 
both the officers respectively in command of the two batta- 
lions of a native regiment. 

The conclusion must be, that th 2 allowance may. be continued 
to the senior officer of a regiment when the colonel shall be abx 
sent; because the senior officer in that case will be exposed to 


376 MINUTE OF THE Dec. 


anadditional expense. Forthe same reason, the allowance ought 
to be continued to both the officers commanding the two bat- 
talions of a native regiment, when separated, and when the 
colonel shall not be present with either battalion ; when the 
colonel shall be present with one of the battalions, the 
superior batta ought to be continued to the officer command- 
ing the other battalion. As this separation of battalions must 
frequently happen, it may perhaps not exceed the Court's in- 
tention (which is not on this occasion peremptorily expressed) 
if the superior batta be allowed to the officers commanding 
both battalions of a native regiment whenever the colonel 
shall not be present with either battalion, 

The fourth article relates to the additional pay of one 
rupee per day to captain lieutenants, the continuance of which 
is left optional with the Government of India. 

The pay of a captain lieutenant being the same as that of a 
lieutenant, and his batta, when on half batta, only one rupee 
per day more, if the additional’ allowance of one rupee per 
day be reduced, he will in point of income be placed in the 
same situation with a lieutenant, excepting the difference in. 
the gratuity, which is twelve rupees per month. I have, there- 
fore, no hesitation in declaring, that “ the additional allowance 
is absolutely necessary to support the rank of captain lieu- 
tenant.” ‘ 

Fifth. The batta of captain to brevet captains (promoted 
in consequence of their having been of fifteen years standing) 
is ordered to be discontinued, and one rupee per day to be 
established in lieu thereof. 

The Court of Directors declare it to be impossible for them 
to concur in the measure of giving captain’s batta to the cap- 
tains by brevet, who are the subject of this article; but in 
order to render the pecuniary situations of officers of this de- 
scription adequate to their rank, the Court does not object to 
an allowance of one rupee per day to brevet captains, in ad- 
dition to their usual pay and allowances of lieutenant. 

The difference between the half batta of a captain and that 
of a lieutenant is one rupee per day, consequently the brevet 
captains will sustain no loss in garrison and in cantonments ; 
but in the field, on full batta, they will suffer a diminution of 
one rupee per day, and on the Vizier’s allowances of three 
rupees per day. 


1798. GOVERNOR GENERAL. 377 


The situation of these officers has a peculiar claim to atten- 
tion. The Honourable Court of Directors, in consideration of 
their long service, granted superior rank to them, thereby ad- 
vancing them out of the subaltern line, and raising them to 
an honorary distinction. 

This description of officers forms the bulk of the most la- 
borious and effective part of the officers of the army; and the 
reduction will fall upon them on their taking the field, in a 
situation of increased fatigue and expense. 

Since the abolition of the double batta on foreign service, 
the alacrity to engage in that service is considerably dimi- 
nished ; nor ought this to be a matter of astonishment when 
the fact is ascertained, that the present income of brevet cap- 
tains will hardly bear the additional expenses which duty in the 
field necessarily occasions by the enhanced rate of servants’ 
wages, by the increased price of provisions, by the wear and 
tear of camp equipage, and by the loss of cattle, always inci- 
dent to such service. 

It may be urged, that the additional rupee per day granted 
by the Honourable Court of Directors, by raising the income 
of brevet captains above that oflieutenants, preserves the due 
proportion, but we must also look to the proportion which the 
income of brevet captains will bear to that of captain, the 
title and the rank which they really hold. It will be found 
on calculation that the income of the brevet captains, with the 
additional rupee per day, will be 72 rupees per month less 
than that of captain; -and 42 rupees per month less, even 
with the continuance of the captains batta. Under this last 
head, therefore, the reduction would fall heavily on the most 
efficient class of the officers of the army at the moment when 
their services would be most necessary to the state. 

The result of a deliberate examination of the operation of 
the proposed reductions convinced me that they would pro- 
duce so considerable a diminution of the income of every 
class of officers, as_ well in His Majesty’s as in the Honour- 
able Company’s service, as must be severely felt throughout 
the whole army ; that they would press with peculiar weight — 
upon the most laborious and effective class of officers, the 
brevet captains of fifteen years standing ; and that the pres- 
sure would be most severe upon the officers employed in the 
field, on whose zeal and exertions must depend our means of 


378 MINUTE OF THE- Dee. 


defence against the impending attack: of the enemy. Under 
these circumstances, I thought it my duty to suspend the 
execution of. such parts of the orders of the Honourable 
Court as appeared to. me likely to cast any degree of damp 
upon the spirits of their officers: at the same time, however, 
I took occasion to modify the Vizier’s allowances, and to in- 
troduce a regulation for the purpose of precluding all future 
claims to arrears of batta accruing under promotions by 
brevet. 

In examining the policy of reducing the military allowances 
at this critical period, I was led .to consider the extent of the 
saving which would be effected at this Presidency by that re- 
duction, and to compare it with the charges as they will stand 
under the modification, of the Court’s orders, which I have 
thought it advisable to adopt. 

The account No. 1 will show the effect which would have 
resulted from.the complete execution of the Court’s orders at 
this Presidency; and the paper No. 2 will show the compa- 
rative effect of the modification of those orders, accompanied 
by the regulation which confines the Vizier’s allowance of 
regimental rank in correspondence with pay, instead of con- 
tinuing it, as originally ordered, in correspondence with batta. 

Upon the result of the two accounts it appears, that the 
monthly difference of charge at this Presidency will amount 
to Sonat Rupees 12,480. 

It must be observed that the heaviest part of this charge 
consists of the batta to brevet officers, and is not of a perma- 
nent nature, but must progressively decrease. 

If, however, the difference between’ the two accounts were 
to be considered as a charge of a permanent nature, I do not 
conceive that it would be deemed an object of sufficient mag- 
nitude to justify me in hazarding the consequences to be ap- 
prehended from-any abatement of the spirit of the army in 
the present crisis. 

I have already declared that if the actual state of affairs in 
India had either been of a less pressing nature, or had been 
known to the Honorable Court of Directors in the month of 
June, 1798, I should not have presumed either to have sus- 
pended the execution of their orders, or to have submitted 
any remarks upon the justice or policy of the proposed re- 
auctions. But the peculiar exigency of this conjuncture 


1798. GOVERNOR. GENERAL. 379 


having rendered the interposition of my discretion a matter 
of indispensable duty on my part, a considerable interval of 
time must necessarily elapse before the final judgment of the 
Court on this interesting question can reach their servants in 
India. During this interval it has appeared to me to be a 
part of my duty to lay before the Court such considerations 
as have occurred to me, not only with respect to the present 
expediency, but also to the fundamental justice and policy of 
the proposed reductions as applicable to the pecuniary situa- 
tion of the King’s and Company’s officers serving in India. 

It will rest with the wisdom of the Honorable Court, after 
a due examination of the foregoing remarks, to determine 
whether the allowances in question shall ultimately be conti- 
nued or abolished. 

If it should be the final ple&yre of the Court to abolish, 
them, it will be my duty to enforce that order, whenever a 
change in the condition of politiqal‘affairs in India shall ap- 
pear to the Honorable Court to admit of such a measure. 
The step which I have taken has not. been dictated by any 
remonstrance, or claim of right,on the part of the officers, 
but by the spontaneous operation of my own free and un- 
biassed judgment, actuated by a deliberate sense of public 
duty. No principle of discipline has been sacrificed, or even 
brought into question on the present occasion ; and if I should 
ultimately be ordered by the Court to carry the proposed. 
reductions into effect, I am satisfied that I shall be able to 
obey their commands without any difficulty arising from the 
temper of their army. 

Ihave thought fit to record my sentiments 6n this occasion 
in the Secret Department from a sense of the evils which. 
have been produced on former occasions by the public dis- 
cussion of the interests and claims of the officers of the army, 
and with a full confidence that the Secret Committee will sub- 
mit this Minute to the Honorable Court of Directors in such 
a manner as shall be best calculated to secure the object of. 
my remarks. 


380 . LORD CLIVE, TO Dee, 


No. CXIII. 
Lord Clive to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Lorp, Fort St. George, 17th Dec. 1798, 


From all the combined information received of Seringapa- 
tam, it is reasonable to conclude that the works going on 
there are in a very unfinished state, and that if the place can 
be attacked this season it will easily fall. I have the satis- 
faction to acquaint your Lordship, that it is Colonel Close’s 
opinion, which I believe to be the best that can be had in this 
country, that with exertion'the army may reach Seringapa- 
tam by the middle of March, and that six weeks is ample 
time for its reduction. There is reason to believe that the 
Sultaun’s army is at present in a very indifferent state, but 
.that with the assistance of some French officers, whom he has 
lately engaged in his service, it may become formidable in 
another year. Under these circumstances, I am induced to 
give it to your Lordship as my sincere opinion, that your 
coming to this country would be attended with the most be- 
neficial consequences to the public cause. Your presence 
would preclude the delays of reference to Bengal, and your 
union with Sir A. Clark, who I am happy to hear we are so 
soon to expect, would give such weight and efficacy to your 
negotiations, or offensive operations, should you be obliged to 
have recourse to them, as would in all human probability in- 
sure success to your measures; and permit me to say that in 
case your Lordship shall determine to visit the ‘coast, I 
shall have much more satisfaction in obeying your commands 
when present, than at the distance you now are. 

I cannot conclude this letter without testifying to your Lord- 
ship how much I feel the sentiments of friendship and regard 
expressed towards me, nor without assuring you with what 
pleasure I entertain the offer of that connection, which you have 
the goodness to say you seek with me, upon grounds so honor- 
able as those of mutually devoting our labours to, and sharing 
the difficulties, and honour of defending and saving so valua- 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 381 


luable a part of the British Empire, as our possession in 
India.* 
I have the honour to be with the greatest respect and esteem, 
My Lord, your Lordship’s, 
Most faithful and humble servant 
Cuive. 


No. CXIV. 
Tippoo Sultaun to the Earl of Mornington, 


Sth Dec. 1798. 

(Received at Fort St. George, 25th Dec. 1798. 

I have been made happy by the receipt of your Lordship’s 
two friendly letters, the contents of which I clearly compre- 
hend, (vide those written 4th and 8th November.)* The par- 
ticulars which your Lordship has communicated to me, 
relative to the victory obtained by the English fleet over that 
.of the French near the shores of Egypt, nine of their ships 
having been captured and two burnt, on one of which of the 
latter was their Admiral, have given me more pleasure than 
can possibly be conveyed by writing. Indeed I possess the 
firmest hope that the leaders of the English and the Com- 
pany Bahauder, who ever adhere to the paths of sincerity, 
friendship, and good faith, and are the well wishers of man- 
kind, will at all times be successful and victorious; and that 
the French, who are of a crooked disposition, faithless, and 
the enemies of mankind, may be ever depressed and ruined. 
Your Lordship has written to me with the pen of friendship, 
“that in no age or country were the baneful and insidious 
arts of intrigue ever cultivated with such success as they are: 
at present by the French nation. Would to God that no 
impression had been produced on my mind by that dangerous 
people; but that your Lordships situation enables you to 
know that they have reached my presence, and have endea- 
voured to pervert the wisdom of my councils, and to instigate 


*It may be necessary to remark, that at this period the Governor 
General had never had any personal acquaintance with Lord Clive. 
* See pages 321 and 326. 


882 ’ ‘BEPROO SULTAUN, TO Dec. 


-me to war against those who have given me no provocation. 
That it is impossible that I should suppose your Lordship 
ignorant of the intercourse which subsists between me and 
the French, who I know to be the inveterate enemies of the 
Company, and to be now engaged. in an unjust war with the 
British, and that I cannot imagine your Lordship indifferent 
to the transactions which have passed between me and the 
enemies of the English.” 

In this Sircar (the gift of God) there is a mercantile tribe, 
who employ themselves in trading by sea and land. Their 
agents purchased a two masted vessel, and having loaded her 
with rice, departed with a view to traffic. It happened that 
she went to the Mauritius, from when forty persons, French, 
and of a dark colour, of whom ten. or twelve were artificers, 
and the rest servants, paying the hire of the ship, came 
here in search of employment. Such as chose to take service 
were entertained, and the remainder departed beyond the 
confines of this Sircar (the gift of God); and the French, 
who are full of vice and deceit, have perhaps taken advan- 
tage of the departure of the ship to put about reports with 
the view to ruffle the minds of both Sircars. 

It is the wish of my heart, and my constant endeavour, to 
observe and maintain the articles of the agreement of peace, 
-and to perpetuate and strengthen the basis of friendship and 
-union with the Sircar of the Company Bahauder, and with 
the Sircars of the Maha Rajah Saheb, Sree Munt Peishwa 
Bahauder, and his Highness the Nabob Asuph Jah Bahau- 
der. And I am resident at home, at times taking the air, and 
at others amusing myself with hunting at a spot which is used 
as a pleasure ground. In this case, the allusion to war in 
your friendly letter, and the following passage, namely “ that 
prudence required that both the Company and their allies 
should adopt certain measures of precaution and self de- 
fence,” have given ihe the greatest surprize. 

It was further written by your friendly pen, that as your 
Lordship is desirous of communicating to me, on the behalf of 
the Company and their allies, a plan calculated to promote 
the mutual security and welfare of all parties; your Lord- 
ship proposes to depute to me for this purpose Major Dove- 
ton, who formerly waited upon me, and who will explain to 
me more fully and particularly the sole means which appear 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 383 


to your Lordship and the allies to be effectual for the salutary 
purpose of removing all existing distrust and suspicion, and 
of establishing peace and good understanding on the most 
durable foundations; and that therefore your Lordship trusts 
I will let you know at what time and place it will be conve- 
nient to me to receive Major Doveton. It has been under- 
stood, by the blessing of the Almighty, at the conclusion of 
the peace, the treaties and engagements entered into among 
the four Sircars were so firmly established and confirmed as 
ever to remain fixed and durable; and be an example to the 
rulers of the age; nor are they nor will they ever be liable to 
interruption. I cannot imagine that means more effectual 
than these can be adopted, for giving stability to the founda- 
tions of friendship and harmony, promoting the security of 
states, or the welfare and advantage of all parties. 

In the view of those who inspect narrowly into the nature 
of friendship, peace and amity are the first of all objects, as 
indeed your Lordship has yourself written to me that the 
allied Sircars look to no other object than the security and 
tranquillity of their own dominions, and the ease and comfort 
of their subjects. Praise be to God, that the sum of my 
views and the wish of my heart are limited to these same 
points. On such grounds then a just and permanent obser- 
vance of existing treaties is necessary ; and these, under the 
favours of God, daily acquire new strength and improvement 
by means of amicable correspondence. Your, Lordahip is a 
great Sirdar, a firm friend, and the rectifier of all things, and 
you possess an enlightened judgement. TI have the strongest 
hope that the minds of the wise and intelligent, but particu- 
larly of the four states, will not be sullied by doubts and jea- 
lousies, but will consider me from my heart desirous of har- 
mony and friendship. 

Continue to allow me the pleasure of your correspondence, 
making me happy by accounts of your health. What more 
shall be written. 

Dated the 9th of Rujub, 1213, of the Hegirah, (answering 
to the 18th December.) 

A true Translation, N. B. Epmonsroneg, 
Persian Translator to Govt. 


384 MINUTE OF THE Dec. 


No. CXV. 


(Secret Department.\ 
The Governor General’s Minute. 
Fort William, 22nd Dec. 1798. 


The recent advices from the north western frontier of Hin- 
dostan, as well as from Fort St. George, have induced me to 
suggest to the Commander-in-Chief the necessity of an alter- 
ation in the arrangement under which I had proposed to him 
to embark for Fort St. George. 

The reports of Zemaun Shah’s progress, which hitherto 
have been vague and contradictory, have now become more 
uniform and consistent. Zemaun Shah is now advanced to 
Lahore and appears determined to prosecute his design of 
proceeding at least as far as Delhi. 

On the other hand the check which the French have re- 
ceived in Egypt, the destruction of their influence in the Dec- 
can, the revival of our defensive alliance with the Nizam and 
the Peishwa, and the appearance of the fleet off the coast of 
Malabar, together with the advanced state of military pre- 
parations on that coast and on the coast of Coromandel, ap- 
pear, by late intelligence from Fort St. George, to have ex- 
cited in the mind of Tippoo Sultaun an apprehension of our 
power to enforce our just demands of satisfaction, for his late 
infraction of the treaty of Seringapatam. 

The ‘probability of military operations on the frontier of 
Oude is therefore increased, while a prospect opens of our 
being able to induce Tippoo Sultaun to listen to reasonable 
terms of accommodation without resorting to arms. 

Under these circumstances, it appears to me, that the 
public service will derive material benefif from the presence 
of the Commander-in-Chief in Bengal, and that it is my duty 
to proceed to Fort St. George. 

In the present conjuncture, it would not be advisable that 
both the Governor General and the Commander-in-Chief 
should be absent from Bengal at the same moment; and the 
frequent references which must be made. to me, in the event 
of a negotiation with Tippoo Sultaun, render it necessary 
that I should be as near as possible to his dominions. A 


1798. GOVERNOR GENERAL. 385 


single reference from Seringapatam to Fort William, would 
consume a large part of the season which ought to be em- 
ployed in military operations, if war should unfortunately 
become inevitable; Tippoo Sultaun would certainly avail 
himself of this advantage to protract, and probably to frus- 
trate the issue of the negociation. 

It is, therefore, my intention to embark for Fort St. George, 
as soon as his Majesty's ship La Sybille shall be ready to re- 
ceive me. : 

During my absence, I request that his Excellency the 
Commander-in-Chief, will act as Vice President and Deputy 
Governor of Fort William. 

Under the act of the 33rd of the King, cap. 52., the ample 
powers and authorities exercised by the Governor General in 
Council at Fort William, will be transferred to Fort St. 
George, during the period of my residence at the latter Pre- 
sidency ; and I shall also be invested, during the same period, 
with the powers and authorities of the Governor in Council 
at Fort St. George. 

The Government of this Presidency will, therefore, be ex- 
ercised during my residence at Fort St. George, in the same 
manner, and under the same limitations as the Governments 
of Fort St. George and Bombay are now exercised by their 
respective Governors in Council, subject however, to the 
several restrictions contained in the act of the 33rd of the 
King, cap. 52. 

But feeling the propriety and necessity of apprizing the 
Council at Fort William of the general state of the British 
interests in India during my absence, I have directed copies 
of all such public documents, as relate more particularly to 
the Government General, to be regularly transmitted to this 
Presidency for the information of the members of the board ; 
the original records of all such documents shall be brought 
to Fort William, whenever I shall be able to return from the — 
coast of Coromandel. 

I rely on the Comimander-in-Chief and on the members of 
the Council, for such an administration of the Government of 
Bengal during my absence, as shall correspond with the 
pressing exigencies of the present difficult crisis, and shall 
promote those important objects of the public service, which 
form the common scope of our united views. 

VOL. I. 2c 


386 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Dee. 


. The Board has been already apprized by verbal communi- 
.eation of the progress, which, with the assistance of the Com- 
‘mittee, appointed on 20th June, I have been enabled to make 
‘in the revision of several branches of the civil estabjishmenis 
‘of this Presidency ; the great pressure of other business has 
not yet admitted of my drawing the details of my plan into a 
connected form; but the materials which I have already laid 
before the Board, and which I now leave in the hands of Sir 
Alured Clarke, will I trust be sufficient to enable the Board 
to issue the necessary orders for putting the proposed reduc- 
tions in train; and upon my return to this Presidency, I pro- 
pose to submit the whole arrangement to the Honorable the 
Court of Directors, together with a full statement of the 
principles on which the arrangement is founded, and of the 
means by which it is to be carried into effect. 

I am, &c., 
MornineTon, 


No. CXVI. 


(Private.) 
The Earl of Mornington to J. Lumsden, Esq. 
Sir, Fort William, 23rd Dec. 1798. 


The extraordinary pressure of public business in a con- 
juncture which demanded the most unremitting exertion, al- 
most from the moment of my arrival in Bengal, must plead 
my excuse for having so long delayed to acknowledge your 
private letter, I now request you to believe that I entertain a 
very high sense of your talents and integrity, as well as of 
your diligence, and that I am perfectly satisfied with your 
‘conduct in your office as far as it has come under my observa- 
tion. The necessity of providing for the defence of the Car- 
natic, and for the early revival of our alliances in the Penin- 
sula, as well as for the seasonable reduction of the growing 
influence of France in India, has not admitted either of my 
visiting Oude, or of my turning my undivided attention to 
the reform of the Vizier’s affairs. There are, however, two 
or three leading considerations in the state of Oude, to which 
I wish to direct your particular notice, intending at an early 


1798. J. LUMSDEN, ESQ. 387 


period. to enter fully into the arrangement in which they must 
terminate. Whenever the death of Almas shall happen, an 
opportunity will offer of securing the benefits of Lord Teign- 
mouth’s treaty by provisions, which seem necessary for the 
purpose of realizing the subsidy under all contingencies. 
The Company ought to succeed to the power of Almas, and 
the management, if not the sovereignty of that part of the 
Doab which he now rents, ought to be placed in our hands, 
a proportionate reduction being made from the subsidy. 
The effect of such an arrangement would be confined to the 
improvement of our security for the subsidy. The strength 
of our north western frontier, would also be greatly increased. 
On the other hand, in the event of Almas’s death we shall 
have to apprehend either the dangerous power of a succes- 
sor equal to him in talents and activity, or the weakness of 
one inferior in both, or the division of the country among a 
variety of renters. In the first case we should risk intérnal 
commotion, in the two latter, the frontier of Oude, would be 
considerably weakened against the attacks either of the Ab- 
dalli or of any other invader. The only remedy for these 
evils will be the possession of the Doab fixed in the hands 
of our Government. The state of the Vizier’s own troops is 
another most pressing evil. TTo you I need not enlarge on 
their inefficiency and insubordination. My intention is to 
persuade his Excellency at a proper season to disband the 
whole of his own army, with the exception of such part of it, 
as may be necessary for the purposes of state, or of the cal- 
lection of revenue. Some expedient must be devised for pro- 
viding a maintenance for such leaders and officers, as from 
their birth or habits, cannot easily be divested of their mili- 
tary pretensions, (I do not say military character, for I do not 
believe that any such description of men exist at Lucknow.) 
In the place of the armed rabble which now alarms the Vizier 
and invites his enemies, I propose to substitute an increased 
number of the Company’s regiments of infantry and cavalry, 
to be relieved from time to time, and to be paid by his Ex- 
eellency ; I have already increased our establishment to the 
extent of 17 regiments of infantry, with the view of trans- 
ferring three regiments to the service of his Excellency, I 
imagine that under this plan, his force might be rendered 
much more efficient at a reduced expense; objects, which 


388. LORD CLIVE, TO Dec. 


would probably meet the two prominent features of his cha- 
racter, timidity, and parsimony; I have not yet fixed the 
amount of the force which it might be deemed necessary for 
his Excellency to maintain with a view to the two objects of 
increased security, and diminished expence ; but I request 
you to take these suggestions into your consideration, and to 
state your opinion to me in a private letter, you will also 
point out the time when you think this reform of the Vizier’s 
army might be attempted with the best prospect of success, 
and in the mean while you will constantly encourage all such 
partial reductions of the present military establishment, as 
may facilitate the final and total reduction of this useless 
charge. 

With respect to the Vizier’s civil establishments, and to 
his abusive systems for the extortion of revenue, and for the 
violation of every principle of justice, little can be done be- 
fore 'I can be enabled to visit Lucknow. I am now under the 
necessity of proceeding to Fort St. George, whence, I trust I . 
shall be at liberty to return to Fort William, in the month of 
March; and I propose to set out for Lucknow at the conclu- 
sion of the month of June. I must call your attention to ano- 
ther important subject. The number of Europeans, particu- 
larly of British subjects established in Oude, is a mischief 
which requires no comment. My resolution is fixed to dis- 
lodge every European excepting the Company’s servants from 
Oude. It is my intention to allow to those Europeans now 
established in Oude, a reasonable time for the settlement of 
their affairs, limiting the period to twelve or eighteen months 
at furthest; you will transmit to me privately, a list of all the 
Europeans now in Oude, as complete as you can make it, 
with a state of their several occupations, and of the period 
which might reasonably be required by each for settling their 
affairs. My wish is to occasion as little private- distress as 
possible, but the public service must take its course; and it 
is not to be expected, that some cases of hardship will not be 
found in the extent of so great a measure. In the mean 
while, I have refused permission to every European who has 
applied for leave to visit Oude, with the exception of a single 
case now under my consideration, that of Mr. Prendergast, 
to whom I think it is. possible, on a revision of his claims, that 
I may extend at indulgence of visiting Oude, (but not Luck- 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 389 


now) for the arrangement of his affairs. If I should permit 
this gentleman to return to Oude, he must not continue there 
beyond the period assigned for the general recall of all Euro- 
peans. You will understand it to be a fixed determination 
in my mind, never to lend the assistance of Goverment to any 
European residing in Oude, for the recovery of any private 
claims, either upon the Nabob or any of the natives. 
I have the honour to be, &c. 
MornineTon. 

I wish that the Nabob could see, that it would be a more 
dignified course to pay his subsidy without giving me the 
trouble of importuning him, he regularly falls into arrear, and 
as regularly pays up the arrear, whenever he learns from me 
that it has attracted my notice, would it not be more for his 
honour and for my ease, if he would not wait for my applica- 
tion, but pay punctually as the subsidy become due. 


No. CXVII. 
Lord Clive to the Earl of Mornington. 

My Lorp, Fort St. George, 31st Dec. 1798. 

Hoping that your Lordship has had a prosperous and fa- 
vourable passage, and that you are in perfect health, I have 
the honour to offer my most cordial congratulations upon 
your arrival in these roads; your presence in the present 
crisis will, 1 am convinced, be followed by consequences the 
most beneficial to the public welfare. It will, I trust, pro- 
duce a unity of action and a combined exertion, similar to 
that which prevailed during the war, conducted by Lord 
Cornwallis, and enable your Lordship to accomplish the great 
and important object you have in view, of placing the British 
interests in India upon a secure and permanent foundation. 
Adverting to the friendly tenour of your letters, and to the 
unreserved .and confidential communication with which you 
propose to honour me, and reflecting upon the advantage I 
may expect to derive from the assistance of your direction 
and advice, I have looked to your Lordship’s arrival as a 
source of comfort and satisfaction. 

have the honour to be, with the greatest respect 
and esteem, my Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most faithful and humble Servant, 
CLIvE. 


390 PROCLAMATION OF THE GOVERNOR Jan. 


No. CXVIII. 
-Proclamation by the Rt. Hon. the Governor in Council of Fort St. George. 


Whereas in and by an Act of Parliament made and passed 
in Great Britain, in the 33rd year of the reign of his present 
Majesty King George the third, and entitled, an act for con- 
tinuing in the East India Company, for a further term the 
possession of the British territories in India, together with 
their exclusive trade, under certain limitations for establish- 
ing further regulations for the Government of the said terri- 
tories, and the better administration of justice within the 
same, for appropriating to certain uses the revenues and 
profits of the said Company; and for making provision for 
the good order and Government of the towns of Calcutta, 
Madras, and Bombay ; it is enacted, that when the Governor 
General of Fort William in Bengal, for the time being, shall 
find it expedient to visit the Presidency of Fort St. George, 
or the Presidency of Bombay, or any province, or place in 
India, the powers and authorities of the Governor or other 
chief officer or officers of such presidency, province, or place, 
shall*from the time of the proclamation of the arrival of the 
said Governor Genéral therein, be suspended, (except with 
regard to judicial proceedings), and shall so continue to be 
suspended, until other proclamation be made to the contrary, 
by the order of the said Governor General, or otherwise until 
the said Governor General shall depart therefrom, and no 
longer, and that during that interval the powers and autho- 
rities of the said Governor, or other chief officer, shall be 
vested in the said Governor General with liberty, neverthe- 
less for such Governor to sit and act as a Member of the 
Council of such Presidency, and that the said Governor 
General in Council at either of the said Presidencies of Fort 
St. George and Bombay, shall be invested with the powers 
and authorities of the Governor in Council of the same Pre- 
sidency or settlement respectively, and also with the same 
ample powers and authorities, as can, or may be exercised by 
the Governor General in Council at Fort William, by force 
and virtue of this act; and whereas the Right Hon. Richard 
Earl of Mornington, Viscount Wellesley, of Dengan Castle, 
and Baron Mornington, of Mornington in the Kingdom of 


1799. IN COUNCIL OF FORT ST. GEORGE. 39f 


Ireland, Baron Wellesley, of Wellesley in the county of 
Somerset in the Kingdom of Great Britain, one of his Ma- 
jesty’s most honorable Privy Council in the Kingdoms of 
Great Britain and of Ireland, Custos Rotulorum of the county 
of Meath, and Knight Companion of the illustrious Order of 
St. Patrick, and now being Governor General of Fort William 
in Bengal aforesaid, has found it expedient to visit this Pre- 
sidency of Fort St. George, and is actually arrived at the 
same, with intent to exercise, and for the purpose of exer- 
cising the powers so vested, and intended to be vested in the 
Governor General in Council at this Presidency of Fort St. 
George aforesaid, under and by the virtue of the said act; 
and whereas such the arrival of the said Richard Earl of 
Mornington, &c. &c. &c., Governor General of Fort William 
aforesaid, has been duly notified to the Right Hon. Edward 
Lord Clive, Baron Clive, of Walcot in the county of Salop, 
_ and Plassy, of the Kingdom of Ireland, Governor General in 
Council of Fort St. George, and the said Edward Lord Clive 
Governor in Council aforesaid, has. in consequence thereof, 
ordered, and directed such the arrival of the said Richard Earl 
of Mornington, &c. &c. &c., Governor General aforesaid, to be 
publicly proclaimed, pursuant to the said act. Now procla- 
mation is hereby made accordingly of such the arrival of the 
said Richard Earl of Mornington, Governor General of Fort 
William aforesaid, and all persons are hereby strictly enjoined 
and required to take notice thereof. 

By order of the Governor in Council of Fort St. George 
aforesaid, the second day of January in the year of our 
Lord 1799. 

J. WeBseE. 


No. CXIX. 


Minute by the Governor. General, 


Fort St. George, 2nd Jan. 1799, 
The critical state of our actual situation with Tippoo Sul- 
taun, must necessarily require frequent references to the 
authority of the Governor General in Council on a variety of 
important points, which will demand a prompt and immediate 
decision; my continuance in Bengal during such a crisis, 


392 MINUTE OF THE Jan. 


might have been attended with great inconvenience to the 
public service, and the season for active operation might have 
been ‘consumed, before my opinion could have been obtained 
on the several emergencies which may be expected to arise; 
the consideration of this inconvenience is the principal motive 
which has induced me to proceed to this Presidency, and I 
am happy to take this opportunity of declaring, that I should 
not have felt my presence to have been at all requisite in this 
place, for the purpose of adding energy or vigour to such 
branches of the public service, as fall within the particular 
duty of this Government. I am perfectly satisfied with the 
conduct of this Government in the respectable hands towhich 
it has been committed, and I am persuaded that I should 
always have found the same cordial, manly, and honorable 
support from your Lordship in Council, which has already 
obtained the public testimony of my unqualified approbation. 
My object, therefore, in taking my seat at this Board, is no 
other than to deprive our enemies of the advantages which 
they might derive under the present circumstances, from the 
remote situation of the power entrusted to me, from the pro- 
bable scene of action. The provisions of the law, require 
that the authority of the Governor in Council at Fort St. 
George, should be vested in my hands during my residence 
at this Presidency, the public acts and proceedings of this 
Government, must accordingly pass in my name. But J am 
anxious as well from motives of personal respect, as ‘from 
considerations connected with the public service, that my re- 
sidence at this Presidency, should in no degree impair the 
present or future dignity and influence of Lord Clive. I, 
therefore, am desirous of abstaining from all unnecessary in- 
terference in the details of this Government, nor do I wish to 
disturb the system established under his Lordship’s imme- 
diate direction, by the interposition of my power of superin- 
tendence on the spot, beyond the limits of the ordinary ex- 
ercise of that power at the seat of the supreme Government 
in Bengal. I therefore, request that Lord Clive and the 
Members of this Council, will take the trouble of conducting 
the details of this Government, especially those which relate 
to the patronage of the Governor in Council, according to 
the principles which have been observed by his Lordship 
since his arrival in India, and I am satisfied, that I shall de- 


1799. GOVERNOR GENERAL. 393 


rive the utmost degree of advantage from the united zeal, 
talents, experience, and assiduity of those whom I have the 
honor to address, while my principal attention must be de- 
voted to the superintendence of the general interests of all 
the Company’s possessions, and of the security and defence 
of the British Empire in India, against the various dangers by 
which it has recently been menaced. 

2nd Jan. 1799. Mornineron. 


The Board express their satisfaction, that their endea- 
vours to meet the wishes of the Governor General, have re- 
ceived his Lordship’s approbation, as well as their sense of 
the confidence which his Lordship is pleased to repose in 
them, and at the same time-beg leave to assure him of their 
most cordial cooperation, and assistance in thearduous labours, 
in which his Lordship is at present engaged. 


No. CXX. 


From Tippoo Sultaun, 


Dated 2nd January, 1799. 

[Received 11th January, 1799.] 

The agreeable arrival of your Lordship’s two* letters, de- 

noting your welfare, rejoiced and gratified me. A khereeta, 

in reply to your Lordship’s former friendly letter, has been 

written and despatched. It will no doubt, by this time, have 

been received, and the sincerity of my friendship and regard, 

together with proofs of my solicitude for tranquillity and 

peace (my friendly heart being bent upon their increase) will 

have been made apparent. Continue to rejoice me with happy 
letters. 


A true Translation, N. B. Epmonsrone, 
Persian Translator to Govt. 


* Original and duplicate of that written 10th December, 1798, see page 
363. 


394 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Jan. 


No. CXXI. 


From the Governor General to Tippoo Sultaun. 
Fort St. George, 9th January, 1799. 

My letter to your Highness, of the 8th of November,* will 
have explained to your Highness the object of the military 
preparations, which have been advancing in every part of the 
dominions of the allies ever since the beginning of the month 
of July. 

On my arrival at Madras, I had the honour to receive your 
letter of the 18th of December,+ in answer to my two letters 
addressed to your Highness on the 4th and 8th of November. 

I am happy to find that, in this letter, your Highness has 
been pleased to admit, “ that the English nation and the 
Honourable Company ever adhere to the paths of sincerity, 
friendship, and good faith; and that they are the well-wishers 
of mankind.” This declaration is peculiarly satisfactory to 
me in the present moment, because I am persuaded that a 
Prince of your Highness’s discernment, would not express 
such sentiments without full deliberation. I, therefore, accept 
with pleasure this declaration, as affording not only an une- 
quivocal testimony, on the part of your Highness, to the 
justice of that cause in which the English nation and the 
Company are engaged, but an unqualified admission, that you 
have no ground of complaint against the English Govern- 
ment. 

In answer to that part of my letter, of the 8th of November, 
in which I lamented the unhappy connection which you had 
formed with the French nation, your Highness is pleased to 
mention, “ that, in the Sirkar (the gift of God) there is a 
mercantile tribe who employ themselves in trading by sea and 
land: that their agents purchased a two-masted vessel, and 
having loaded her with rice, departed with the view to traffic; 
that it happened that she went to the Mauritius, from whence 
forty persons, French, and of a dark colour, of whom ten or 
twelve were artificers, and the rest servants, paying the hire 
of the ship, came to your country in search of employment: 
that such as chose to take service were entertained; and the 
remainder departed beyond the confines of that Sirkar (the 


* See p. 326. + See p. 381. t See p. 321, 326. 


1799. TIPPOO SULTAUN. 395 


gift of God): and that the French, who are full of vice and 
deceit, have perhaps taken advantage of the departure of the 
ship, to put about reports, with a view to ruffle the minds of 
both Sirkars.” 

I had no knowledge of the transaction which your High- 
ness has thus described, until I had the honour to receive 
your Highness’s letter. Nor was it to this transaction I 
adverted, when I expressed my concern at the intercourse 
which your Highness had established with the French. The 
facts to which I referred, were of a nature entirely different 
from those which your Highness has related. If the transac- 
tions, of which I complained, had not indisputably proved the 
existence of a connection between your Highness and the 
French, entirely incompatible with your engagements to the 
Honourable Company and to its allies, neither the allies, nor 
1, would have resorted to those measures of precaution and 
defence, which have attracted your Highness’s attention. 

I will now fully and explicitly state to your Highness the 
circumstances, to which I referred in my letter of the 8th of 
November, wherein I remonstrated against the tendency of 
your intercourse with the French. 

Although I had been, for some time past, apprized, that 
your Highness had engaged with several powers of Asia in 
various negociations, of the most hostile tendency, towards 
the interests of the Company, and of its allies; and, although 
your continued military preparations corresponded with the 
spirit of your negociations, I still hoped that a sense of your 
own interests, and a regard to the acknowledged maxims of 
prudence and good faith, would have induced you to relin- 
quish projects of aggression, so inconsistent with your own 
professions, with your real interests, and with the character 
of your wisdom and discretion. But I had scarcely formed 
that decision on your Highness’s claim to Wynaad (by which 
I had afforded an unquestionable testimony of my disposition 
to render impartial and ample justice to your rights, and to 
cultivate and improve the relations of amity and peace with 
your Highness,) when I received from the Isle of France an 
authentic copy of the proclamation, a Persian translation of 
which accompanies this letter. 

In addition to this proclamation, I possess full and accurate 
information of all the proceedings of your Highness’s ambas- 


396 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Jan. 


sadors during their residence in the Isle of France; of the 
whole of their conduct in exercising the powers delegated to 
them by your Highness; and of your Highness’s conduct, 
since the return of your ambassadors. 

From the whole evidence in my possession, the following 
facts are incontestibly proved. 

Your Highness despatched two ambassadors from your 
presence, who embarked at Mangalore, for the Isle of France, 
and arrived there at the close of the month of January, 1798. 
The ship on which your ambassadors were embarked, hoisted 
your Highness’s colours upon entering the harbour of Port 
Nord Ouest, in the Isle of France; your ambassadors were 
received publicly and formally by the French Government 
under a salute of cannon, and every circumstance of distinc- 
tion and respect; and they were entertained, during their 
continuance on the island by the French Government, at the 
public expense. 

Previously to the arrival of your ambassadors on the island, 
no idea or rumour existed there of any aid to be furnished to 
your Highness by the French; or of any prospect of a war 
between your Highness and the Company. But within two 
days after the arrival of your ambassadors, the proclamation, 
of which I now forward to you a translation, was fixed up, in 
the most public places, and circulated through the town of 
Port Nord Ouest. 

Your ambassadors, far from protesting against the matter 
or style of the proclamation, held without reserve in the most 
public manner the same language, which it contains, with re- 
spect to the offensive war to be commenced by your Highness 
against the British possessions in India: and they even suf- 
fered the proclamation to be publicly distributed at their own 
houses. 

In consequence of these circumstances, an universal belief 
prevailed in the island, that your Highness would make an 
immediate attack upon the British possessions in India. 

Your ambassadors were present in the island when the 
French Government proceeded to act under the proclamation 
in question; and your ambassadors aided and assisted the 
execution of the proclamation by making promises, in the 
name of your Highness, for the purpose of inducing recruits 
to enlist in your service. Your ambassadors proposed to levy 


1799. TIPPOO SULTAUN. 397 


men to any practicable extent, stating their powers to be un- 
limited, with respect to the numbers of the forces to be raised 
in your Highness’s name, for the purpose of making war on 
the Company. 

The ambassadors entered into certain stipulations and en- 
gagements, in the name of your Highness, according to the 
tenor of the proclamation,* with several Frenchmen, and 
others who entered into your service, particularly with Mon- 
sieur Du Buc, whom the ambassadors engaged in your High- 
ness’s name, for the express purpose of assisting in the war 
to be commenced by your Highness against the English in 
India. 

The proclamation, therefore, is proved to have been the 
act of your ambassadors. It originated in their arrival at the 
Isle of France; it was distributed by their agents; it was 
avowed in every part by their own public declarations; and 
finally, it was executed, according to its tenor, by their per- 
sonal assistance and. cooperation. 

On the 7th of March, 1798, the ambassadors embarked at 
Port Nord Ouest, on board the French frigate La Preneuse, 
together with the force thus raised in your Highness’s name. 

This French frigate, with your ambassadors, and with the 
troops raised in the enemy’s country for your service, arrived 
at Mangalore on or about the 26th of April, 1798. Your 
Highness permitted this force to land in your dominions, and 
far from manifesting the least symptom of disapprobation of 
the conduct of your ambassadors in any part of this transac- 
tion, you formally received them, and the French officers, and 
principal persons who accompanied them, with public marks 
of honour and distinction, and you now entertain in your ser- 
vice a large part of the force thus raised for the purpose of 
making war upon the Honourable Company. 

From these several facts the following conclusions reault: — 

First. That the ambassadors, despatched by your High- 
ness to the Isle of France, did propose and actually did con- 


* Nous pouvons assurer tous les Citoyens, qui se feront inscrire, que 
Tippoo leur fera des traitements avantageuses qui seront fixés avec ses 
Ambassadeurs, qui s’ éngageront en outre au nom de leur Souverain, a 
ce que les Francois qui auront pris parti dans ses Armées, ne puissent 
jamais y’ etre retenus quand ils voudront rentrer dans leur Patrie. 


398 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Jan. 


clude an offensive alliance with the French, for the express 
purpose of commencing a war of aggression against the Com- 
pany, and consequently against the allies, the Peishwa and 
the Nizam. 

Secondly. That your Highness’ s ambassadors demanded 
military succours from the French, for the purpose of prose- 
cuting the said war; and declared that your Highness had 
already completed your hostile preparations against the Com- 
pany, (and consequently against the allies), and that you only 
waited the arrival of effectual aid from the French to break 
out into open hostilities. 

Thirdly. That your Highness’s ambassadors levied a mili- 
tary force in the Isle of France, under the conditions of the 
proclamation, and for the avowed purpose of carrying into 
effect the offensive alliance, contracted in the name of your 
Highness, with the enemy of the Company, and of the allies. 

Fourthly. That your Highness approved the conduct of 
your ambassadors; suffered the French force, raised for the 
purpose of making war upon the Company and the allies, to 
be landed in your country; and finally, admitted the said 
force into your army. 

+ Fifthly. That your Highness, by these several personal and 
unequivocal acts, has ratified the engagements contained in 
the proclamation published in the Isle of France, and has 
taken the preliminary steps for fulfilling those engagements, 
according to the tenor of that proclamation; and that you 
have thereby precluded whatever hope might otherwise have 
been entertained, that the proceedings of your Highness’s 
ambassadors were unauthorized by your orders. 

Sixthly. That your Highness has, for some time past, been 
employed in military preparations, conformably to the hostile 
spirit of your engagements, contracted with the enemy of the 
Company and of the allies. 

Seventhly. That your Highness was prepared to make 
an unprovoked attack upon the Company’s possessions, if 
you had obtained from the French the effectual succour 
which you,had solicited, through your Ambassadors. 

Eighthly. That your Highness, by these several acts, has 
violated the treaties of peace and friendship subsisting be- 
tween your Highness and the allies. 

Such are the grounds on which I founded. my complaint in 


1798. TIPPOO SULTAUN, 399 


my letter of the 8th of November, and such are the motives 
which now compel the allies to seek relief from that ambigu- 
ous and anxious state, in which they have been placed for 
some years past by the conduct of your Highness. The 
allies complain, that your frequent preparations for war, toge- 
ther with your hostile negociations, and offensive alliances 
with the enemy, continually expose. them during a period of 
supposed peace, to all the solicitude and hazard, and much 
of the expence of war. 

Even under all these circumstances of provocation, the 
allies entertain the most earnest desire to establish with your 
Highness, a real and substantial peace, accompanied by the 
intercourse and good offices, usual among friendly and conti- 
guous states. We are, therefore, ready to renew and confirm 
the bonds of amity with your highness, on such conditions, 
as shall* preclude the continuance of those jealousies, which 
must subsist so long as a final and satisfactory adjustment of 
all causes of suspicion shall be delayed. 

Your Highness is pleased to say, “ that you cannot imagine 
how means more effectual, than the existing treaties, can be 
adopted for giving stability to the foundations of friendship 
and harmony, or for promoting the security of the states, and 
the welfare and advantages of all parties.” 

In this sentiment I entirely concur with your Highness ; 
and if .your Highness’s wisdom had not been perverted by 
evil councils, from a due observance of your engagements 
with the allies, no new or more effectual means would now be 
necessary, ‘‘for giving stability to the foundations of friend- 
ship and harmony, or for promoting the security of the states, 
and the welfare and advantage of all parties.” But a new 
arrangement is become indispensable, in consequence of your 
Highness’s new engagements with the common enemy of the 
allies; and I again entreat your Highness to meet, with cor- 
diality, the friendly and moderate advance of the allies, to- 
wards an amicable settlement of every ground of jealousy and . 
danger. 

Had your Highness received Major Doveton, that gentle- 
man would have explained to your Highness, on the part of 
the Company and of the allies, “how this advantageous ar- 

rangement is to be obtained, 

The allies being always anxious to enter into this friendly 


“400 — THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Jan. 


explanation with your Highness, I once more call upon your 

- Highness, in the most serious and solemn manner, to assent 
to the admission of Major Doveton, as a measure, which | 
am confident, would be productive of the most lasting advan- 
tages to all parties. 

I trust that your Highness will favour me with a friendly 
letter in reply to this; and I most earnestly request that your 
reply may not be deferred for more than one day after this 
letter shall reach your presence; dangerous consequences re- 
sult from the delay of arduous affairs. 


A true Copy, N. B, Epmonstone, Tam, &c. 
Persian Translator to Govt. MornincrTon. 
No. CXXII. ‘ 


The Earl of Mornington to the Resident at Poonah. 


Sir, Fort St. George, 11 January, 1799. 


No disposition appearing at present in the Court of Poonah 
to accept of my propositions of the 8th of July, I now direct 
you to abstain from any.further solicitation on that subject. 
If the negotiation should be renewed by the Peishwa or by his 
ministers, you will receive their advances with cordiality ; but 
you will signify, “ that although my anxiety to promote the 
welfare of the Peishwa and of the Mahratta State has suffered 
no diminution, you are apprehensive that I may not possess 
‘the means of imparting to his Highness the full and imme- 
diate benefit of that arrangement which he had thought fit to 
decline. Under the present circumstances, therefore, you 
can only declare the continuance of my disposition to execute 
the whole plan as originally stated in my instructions of the 
8th of July, whenever the state of affairs will adinit of a re- 
newal of my propositions.” 

Although any negotiation on the basis of my original pro- 
positions is become inexpedient in the present moment, I am 

“extremely desirous of accepting the suggestion of Moonshee 
Gopal Row, that a detachment of the Company’s troops, of 
equal strength with that which served during the last war, 
with Captain Little, in conjunction with Purseram Bow, should 
join and act with the Peishwa’s present contingent, in the 


799. THE RESIDENT AT POONAH. 401 


same manner and on the same conditions on which the ser- 
vices of that detachment were granted to the Mahrattas by 
Lord Cornwallis. 

I have accordingly directed the Government of Bombay to 
prepare the force necessary for this purpose with all possible 
expedition ; and to inform you without delay at what period 
it will be in readiness to march from Bombay and to join the 
Peishwa’s contingent, at such place as shall be appointed for 
the junction. 

You will not announce the arrangement to the Peishwa 
and to Nana Furnavese, until you shall have received an inti- 
mation to this effect from the government, of Bombay ; and if 
the measure shall be approved by his Highness and by his 
minister, you will immediately proceed to arrange with them, 
and with the government of Bombay, all the details of the 
business. 

It is extremely desirable that the junction of the detach- 
ment from Bombay, with the Peishwa’s contingent should be 
effected, as was the case last war, at an advanced point to- 
wards the frontier of Mysore; and you will, therefore, be 
careful to preserve this object in view. But if the march of 
the Company’s troops to Poonah should be anxiously desired 
by the Peishwa, you are to comply with his wishes. It is 
probable that the suggestion of Gopal Row, originated in the 
motive which you suspect; but in the present conjuncture, it 
is an important object to conciliate the Peishwa, and to main- 
tain both the reality and the appearance of harmony. and 
good understanding between his Highness and the Company. 
If, therefore, the result of my present orders shall be, that our 
detachment shall be detained at Poonah for his Highness’s 
private purposes, so long as to preclude the hope of its ser- 
vices in the field, I shall still look with satisfaction to the 
extensive political advantages which must be derived from 
the presence of a British force at Poonah in the present 
crisis. 

In the event of a war with Tippoo Sultaun, which now 
appears highly probable, it will certainly be of the utmost 
importance that an early and powerful diversion should be 
made in the country of Bednoree You will therefore urge 
the Peishwa to station a large force in a forward position, for 

VOL. I. 2D ‘ 


402 SIR J. H. CRAIG, TO Jan. 


this purpose, without delay, and without waiting for the junc- 
' tion of the Company’s forces. 

You will communicate to the Peishwa the correspondence 
between me and Tippoo Sultaun, (a copy of which will be 
forwarded to you by the Persian translator), and you will 
apprize his Highness, that although I shall leave the channels 
of pacific negotiation open to the Sultaun to the latest pos- 
sible moment, I shall not, on that account, relax or retard the 
movement of our army, being satisfied that no adequate satis- 
faction can be expected from the Sultaun until he shall find 
himself deprived of all hope of foreign aid, and of every 
resource of subterfuge or procrastination. 

You will not fail to call the attention of the Peishwa to the 
prevarication and duplicity of the Sultaun’s statement of the 
nature of his intercourse with the French, and you will par- 
ticularly observe the artifice by which he has evaded the 
amicable advance of the allies, by. eluding the reception of 
Major Doveton. 

In the present state of affairs, I must insist.on the imme- 
diate dismission of Tippoo’s Vakeels from Poonah; and I 
direct you to remonstrate in the strongest terms against their 
continuance at the Court of the Peishwa, as being wholly 
incompatible with the relation subsisting between his High- 
ness and the Company.. You will assure his Highness that I 
shall constantly submit to him the state of any negotiation 
,which Tippoo may open with me on behalf of the allies ; but 
the residence at Poonah of an embassy from Tippoo, in the 
actual crisis, must tend to encourage the hopes of the Sul- 
taun, and to countenance rumours of disunion and jealousy 
between the allies. 

I am aware that under the existing establishment of the 
Company’s armies in India, the expense of the detachment, 
proposed to act with the Peishwa’s contingent, will exceed 
that of the detachment which was commanded by Captain 
Little during the last war with Tippoo Sultaun: but I con- 
sider it so essential an object, in the event of hostilities with 
the Sultaun, that a British force should act in conjunction 
with the Mahrattas, that I direct you to wave the considera- 
tion in arranging the amount of the subsidy with the Court 
of Poonah. 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, 403 


“You will send your assistant with the detachment of the 
Company’s troops, proposed to act with the Peishwa’s con- 
tingent, for the purpose of conducting, in the first instance, 
the intercourse between the commanding officer of the former 
and the Mahratta commander, and eventually of serving as 
the channel of communication between the latter and the 
commanders of the Company’s forces on the coasts of Mala- 
bar and Coromandel. 

Iam, &c. 
MorninoTon, 


No. CXXHI. * 
Sir J. H. Craig to the Earl of Mornington. 
My Lorp, Camp at Anopsheer, 12th January, 1799. 


The army under my command assembled here on the 27th, 
as I make no doubt that you will have been informed from 
Calcutta. We are encamped close to the city and fort, and 
the more intimate knowledge which I have been able to ob- 
tain of the country has only served to convince me, that we 
could not havé chosen a position better adapted to every cir- 
cumstance that may occur in the execution of your Lordship’s 
instructions in the defence of the Vizier’s dominions. Almas 
has joined me here with four battalions of sepoys and one of 
nujeebs, twelve very well provided guns and some horse. J] 
have not yet been able to get from him any exact statement 
of his numbers; but from having seen his battalions under 
arms, I compute the amount of the five nut to exceed 2500 
men. As to the Nabob’s troops, it is impossible for me to 
convey to your Lordship a more decided opinion as to their 
nullity, than I have already had the honor of communicating 
to your Lordship. With the view, however, of drawing from 
them the only service which it seemed possible to hope for, I 
pressed strongly for the appointment of General Martine to 
the command of those stationed in Rohileund, which the 
Nabob has acceded to, and the General is now on the duty 
of examining the fords of the river from Hurdwar to this 
place. It is however extremely difficult to combat the ob- 
stacles which arise from the extreme pusillanimity and sordid 
avarice of the Nabob. I have written in strong terms, and T 


404 SIR J. H. CRAIG, TO Jan. 


am sure Mr. Lumsden is indefatigable in his representations, 
for it is a duty, that I owe to that gentleman, to assure your 
Lordship that nothing can exceed the cordiality and zeal 
with which he has seconded every view that has occurred to 
me on this occasion. I am well assured that the Nabob’s 
troops are neither armed nor clothed, nor is there a gun in 
the district, which is put under General Martine’s command, 
that can be made use of. In consequence of our representa- 
tions he has promised to send some guns; but he declares 
that he has neither arms nor clothing beyond what he nust 
furnish to the battalions that he keeps near his person. He 
has indeed given directions for their regular payment, which 
Mr, Lumsden thinks will be sufficient to ensure it. I own! 
have great doubts of it. . 

I do not know in what terms Colonel Collins has communi- 
cated to Rajah Amhajee your Lordship’s determination upon 
the proposal which he had made. It is however certain that 
he has industriously disseminated in the country the report 
that the Mahratta forces are to be joined by this army; and 
it is generally considered that our advance for that purpose 
is only delayed till the arrival of the boats in which our stores 
are supposed to be. The Mahrattas have in the mean time 
made some movements towards Delphi, but I do not find that 
they have it in their power to assemble any force of a magni- 
tude to promise any considerable effect. 

Zemaun Shah was still in Lahore so late as the 31st of 
December. We had a report in all our intelligence that he 
had quitted it on his return to his own dominions the 27th. 
I confess I considered it as probable, though the report did 
not appear to me to be sufficiently authenticated to merit en- 
tire confidence, and accordingly it has since turned out to 
have been false. It would seem from all the intelligence we 
get, that he has been employed in repairing both the works 
and the dwelling part of the fort at Lahore, whilst he has 
restrained his army from the usual exercise of the right they 
claim of plundering the country, and has been anxious to 
conciliate the people to his government. This carries with it 
the appearance of an intention to establish himself there, but 
his unvaried declarations have always been, that he would 
soon advance to Delhi. On the other hand the Seiks are 
assembled in considerable numbers at Amrutsir, some skir- 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, 405 


mishes have taken place, but nothing that can have any influ- 
ence on the real state of the contest. ‘hey, however, impede 
the supplies to the Shah’s army much, and there is no doubt 
that he has been very much distressed in that respect. Not- 
withstanding the state of hostility with a common enemy, the 
chiefs of these people appear to be as much disunited, and to 
entertain as strong a jealousy of each other as ever; and 
there is no doubt that they are all negociating with the Shah. 
He sent a Vakeel to them in common, who is returned with 
general answers and nuzzirs from them all; but besides this, 
each has sent a separate Vakeel with him to negociate for 
himself, It is, I think, impossible to form an idea how this 
is likely to terminate, but to give your Lordship a notion of 
the opinion which generally prevails on the subject, I do 
myself the honor to enclose a copy of a translation of part of 
a paper of intelligence from my own people, which relates to 
it. I cannot conceive that confidence or cordiality can ever 
exist between them, and if they ever do come to an agree- 
ment, I should rather suppose that they will pay the Shah a 
sum of money under the denomination of tribute, with which 
he will return. If, however, my conjecture should prove 
wrong, and they should actually submit, and join him with 
their forces, there cannot exist a further obstacle ta his pro- 
gress to Delhi, where he will collect a very formidable force. 
Every thing remains perfectly quiet in Rohilcund, nor is there 
any account of Gholaum Mahommed having joined the Shah. 
1 believe he is still at or near Nadoun. 

We have an account from Delhi, that it has been mentioned 
at the King’s durbar by Monsieur Peron Duyan, that he had 
heard that the. French had penetrated through some islands, 
and had approached Herat and the Holy Mushed. This 
appears to be utterly impracticable, as they could not have 
reached any place from whence they could alarm those cities, 
in the time that has elapsed since we know them to have 
been in Egypt, even supposing them to have encountered no 
obstacle in their march; but if the report is not totally des- 
titute of foundation, it must proceed from some part of Buo- 

-naparte’s army having made their escape from the immediate 
ruin with which they were threatened in Egypt; and yet I 
cannot conceive any route by which they can have done it, 


406 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Jan. 


that must not have fallen under the cognizance of Mr. Man- 
nesty at Bussorah, who would, of course, have conveyed the 
‘ information to your Lordship. 


I have the honour to be, 
My Lord, : 
your Lordship’s most obedient 
humble Servant, 
. J.H. Craie. 


No. CXXIV. 


To the Secret Committee of the Honourable Court of Directors. 


HonouraB.e Sirs, Fort St. George, 13th January, 1799. 


The Government at Fort William will have communicated 
to you, through the Secret Department, a detail of the affairs 
of that Presidency, from the date of my last despatches by the 
extra ship Eurydice, to the period of my embarkation for the 
coast of Coromandel. 

I shall now lay before you the motives which induced me to 
adopt the measure of proceeding to Fort St. George. 

I had made an arrangement with the Commander-in-Chief 
in India, under which I had proposed to his Excellency to 
proceed to Fort St. George, for the purpose of taking upon 
himself the command of the army on the coast of Coromandel ; 
but my subsequent advices from the north-western frontier of 
Hindostan, as well as from this quarter, led me to suggest the 
necessity of an alteration in that arrangement. 

From these advices, it appeared that the reports of Zemaun 
Shah’s progress, which had until that period been vague and 
contradictory, were become more uniform and consistent ; and 
that the Shah had actually advanced as far as Lahore, and 
appeared determined to prosecute his design of proceeding at 
least as far as Delhi. On the other hand the check which the 
French had received in Egypt, the destruction of their in- 
fluence in the Deccan, the revival of our defensive alliance 
with the Nizam and the Peishwa, and the appearance of our 
fleet off the coast of Malabar, together with the advanced 


1799. THE HON. COURT OF DIRECTORS. 407 


state of our military preparations on that coast, and on the 
coast of Coromandel, appeared by my latest intelligence 
from Fort St. George, to have excited in the mind of Tippoo 
Sultaun an apprehension of our power to enforce our just de- 
mands of satisfaction for his late infraction of the treaty of 
Seringapatam. 

The probability of military operations on the frontier of 
Oude was, therefore, increased, whilst a prospect was opened of 
our being able to induce Tippoo Sultaun to listen to reason- 
able terms of accémmodation, without resorting to arms. 

Under these circumstances it appeared to me that the 
public service would derive material benefit from the presence 
of Sir Alured Clarke in Bengal, and that it became my duty 
to proceed to Fort St. George. 

In such a conjuncture, it was not advisable that both the 
Governor General and the Commander-in-Chief should be 
absent from Bengal at the same moment; and the frequent 
references which must be made to me, in the event of a nego- 
tiation with Tippoo Sultaun, rendered it necessary that I 
should be as near as possible to his dominions. A single 
reference from Seringapatam to Fort William would have con- 
sumed a large part of the season which ought to be employed 
in military operations, if war should unfortunately become 
inevitable ; Tippoo Sultaun would certainly have availed him- 
self of this advantage to protract, and probably to frustrate, 
the issue. of the negotiation. 

I, therefore, resolved to embark for Fort St. George on 
board his Majesty’s ship La Sybille, which was then in the 
river preparing for sea. 

I requested that during my absence his Excellency, Sir 
Alured Clarke, would act as Vice President and Deputy Go- 
vernor of Fort William. 

The Government at Fort William had been apprized, by 
verbal communication, before my departure, of the progress 
which, with the assistance of the Committee appointed on the 
20th of June, I had been enabled to make in the revision of 
the several branches of the civil establishments of that Pre- 
sidency. The great pressure of other business has not yet 
admitted of my drawing the details of my plan into a con- 
nected form: but the materials which I have already laid be- 
fore the Council at Fort William, and those which I have left 


408 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Jan. 


‘in the hands of Sir Alured Clarke, will, I trust, be sufficient to 
enable him to issue the necessary orders for putting the pro- 
posed economical reductions in train; and, on my return to 
Fort William, I propose to submit the whole arrangement to 
the Honourable Court of Directors, together with a full state- 
ment of the principles on which that arrangement is founded, 
and of the means by which it is to be carried into effect. 

On the 25th Dec. 1798, I embarked for Fort St. George, 
and having reached the Sybille on the 27th, I arrived at this 

‘Presidency on the 31st. 

The public despatch of this date from me in Council to the 
Honourable Court of Directors will state the powers and au- 
thorities which it is my intention to exercise during my resi- 
dence at this Presidency, and the circumstances which attended 
my taking my seat in Council at Fort St. George on the 2nd 
Jan. 1799.* 

On my arrival I received an answer from Tippoo Sultaun 
-to my letter of the 8th of November.+ 

Your Honourable Committee will observe the prevarication 
and duplicity of the Sultaun’s statement of his late intercourse 
with the French; and you will remark the evasion, by which 
he eludes ‘the moderate and amicable proposition of the 
allies for opening a negotiation with him, through the mission 
of Major Doveton. 

To this letter from the Sultaun I returned the answer dated 
9th January, 1799, in which I have renewed the proposition 
of opening a pacific negotiation. 

Subsequently to the despatch of my letter dated 9th Jan. 
1799, I received from the Sultaun the letter dated 2nd Jan. in 
reply to a letter dated 10th. Dec. 1798, which I had forward- 
-ed from Fort William, apprizing him of my intention to pro- 
ceed to Fort St. George, and again urging the admission of 
Major Doveton. The Sultaun’s letter, dated 2nd Jan., is en- 
tirely silent on the latter point, and furnishes an additional proof 
of his disposition to evade the pacific advances of the allies. 

In the mean while I have the satisfaction to inform you that 
the military preparations in the Carnatic are in the most for- 


* The despatch adverted to is a mere referrence to the {ninute and pro- 
‘clamation at pages 390 and 391. 
t+ See p. 381. 


1799. THE HON, COURT OF DIRECTORS. 409 


ward state, having been advanced during the last two months 
with a degree of alacrity and vigour which reflects the highest 
credit on this Government. 

The volunteers from Bengal had served at this Presidency 
a few days before me. 

His Highness the Nizam’s Contingent, which is to consist 
of the whole of the Company’s subsidiary troops, of 6,000 of 
the Nizam’s infantry, and.of 10,000 cavalry, under the com- 
mand of Meer Allum, marched from the vicinity of Hyderabad 
on the 26th of December, and was expected to cross the 
Kistna onthe 6th of this month; it will join a detachment of 
the army of this Presidency under the command of Colonel 
Wellesley at Tripetty. 

His Majesty’s 84th regiment, with a part of the Scotch bri- 
gade, and of the 28th regiment of light dragoons, from the 
Cape of Good Hope, arrived here in perfectly good condition 
on the 7th of this month. 

The last advices from Poonah afford every reason to expect 
the cooperation of a considerable Mahratta force in the event 
of hostilities with Tippoo Sultaun. 

The Government of Bombay have employed every effort 
to forward the military preparations on the coast of Malabar, 
from whence a respectable assistance will be afforded if the 
occasion should require it. 

The coast of Tippoo Sultaun’s dominions in Malabar is at 
present guarded by his Majesty’s ships Suffolk and Victo- 
rious, and by the Company’s ships Earl Howe and Princess 
Charlotte, armed under my orders at Calcutta. 

By accounts received from the Cape, it appears that Com- 
modore Blanket was met at sea by the ship Mildred, in a 
position which leaves no doubt of his having reached his sta- 
tion, although no official accounts have yet been received of 
that event. 

‘Under all. these circumstances, I trust that I shall possess 
the means of effectually precluding Tippoo Sultaun from the 
advantages which he expected to derive under his late offensive 
alliance with the French. 

The fate of the French army in Egypt is still unknown to 
me; but thesforward state of our armies and alliances in- 
duces me to entertain a confident expectation, that I shall be 
enabled to attain effectual security against the hostile designs 


410 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Jan. 


of Tippoo Sultaun, before the season will admit of any assist- 
ance reaching him from Egypt, even if any part of the French 
army shall have surmounted-the innumerable difficulties of 
their situation; and if the vigilance of his Majesty’s squadrons 
shall have been frustrated on the Red Sea, and on the coast 
of Malabar. , 

The intelligence which I have received this day from 
Lucknow, and from the resident with Scindiah, induces me to 
believe that the Shah will not venture to advance beyond 
Lahore during the present season. 

The Seiks have collected their forces at Amrutsir, as well 
as on other points of his proposed march, and have obtained 
some partial advantages over detachments of his army. And 
although they do not appear to possess a force sufficient to 
cope with his whole army in the field, he seems to dread the 
effects which might be produced by the embarrassments which 
they might bring upon the line of his march, if he should at- 
tempt to advance towards Delhi. 

Both the Mahrattas and Seiks on the north-western fron- 
tier of Hindostan have manifested the most anxious desire to 
cooperate with our forces in opposing the progress of the 
Shah, I trust that this disposition may hereafter become the 
source of encreased security to the Company’s possessions on 
that side of India. 

In the meanwhile I have the satisfaction to assure you, that 
the army under the command of Sir James Craig is in the 
highest condition in point of discipline and equipment, and 
that the zeal, alacrity and talents of that able officer, as well 
as of those who command under his orders, leave no doubt 
that any attack, which the Shah’s imprudence might hazard, 
must terminate to the honour of the British arms. 

The family and treasure of Golam Mahomed, the Rohilla 
Chief, have been conveyed under my orders to a place of se- 
curity at Benares. 

Syed Khan, an active agent in the service of Golam Ma- 
homed, is now imprisoned in the fortress of Chunar; and the 
remaining sons of Fyzoollah Khan, from whose movements 
disturbance was apprehended in Rohilcund, are at present 
detained at Lucknow. * 

Althouigh the general appearance of affairs promises an 
augmentation to the security of the British Empire in India, 


1799. THE HON. COURT OF DIRECTORS, 411 


the expense of the necessary means of accomplishing that 
important object must be very heavy, and the exigency of the 
pecuniary demands of this Presidency is peculiarly urgent in 
the present moment. 

Even previously to the apprehension of hostilities in India 
I submitted to your Honourable Committee, and to the Ho- 
nourable Court of Directors, my deliberate opinion, that the. 
state of your affairs in India absolutely required an imme- 
diate and large supply of treasure from Europe. My duty 
now demands still more urgently that I should recommend to 
your serious consideration, in the most earnest manner, the in- 
dispensable necessity of aiding, by a seasonable remittance of 
supply, the efforts of your servants in India to rescue these 
valuable possessions from the accumulated danger which has 
lately menaced their tranquillity. 

With an anxious zeal for your service, and with a firm re- 
solution to encounter, by every practicable effort, whatever 
difficulties may arise in the course of your affairs, the servants 
of the Company in India, cannot be expected to surmount all 
the exigencies of the present conjuncture without some extra- 
ordinary aid from home. I, therefore, trust that you will take 
the earliest opportunity of affording effectual relief to the re- 
sources of the Government of Bengal, on the credit of which 
the whole system of your finances in India must depend. 

I am happy to take this opportunity of repeating the as- 
surance of my entire confidence in the cordial and honourable 
cooperation of Lord Clive; and it is a peculiar satisfaction to 
me to be able to add, that since my arrival here I have found 
in all your civil and military servants, and in all the European 
and Armenian inhabitants of this settlement an unanimous dis- 
position to assist me in the despatch of the public service. 

I must refer your Honourable Committee to a minute re- 
corded by me in the secret department of the government at 
Fort William,* which will be transmitted to you by the first 
ships of this season, for the motives which induced me to mo- 
dify the orders of the Honourable Court of Directors with 
respect to the allowances to the officers of the army. The 
regulation respecting regimental rank had been carried into 
execution in Bengal sometime previous to my departure. 

T have the honour to be, &c. 
Mornineton, 


* See page 384. 


412 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Jan, 


No. CXXV. 
From the Earl of Mornington to Major Bannerman. 
Sir, : Fort St. George, 16th Janudty, 1799. 


Judging it necessary in the present conjuncture to employ 
a person to reside with the Rajah of Travancore, I have been 
induced by the favourable report which I have received of 
your zeal, activity and ability, to select you for this service. 

The following are the objects to which you are to direct 
your attention :— - 

1. You are to stimulate the Rajah, and his minister, to the 
necessary exertions for placing without delay the whole of the 
military force of Travancore in a forward state of preparation, 
for the purpose of effectual cooperation with the Company's 
armies in the event of hostilities with Tippoo Sultaun. 

2. You will urge the Rajah’s immediate compliance with 
the requisitions contained in my letter to him.* 

3. You will call upon him, in my name, to give every pos- 
sible encouragement to the brinjarries and bazar dealers of 
his country to repair, with supplies, to the army on the coast 
of Malabar, by such routes, and at such periods, as you shall 
recommend. : 

4. As the army under General Stuart will eventually be in 
-great want of coolies for the purpose of assisting in the trans- 
portation of provisions and stores up the Ghauts, you will en- 
deavour to prevail on the Rajah to send as many of this useful 
class of people to the army as you may judge requisite. 

5. You will correspond constantly with Lieutenant General 
Harris and with Lieutenant General Stuart, and you will en- 
deavour to comply with such requisitions as they shall sever- 
ally make to you for supplies. 

6. In the event of hostilities with Tippoo Sultaun, you will 
exert yourself to engage the Rajah to employ his military 
force in the manner, which shall appear to you best calculated 
to promote the common cause, or according to such directions 
as you shall receive, either from Lieutenant General Harris 
or from Lieutenant General Stuart. 


+ 


* The letter referred to contains requisitions for the Rajah to furnish 
supplies of bullocks and coolies for the use of the Madras army. 


1799. TIPPOO SULTAUN. 413 


7. You will carefully endeavour to prevent the Rajah from 
committing any aggression against the state of Mysore until 
hostilities shall have dctually commenced between the Com- 
pany and Tippoo Sultaun. 

8. I understand that the Rajah entertains in his service se- 
veral French and other European natives, or subjects of eoun- 
tries at war with Great Britain. You will, therefore, represent 
to the Rajah, and his ministers, in the most forcible terms, the 
great danger to his own government from the mischievous 
principles of the French, and the impropriety of his extending 
favour and protection to the inveterate enemies of the British 
nation. You will pursue this representation by an assurance, 
in my name, that the Rajah cannot better consult his own 
true interests, or my satisfaction, than by immediately dis- 
missing from his service, and sending out of his country, all 
Europeans of the character described. Should he wish to 
replace the foreigners employed in his military service by Bri- 
tish subjects, I shall be prepared to receive an application 
from him to that effect. 

9. You will transmit to me, as soon as possible, an account 
of the military forces and equipments of the Rajah, including 
a report,of all the Europeans in his service ; and you will re- 
gularly advise me of all material transactions in the Rajah’s 
dominions, and in the adjacent countries. 

Iam, &c. &c. 
Mornincron. 


No. CXXVI. 


The Earl of Mornington to Tippoo Sultaun. 
Fort St George, 16th January, 1799, 


Your Highness has already been furnished by Lord Clive 
with a translation of the declaration of war issued by the Sub- 
lime Porte against the French, in consequence of their having 
violated the sacred obligation. of treaty with the Grand Sig- 
nior, and of their having invaded Egypt in contempt of every 
principle of good faith, and of the law of nations. You have 
also received from me a translation of the manifesto published 
by the Porte on the same occasion; exposing, in just colours, 
the overbearing and arrogant spirit, as wéll as the treachery 


AGA THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Jan. 


and falsehood, which the French have disclosed in their con- 
duct towards all mankind, and especially towards the Sublime 
Porte. ~ 

The Porte, justly outraged by an aggression so atrocious 
and unprecedented as the invasion of Egypt, has néw united 
in a common cause with the British nation, for the purpose 
of curbing the intemperance of the French; and the Grand 
Signior having learnt the unfortunate alliance which your 
Highness has contracted with his enemies the French against 
his friends and allies the British nation, his Highness re- 
solved, from motives of friendship towards you, as well as to- 
wards the British nation, to warn you, in an amicable letter, 
of the dangers of this fatal connection; and to exhort you to 
manifest your zeal for the Mussulman faith, by renouncing 
all intercourse withthe common enemy of every religion, and 
the aggressor of the head of the Mahomedan Church.* 


* The following is a copy of the letter :— 7 


Letter from Sultaun Selim to the Indian Sovereign, Tippoo Sultaun, dated 
Constantinople, 20th September, 1798 3 delivered to Mr. Spencer Smith, 
his Britannic Majesty’s Minister Plenipotentiary, Sc. 


We take this opportunity to acquaint your Majesty, when the French 
Republic was engaged in a war with most of the powers of Europe within 
this latter period, our Sublime Porte not only took no part against them, 
but regardful of the ancient amity existing with that nation, adopted a 
system of the strictest neutrality, and shewed them even such acts of 
countenance as have given rise to complaints on the part of other Courts. 

Thus friendly disposed towards them, and reposing a confidence in 
those sentiments of friendship which they appeared to profess for us, we 
gave no ear to many propositions and advantageous offers which had 
been made to us to side with the belligerent powers, but pursuant to our 
maxims of modcration and justice, we abstained from breaking with them 
without direct motive, and firmly observed the line of neutrality; all 
which is notorious to the world. 

In this posture of things, when, the French having witnessed the great- 
est marks of attention from our Sublime Porte, a perfect reciprocity was 
naturally expected on their side, when no cause existed to interrupt the 
continuance of the peace betwixt the two nations, they all of a sudden 
have exhibited the unprovoked and treacherous proceedings, of which 
the following is a sketch. 

They began to prepare a fleet in one of their harbours, called Toulon, 
with most extraordinary mystery, and when completely fitted out and 
ready for sea, embarked a large body of troops, and they put also on 
board several people versed in the Arabic language, and who had been in 


1799. TIPPOO SULTAUN, 415 


Accordingly this letter (the testimony of friendship, and the 
fruit of wisdom, piety and zeal) was delivered by the minister 
resident at Constantinople, by whom it was transmitted to the 


Egypt befgre; they gave the command of that armament to one of their 
generals, named Buonaparte, who first went to the Island of Malta, of 
which he took possession, and thence proceeded direct for Alexandria, 
where being arrived the 17th Muharem, all of a sudden landed his troops, 
and entered the town by open force, publishing soon after manifestoes in 
Arabic among the different tribes, stating, in substance, that the object 
of their enterprize was not to declare war against the Ottoman Porte, but 
to attack the Beys of Egypt, for insults and injuries they had committed 
against the French merchants in time past; that peace with the Ottoman 
empire was permanent, that those of the Arabs who should join, would 
meet with the best treatment; but such as shewed opposition, would 
suffer death: with this further insinuation, made in different quarters, 
but more particularly to certain Courts at amity with us, that the expe- 
dition against the Beys was with the privity and consent of our Sublime 
Porte ; which is a horrible falsity. After this they also took possession 
of Rosetta, not hesitating to engage in a pitched battle with the Ottoman 
troops, who had been detached from Cairo to assist the invaded. 

It is a standing law amongst all nations, not to encroach upon each 
others’ territories, whilst they are supposed to be at peace. When any 
such events take place as lead to a rupture, the motives, so tending, are 
previously made known between the parties; nor are any open aggres- 
sions attempted against their respective dominions until a formal declara- 
tion of war takes place. 

Whilst, therefore, no interruption of the peace, nor the smallest symp- 
tom of misunderstanding appeared between our Sublime Porte and the 
French Republic, a conduct so audacious, so unprovoked, and so deceit- 
fully sudden on their part, is an undeniable trait of the most extreme 
insult and treachery. 

The province of Egypt is considered as a region of general veneration, 
from the immediate proximity of the noble city of Mecca, the Kebleh of 
the Mussulmen, (the point of the compass to which all Turks turn-their 
face in performing their prayers) and the sacred town of Medina, where 
the tomb of our blessed prophet is fixed; the inhabitants of both these 
sacred cities deriving from thence their subsistence. 

Independent of this, it has been actually discovered from several letters 
which have been intercepted, that the further project of the French is to 
divide Arabia into various republics ; to attack the whole Mahommedan 
sect, in its religion and country; and by a gradual progression, to extir- 
pate all Mussulmen from the face of the earth. 

It is for these cogent motives and considerations, that we have deter- 
mined to repel this enemy, and to adopt every vigorous measure against 
these persecutors of the faith; we placing all confidence in the Omnipo- 
tent God, the source of all succour, and in the intercession of him who is 
the glory of prophets. 


416 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Jan. 


Honourable Mr. Duncan, Governor of Bombay, who has for- 
warded it to Lord Clive; the day before yesterday this letter 
reached Madras, and a translation accompanied it, by which 


Now it being certain that, in addition to the general tics of religion, 
the bonds of amity and good understanding have ever been firm and per- 
manent with your Majesty, so justly famed for your zeal and attachment 
to our faith; and that more than once such public acts of friendly atten- 
tion have been practised bétween us, as to have cemented the connection 
subsisting between the two countries, we therefore sincerely hope, from 
your Majesty’s dignified disposition, that you will not refuse entering 
into concert with us, and giving our Sublime Porte every possible assist- 
ance, by such an exertion of zeal, as your firmness and natural attach- 
ment to such a cause cannot fail to excite. 

We understand that, in consequence of certain secret intrigues ania 
on by the French in India, (after their accustomed system) in order to 
destroy the settlements,,and to sow dissensions in the provinces of the 
English there, a strict connection is expected to take effect between them 
and your Majesty, for whose service they are to send over a corps of 
treops by the way of Egypt. 

We are persuaded, that the tendency of the French plans cannot, in . 
the present days, escape your Majesty’s penetration and notice, and that 
no manner of regard will be given to their deccitful insinuations on your 
side: and whereas the Court of Great Britain is actually at war with 
them, and our Sublime Porte engaged on the other hand in repelling 
their aggressions, consequently the French are enemies to both; and 
such a reciprocity of interests must exist between those Courts, as ought 
to make both parties eager to afford every mutual succour which a com- 
mon cause requires. 

It is notorious, that the French, bent upon the overthrow of all sects 
and religions, have invented a new doctrine, under the name of Liberty ; 
they themselves professing no other belief Wut that of Debrees; (Epicu- 
reans, or Pythagoreans) that they have not even spared the territories of 
the Pope of Rome, a country, since time immemorial, held in great re- 
verence by all the European nations; that they have wrested and shared, 
with others, the whole Venetian State, notwithstanding that fellow repub- 
lic had not only abstained from taking part against them, but had ren- 
dered them service during the course of the war, thus effacing the name 
of the republic of Venice from the annals of history. 

There is no doubt that their present attempt against the Ottomans, as 
well as their ulterior designs (dictated by their avaricious view towards 
oriental riches) tend to make a general conquest of that country, (which 
may God never suffer to take effect!) and to expel every Mussulman from 
it, under pretence of annoying the English. Their end is to be once ad- 
mitted in India, and then to develope what really lies in their hearts, just 
as they have done in every place where they have been able to acquire a 
footing. 

In a word, they are a nation whose deceitful intrigues and perfidious 


wr 


:1799. TIPPOO SULTAUN. 4lT 


I learnt the valuable ‘eicou of ‘prudence and truth which it 
contains. I now forward it to your. Highness; you will read 
and consider it with the respectful attention which it demands ; 
there you will find the same friendly admonitions respecting 
the dangerous views of the French nation,'which I have al- 
ready submitted to your consideration. 

* When your discerning mind shall have duly examined this 
respected letter; you will no doubt draw the following conclu- 
“sions from it :— ' 

First. That all the maxims 6f public law, honour and reli- 
gion, are despised and profaned by the French nation; who 
.consider-all the thrones of the world, and every system of civil 
order and religious faith, as the sport and prey of their bound- 
less ambition, msatiable rapine, and indiscriminate sacrilege. 


7 ry 
pursuits know no bounds. They are intent on nothing, but on depriving 
‘people of their lives and properties, and on persecuting religion, wherever 
' Ae arms can reach. 

\ .Upon-all this, therefore, coming to your Majesty’s knowledge, it is 
' “sincerely hoped, that you will not refuse every needful exertion towards 
- assisting your brethren Mussulmen, according to the obligations of reli- 
"gion, and towards defending Hindostan itself, against the effect of French 
machinations. Should it be true, as we hear, that an intimate connection 
has taken place between your Court and that nation, we hope that, by 
weighing present circumstances, as well as every future inconvenience, 
which would result from such a measure, your Majesty will beware 
against it, and in the event of your having harboured any idea of joining 
with them, or of moving against Great Britain, you will lay such resolu- 
tion aside. We make it our especial request, that your Majesty will 
please to refrain from entering into any measures against the English, or 
dending any compliant ear to the French. Should there exist any subject 
of complaint with the former, please to communicate it, certain as you 
may be of the employment of every good office on our side, to compro- 
mise the same; we wish to see the connection above alluded to, exchanged 

in favour of Great Britain. 

We confidently expect that, upon consideration of all that is stated in 
this communication, and of the necessity of assisting your brethren Mus- 
sulmen in this general cause of religion, as well as of cooperating to- 
wards the above precious province, being delivered from the hands of the 
enemy, your Majesty will employ every means, which your natural zeal 
will point out, to assist the common cause, and to corroborate, by that 
means, the ancient good understanding so happily existing between our 
empires. 

-A true Copy, N. B. Epmonstone, 
Persian translator to Govt. 


VOL. I. 2E 


4.18 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Jan. 


Secondly. That the French have insulted and assaulted the 
acknowledged head of the Mahomedan Church; and that 
they have wantonly raised an unprovoked and cruel war in the 
heart of that country, which is revered by every Mussulman 
as the repository of the most sacred monuments of the Maho- 
medan faith. 

Thirdly. That a firm, honourable, and intimate alliance and 
friendship, now subsists between the Grand Signior and the 
British nation, for the express purpose of opposing a barrier 
to the excesses of the French. 

Fourthly, That the Grand Signior is fully apprized of the 
intercourse and connection unhappily established between 
your Hig ness and the French, for purposes hostile to the 
British nation; that he offers to your Highness the salu- 
tary fruit of that experience, which he has already acquired, 
of the ruinous effects of French intrigue, treachery and de- 
ceit; and that he admonishes you not to flatter yourself with 
the vain hope of friendly aid from those, who (even if they 
had escaped from the valour and skill of the British forces) 
could never have reached you until they had profaned the 
tomb of your Prophet, and overthrown the foundation of your 
religion. 

May the admonition of the head of your Faith dispose your 
mind to the pacific propositions which I have repeatedly, but 
in vain, submitted to your wisdom. And may you at length 
receive the ambassador, who will be empowered to conclude the 
definite arrangement of all differences between you and the 
allies, and to secure the tranquillity of India against the dis- 
turbers of the world ! 

A true Copy, N. B. EpMonstTone, 
Persian Translator to Govt.. MornNINGTON. 


No, CXXVII. 
The Earl of Mornington to the Resident at Hyderabad. 
Sir, Fort St. George, 21st Jan. 1799. 

I have received a letter from Captain White, in which he 
informs me that 6000 of the Nizam’s infantry had halted on 
the banks of the Kistna and refused to proceed; and that 
Meer Allum was doubtful of being able to prevail on them to 
follow the army. , 


1799. THE RESIDENT AT HYDERABAD. ; 419 


The deficiency, which may be expected to take place in his 
Highness’s contingent in consequence of this event, does not 
appear to menace evils of so serious a nature, as those which 
may be apprehended from the continuance of a body of dis- 
affected troops in his Highness’s dominions, during the ab- 
sence of our military force. 

These troops lately constituted a part of M. Peron’s army, 
and although deprived of their European officers, their dis- 
cipline is still superior to that of any other corps in the 

_ Nizam’s service; they are well armed, and have a train of 
field artillery attached to them. Under all these circum- 
stances, the greatest mischiefs are to be apprehended from 
their disposition and power. They may either desert in a 
body to Tippoo Sultaun, who might immediately replace their 
late officers by others of the same nation; or they may raise 
the standard of revolt in the heart of his Highness’s country. 
The Nizam and Azim ul Omra must, without delay, take 
every practicable measure for preventing either of these dan- 
gers. 

My decided opinion is, that these troops ought immediate- 
ly to be disarmed and disbanded. At the same time I am 
aware, that his Highness may not possess the means, in the 
absence of the Company’s troops, to effect this desirable ob- 
ject. In this case it will be necessary to temporise with the 
revolted troops, and to endeavour to break them into small 
parties. They must be withdrawn without loss of time, from 
their present station, and on no account be employed to the 
southward. Their guns should be separated from them as 
speedily as it may be practicable to attempt the measure 
with a prospect of success. 

You must call upon the Nizam to supply the existing defi- 
ciency in his contingent, arising from the desertion of these 
troops, by a reinforcement of at least 4000 cavalry who must 
be ordered to join Meer Allum, by the route of Budwail and 
Dornal pass immediately. 

I am, &c., 

MornineTon. 


420 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Jan. 


No. CXXVIII. 
The Earl of Mornington to His Excellency Rear Admiral Rainier. 


Sir, Fort St. George, 21st Jan. 1799. 


I trust that the ships Earl Howe and Princess Charlotte, 
are arrived on the coast of Malabar, and that their respective 
Captains will conduct themselves in such a manner as to 
merit your Excellency’s approbation. But feeling with your 
Excellency the necessity of investing you with a power of 
superseding the commanders of the Honorable Company’s 
armed ships, during the period of their serving ugder your 
orders; I hereby authorize your Excellency accordingly, to 
supersede the commanders of any ships armed by the Com- 
pany and now serving, or which may hereafter be placed, 
under your Excellency’s authority. Although your Excel- 
lency has expressed your readiness to accept any such re- 
strictions of this general power as I may deem expedient, I 
think the public service will be best promoted, by leaving to 
your Excellency the free and unlimited exercise of your dis- 
cretion, with respect to such supercessions or appointments, 
as you may think fit to make. 

I rely entirely on your Excellency’s prudence, experience 
and zeal for the public service, that you will use the power 
which I have vested in your hands in such a manner, as shall 
most effectually promote the interests of the Company, and 
of the Nation. 

I have signified to the Government of Bombay, the powers 
with which I have invested your Excellency, and I have di- 
rected that Government to notify my orders on this subject 
to the commanders of the Company’s ships serving under 
your Excellency’s authority. 

I found Fort St. George crowded with French prisoners, 
and I was informed that a considerable number of the same 
description remain in Pondicherry. In the event of a forward 
moyement of the army, great danger is to be apprehended 
from the turbulent disposition of these prisoners, and the 
only security against this danger would be to divert a consi- 
derable portion of our European force from our operations in 
the field, for the express purpose of guarding the French 


1799. ADMIRAL RAINIER. AQ] 


prisoners in Fort St. George, and at Pondicherry. Even this 
security might become precarious, in the course of certain 
events, which I need not suggest to your Excellency’s expe- 
rience. 

I, therefore, deemed the immediate removal of the French 
prisoners to be an object essentially necessary towards ena- 
bling me to prosecute the war against Mysore with confi- 
dence and vigour. I have accordingly taken up tonnage for 
the purpose of transporting the French prisoners to Europe 
without delay ; being aware that your Excellency under the 
present circumstances could not be expected to afford any 
assistance in convoying the prisoners to Europe, I have 
thought YS eolenas to employ the Cornwallis to accompany 
them as far as the Cape of Good Hope; from thence, I trust, 
that the Admiral on that station will be able to guard them 
to Europe, if he should not, J shall direct the Captain of the 
Cornwallis to proceed thither from the Cape. 

The last intelligence from Europe received overland leads 
me to apprehend, that the French will at length make an 
effort (which I have long expected) to send a squadron into 
these seas. Although I have little doubt that: the vigilance 
of his Majesty’s Ministers, will take an early opportunity of 
reinforcing the fleet under your Excellency’s Command, I 
feel it to be the duty of those on the spot to provide with 
every practicable degree of precaution, against the possibility 
of the French becoming superior to the British fleet in India. 
I, therefore, take the liberty of recommending to your Excel- 
lency the detention of the Sceptre, after she shall have been 
repaired at Bombay; and as Sir Hugh Christian has directed 
Captain Edwards to attend to any suggestions which he may 
receive from the Government of India, I propose to convey 
my decided opinion to Captain Edwards, that he cannot 
better promote the safety of the British possessions in India, 
than by placing himself under your Excellency’s orders, until 
further naval reinforcements shall arrive from Europe, or 
until all apprehension of the appearance of'a French fleet in 
these seas shall have ceased. 

The Osterley will soon depart from this port, with a supply 
of coals for the use of your Excellency’s squadron. I shall 
direct the Government of Bombay to arm her with all ex- 


422 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Jan, 


pedition, if your Excellency should deem such a measure 
advisable. 

I shall also transmit my orders to Fort William, for the 
equipment of any large ships which may arrive in the river 
Hooghly. 

I am extremely happy that my suggestions, with respect to 
the station of the Sybille, have met with your Excellency’s 
approbation. 

My endeavours are still directed to obtain a suitable ad- 
justment of our differences with Tippoo Sultaun, through the 
channel of negotiation, accompanying, however, my pacific 
propositions with such a disposition of our forces as may tend 
to give full effect to my representations. 

I rely with the most implicit confidence on ySur Excel- 
leney’s assurances of cordial cooperation, in the event of war 
with Tippoo Sultaun, being satisfied that I shall derive every 

. degree of practicable assistance, from the squadron under 
your command, in my efforts to defeat the projects of the 
common enemy. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 


Mornineton. 


No. CXXIX. 


The Earl of Mornington to the Resident at Hyderabad. 
Sir, Fort St. George, 22nd Jan. 1799. 


It is of the utmost importance to ascertain the causes which 
impeded the operations of his Highness’s cavalry during the 
last war, and to. consider how those causes can now be re- 
moved. 

I am informed that for the most part his Highness’s cavalry 
were sufficiently well mounted and armed ; and I have never 
heard that they manifested any peculiar deficiency in point of 
personal courage. Their unwillingness to engage the enemy 
during the last war must, therefore, have arisen from other 
causes. 

During the first campaign of Lord Cornwallis, the com- 
mander of the Nizam’s eavalry was not zealous in the cause 


1799. THE RESIDENT AT HYDERABAD. 423 


of the allies, and some of the rissallahdars were strongly 
suspected of having been corrupted by the enemy. ‘These 
citcumstatices may reasonably be supposed to have contyi- 
buted, in @ great degree, towards their disgraceful inactivity. 
At present his Highness’s contingent is commanded by a 
person of a very different disposition from Rajah Taiz Wunt ; 
none of the suspected rissallahdars are now employed with 
it; and no reason exists to justify a suspicion of the faith of 
any of those now attached to it. 

Notwithstanding these advantages, certain radical defects 
remain in the system of his Highness’s cavalry which require 
correction. 

The principal of these defects consists in the want of due 
encouragement to the sillahdar, or hired cavalry (of whick 
description the Nizam’s contingent of cavalry is, I believe, 
almost entirely composed), to expose their horses in action. 
For the horses being the property of individuals, and somé- 
times constituting the whole fortune of the horsemen, no risk 
will be incurred unless a previous indemnity be provided 
against the accidents of the field. Engagements to this effect 
are sometimes formed with sillahdar horse by the native 
powers, but these engagements are frequently violated. 

Another defect in the constitution of the sillahdar cavalry 
is, that although a horseman should be disabled for life in 
action, no provision is made for him; he, therefore, is un- 
willing to expose his person. 

The remedies for these defects are sufficiently obvious. 
The Nizam ought to engage to pay the proprietor for every 
horse killed or disabled in action, according to its rated 
value ; and his Highness ought also to make a suitable pro- 
vision, during life, for such horsemen as shall be disabled in 
actual service. 

You will, therefore; take an early opportunity of stating to 
the Nizam, and to Azim ul Omra, the great advantages which 
would result to his Highness’s service from the adoption of 
regulations of the nature here suggested ; and you will en- 
deavour, by every argument in your power, to induce the 
Minister to pursue the true interests of his Sovereign on this 
occasion. 

I am aware that his Highness will not readily adopt the 


424. GENERAL HARRIS, TO Feb. 


proposed improvements to any useful extent; but if he will 
only signify his approbation of the plan, and will promise to 
adopt it, I am disposed (on the strength of such general 
assurances), to. authorize Captain Malcolm, in concert with 
Meer Allum, to pledge the Company’s government for the 
faithful performance, by his Highness, of whatever promises 
might be made to the horsemen in his name. 

Without the guaranty of the Company, it is not to be sup- 
posed that any vague assurances from his Highness would 
produce the desired effect. That guaranty would of course 
be given with every degree of respect and consideration for 
his Highness. 

It is possible that the whole expense resulting from the 
proposed measures might ultimately fall on the Company. 
But the advantages of the arrangement to the Company, as 
well as to the Nizam, would probably be very considerable, 
and might be of the most decisive nature in the approaching 
war. 

Iam, &c., 
MornIneGTon. 


No. CXXX. 
(General Orders.) 


By the Right Hon. the Governor General in Council. 
Fort St. George, 2nd Feb. 1799. 


Whereas the despatch of the public service requires that 
the requisitions and orders of the Commander-in-Chief in the 
field should be carried into effect with every practicable de- 
gree of promptitude and expedition, the Right Honourable 
the Governor General in Council hereby orders and directs 
all civil servants subject to the authority of the Presidencies 
of Fort St. George, or of Bombay, and all military officers 
serving under the authority of either Presidency, respectively 
to pay an immediate and prompt obedience to all such requi- 
sitions or orders as they shall receive from the Commander- 
in-Chief of the Forces of His Majesty, and of the Honorable 
the East India Company, on the coasts of Coromandel and of 


1799. THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL IN COUNCIL. 425 


Malabar ; and all civil servants and military officers are hereby 
informed, that any requisition or order under the signature of 
the Commander-in-Chief of the said Forces, shall be consi- 
dered as a full and sufficient voucher for any advance or 
disbursement of money which such requisition or order shall 
authorize. 

The Right Honourable the Governor General in Council 
further directs, that any civil servant or military officer re- 
ceiving any such requisition or order from the Commander- 
in-Chief, shall report the same by the earliest opportunity 
through the regular official channels to his Lordship in Coun- 
cil, but the execution of the said requisition or order shall 
not therefore be suspended or delayed; and all civil servants 
and military officers are hereby informed that this order is to 
remain in full force until further notice from the Governor 
General in Council. 


No. CXXXI. 
General Harris to the Governor-General in Council. 


My Lorp, Camp near Vellore, Feb. 2, 1799. 


Having had leisure since my arrival here to inspect the 
division of the army which has been since its formation under 
the orders of the Honorable Colonel Wellesley, I have much 
satisfaction in acquainting your Lordship, that the very hand- 
some appearance and perfect discipline of the troops do 
honour to themselves and to him, while the judicious and 
masterly arrangements in respect to supplies, which opened 
an abundant free market, and inspired confidence into dealers 
of every description, were no less creditable to Colonel Wel- 
lesley than advantageous to the public service, and deservedly 
entitle him to my thanks and approbation. 

The other divisions ef the army are under orders to take 
up their respective stations in the line, and as-soon as they 
join, and when the officers at the head of the several depart- 
ments of ordnance and stores and. of supplies, have been fully 
provided with their cattle and carriage, I shall be able to 
state, for your Lordship’s information, the probable period of 


426 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


our being ready to move towards the frontiers of Tippoo 
Sultaun. 


I have the honour to be, with great respect, 
Your Lordship’s obedient Servant, 
GrorceE Harais. 


No. CXXXIL. 


The Earl of Mornington to Lieut.-Gen, Harris, Commander-in-Chief. 


Sir, - Fort St. George, 3d Feb. 1799. 


‘You have already been furnished with copies of the cor- 
respondence which has taken place between me and Tippoo 
Sultaun since the 24th of October last. 

I have directed copies of this correspondence to be trans- 
mitted to the Commissioners in Malabar, whom I have in- 
structed to communicate the same to his Excellency Admiral 
Rainier, and to Lieutenant-General Stuart, or the officer 
commanding the Company’s troops on the Malabar coast. 

Having received no answer from Tippoo Sultaun to the 
letter which I despatched to him on the 9th ultimo, and in 
which I repeated for the third time, with increased earnest- 
ness, my proposal respecting the admission of Major Doveton, 
it is reasonable to conclude that the object of the Sultaun’s 
silence is to delay the commencement of decisive military 
operations until the season shall be so far advanced as to 
render the siege of his capital impracticable during the pre- 
sent year. 

To defeat these views it is become necessary to suspend all 
negociation with the Sultaun until the united force of the 
arms of the Company aiid their allies shall have made such 
an impression on his territories as may give full effect to the 
just representations of the allied powers. 

I, therefore, direct that you enter the territory of Mysore 
with the army now assembled under your command, with as 
little delay as possible, and that you proceed to the siege of 
Seringapatam. 

With. respect. to the division of the Company’s army on the 
Malabar coast, its operations, and, consequently, those of the 
troops of the Rajahs of Coorga and Travancore (who are to 


1799. GENERAL HARKIS. 427 


be carefully prevented from making any premature move- 
ments), will be regulated by the orders which you shall 
transmit for that purpose to Lieutenant-General Stuart, or to 
the officer commanding in Malabar. 

I have instructed the Resident at Poonah to express to the 
Peishwa and to his Minister, Nana Furnaveese, my hope that 
the Mahratta empire will instantly. pursue the necessary 
measures for the vigorous prosecution of hostilities against 
the common enemy, and the assurances which I have already 
received from that Court, lead me to expect that the north- 
western territory of the enemy will soon be invaded by a con- 
siderable Mahratta force under Purseram Bhow. 

My latest accounts from the Resident at Poonah induce 
me to believe, that he must have applied before this time to 
the government of Bombay for the assistance of a detachment 
of the Company’s troops to act with the Peishwa’s contingent. 
In the event of the government of Bombay having been able 
to furnish such a detachment (of which I have no doubt), they 
will apprize the commission in Malabar, and Lieutenant-Ge- 
neral Stuart, or the officer commanding the troops of the 
Presidency of Bombay in that quarter. 

The government of Bombay will also instruct the officer in 
the command of the detachment serving with the Mahrattas, 

_ to maintain as constant and regular a correspondence with 
you, and with Lieutenant-General Stuart, as possible, and to 
exert all his influence with the commander of the Peishwa’s 
contingent, to engage him to regulate the progress and opera+ 
tions of the Mahratta forces by your advice and directions, 
or by those of Lieutenant-General Stuart. 

Entertaining no views of aggrandizement, my objects in 
the war will be limited to the attainment of a just indemnity 
for the great expence to which the aggression. of Tippoo 
Sultaun has subjected the allies, and of a reasonable security 
against the future violence and treachery of that Prince; but 
no negociation with a view to either object can be opened 
without danger to the common cause, until the Sultaun shall 
have been compelled to entertain serious apprehensions for 
the safety of Seringapatam, and it is accordingly my resolu- 
tion to listen to no overtures from him, until we shall have 
attained such a position as shall sufficiently secure us against 
the effects of his insincerity. 


428 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


I shall hereafter inform you of the manner in which I wish 
you to receive such overtures as may be made to you by any 
of the inhabitants of Tippoo’s dominions desirous of throwing 
off the authority of that Prince. I shall also, in due time, 
send you such further instructions as may appear to me to be 
necessary for your direction, previously to your entrance into 
the territory of Mysore. 

I have the honour to be, &e. 
Moxnineron. 


No. CXXXIII. 
The Earl of Mornington to the Hon. Jonathan Duncan. 
Sir, Fort St. George, Feb. 5, 1799. 


I return you many thanks for your exertions to procure 
intelligence respecting Zemaun Shah ; although your success 
has not yet been complete, I trust you will ultimately be able 
to establish a channel of information which may hereafter be 
useful. Zemaun Shah commenced his retreat from Lahore 
on the 4th of January; the principal cause assigned for his 
retreat is the appearance of Mahmoud, the Shah’s brother, in 
Balkh. From a comparison of dates, I think the movement 
of this Prince may possibly be the work of your agent, Me- , 
hedy Ali; which, if it should be proved, will establish his 
utility. If you should be satisfied of Mehedy Ali’s real effi- 
ciency, I think 2 lacs 10,000 rupees a sum not greater than 
the value of the service; and I authorize you to use your 
discretion on the subject accordingly. The plan of subsi- 
dizing the whole army of Persia is more extended and expen- 
sive than circumstances require. But I should hope that, by 
the judicious application of moderate sums of money, from 
time to time, not only the brothers of Zemaun Shah might 
be maintained in such a state as to occupy the Shah’s atten- 
tion at home; but the Court of Persia might be induced to 
keep him in perpetual check without any decided act of hos- 
tility. This system, well executed, would save us a large 
‘portion of the expense of drawing our armies to the frontier 
of Oude, whenever the Shah chooses to cross the Attock. I, 
therefore, recommend the subject to your constant attention, 
and I shall willingly provide for a small annual expense. in 


1799. THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 429 


Persia, which promises to save enormous contingent charges 
in Oude. 

I am much pleased with your attention to the affairs of 
Goa, and I should most anxiously wish to throw a garrison 
into that place, if we could at present spare troops for the 
purpose. At present I can only request you not to lose sight 
of this important object. 


I have the honour to be, 
with great respect and esteem, Sir, 
your most faithful Servant, 
Mornineron. 


No, CXXXIV. 


The Earl of Mornington to the Court of Directors of the Honourable 
East India Company. 


Hon. Sirs, Fort St. George, 12th Feb. 1799. 


I have deemed it to be my duty to transmit to your Ho- 
nourable Court, by the speediest conveyance, the advices 
which I have received from Bengal with respect to the inhu- 
man murder of Mr. Cherry and of several British subjects, 
perpetrated by Vizier Alli and his adherents, in the a of 
.Benares, on the 14th of January, 1799. 

Your Honourable Court is already apprized of the circum- 
stances which induced Lord Teignmouth to establish Saadut 
Alli on the Musnud of Oude, and to depose Vizier Alli, who 
had been raised to that situation in the confusion which en- 
sued upon the death of Asoph ud Dowlah. You are also in 
possession of the evidence by which the spurious birth of 
Vizier Alli was incontrovertibly proved, and you have been 
informed that his Lordship had fixed the residence of Vizier. 
Alli in the city of Benares; where he enjoyed an ample allow- 
ance from the Nabob Vizier, and was treated with the utmost 
degree of indulgence and kindness by Mr. Cherry, agent to 
the Governor. General, and chief judge of the Provincial 
Court of Circuit and Appeal for that district. 

Within the short period of four months, during which 
Vizier Alli occupied the Musnud of Oude; he had betrayed 
symptoms of a ferocious, sanguinary, and treacherous dispo- 
sition, accompanied by an extraordinary degree of boldness 


430 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


and activity; Lord Teignmouth, from a knowledge of his 
character, recorded an opinion, that it might be advisable to 
take an opportunity of changing the place of Vizier Alli’s 
residence to a situation more remote from the scene of his 
elevation and fall, and more convenient to the immediate 
superintendence of the Governor General in Council. 

Since my arrival in India, various events have happened to 
convince me, that the removal of Vizier Alli to the vicinity of 
Calcutta was a measure essentially necessary to secure the 
tranquillity of the province of Oude. 

The numerous retinue entertained by Vizier Alli had more 
than once disturbed the peace of the city of Benares; and the 
ordinary military force stationed in the district could not be 
deemed sufficient to preclude all danger, either of commotion, 
or of the escape of Vizier Alli. Information had reached me, 
through different channels, which left no doubt on my mind, 
that Vizier Alli had despatched a vakeel with presents to 
Zemaun Shah; a circumstance which sufficiently indicated 
the disposition of Vizier Alli to attempt any enterprize of 
which the success might be favoured by the approach of the 
Shah, and by the consequent diminution of the British force 
in the interior parts of the province of Oude. 

When the Shah had actually advanced to Lahore, and the 
army under Sir J. Craig had been ordered to proceed to 
Anopsheer, the Nabob Vizier Saadut Alli applied, in the 
most pressing manner, for the removal of Vizier Alli to some 
position less favourable to the exercise of his adventurous 
and daring spirit. 

Under all these circumstances, it appeared to me to be my 
duty to-effect an arrangement, which had been deemed ad- 
visable, on general grounds, by the experience and prudence 
of Lord Teignmouth, and which the actual conjuncture of 
affairs had rendered highly expedient. I, therefore, directed 
Mr. Cherry (some time previous to my departure from Fort 
William) to signify to Vizier Ali my wish that he should re- 
side in the vicinity of Calcutta, and at the same time to assure 
him, that no diminution of his allowances or appointments 
would be attempted, and that he would neither be subject to 
any additional restraint, nor denied any indulgence at the 
Presidency which he had been: suffered to enjoy at Benares. 

Being however aware of the difficulty of reconciling Vizier 


1799. THE COURT OF DIRECTORS. 431 


Alli, by any accompanying measures of lenity, to a change 
which must preclude his hopes of joining Zemaun Shah, or 
of disturbing the Government of the Nabob Vizier, I parti- 
cularly enjoined Mr. Cherry to use the necessary precautions 
for securing the effectual execution of my orders in any. con- 
tingency which might arise. 

The arrival of the Shah at Lahore, with the declared pur- 
pose of advanéing to Delhi, and the defenceless state of the 
intervening possessions of the Seiks and of the Mahrattas in- 
duced me to assemble the main body of the army of Bengal 
on the frontier of Oude, and to station a large force within a 
few miles of Benares, for the protection of that opulent city. 

The presence of this force seemed to have placed the tran- 
quil accomplishment of the removal of Vizier Alli beyond alt 
doubt, and I left Bengal without any apprehension of the 
possibility of the dreadful events which have ensued. 

When my orders were signified to Vizier Alli, he at first 
expressed, according to my expectation, considerable reluc- 
tance to leave his actual situation, but in a short time he ap- 
peared to be entirely reconciled to the change of his residence, 
and to be perfectly satisfied with the assurances which he > 
had received of a continuance of the protection and indul- 
gence of the Honourable Company. The conduct of Mr. 
Cherry towards Vizier Alli, on every occasion, had been an 
uninterrupted course of every office of kindness, delicacy, 
and conciliation, calculated to excite sentiments of affection 
and gratitude in any mind capable of such impressions. 
Vizier Alli had uniformly professed to entertain these senti- 
ments towards Mr. Cherry in their utmost force; but his pro- 
fessions proved to be the artifice of the deepest dissimulation, 
designed to mask the unalterable purpose of a secret and 
implacable hatred. For it appears that the active exertion 
of Mr. Cherry’s eminent talents in the negociation of the late 
treaty with Saadut Alli, and in facilitating the sudden depar- 
ture of that prince from Benares to Lucknow at the period of 
the deposition of Vizier Alli, had fixed in the mind of the 
latter a spirit of personal revenge which no kindness could 
mitigate, and which no difficulty or danger could controul. 
The evidence in my possession leaves no doubt that this 
spirit would have broken forth on the first favourable occa- 
sion, if Vizier Alli had been suffered to remain at Benares ; 


432 . TIPPOO SULTAUN, TO Feb. 


but it does not yet appear whether the immediate cause of 
the murder of Mr. Cherry was any augmentation of Vizier 
Alli’s inveterate resentment, exasperated by the supposition 
that Mr. Cherry had suggested my late orders; or whether 
the motive of Vizier Alli was merely to seize that opportunity 
of accomplishing a purpose which he had long determined, 
and which might have become impracticable after the seat of 
his residence had. been changed. ° 

. My concern for the fate of Mr. Cherry is much aggravated 
by the reflection, that he might have avoided all danger, if 
the humanity of his disposition had not been deceived by the 
artful dissimulation of his assassin; notwithstanding that Mr. 
Cherry had been repeatedly warned of his danger, the cha- 
racter of mildness and submission which Vizier Alli had as- 
sumed, had unfortunately induced that gentleman to omit 
those necessary precautions which were recommended by 
every principle of prudence, and particularly enjoined by my 
positive orders. 

I am happy to be able to assure you, that no serious inter- 
ruption of the tranquillity, either of the province of Benares 
or of Oude, is likely to be the immediate result of this out- 
rage, But it will require much consideration to devise such 
a system of measures as shall afford permanent security to 
your possessions against the ultimate consequences of an 
event of such evil impression and dangerous example. 

I have the honour to be, 
Honourable Sirs, with the greatest respect, 
your most obedient and faithful Servant, 
MornInerTon. 


No. CXXXV. 
From the Earl of Mornington to the Hon. Jonathan Duncan. 


Sir, Fort St. George, 13th February, 1799, 


My letter of the 5th instant* will have furnished you with 
sufficient authority to continue every encouragement to 
Mehedy Ali on the limited scale of from two to three lacs of 


* See page 428. 


’ 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 433 


rupees. I cannot express to you my satisfaction at the able 
manner in which you have executed my ideas with respect to 
the recal of Zemaun Shah. A comparison of dates, com- 
bined with the whole tenor of my intelligence from Lucknow 
and Anopsheer, leaves little doubt on my mind that the Shah’s 
sudden retreat was occasioned by the news of his brother’s 
appearance at Balkh, and that the latter event was the fruit 
of your agent’s activity. I beg you will provide, or order Ma-’ 
hedy Ali to provide, all the khelaats and presents which he 
desires, and let them be presented in my name. You shall be 
furnished with the letters required in a few days. 

I am desirous of extending and improving our relations 
with Persia to the utmost practicable degree; and I wish to 
receive your opinion with respect to such commercial or poli- 
tical objects as appear to you desirable and attainable under 
any treaty with the Court of Persia. The great political 
objects appear to me to be, the exclusion of the French, espe- 
cially if they should make any attempt to penetrate through 
Persia to Hindostan; and the establishment of such a conti- 
nual source of anxiety and apprehension to Zemaun Shah on 
the borders of his own dominions, as shall effectually preclude 
his future projects of advancing towards Hindostan. 

I have the honour to be, 


Sir, 
your most faithful Servant, 
Morninerton. 
No. CXXXVI. 


From Tippoo Sultaun to the Right Hon, the Governor General. 


Received* 13th February, 1799. 

I have been much gratified by the agreeable receipt of your 
Lordship’s two friendly letters, the first brought by a camel- 
man, the last by hircurrahs, and understood their contents. 
The letter of the Prince, in station like Jumsheid; with angels 
as his guards} with troops numerous as the stars; the sun illu- 
mining the world of the heaven of empire and dominion; the 
luminary giving splendour to the universe of the firmament of 


* On the 7th of February, Dubuc, the agent of Tippoo Sultaun embarked at 
Tranquebar to proceed on his Embassy to France. 
VOL. 1. QF 


434 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


glory and power; theSultaun of the sea and the land; the King 
of Rome (i.e. the Grand Signior); be his empire and his 
power perpetual! addressed to me, which reached you through 
the British Envoy, and which you transmitted, has arrived. 
Being frequently disposed to make excursions and hunt, I am 
accordingly proceeding upon a hunting excursion. You will 
be pleased to despatch Major Doveton (about whose coming 
your friendly pén has repeatedly written) slightly attended (or 
unattended). 

Always continue to gratify me by friendly letters, notifying 
your welfare. 


A true Translation, N. B. Epmonstone, 
Persian Translator to Govt. 


No. CXXXVII. 


From the Governor General to the Secret Committee of the Honourable 
Court of Directors. 


HonovuraB.e Sirs, Fort St. George, 13th February, 1799. 


In my last letter to your Honourable Committee, under 
date the 13th* of January, I informed you, that I had ad- 
dressed a letter to Tippoo Sultaun, on the 9th of January, 
and I enclosed a copy of that letter, as well as the whole of 
my correspondence, with that Prince. 

Soon after the 13th of January, I received from his Ma- 
jesty’s Minister at Constantinople a letter from the Grand 
Signior, addressed to Tippoo Sultaun, which I despatched to’ 
Seringapatam on the 16th ultimo, together with a letter from 
myself, renewing with encreased earnestness my proposition 
for the admission of an ambassador, with a view to the come 
mencement of a pacific negotiation. 

To this hour I have received no answer from Tippoo Sul- 
taun to either of those letters. 

It appeared to me, that the object of the Sultaun’s silence 
-could be no other than to delay the commencement of deci- 
sive military operations until the season should be so far ad- 
vanced as to render the siege of his capital impracticable dur- 
ing the present year. 

In the mean while, the advices from Bussorah, Bagdad, 


* See p. 406. 


1799. THE COURT OF DIRECTORS. 435 


Constantinople, and Bombay, were ofso uncertain a nature, 
as!to leave me still in doubt of the French army in Egypt; 
the only safe conclusion which could be drawn from these 
advices being, that the French still maintained the possession 
of that country. 

Reports had also reached me through various channels, 
stating, that a French squadron, under M. Richany, destined 
to the Arabian Gulf, and superior in force to that of Commo- 
dore Blanket, had left Europe so early in the season that it 
might easily have pre-occupied the intended station of the 
Commodore, and as no intelligence has been received directly 
from the Red Sea since the date of the advices by the 
Intrepid, the state of our naval force, or of that of the enemy 
in that quarter, is not yet ascertained. 

In addition to these circumstances, I was apprized by the 
most unquestionable authority, that while Tippoo Sultaun 
had declined to answer my several letters, three vakeels, 
from Seringapatam, accompanied by M. Dubuc (one of the 
leaders of the French force raised in the Isle of France, under 
M. Malartic’s proclamation) were upon the point of embark- 
ing at Tranquebar, with an avowed mission from the Sultaun 
to the Executive Directory of France. 

In order, therefore, to defeat the object of Tippoo Sultaun’s 
silence, and to avail myself of the actual superiority of our 
force, and of the advantages of the present season, before the 
French can effect any junction with him, I determined to 
commence hostilities without delay ; and I am resolved to sus- 
pend all negotiation with the Sultaun until the united force 
of the arms of the Company, and of their allies, shall have 
made such an impression on his territories as may give full 
effect to the just representations of the allied powers. 

With these views, on the 3rd instant, I directed Lieute- 
nant General Harris to enter the territory of Mysore with the 
army assembled under his command, and to proceed to the 
siege of Seringapatam with as little delay as possible. 

With respect to the division of the Company’s army on the 
Malabar coast, its operations, and consequently those of the 
troops of the Rajahs of Coorg and Travancore (who will be 
carefully prevented from making any premature movements), 
will be regulated by the orders which Lieutenant General 


436 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb, 


Harris shall transmit for that purpose to Lieutenant General 
Stuart, or to the officer commanding in Malabar. 

I have instructed the Resident at Poonah to express to the 
Peishwa, and to his Minister, Nana Furnavese, my hope 
that the Mahratta Empire will instantly pursue the necessary 
measures for the vigorous prosecution of hostilities against the 
common enemy; and the assurances which I have already re- 
ceived from that Court, lead me to expect that the northwestern 
territory of the enemy will soon be invaded by a considerable 
Mahratta force under Purseram Bhow. 

My latest intelligence from the Resident at Poonah induced 
me to believe that he must have applied before this time to 
the Government of Bombay for the assistance of a detach- 
ment of the Company’s troops (which I know that Govern- 
ment to be prepared to furnish), for the purpose of acting with 
the Peishwa’s contingent. In that event the Governor of 
Bombay will instruct the officer in the command of the de- 
tachment serving with the Mahrattas to maintain as constant 
and regular a correspondence with Lieutenant General 
Harris, and with Lieutenant General Stuart, as possible, and 
to exert all his influence with the commander of the Peishwa’s 
contingent to engage him to regulate the progress and opera- 
tions of the Mahratta forces by the advice and directions of 
Lieutenant General Harris, or by those of Lieutenant Ge- 
neral Stuart. 

TI have authorized the Commissioners in Malabar to receive 
and encourage from any of the chiefs or public officers of 
Tippoo Sultaun on the coast of Malabar, any advances which 
shall appear to them to promise assistance to the Company in 
the prosecution of the war against that Prince. 

I am not at present in possession of information which 
enables me to judge with sufficient certainty of the general 
disposition and temper of the inhabitants of 'Tippoo’s re- 
maining dominions on the coast of Malabar. If, however, they 
should manifest an inclination to revolt against his authority, 
and the Commissioners should think it expedient to encou- 
rage them, Ihave left it to the discretion of the Commissioners 
to offer such support and protection to those disposed to 
abandon the cause of the Sultaun, as the state of the British 
force on the Malabar coast may admit. I have also autho- 


1799. THE COURT OF DIRECTORS. 437 


rized the Commissioners to give to all tributaries, and others 
renouncing their obedience to Tippoo, and acting cordially in 
our favour, the most positive assurances, in the name of the 
Company, that I will use my utmost efforts to compel that 
Prince to relinquish all claims upon their allegiance, and to 
assent to their becoming the dependants and subjects of the 
Honourable Company on such terms as shall hereafter be ar- 
ranged under my orders. 

My instructions to Lieutenant General Harris respecting 
the manner in which he is to receive such overtures as may be 
made to him by any of the inhabitants of Tippoo’s dominions, 
desirous of throwing off the authority of that Prince, will be 
framed upon similar principles with my directions on the 
same subject to the Commissioners in Malabar. 

His Excellency, Admiral Rainier, is fully acquainted with 
the actual state of affairs; and I have informed him that I 
rely with confidence on his Excellency’s zeal for the public 
service (of which I have already received the most unequivocal 
proofs), for his cordial cooperation with the Commissioners in 
Malabar, and with Lieutenant General Stuart, in the vigorous 
prosecution of the war on the coast of Malabar; and I am 
persuaded his Excellency will take the most effectual mea- 
sures for enabling the fleet under his command to keep its 
present station, on the coast of Malabar to as late a period of 
the season as possible. 

The whole tenor of my intelligence from Mysore induces 
me to believe, that there is a general aversion in Tippoo’s coun- 
cils and armies to his intimate connection with the French ; 
and I have already received intimations from various parts of 
his dominions, and from some of his principal ministers and 
officers, which promise considerable advantage in the prose- 
cution of hostilities against him. 

The main body of the army of the Carnatic, under General 
Harris, marched from Vellore on the 11th instant; I trust 
that the Barramahal, and the Southern Provinces, will be suf- 
ficiently protected by the force assembled under Colonels 
Reade and Brown. 

The Nizam’s contingent, accompanied by the whole of the 
Company’s subsidiary troops arrived within a few miles of the 
main body of General Harris’s force previously to their depar- 
ture from Vellore. 


438 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


I have the satisfaction to inform your Honourablé Com- 
mittee that Zemaun Shah commenced his retreat on the 4th of 
January; by acopy of a letter from Zemaun Shah’s Vizier to | 
Shah Allum, it appears that Zemaun Shab has finally relin- 
quished his project of invading Hindostan in thé present year, 
but has engaged to return in the next season. The imme- 
diate cause of Zemaun Shah’s precipitate retreat is stated in 
all the papers of intelligence to be the sudden appearance of. 
his brother at the head of a military force in the neighbour- 
hood of Herat. 

The documents which I have directed the Governor of 
Bombay to forward by this despatch, will shew your Honour- 
able Committee that my attention was directed at an early pe- 
tiod to the establishment of such an intercourse with the 
Court of Persia as should withdraw the Shah from the prose- 
cution of his ambitious views of aggression, to the defence of 
his own dominions. © 

I flatter myself that you will approve the sucess of those 
exertions which (with the aid of Mr. Duncan’s ability and 
zeal for the public service), I have already been enabled to 
make in Persia, with a view to this desirable object; it would 
eertainly be a wise policy to apply annually a moderate sum 
of money to the same object, for the purpose of precluding 
those annual alarms of invasion which have occasioned so 
large an increase of your military charges in Bengal. You 
may rely on my particular attention to the improvement of 
the intercourse now likely to be established with the Court of 
Persia, from which I trust to derive many advantages, in ad- 
dition to those to which I have adverted in this despatch. 

The declared views of the French government, the position 
of the French army in Egypt, the possible cooperation of a 
French squadron in these seas, added to the recent proceedings 
of Tippoo Sultaun, render it indispensable to the security of 
the British empire in India, that the power of that restless 
and vindictive Prince should be speedily reduced. The delay, 
even of a few weeks, at this season, might enable him, in the 
next, to attempt the execution of his avowed projects of ven- 
geance with a formidable accession of strength. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 
Mornineron. 
P.S. As Iwas closing this despatch, I received the en- 


1799. THE RESIDENT AT POONAH, 459 


closed letter, No. 3,* from Tippoo Sultaun. His design is, 
evidently,.to gain time, until a change of circumstances and 
of season shall enable him to avail himself of the assistance of 
France. I shall endeavour to frustrate this design; and 
although I shall not decline even this tardy and insidious 
acceptance of my repeated propositions for opening a nego- 
tiation, I shall accompany the negotiation by the movement 
of the army, for the purpose of enforcing such terms of peace 
as shall give effectual security. to the Company’s possessions 
against any hostile consequences of the Sultaun’s alliance 
with the French. I have just now received intelligence that 
' M. Dubuc, with three vakeels from the Sultaun, has actually 
sailed from Tranquebar, upon an embassy to France, with 
considerable presents from Tippoo to the Executive Directory. 
I had despatched the Osterley with a party of the 28th dra- 
goons, for the purpose of intercepting the vessel in which 
the embassy had embarked ; but, unfortunately, the captain 
of the Osterley was not able to accomplish that desirable 
object. 


No. CXXXVIII. 
The Earl of Mornington to the Resident at Poonah. 


Sm, Fort St. George, 19th Feb. 1799. 


Your letter, No. 86, requires the suggestion of some points 
necessary for your direction. 

My intention, in my letter of the llth January,} was not 
that the Peishwa should be solicited, as a matter of favour, 
to receive the Bombay detachment in the manner suggested 
by Gopal Rao. 

On the contrary, my expectation was, that under all the 
circumstances of the case, the Bombay detachment would be 
received by the Peishwa as a testimony of my disposition to 
accord with his Highness’s wishes. 

I, therefore, desire that you will not attempt to use any 
persuasion to induce the Peishwa to receive the detachment 
from Bombay ; my experience of the policy of the Court of 
Poonah has already been sufficient to convince me of its dis- 


* See p. 433. + See p. 400. 


440 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


position to view with suspicion the most amicable compliance 
with its own repeated and earnest requests. You will leave 
it entirely to the discretion of the Peishwa to accept or reject 
the offer of the detachment, declaring that his Highness’s 
decision is a matter of perfect indifference to me. 

You will understand that I am determined never to consent 
to any augmentation of the subsidiary force now offered to 
the Peishwa, nor to the continuance of this force in his ser- 
vice after the conclusion of peace with Tippoo, on any other 
conditions than those proposed in my letter of the 8th of 
July.* 

You will peremptorily insist on the dismission of Tippoo’s 
vakeels. Under the present circumstances, their detention 
at Poonah is little short of an insult to the British govern- 
ment. From the several facts which you have stated, I con- 
fess that I cannot draw conclusions favorable to the cordial 
cooperation of the Peishwa, in the present contest with the 
Sultaun. 

The whole conduct of the Peishwa has betrayed a syste- 
matic jealousy, suspicion, and even insincerity, in return for 
the most liberal and unqualified offices of friendship and good 
will. The time, I trust, is not far remote, when the Court of 
Poonah may lament the despicable policy which has governed 
its councils, in its late communications with the British 
government. _ 

In the mean while, your activity must be exerted to coun- 
teract the pride, imbecility and falsehood, of Baagy Rao. My 
object is to be charged with the sole conduct of the interests 
of the allies, in any negotiation with Tippoo Sultaun. My 
proposition respecting the Mahratta vakeel to be sent to Fort 
St. George, was intended merely to preclude any emotion of 
the lively jealousy of the Court of Poonah. But, as the 
Peishwa has not yet made any effort in the common cause, 
nor is likely to make any, before every question with Tippoo 
shall be brought to an issue, his Highness might safely trust 
to me for the management of interests which he has aban- 
doned, and which must ultimately be secured by my exertions. 
You will, therefore, rather discourage, than endeavour to 
accelerate, the appointment of a vakeel from the Peishwa, for 


* See p. 113. 


1799. THE RESIDENT AT POONA. 44) 


the purposes proposed. By reference to Hyderabad, you 
will find, that the Nizam has thrown the conduct of his 
interests with Tippoo entirely into my hands; and I know no 
reason, either of justice, policy, or real dignity, which should 
restrain the Peishwa from an equal degree of confidence in 
my friendship and good faith. 

I apprize you that I will not accept the Peishwa’s media- 
tion between me and Tippoo Sultaun; nor can I conceive 
how the Peishwa can undertake the office of mediator in such 
a cause, without the most flagrant inconsistency. As a mem- 
ber of the triple alliance, he has already declared himself to 
be a party aggrieved by the Sultaun, and in that view the 
Sultaun might naturally suspect the sincerity of his mediation: 
but if he has really brought himself to that temper of impar- 
tiality which is the indispensable characteristic of a mediator, 
he has violated his faith towards the allies, and they cannot 
accept a mediation founded on a violation of their reciprocal 
engagements. 

Even if this reasoning could be controverted, after having 
rejected, in the most offensive manner, my proffered media- 
tion between him and another branch of the triple alliance, 
the Peishwa cannot reasonably expect that either the Nizam 
or I should admit him to mediate between us and the common 
enemy. 

It may not be useless to suggest to Scindiah, that although 
Zemaun Shah’s retreat has relieved me from all apprehension 
of any interruption of the tranquillity of the province of 
Oude, I think it advisable, under the present circumstances, 
to maintain a large force on the frontier of the Vizier’s 
dominion. 

It will not be proper to use any intimidation to Scindiah, 
but I apprize you, that if he should enter into any connection 
with Tippoo, of a nature dangerous to the British interests, 
the security of his dominions in Hindostan will be exposed 
to hazard. 

Iam, &c. 
Morwninerton, 


442 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


No. CXXXIX. 
The Earl of Mornington to his Excellency Lieutenant-General Harris. 
Sir, Fort St. George, Feb. 22nd, 1799. 


I have reason to believe that many of the tributaries, prin- 
cipal officers, and other subjects of Tippoo Sultaun, are 
inclined to throw off the authority of that Prince, and to 
place themselves under the protection of the Company and 
of our allies. The war in which we are again involved, by 
the treachery and violence of the Sultaun, renders it both 
just and expedient that we should avail ourselves, as much 
as possible, of the discontents and disaffection of his people. 
It is, therefore, advisable, to arrange a plan for the regular 
conduct of all negotiations connected with this object. 

Being apprehensive that your more important avocations 
will not admit of your taking any part in the details of this 
business, I hereby direct you to constitute a commission for 
this purpose, to consist of the Honourable Colonel Wellesley, 
Lieutenant-Colonel Close, Lieutenant-Colonel Agnew, and 
Captain Malcolm, assistant to the Resident at Hyderabad ; 
with Captain Macaulay, to act as secretary to the commission. 

The commissioners are to act constantly in communication 
with you, and to obey whatever directions you shall think 
proper to signify to them. 

They are to report their proceedings to me as frequently 
and as regularly as circumstances shall permit. 

They will correspond with the commissioners in Malabar 
on such points as shall be connected in any respect with the 
objects of this commission: and for this purpose you will be 
pleased to furnish them with a copy of the Company’s cypher, 
No. 11. 

Their duty is to consist, generally, in receiving and con- 
sidering all such overtures from the subjects of Tippoo Sul- 
taun (of whatever class), as may either be referred by you to 
the commissioners, or may be addressed to them through 
other channels. 

In cases which may not admit of reference to me, they will 
decide, under your authority, on the degree and nature of the 
encouragement proper to be given to such persons as may 


1799. GENERAL HARRIS. 443 


propose to place themselves under the protection of the Com- 
pany. The following extracts from my instructions to the 
commissioners in Malabar (which you will be pleased to com- 
municate to the officers named in the present commission), 
will explain the general principles by which their conduct is 
to be regulated. 

“‘ I now authorize you to avail yourselves, without reserve, 
of the overtures made some time since to Mr. Uthoff and to 
Captain Mahony, by Shehab-ud-Dein Khan, to whatever ex- 
tent you may judge practicable and useful. You will also 
receive and encourage from any other of the chiefs, or public 
officers of Tippoo Sultaun, on the coast of Malabar, any ad- 
vances which shall appear to you to promise assistance to the 
Company, in the prosecution of the war against that Prince. 

‘““T am not at present in possession of any information 
which enables me to judge with sufficient certainty of the 
general disposition and temper of the inhabitants of Tippoo’s 
remaining dominions on the coast of Malabar. If, however, 
they should manifest an inclination to revolt against his au- 
thority, and you should think it expedient to encourage them, 
I leave it to your discretion to offer them such support and 
protection as the state of the British force on your coast may 
enable you to afford.. I also authorize you to give to all 
tributaries, or others, renouncing their allegiance to Tippoo, 
and acting heartily in our favour, the most positive assurances, 
in the name of the Company, that I will use my utmost efforts 
to compel that Prince to relinquish all claims upon their alle- 
giance, and to agree to their becoming the dependents and 
subjects of the Honorable Company, on such terms as shall 
hereafter be arranged under my orders.” 

The enclosure No. I contains an account of the overtures 
from Shehab-ud-Dien Khan, referred to in the foregoing 
extract.* 

It will be obvious, however, that the instructions apply 


* This document not only states the overtures made for a junction 
with the English, by some of Tippoo’s chiefs, but declares also the fact, 
that “‘ Tippoo had formed a close alliance with the French, to the extent 
of declaring that the enemies of the one were to be considered as the 
enemies of the other ; and that he (Tippoo) had engaged to grant them 
(the French) the fort of Honowir (Onore) to facilitate their communica- 
tion with his dominions.” 


444 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


more particularly to tributaries, or zemindars, possessing or 
' claiming such districts on the borders of the Company’s ter- 
ritory as may be annexed to it, in the favourable event of a 
further reduction of the Sultaun’s power, and of a-partition of 
his present dominions. 

The: commission will communicate with Meer Allum, with 
respect to all such proposals as may appear likely to concern 
the interests of the Nizam. Any overtures which may be 
made by tributaries, or other subjects of the Sultaun, adjacent 
to the present frontier of his Highness, will be considered 
with Meer Allum’s assistance; the necessary encouragement 
and assurances to such persons being, more properly, to be 
adjusted by the powers to whom their allegiance may even- 


tually be transferred. 
The same principle must be applied to any offers which 


may proceed from districts bordering on the present Mah- 
ratta dominions. Should a Mahratta force hereafter join 
your army, the commissioners will (in the cases to which I 
now refer), consult with the commander of that force, as well 
as with the commanding officer of any British detachment 
from Bombay which may be acting with the Mahrattas. 

But, although in the two last cases, authoritative assurances 
and encouragement would most properly proceed from our 
allies respectively, it is not improbable that, on some occa- 
sions, the guarantee of the Company may be required to such 
engagements, and even be made an indispensable preliminary 
condition by the parties proposing to abandon the cause of 
Tippoo. 

It is desirable to avoid all such engagements of the nature 
of a guarantee, the commissioners, therefore, will be careful 
not to guarantee any engagements which the allies may be 
inclined to form with persons renouncing their allegiance to 
Tippoo Sultaun, excepting in cases where the proposed ad- 
vantage shall be important to the common cause, and evidently 
unattainable without a formal guarantee. In general, there- 
fore, such contracts must be avoided ; but if a case of peculiar 
exigency should arise, without a possibility of a previous 
reference to me, the commissioners will regulate their conduct 
as nearly as possible on the principles which I have already 
established, for cases more immediately affecting the particular 
interests of the Company. 


1799. GENERAL HARRIS. 445 


The firm foundation on which our connexion with the 
Court of Hyderabad is now happily placed, disposes me to 
guarantee, with less hesitation, any engagements which the 
Nizam, or Meer Allum, on his Highness’s behalf, might be 
willing to form with the tributaries of the enemy on the side 
of his Highness’s frontier than prudence would require in any 
similar transaction under the Mahratta power. 

With respect to overtures proceeding from the more cen- 
tral parts of the enemy’s country, and, therefore, from persons 
whose possessions are not likely, in any event, to be trans- 
ferred to any of the allies, it is evident that such overtures 
cannot be received or encouraged in the same manner as 
those which have been already considered. To offers of this 
description, the commission must return merely such assur- 
ances of aid and support (whether military or pecuniary), as 
it may be immediately practicable to afford ; avoiding, care- 
fully, any engagements which might ultimately embarrass a 
negotiation for peace. With regard to pecuniary aids, I 
authorize you to give your sanction to such advances of 
money as the commissioners may deem essentially necessary 
to promote the objects of these instructions; apprizing you, 
however, that these advances of money must be confined 
within the limits of moderation, and with due attention to 
economy. 

With these instructions you will receive copies, in Persian 
and English, of a declaration which I propose to publish for 
the purpose of justifying to the powers of Hindostan the 
measures which the conduct of Tippoo Sultaun has compelled 
the Company and their, allies to adopt. You will communi- 
cate this document to the commissioners, who are to prepare 
and publish, in your name, such proclamations as shall appear 
to them to be best adapted to the state of the different parts 
of the enemy’s country through which you may pass, or with 
which you may open any intercourse, conforming the general 
tenor of all such proclamations to the principles and spirit of 
the declaration. 

You have already been furnished with copies in Persian 
and English, of my correspondence with Tippoo Sultaun, as 
well as with translations in Persian, of the Grand Signior’s 
manifesto, and of his Highness’s letter to the Sultan; you will 
communicate these papers to the commissioners. Those pas- 


448 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


sages of the correspondence, and of the documents received 
from Constantinople, which expose the character of the French 
republic, and the outrages committed by the French against 
the acknowledged head of the Mahommedan church, may, in 
particular, be employed to produce an useful impression on 
all the Mussulman inhabitants of Mysore. The commissioners 
will make any further use of these documents which may 
appear advisable. 

TI also enclose (No. 2) copies, in Persian and English, of 
an agreement which has been lately concluded, under my 
direction, with certain chiefs of the Ghyre Mehdy sect’ of 
Mussulmans. For an account of the banishment of these 
sectaries from the dominions of Tippoo Sultaun, I refer you 
to the accompanying extract of a letter from the Resident at 
Hyderabad, under date the 4th of January last, making the 
inclosure No. 3. Among these exiles are many persons who 
formerly held situations of great trust under the government 
of the late Hyder Ali Khan, as well as under that of Tippoo 
Sultaun ; and it is obvious that all these persons must be 
intimately acquainted with the country of the enemy. It will 
be the business of the commissioners, under your orders, to 
consider how the knowledge and probable connexions of these 
people, may. be best applied to the promotion of the objects 
of their commission. It appears that the Sudars, whom, 
together with 400 Sillahdar horse, I have agreed to entertain 
for the present (principally with a view to the advantages 
which may be derived from their local knowledge and con- 
nexions) possess the means, as well as the inclination, of 
levying for our service a considerable body of cavalry, con- 
sisting of their exiled associates, now dispersed throughout 
the dominions of the Peishwa and of the Nizam. To em- 
ploy their whole force in the field would be extremely bur- 
thensome, and I trust we shall never be under the necessity 
of resorting to such assistance beyond the extent of the 
arrangement already concluded with Jaffier Khan and Syed 
Yacoob. 

The commission will be confidentially informed by Captain 
Malcolm of the progress which may have been made in a 
certain secret negotiation which has been opened by Meer 
Allum, in communication with Captain Malcolm since the 
conduct of Tippoo Sultaun compelled me to adopt the reso- 


1799. GENERAL HARRIS. 44,7 


lution of attacking his territories. It is impossible for me, in 
the present stage of this negotiation, to give the commission 
any precise instructions for the regulation of their proceed- 
ings with relation to this very peculiar and important case, 
and, therefore, I must leave the management of it to their dis- 
cretion, aided by that of Meer Allum. If, however, they. 
should be able to transmit to me any report on this delicate 
point before the communication between the army and this 
Presidency shall become precarious or difficult, it is my de- 
sire that they should write to me in cypher, a caution which 
they must always observe in their correspondence with me, 
from any position which may render their despatches liable 
to be intercepted. 

The enclosure No. 4, consists of a memorandum of a most 
secret and delicate nature, relating to the family which go- 
verned Mysore previously to the usurpation of Hyder Alli 
Khan. 

It is obvious that no advantageous negotiation can be 
opened with any of the surviving branches of this family 
under any other circumstances than a determination, accom- 
panied by undoubted power, to effect the total removal of the 
ruling dynasty. Such a determination in the present stage 
of our contest with Tippoo Sultaun would be premature, and 
incompatible with the principles on which my instructions to 
you of the 3rd instant were founded. My orders for the 
march of the army being grounded on the necessity of pro- 
viding for our own indispensable security and reasonable in- 
demnity, and being strictly limited to those justifiable objects. 
There is, besides, no reason to suppose that any of the per- 
sons mentioned in the accompanying memoir could be ren- 
dered useful (in any material degree) in the prosecution of 
the war. 

The commissioners must, therefore, confine their proceed- 
ings on this subject to enquiries into the state of parties in 
Mysore, with a view to the practicability of restoring that 
family with or without the consent of the principal Mussulman 
chiefs at present in authority in the country. The commis- 
sion will readily perceive that these enquiries must be con- 
ducted with the utmost caution and prudence; for if their 
object were to transpire, the discovery might check, if not 


448 - DECLARATION OF Feb. 


prevent, many advances which would otherwise be made from 
persons attached to the Mussulman Government. 

The personal safety of the surviving adherents of the an- 
cient family of the Rajahs of Mysore, and even of the Ranee 
herself, also requires peculiar discretion and secrecy in the 
conduct of this part of the business of the commission. The 
most dreadful scene of vengeance and slaughter would be the 
probable consequence of Tippoo’s receiving the slightest inti- 
mation of the contents of the accompanying memoir, which, 
therefore, after being attentively perused by the commission- 
ers, must be destroyed. 

You will direct Captain Macleod, of the intelligence de- 
partment, to communicate, from time to time, to the com- 
mission whatever intelligence he may receive of a nature 
connected with the objects of the commission, with which I 
authorize you to make him fully acquainted. 

I am, &c. 
MornineTon. 


No. CXL. 


Declaration of the Right Honourable the Governor General in Council, for 
all the forces and affairs of the British nation in the East Indies, on behalf 
of the Honourable the East India Company and the allies of the said Com- 
pany there, his Highness the Nizam and the Peishwa. 


Fort St. George, 22d Feb. 1799. 

A solemn treaty of peace and. friendship was concluded at 
Seringapatam, between the Honourable Company and the 
Nabob Asoph Jah and the Peishwa on the one part, and the 
Nabob Tippoo Sultaun on the other part; and from that day 
all commotion and hostility ceased. Since that day, the three 
allied states have invariably manifested a sacred regard for 
the obligations contracted under that treaty with the Nabob 
Tippoo Sultaun. Of this uniform disposition, abundant proofs 
have been afforded by each of the alljes. Whatever differ- 
ences have arisen with regard to the limits of the territory of 
Mysore, have been amicably adjusted without difficulty, and 
with the most exact attention to the principles of equity, and 
‘to the stipulations of treaty. Such has been the solicitude of 
athe allies for the preservation of tranquillity, that they have 


1799. THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL IN COUNCIL. 449 


viewed with forbearance, for some years past, various embas- 
‘sies and military preparations on the part of Tippoo Sultaun, 
of a tendency so evidently hostile to the interests of the allies, 
as would have justified them, not only in the most serious re- 
monstrances, but even in an appeal to arms. On the part of 
the British Government every endeavour has been employed 
to conciliate the confidence of the Sultaun, and to mitigate 
his vindictive spirit, by the most unequivocal acknowledgment 
and confirmation of his just rights, and by the removal of 
every cause of jealousy which might tend to interrupt the 
continuance of peace. These pacific sentiments have been 
most particularly manifested in the Governor General’s recent 
decision on Tippoo Sultaun’s claim to the district of Wynaad, 
and in the negotiation opened by his Lordship with regard 
to the districts of Amerah and Souleah. In every instance 
the conduct of the British Government in India towards 
Tippoo Sultaun, has been the natural result of those princi- 
ples of moderation, justice, and good faith, which the legis- 
lature of Great Britain and the Honourable the East India 
Company have firmly established as the unalterable rule of 
their intercourse with the native princes and states of India. 

The exemplary good faith and the pacific disposition of 
the allies, since the conclusion of the treaty of Seringapatam, 
has never been disputed even by Tippoo Sultaun. “Far from 
having attempted to alledge even the pretext of a complaint 
against their conduct, he has constantly acknowledged their 
justice, sincerity, and good faith; and has professed, in the 
most cordial terms, his desire to maintain and strengthen the 
foundations of harmony and concord with them. 

In the midst of these amicable professions on the part of 
Tippoo Sultaun, and at the moment when the British Govern- 
ment had issued orders for the confirmation of his claim to 
Wynaad, it was with astonishment and indignation that the 
allies discovered the engagements which he had contracted 
with the French nation, in direct violation of the treaty of 
Seringapatam, as well as of his own most solemn and recent 
protestations of friendship towards the allies. 

Under the mask of these specious professions, and of a 
pretended veneration for the obligations of treaty, Tippoo 
Sultaun despatched ambassadors to the Isle of France, who, 
in a period of profound peace in India, proposed and con- 

VOL. I. 26 


450 DECLARATION OF THE Feb. 


cluded, in his name, an offensive alliance with the French, 
for the avowed purpose of commencing a war of aggression 
against the Company, and consequently against the Peishwa 
and the Nizam, the allies of the Company. 

The ambassadors, in the name of Tippoo Sultaun, de- 
manded military succours from the French, and actually levied 
a military force in the Isle of France, with the declared view 
of prosecuting the intended war. 

When the ambassadors returned, in a French ship of war, 
from the Isle of France, Tippoo Sultaun suffered the military’ 
force, which they had levied for the avowed purpose of 
making war upon the allies, to land in his country; and finally, 
he admitted it into his army: by these personal acts ratifying 
and confirming the proceedings of his ambassadors. 

This military force, however, was not sufficiently powerful 
to enable him immediately to attempt his declared purpose of 
attacking the Company’s possessions, but in the meanwhile 
he advanced his hostile preparations conformably to his en- 
gagements with the French; and he was ready to move his 
army into the Company’s territories whenever he might obtain 
from France the effectual succours which he had. assiduously 
solicited from that nation. 

But the providence of God, and the victorious arms of the 
British nation, frustrated his vain hopes, and checked the 
presumptuous career of the French in Egypt at the moment 
when he anxiously expected their arrival on the coast of 
Malabar. 

The British Government, the Nizam, and the Peishwa, 
had not omitted the necessary precaution of assembling their 
forces for the joint protection of their respective dominions. 
The strict principles of self-defence would have justified the 
-allies at that period of time in making an immediate attack 
upon the territories of Tippoo Sultaun; but even the happy 
intelligence of the glorious success of the British fleet at the 
mouth of the Nile did not abate the anxious desire of the 
allies to maintain the relations of amity and peace with Tippoo 
Sultaun. They attempted, by a moderate representation, to 
recall him. to a sense of his obligations, and of the genuine 
principles of prudence and policy; and they employed every 
effort to open the channels of' negotiation, and to facilitate 
the means of amicable accommodation With these salutary 


1799. GOVERNOR-GENERAL IN COUNCIL. 451 


views, the Governor General, on the 8th November, 1798, in 
the name of the allies, proposed to despatch an ambassador 
to Tippoo Sultaun, for the purpose of renewing the bonds of 
friendship, and of concluding such an arrangement as might 
afford effectual security against any future interruption of the 
public tranquillity; and his Lordship repeated the same pro- 
posal on the 10th December, 1798. Tippoo Sultaun declined, 
by various evasions and subterfuges, this friendly and mode- 
rate advance on the part of the allies, and he manifested an 
evident disposition-to reject the means of pacific, accommo- 
dation, by suddenly breaking up, in the month ef December, 
the conferences which had commenced with respect ta the 
districts of Amerah and Souleah, and. by interrupting the 
intercourse between his subjects and those of the Company 
on their respective frontiers. On the 9th January, 1799, the 
Governor General being arrived at Fort St. George (notwitht 
standing these discouraging circumstances in the conduct of 
Tippoo Sultaun) renewed with increased earnestness, the 
expression of his Lordship’s anxious desire to despatch an 
ambassador to the Sultaun. 

The Governor General expressly solicited the Sultaun to 
return an answer within one day to this letter; and as it ine 
volved no proposition either injurious to the rights, dignity, or 
honour of the Sultaun, or in any degree novel or complicated 
either in form or substance, it could not require a longer con- 
sideration. The Governor General waited with the utmost 
solicitude for an answer to the reasonable and distinct pro- 
position contained in his letter of the 9th January, 1799, 
Tippoo Sultaun, however, who. must have received this letter 
before the 15th of January, remained silent, although the 
Governor General had plainly apprized that prince, that dan- 
gerous consequences would result from delay. In the mean- 
while the season for military operations had already advanced 
to so late a period, as to render a speedy decision indispensa- 
ble to the security of the allies. Under these circumstances, 
on the 3rd of February (eight days having elapsed from the 
period when an answer might have been received from Serin- 
gapatam to the Governor General’s letter of the 9th January) 
his Lordship declared to the allies, that the necessary mea- 
sures must now be adopted, without delay, for securing such 
advantages as should place the common safety of the allies 


452 - THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


beyond the reach of the insincerity of Tippoo Sultaun, and 
of the violence of the French. With this view, the Gevernor 
General, on the 3rd of February, issued orders to the British 
armies to march, and signified to the commander of his Ma- 
jesty’s squadron, that the obstinate silence of the Sultaun 
must be considered as a rejection of the proposed amicable 
negotiation. + Ff 

At length, on the 13th of February, a letter from Tippoo 
Sultaun vented the Governor General, in which the Sultaun 
signifies to his Lordship, “ that being frequently disposed to 
make excursions and hunt, he was accordingly proceeding 
upon a hunting excursion ;” adding, “ that the Governor Ge- 
neral would be pleased to despatch Major Doveton to him, 
unattended or slightly attended.” 

‘The allies will not dwell on the peculiar phrases of this 
letter; but it must be evident to all the states of India, that 
the answer of the Sultaun has been deferred to this late pe- 
riod of the season, with no other view than to preclude the 
allies, by insidious delays, from the benefit of those ,advan- 
tages which their combined military operations would enable 
them to secure. On those advantages alone (under the re- 
cent experience of Tippoo Sultaun’s violation of the treaty 
of Seringapatam, and under the peculiar circumstances of 
that prince’s offensive alliance with the French) can the allies 
now venture to rely for the faithful execution of any treaty 
of peace concluded with Tippoo Sultaun. 

The allies cannot suffer Tippoo Sultaun to profit by his 
own studied and systematic delay, nor to impede such a dis- 
position of their military and naval force, as shall appear best 
ealculated to give effect to their just views. 

Bound by the sacred obligations of public faith, professing 
the most amicable disposition, and undisturbed in the posses- 
sion of those dominions secured to him by treaty, Tippoo 
Sultaun wantonly violated the relations of amity and peace, 
and compelled the allies to arm in defence of theif rights, 
their happiness, and their honour. 

For a period of three months, he obstinately fejected every 
pacific overture, in the hourly expectation of receiving that 
succour which he has eagerly solidited for the prosecution of 
his favourite purposes of ambition and revenge. Disappoint- 
ed in his hopes of immediate vengeance and conquest, he now 

* 


1799. TIPPOO SULTAUN. 453 


resorts to subterfuge and procrastination; and, by a tardy, 
reluctant, and insidious acquiescence in a proposition which 
he had so long and repeatedly declined, he endeavours to 
frustrate the precautions of the allies, and to protract every 
effectual operation, until some change ‘of circumstances and 
of season shall revive his expectations of disturbing the 
tranquillity of India, by favouring the irruption of a French 
army. ; er 
The allies are equally prepared to repel his violence, and 
to counteract his artifices and delays. 

The allies are, therefore, resolved to place their army in 
such a position as shall afford adequate protection against 
any artifice or insincerity, and shall preclude the return of 
that danger which has so lately menaced their possessions. 
The allies, however, retaining an anxious desire to effect an 
adjustment with Tippoo Sultaun, Lieutenant General Harris, 
Commander-in-Chief of his Majesty’s and the Honourable 
Company's forces on the coast of Coromandel and Malabar, 
is authorized to receive any embassy which Tippoo Sultaun 
may despatch to the head quarters of the British army, and 
to concert a treaty on such conditions as appear to the allies 
to be indispensably necessary for the establishment of a secure 
and permanent peace. 

Dated Fort St. George, 22nd February, 1799, by order of 
the Right Honourable the Governor General in Council, 


A true Copy, N. B. Epmonstone, Jos. WEBBE.. 
Persian Translator to Govt. 


No. CXLI. 


From the Right Hon, the Governor-General to Tippoo Sultaun. 


Fort St. George, 22d Feb. 1799. 


* I had the honour, on the 13th instant, to receive your 
letter,* acknowledging your receipt of my two letters of the 
9th and 16th January, informing me of your intention to 
proceed on a hunting excursion, and desiring me to despatch 
Major Doveton unattended to you. , 


* See p. 433. t See p. 394—413. 
, « 


454 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


‘I lament most sincerely that the friendly intimation con- 
tained in my letter of the 9th January,* regarding the dangers 
‘of delay, produced no effect on your discerning mind, and 
that you deferred your reply to that letter to so late a period 
in the season. Your long silence on this important and press- 
ing occasion, compelled me to adopt the resolution of order- 
dng the British forces to advance in concert with the armies 
of the allied powers. You are not ignorant that the period 
of the season rendered the advance of the army absolutely 
necessary to the common security of the allies. This move- 
ment of the army is to be imputed entirely to your repeated 
tejection of my amicable proposal of sending an ambassador 
‘to your presence. 

Under the present circumstances, to send Major Doveton 
to you,’ could not be attended with those advantages which 
would have resulted from his mission at a proper season. 

The allies, however, retaining an anxious desire to effect 
an adjustment with you, Lieutenant General Harris, com- 
mander of the British troops, has been empowered to receive 
any embassy which you ‘shall despatch to him. Lieutenant 
General Harris will also authorize such persons as he may 
think proper, to concert, in communication with your ambas- 
sadors, a new treaty of friendship with your Highness, founded 
on such conditions as appear to the allies to be indispensably 
necessary to the establishment of a secure and permanent 
peace. 

A true Copy, N. B. Epmonsrone, 

Persian translator to Govt. 


No. CXLII. 
(Secret.) 
The Earl of Mornington to Lieut.-General Harris, Commander-in- Chief. 
Sir, Fort St. George, 22nd Feb. 1799. 


In my letter of the 3rd of February,} I apprised you, that 
I should in due time inform you of the manner in which I 
wished you to receive such overtures, as might be made to 
you by any of the inhabitants of Tippoo Sultaun’s dominions 


; * See p 394. + See p. 426. 


> 


1799. LIEUT.-GENERAL HARRIS. 455 


desirous of throwing off the authority of that Prince; and 
that I should also send you such further instructions, as 
might appear to me to be necessary for your direction previ- 
ously to your entrance into the territory of Mysore. 

With regard to the first of those objects, the enclosed in- 
structions of this date,* direct you to form a commission for 
the special purpose of assisting you in the conduct of such 
negotiations as may eventually be opened with any descrip- 
tion of Tippoo’s subjects. 

As the intercourse between your army and the Presidency 
must become liable to interruption after you shall have passed 
the frontiers of Mysore, I shall now furnish you with such in- 
structions as appear to me to be necessary for your direction, 
not only previous to your entrance into the dominions of the 
Sultaun, but during your progres towards his capital, and 
after you shall have commenced the seige of that city. ; 

The enclosure No. 2,} contains a copy of a letter received 
by me from Tippoo Sultaun, on the 13th of February; the 
original of my answer te which, is contained in a sealed 
packet made up for despatch to the Sultaun, and forming 
No. 3. No. 4, contains a copy of that answer for your in- 
formation.- No. 5,§ contains copies in English, Persian, and 
Malabar, of the declaration of the allies, with respect to the 
causes of their present measures. 

When you shall arrive within one day’s march of the point 
by which you propose to enter Mysore, you will transmit the 
original letter addressed to the Sultaun contained in the 
‘sealed packet No. 3, to Major Doveton, with directions to 
forward it to Tippoo Sultaun, 

You will not delay the march of your army one hour after 
the receipt of this despatch, and you will proceed to enter 
the territory of Mysore, and to advance towards Seringapa- 
tam with the utmost possible degree of expedition. 

@ On passing the frontiers, you will circulate among Tippoo’s 
subjects as many copies as possible of the declaration of the 
-allies ; and you will issue a proclamation in your own name 
promising protection to the persons and properties of all such 
subjects of the Sultaun as shall, on just and reasonable terms, 


* See page 442, t See page 433. ] See page 453, 
§ See page 448. 


- 


456 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


assist the army in its march by supplies of cattle, grain, 
forage, and provisions of any description; and further assur- 
ing the inhabitants of Mysore in general, that no person shall 
be molested excepting such as shall appear in arms, or shall 
impede the march of the army by the removal of those sup- 
plies (the produce of the country) which may be useful to its 
progress or subsistance. The advance of the army is not, 
however, to be in the least, retarded for the purpose of pre- 
paring and issuing these proclamations. 

In the course of your advance through Tippoo’s territories 
you will employ, and also engage Meer Allum to employ, 
every means to conciliate the subjects of the Sultaun, as well 
by the conduct of the company’s and the Nizam’s forces, as 
by publishing from time to time such assurances as shall ap- 
pear best adapted to the occasion. 

You will order Lieutenant Colonel Browne, or the officer 
in command of the Southern division of the army, to com- 
mence his operations at such time, and to direct them to such 
points of attack on the possessions of the enemy, as you 
shall judge most advisable. 

If Tippoo Sultaun, availing himself of the channel of nego- 
tiation still left open by my letter No. 3, either previously to 
your arrival at Seringapatam, or previously to your having 
taken g position for the siege of that capital, should signify to 
you a desire to send- an embassy to you, I authorize you to 
receive any such embassy; exercising your discretion with 
regard to the particular time and place of receiving it. But 
at whatever period you may judge proper to comply with the 
proposal in question, I most earnestly and particularly recom- 
mend to you to observe with the utmost care, all those measures 
of precaution and vigilance, which the artful and treacherous 
character of the enemy renders peculiarly necessary on such 
an occasion. It must never be. forgotten, that he may possi- 
bly despatch ambassadors to you with the sole view of ob- 
taining intelligence of your designs, or of tampering with 
some of the Sirdars of the allies. Under this constant im- 
pression, you will be particularly careful not to halt for an 
hour nor to relax any operation, necessary with a view to the 
siege, on account of any overtures which you may receive 
from the Sultaun in any stage of your progress towards his 
capital. 


1799. LIEUT.-GENERAL HARRIS. 457 


You will communicate this letter to the commissioners 
named in the instruction, and you will consult with them on 
all points relating to any negotiation with Tippoo Sultaun. 

You may possibly think it unadvisable to disclose to 
Tippoo Sultaun, the nature.and full extent of the demands 
of the allies, before you shall have effected a junction with 
the army of Bombay, or before you shall have taken your 
position for the siege of Seringapatam, and shall have been _ 
satisfied that all your preparations for that purpose are com- 
plete. But after having attained such a position you will 
without delay (and before you open your batteries, or throw 
shells into the town) communicate to Tippoo Sultaun, either 
through the channel of any embassy which you may have ad- 
mitted from him, or by a flag of truce, the demands of the 
allies, comprized in the draft of preliminary articles making 
the inclosure marked A.* The blanks of those preliminary 
articles you will previously fill up, according to your inform- 
ation and judgement, with the assistance of the commissioners 
appointed to aid you in all matters relating to negotiation, 
either with the Sultaun, or with any of his subjects. 

You will require the signature of the articles under Tippoo’s 
seal, and the delivery of the hostages specified in the 8th 
article, within 24 hours from the communication of the ar- 
ticles to the Sultaun, either by his embassadors, or by the 
flag of truce. You will at the same time signify to Tippoo 
Sultaun, that in the event of your being compelled to open 
your batteries against his capital, you will not afterwards de- 
sist for an instant from your operations, on any conditions 
more favorable to him than those contained in the inclosure 
marked B; and accordingly after having opened your bat- 
teries against the place, you will not admit any embassadors 
from Tippoo, unless you shall know them to be charged with 
his formal assent to the articles contained in the inclosure B, 
and to bring with them to your camp, both the money re- 
quired under the draft of preliminary articles B, and the 
hostages required by the 8th article of both drafts of prelimi- 
nary articles A and B. 

Should Tippoo Sultaun agree, either before or after the 
commencement of your attack, to the conditions respectively 


* See p. 460. 


458 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


to be proposed in either case; and should he deliver up the 
required hostages, you will immediately make the necessary 
dispositions with General Stuart, for taking possession of the 
ceded territory on the coast of Malabar; you will also direct 
the Commissioners :appointed to assist you in all matters of 
negotiation, to arrange and conclude with all practicable 
despatch, in concert with Meer Allum, with any Minister 
who shall have been empowered by the Peishwa for that pur- 
pose, and with the embassadors of Tippoo Sultaun, a defini- 
tive treaty of peace and friendship on the basis, and agree- 
ably to the conditions, of the preliminary articles which shall 
have been previously signed by the Sultaun. 

The only difficulty which can occur in framing the defini- 
tive treaty, will consist in the adjustment and specification of 
the territories to be ceded to the allies respectively, accord- 
ing to the preliminaries, which may have been settled. It is 
impossible for me to give you any detailed instructions, with 
regard to the particular countries to be ceded to the Nizam 
and to the Peishwa, whose respective ministers must make 
their own selection under your control. The territories to be 
ceded to the Company under the draft of preliminaries 
marked A., are enumerated in that draft. The additional 
sessions which would be demanded for the Company under 
the draft of preliminaries marked B., must be determined 
with a view to the improvement of our southern frontier, ac- 
cording to the best opinions and information which you shall 
be able to obtain from the Commissioners, or from other 
authorities in your army. » 

If no Mahratta force shall have joined your army, previ- 
ously to the conclusion of the preliminary articles, you will 
still insist on the payment of the whole of the money stipu- 
lated to be paid by the 6th article, into the hands of the 
allied powers on the spot, who will be answerable, in that 
case, for the due delivery to the Peishwa of his third share 
of the sum paid into your hands. If at the conclusion of the 
definitive treaty, no Mahratta vakeels should be present, you 
are to engage, in concert with Meer Allum, to procure the 
Peishwa’s assent to the treaty, before the expiration of three 
months; securing and reserving to the Peishwa, the same full 
and ample power of selecting the districts to be ceded to him 
conformably to the 4th article of the proposed preliminary 


1799. LIEUT.-GENERAL HARRIS. 459 


treaty, as he could have exercised if he had been represented 
during the negotiations by a regularly accredited Minister. 

Although you should be in possession of the required 
hostages, you will not quit your position in the vicinity of 
Seringapatam, until the army of Bombay shall have reached 
such a point on its return to the Malabar coast, as may place 
it beyond the effects of any treachery, which might be at- 
tempted against it by Tippoo Sultaun. With a view to this 
and other advantages, you will reserve to yourself the liberty 
of remaining in the vicinity of Seringapatam, until the allies 
shall have been actually put in possession of any three of the 
fortresses to be ceded to them, which they may respectively 
select. 

I have now furnished you with instructions for your con- 
duct in the two cases of a negotiation, being opened with 
Tippoo Sultan, either previously, or subsequently to the at- 
tack of Seringapatam. 

The case of your being compelled to prosecute the siege 
of Seringapatam to the last extremity, and of your obtaining 
possession of that city would open so extensive and compli- 
cated a change in the political state of India, as to require 
the most comprehensive system of new arrangements. At 
present it appears to me to be sufficient to recommend that 
in this event, you should adopt the necessary measures for 
effectually securing your position in the city; for supporting 
those inhabitants of Mysore, who may have placed themselves 
under the protection of the allies; and for opening a safe and 
easy communication between your army and both coasts. 
In such a conjuncture, particular operations must depend on 
the nature of the political and military situation and strength 
of the enemy, subsequently to the reduction of his capital; 
and on a variety of other ‘circumstances which it is impossi- 
ble to foresee. I rely on your discretion for acting under 
such circumstances in the manner best calculated to maintain 
your advantages, until I shall be enabled to transmit specific 
instructions for your direction. 

Whether in the last case supposed, the person of Tippoo 
Sultaun should fall into your hands or not, you will neither 
open nor conclude any negotiation involving the final settle- 
ment of the country, either with that prince or with any other 
persons, until you shall have received special authority from 

me for that purpose. 


460 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb, 


I have directed % copy to be sent to you of the diary of 
the proceedings of the deputies, who conducted the negotia- 
tions at Seringapatam in 1792, which I desire -you will be 
pleased. to deliver in charge to the Commission appointed in 
my separate instructions of this date. This diary may even- 
tually afford great assistance to the Commissioners in the 
management of any negotiations which they may be required 
to conduct with Tippoo Sultaun. 

I am, &c. 
MornineTon. 


(The following are the Enclosures referred to in the preceding letter.} 


Draft of preliminary Articles. —A. 


Preliminary Articles for the re-establishment of the antient friendship, 
and for the adjustment of existing differences, between the Honourable 
English Company, the Nawab Asoph Jah, Row Pundit Purdhaun, and 
Tippoo Sultaun, settled by Lieut,-General George Harris, &c., in virtue 
of powers delegated to him by the Right Honourable the Earl of Morn- 
ington, K. P., Governer General ; by Meer Allum, Behadur, on the part 
of the Nawab Asoph Jah; by » on the part of the 
Peishwa; and by , on the part of Tippoo Sultaun. 

Article 1st. Tippoo Sultaun to receive and honourably entertain an 
ambassador from each of the allies as often and for as long a period of 
time as any of the said allies shall require; the allies, on their part, seve- 
rally consenting to receive and entertain in the same manner, and on the 
same ternis, an ambassador from Tippoo Sultaun. - 

Article 2nd. Tippoo Sultaun to dismiss without delay from his service, 
and to remove from his dominions, not only all Frenchmen or natives of 
the Islands of France and Bourbon, or of any other countries now sub- 
ject to France ; but also all Europeans, natives, or subjects of countries 
now at war with Great Britain. 

Article 3rd. Tippoo Sultaun to renounce all connection with the French 
nation ; and to engage that none of the subjects of that nation shall ever 
hereafter be entertained in his service, . or be allowed to reside within his 
dominions. , ; ; 

Article 4th. Tippoo Sultaun to cede to the Company in perpetuity the 
whole of the sea-coast of Malabar below the Ghauts, in his possession at 
the commencement of the present war: that is to say, all the territory 
below the Ghauts, situated between the river Cavai (which forms the 
present boundary of the Company to the northward) and the Portuguese 
possessions on that coast.* Tippoo is to cede in like manner to the 


* And including the district of Belguy on the coast of Malabar, unless 
Tippoo can clearly prove that this district is above the Ghauts. 


1799. LIEUT.-GENERAL HARRIS. 461 


Company the district (including the fortress of Sacragerry) which is si- 
tuated between Paulgacherry and Pilney; and which comprehends Ani- 
mallie and other Talooks.* He is likewise to cede in perpetuity to their 
Highnesses, the Nizam and the Peishwa respectively,+ a territory adjacent 
to their present respective boundaries, and agreeably to their selection, 
equal in net revenue to the districts to be ceded to the Company; and it 
is hereby determined and agreed, with a view to the prevention of delays, 
that the several districts to be ceded by Tippoo Sultaun shall be taken at 
the valuation at which they were respectively rated in the accounts deli- 
vered in by his vakeels during the negotiation of the treaty of Seringapa- 
tam in 1792. 

Article 5th. Tippoo Sultaun to relinquish for ever all claim to the 
lately disputed districts of Amera and Souleah, and Ersawaraseemy, to 
any part of the territory possessed by the Rajah of Coorga, at the com- 
mencement of the war, to the whole of the Tambacherry Pass, and gene- 
rally to all places on the present borders of any of the allies which may 
at this time be in dispute. 

Article 6th. One crore and a half of sicca rupees shall be paid by 
Tippoo Sultaun to the allies, agreeably to the following particulars :— 

lst. Seventy-five lacs shall be paid immediately in pagodas, or gold 
mohrs, or rupees of full weight and standard; or in gold or silver bul- 
lion. 

2nd. The remaining seventy-five lacs shall be paid within six months 
from the date of the present treaty. 

Article 7th. All prisoners in the hands of the several powers to be 
fairly and unequivocally released. 

Article 8th. Until the due performance of the articles of the present 
treaty, two of the three eldest sons of Tippoo Sultaun shall be delivered 
as hostages into the hands of Lieut.-General Harris; and as a further 
security for Tippoo’s faithful execution of the same, the fortress or for- 
tresses of } shall also be delivered up to the Company. On 
the arrival of the said sons of Tippoo Sultaun in camp, and on the pay- 


* Memorandum.—The object of this cession being to open a free and 
short communication between Paulgacherry and Dindigul, the Com- 
mander-in-Chief is referred to the proper officers for the necessary in- 
formation with regard to the particular Talooks which are to be demanded 
for this purpose; and, accordingly, this article will admit of variation, 
according to the judgment of the Commander-in-Chief and of the Com- 
inissioners. 

+ That is to say, to each of the other allies a territory equal to that 
ceded to the Company, so that the cession to the Company shall consti- 
tute one-third part of the total cession to the three allied powers. 

t This blank to be filled up by the Commander-in-Chief ; but it is to 
be observed, that, it is not to be filled by the word (Seringapatam.) 

N.B. The fortress or fortresses here to be specified, are to be exclu- 
sive of those within the districts to be ceded (see the conclusion of this 
article.) Gopaul Droog was in contemplation in this passage. 


462 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


ment of the first moiety agreed to be paid by the 6th article, a cessation 
of hostilities shall take place. But the army of the allies shall not quit 
their position before Seringapatam until the fortress (or fortresses) of 

before mentioned, shall be actually in the possession of the 
Company’s troops. And whereas the territory to be ceded to the allies 
will contain several forts, it is hereby further agreed that of the said forts 
the allies shall be at liberty to require (if they judge proper) to be put in 
actual possession of any three of them which they may think fit to select, 
before Tippoo Sultaun shall be entitled to require the departure of the 
allied armies from the vicinity of Seringapatam. 

Article 9th. When an agreement, containing the articles above written, 
shall] arrive, bearing the seal and signature of Tippoo Sultaun, counter- 
agreements shall be sent to Tippoo Sultaun from the allies: and after the 
cessation of hostilities, a definitive treaty of perpetual friendship shall be 
settled and entered into by the several powers. 


Memorandum, 


In the event of no Mahratta force having joined the army at the time 
when preliminary articles shall be concluded, the Commander-in-Chief, 
or Commissioners appointed to treat with Tippoo Sultaun shall, notwith- 
standing, insist upon his paying the whole of the money stipulated to be 
paid by the 6th article, into the hands of the allied powers on the spot, 
who will be answerable for the due delivery to the Peishwa of his share, 
namely, one-third of the whole stipulated sum. If on concluding the 
definitive treaty, no Mahratta vakeels should be present, the other allies 
are to engage to procure the Peishwa’s assent to the treaty in the course 
of three months. Securing and reserving to the Peishwa the same full 
and ample power of selecting the districts to be ceded conformably to the 
4th article of the preliminary treaty, as he would have exercised if he had 
authorized a minister on the spot to sign and execute for him. 

It is probable that the territory to be ceded to the Nizam an@ Peishwa, - 
under the 4th article of the preceding treaty, would consist of Gurram- 
conda, Gooty, Anagoondy, Roydroog, and Harponelly (to be divided be- 
tween them as they may agree ;) the forts of which it would be proper, in 
this case, to require the immediate surrender as additional securities be- 
fore the army should quit the vicinity of Seringapatam, would, perhaps, 
be Gooty to the Nizam, Roydroog to the Peishwa, and Shuddasoo Ghur 
(on the Malabar coast) to the Company. But as it is proposed that a 
fortress of Tippoo’s, over and above those to be ceded (perhaps Gopaul- 
droog) shall be delivered into the temporary possession of the Company 
as an additional security for his faithful performance of the treaty, per- 
haps, instead of Shudashoo Ghur, the immediate delivery of Gurrum- 
conda to the Nizam, in addition to Gooty and Roydroog, would operate 
more effectually as a restraint upon the Sultaun, who would not venture 
to provoke a renewal of hostilities, after the allies were in possession of 
the four strong holds which have been specified. 


1799. LIEUT.-GENERAL HARRIS. 463 


Draft B. 


Article 1, 2, and 3, the same as in draft A. 

Article 4.—One half of the dominions of which Tippoo Sultaun was in 
possession before the war, to be ceded to the allies from the countries ad- 
jacent to their present respective boundaries, and agreeably to their se- 
lection. And it is hereby agreed and determined with a view to the pre- 
vention of delays, that the several districts to be ceded by Tippoo Sultaun, 
shall be taken at the valuation at which they were respectively rated in 
the accounts delivered in by his Vakeels, during the negotiation of the 
treaty of Seringapatam in 1792. 

Article 5, as in draft A. 

Article 6, two crores of sicca rupees shall be paid by Tippoo Sultaun 
to the allies, agreeably to the following particulars : 

1st. One crore shall be paid immediately in pagodas, or gold mohrs, or 
rupees of full weight and standard ; or in gold or silver bullion. 

2nd. The remaining crore shall be paid within six months from the 
date of the present treaty. 

Article 7, 8, and 9, as in draft A. 


Memorandum with a view to the case of Tippoo’s being compelled to cede 
half of his present dominions to the allies, February 26th, 1799. 


Tippoo stated his revenues to amount in 1792, to seventy lacs of kan- 
terai pagodas, or two crores and ten lacs of rupees. The allies, liowever, 
having reason to believe this to be an under statement, insisted on adding 
nine lacs of pagodas to the amount, and, consequently, on dividing 79 
lacs, instead of 70 lacs of pagodas. Hence the amount to be ceded, 
agreeably to the preliminary treaty, was 394 lacs. Accordingly, the Com- 
pany received districts to the amount, according to Tippoo’s own valuation 
of them, of 13,16,765 5% pagodas ; the Nizam 13,16,666 64 pagodas; and 
the Peishwa 13,16,666 74 pagodas; making together 39,50,047 pagodas. 

Consequently Tippoo possesses at present countries yielding, according 
to his own account, corrected by the allies, 394 lacs of pagodas. 

If, therefore, he should be again compelled to cede half of his domi- 
nions to the allies, the latter would each be entitled to districts yielding 
6,58,333% pagodas, making together 19,75,000 pagodas. 

In this case, the Company’s division might be composed as follows : 

Canara, or the Malabar territory below the Ghauts, including Bilguy, 
say 3,20,000; Coimbatoor 80,000; Dennicar Kotah 35,000; Darapoor and 
Chuckergeery 64,000; Sattimungul 30,000; Chickawir 27,000; Chun- 
cherry 27,000; Indore 8,000; Erroad 20,000; Cangum 20,000; Caroor 
45,000 ; total 6,76,000. 

It is to be observed, that Canara is rated above at much more than it 
would appear to be rated at in Tippoo’s own statement of 1792, which is 
to be the basis of any new partition. However, as the districts of Bed- 
nore which compose Canara, cannot at present be accurately distinguish- 
ed (two or three of the number being doubtful) the revenue has, for the 


464 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


greater caution, been assumed at 3,20,000 pagodas, although the most 
that can be made out from Tippoo’s list is three laes. 

Possibly, some of the southern districts below the Ghauts may be 
omitted in the preceding enumeration. On the whole, however, it is suf- 
ficiently clear from this abstract, that the cession to the Company of all 
the countries below the Ghauts on both coasts, would little exceed or 
fall short of their share of half the Sultaun’s remaining possessions, If 
on strict examination it were found to exceed, an equivalent might be 
offered, or some adjustments of the difference be made with the allies. 

’ The share of the Nizam might consist of Anagoondy 60,101 ; Kurnool 
tribute 66,666 63; Gooty (as per memorandum at the end of this paper) | 
2,08,200 34; Gurrumconda 2,74,673 44; Jungamcottah 13,000 ¢ Punga- 
noor 15,000; total 6,37,641 4; or about 21,000 pagodas short of the 
Nizam’s share. The deficiency might be made up from some of the Cotar 

districts, or within a small sum, from the overplus of the cessions to the 

Company according to the preceding article. 

The share of the Peishwa might be composed of Bednore, above the 
Ghauts, or all the parts of Bednore not ceded to the Company, say 3,64,466; 
Harponelly 1,10,030 83; Roydroog 1,15,019 33; total 5,89,516 23; or 
about 69,000 pagodas short, which might be made up from the districts 
of Chittledroog. 

It is probable, however, that Bednore above the Ghauts may prove, on 
a stricter examination of Tippoo’s statement of 1792, to be rateable at 
more than 3,64,666 pagodas. For the whole 31 talooks of Bednore stand 
in his account at 6,84,466 pagodas ; and, therefore, in proportion as the 
talooks below the Ghauts may fall short in valuation of the 3,20,000 
pagodas assumed, those above the Ghauts (proposed to be ceded to the 
Peishwa) will exceed the sum of 3,64,466 pagodas. 

“ There would remain to Tippoo, under the foregoing arrangement, the 
greatest part (if not the whole) of Chittel Droog, Sara, Bangalore, and 
other talooks of Seringapatam (enumerated in his list of antient posses- 
sions) which the allies are entitled to consider as yielding a revenue of 
19,75,000 pagodas. If they should not, in fact, be so valuable, (which, 

however, there is no reason to suppose) the Sultaun would only suffer by 
his own deceit. At all events, the allies will be entitled, in justice, (under 
the treaty now in contemplation) to select their moiety firs¢ ; leaving the 
remaining half to the Sultaun: and accordingly, this is a principle wn 
ought to be carefully adhered to in the case supposed. 


A more moderate arrangement than the preceding one would be, to 
take the Sultaun’s present dominions at 35 lacs of pagodas (instead of 
39% lacs) or half of what he himself stated the revenue to be in 1792, and 
to divide accordingly. 

In this case the allies would have to divide among them only 17,50,000 
pagodas, instead of 19,75,000 pagodas, and at this rate each would be 
entitled to a country of no more than 5,83,333% pagodas, instead of (as 
above) 6,58,333% pagodas. 

Upon this principle, it is evident that we should be under the necessity 


» 


1799. LIEUT.-GENERAL HARRIS. * 465 


of leaving Tippoo in possession of a great part of the southern countries 
below the Ghauts. Our share might, nevertheless, be as follows : 

Canara (as before), 3,20,000 ; Coimbatoor, 80,000; Darapoor and Chue- 
hergeery, 64,000; Erroad, 20,000; Cangum, 20,000; Carroor, 45,0005, 
Dennicar Kotah, 35,000. Total, 5,84,000, : 

Or, perhaps, in preference to some of these, 

Vencatagheerycotah and Punganore above the Ghauts. 

The Nizam’s share might, in the case now supposed, consist of 

Gooty (as before), 2,08,200 3%; Gurrumconda, 2,74,673 4%; Anagoon- 
dy, 60,101; Kurnool tribute, 66,666 63. ‘Total, 6,09,641 4. 

The excess, or 26,308 pagodas, might be made up to Tippoo from 
Gurrumconda or Gooty, according to the pleasure of the Nizam or of 
his Minister. . 

The Peishwa’s share, on this principle, might be, 

Bednore (as before), 3,64,466; Harponelly, 1,10,030 83; Roydroog, 
1,15,019 32. Total, 5,89,516 2; being an excess only of 6,200 pagodas, 
to be deducted from some of the proposed cessions. 

The foregoing divisions are suggested only as outlines: to be filled up 
and improved, upon stricter enquiry and better information. : 


Gooty consisted of nineteen talooks, yielding 2,58,353 4%. Deduct 
ceded in 1792 to the Nizam, four talooks, 51,782 8}; te the Peishwa, 
one talook, 10,000; total, 61,782 83. 1,96,570 64. Add those parts 
of Koorgoor and Dummoor which remained with Tippoo at the peace, 
11,629 74. Remains to be ceded, 2,08,200 33. 


No, CXLIII. 


The Earl of Mornington to Lieut.-General Harris. 
Sir, * _ Fort St George, 23rd Feb. 1799. 


If contrary to present appearances and to every reasona- 
ble expectation, any untoward event should occur, of a nature 
to, render the reduction of Seringapatam within this season 
evidently impracticable, I authorize you to recede from the 
demands contained in the draft A., (inclosed in my letter of 
the 22nd instant,) in proportion to the improbability of your 
being able to accomplish the reduction of that place. But 
whatever may be your own sense of difficulties, it will be of 
the utmost importance that you should not disclose it, and 
that you should still endeavour to excite the apprehensions 
of Tippoo for the safety of his capital. On those apprehen- 
sions alone, can you depend for obtaining any concessions 
whatever from him. 

VoL, I. 2H 


466 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


Although I have judged it necessary to authorize you to 
recede, under certain circumstances, from the demands spe- 
cified in the draft A. before referred to, you will rather con- 
clude no treaty with Tippoo Sultaun, than one which shall 
not put the Company in possession of the whole of the coast 
of Malabar; and secure, besides, some degree of indemnity 
for the expenses of the war. In framing any treaty under 
these unfavourable circumstances, you will always be careful 
to understand that every advantage, either of territory or of 
‘money which may be stipulated, is to be equally divided 
among the allies in such a manner, as they shall hereafter 
adjust. 

In the event of your neither being able to reduce Seringa- 
patam this season, nor to obtain the diminished advantages 
herein stated, you will dismiss the Bombay army with such 
reinforeement as you may have the means of sparing, and 
after having ascertained its safe arrival at the head of the 
Poodicherrum Ghaut, you will keep the field in the enemy's 
country with the remainder of your force, in such manner as 
shall appear most advisable; as well with a view to secure 
‘your own subsistance, as to restrain Tippoo from any under- 
taking against the Carnatic, until a favourable change of cir- 
cumstances shall enable you to resume the siege of that capi- 
tal with better hopes of success. 


Iam, &c. 
Mornineron. 
No. CXLIV. 
The Earl of Mornington to the Peishwa. * 


Fort St. George, 24th Feb. 1799. 

1 have regularly ‘communicated to your Highness the pro- 
gress of my correspondence with Tippoo Sultaun, respecting 
his infraction of the treaty of Seringapatam; and I have had 
‘the satisfaction to find your Highness concurring in all the 
ameasures which I have. deemed it necessary to adopt, for the 
common security of the Company and their allies. It isa 
further satisfaction to me to reflect, that no endeavours have 
been omiited to recall the Sultaun to a sense of the obli- 


1799. THE PEISHWA. 467 


gations of treaty, and to effect an amicable accommodation of 
the differences, which his ambition and insatiable revenge 
have produced between him and the allies. 

It is a subject of extreme regret, that these conciliatory 
and friendly measures have failed to produce a correspondent 
effect on his mind, and have rendered it absolutely necessary, 
upon principles of self defence, to- resort to arms. After the 
Sultaun’s repeated rejection of the propositiqn to send an 
Ambassador to his Court, notwithstanding the warnings he 
received, his tardy and reluctant acquiescence, (intimated to 
me in a letter received on the 13th instant, of which a copy 
will be communicated to your Highness), so far from indicat- 
ing a spirit of conciliation, can only be considered as an insi- 
dious attempt to protrac? the operations in the field, in the 
hope of prosecuting his hostile designs against the allies with 
a better prospect of success. I have, therefore, signified to 
the Sultaun, in my reply, of which a copy will also be sub- 
mitted to your Highness by the Resident, that his compliance 
with the proposal, at this protracted period, cannot produce 
any change in the determination of the allies to put their re- 
spective troops in motion. Deeming it advisable that the 
grounds of this determination should be publicly made 
known, I have drawn up a formal declaration on the part of 
the Honorable Company and their allies, setting forth the 
conduct of Tippoo Sultaun, and the nature of the various 
measures which have been adopted by the allies to effect the 
accommodation they have so earnestly and so unremittingly 
sought. I have forwarded a copy of the declaration to the 
Resident for your Highness’s perusal; I am fully convinced 
that your Highness, sensible of the absolute necessity of the 
resolution therein expressed, will zealously exert the full ex- 
tent of your present means to cooperate with the Company 
and his Highness the Nizam, in the prosecution of the war 
with the common enemy. 

I am persuaded that your Highness will be perfectly satis- 
fied, that no overtures towards accommodation can now be 
received from Tippoo ‘Sultaun with any: degree of consist- 
ency; or any beneficial negociation ‘be opened with him ex- 
cepting at the head of the armies, which are actually enter- 
ing his country. 

F or this reason, your Highness will no doubt perceive that 


468 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


no advantage can possibly arise from the presence of any 
Vakeels from Tippoo Sultaun at your Court; on the con- 
trary, it must be evident to you that your entertaining any 
Vakeels from that Prince, under the present circumstances, 
must prove highly prejudicial to the allied interests, by in- 
spiring Tippoo Sultaun with the hope of dividing the allies, 
and by disseminating general doubts of the sincerity of your 
Highness’s attachment to the common cause. 

I, therefore, earnestly entreat your Highness immediately 
to dismiss the Vakeels of Tippoo Sultaun now at your Court; 
and IJ, with the same earnestness, exhort your Highness not 
to receive any other mission from that Prince during the war. 
If he should express any desire to open a negociation, I re- 
quest your Highness to refer hin®to the representatives of 
the allies, accompanying their armies in the field. Any ne- 
gociation carried on at a distance from the army would prove 
fruitless and indecisive. * 

If (which God avert and my friendly confidence will not 
anticipate) your Highness should neglect my present earnest 
instances, and should either delay the dismission of the 
Vakeels of Tippoo Sultaun now at Poonah, or hereafter re- 
ceive others from that Prince during the war, I think it the 
duty of a friend and an ally to apprize your Highness, that 
I shall be under the necessity of considering such conduct to 
be a departure from the true spirit of the defensive engage- 
ments subsisting between your Highness, his Highness the 
Nizam, and the Honorable Company. And I know not the 
extent of the evils which may follow so unexpected a relaxa- 
tion of the bonds of friendship and alliance. 

On the other hand, it is a pleasure to me to believe, that 
your Highness will discharge the duty of a faithful friend and 
cordial ally by instantly dismissing the vakeels; by refusing, 
during hostilities, to receive any others; and by zealously 
exerting the full extent of your present means to cooperate 
with the Company and his Highness the Nizam, in the pro- 
secution of the war with the commonenemy. Under this ex- 
pectation, and in a firm confidence that you will remember 
the ancient connection between the Company and your family, 
as well as the proof which J have recently afforded of my 
sincere desire to improve the relations of friendship with you, 
I assure your Highness that no negociations shall take place, 


1799. LIEUT.-GENERAL STUART. 469 


or any agreement be concluded with the enemy in which your 
interests shall not be, in all respects, placed on the same 
grounds with those of the Company and of the Nizam. In 
the mean time, I shall be very happy to hear and to consider 
any particular views which your Highness may entertain in 
the event of a negociation with the enemy, whether conveyed 
to me in writing from yourself, or through the channel of 
Colonel Palmer. 
Lam, &c., 
MorninoTon. 


No. CXLV. 
The Earl of Mornington to Lieutenant General Stuart. 
(Private.) 
e 


Sir, Fort St. George, 24th Feb. 1799. 


I learnt, with great anxiety and uneasiness, the state of 
your health as well on private as on public grounds; and it 
was a considerable satisfaction to me to hear that you had 
arrived on the coast of Malabar so much better, as to be able 
to undertake the fatigues of the approaching campaign. 

It is unnecessary for me to assure you of my entire confi- 
dence in your conduct of that part of the present important 
enterprize committed to your charge. You are already ap- 
prized of my sentiments with regard to your merits; I have 
received great pleasure from the accounts of General Hart- 
ley’s preparations for your reception, and of the state in 
which he has delivered over the command to you. An union 
of the talents and zeal of all departments of the service in 
India will enable me to avail myself of the advantages of the 
season, and to render the Sultaun a contemptible ally to the 
common enemy, long before either party can hope to avail 
itself of the alliance lately formed against the British power. 

There is one point, however, which, although highly im- 
probable, I wish to suggest to your early consideration. If 
by any accident the French should land a force on the coast 
of Malabar during the siege of Seringapatam, what would be 
the best arrangements for checking their progress? This 
subject deserves serious consideration, and you should com- 


470 LIEUT.-GENERAE HARRIS, TO Feb. 


niunicate your opinions on it both to the Admiral and to Ge- 
neral Harris, so that you may not be taken by surprize. 

Another point requires timely notice. If the whole of the 
eoast of Malabar should come into our péssession under a 
hew treaty with the Sultaun, what would be the best distri- 
bution of force, with a view to the disappointment of any 
attempt on the part of the French to assist the Sultaun or to 
dispossess us. 

A third question will be: Peace being concluded with 
Tippoo; arid the coast of Malabar in our possession, can we 
afford a force to garrison Goa, and will the Portuguese ac- 
cept a garrison from us? Both of these points, as well as 
the first, should be considered with General Harris. 

I also wish, before you enter Mysore, that you would en- 
deavour to coricert with the Admiral any practicable means 
of employing his powerful squadron on the coast in concert 
with our remaining forces,gr with any disaffected subjects of 
the Sultaun below the Ghauts. 

Recommending these suggestions to your attention, and 
sincerely wishing that your zeal for the public service, and 
your ability to promote it, may not in any degree be counter- 
acted by the state of your health, I have the honour to be, 
with great esteem and respect, Sir, your faithful servant, 

Mornineron. 


No. CXLVI. 
Lieutenant General Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 
Caukengesia, 7 miles W. of Tripatore, 25th Feb. 1799. 


My pear Lorp, 


Your Lordship’s final instructions are received, and their 
very satisfactory contents perfectly understood. 

I shall not attempt an elaborate letter of thanks for them, 
or for all the noble and liberal confidence and encouragement 
they contain; but I trust to that Providence on whom I de- 
pend, that your Lordship shall be paid by a thorough con- 
viction that every thing to the best of my abilities shall be 
tried to ensure that success which your Lordship’s exertions 
give so fair a prospect of; and allow me here to relieve your 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 471 


Lordship’s mind from the fear that I shall permit myself to 
become a despondie* in the business, by the assurance—that 
never in my life was I known to have the smallest tendency or 
turn that way—on the contrary, in some severe trials I have 
been most cheerful in the support of others, and thank God. 
have always found my spirits to rise in the hour of danger. 
It is true I am anxious to examine the worst side of things, 
in order to provide a substitute if possible, but when preven- 
tion is no longer in my power, I trust you will hear that I 
make the best of every thing, and meet with cheerfulness the 
accidents which must happen in our peregrinations. At pre- 
sent we are in a great way of supplies, and with Read and 
Macleod’s exertions, I have great hopes we shall escape simi- 
lar distresses to those we experienced last war. 

You may depend there is no man in the army wishes the 
business over more than myself, but no selfishness, or, I trust, 
persuasion shall induce. me to pysh the cattle beyond their 
powers, for that would be risking every thing. On them we 
must depend for getting our noble battering train along, and 
we will soon make up any time supposed lost in this way 
when once we begin the siege. 

Your Lordship’s last communications have been particu- 
larly grateful to me, and as you have taken care to secure me 
by every tie dear to man—by gratitude; by my own honour 
and conscience being pledged; and even by the Eastern po- 
licy of having} my wife and children in your hands, I think 
you will not be deceived; that you may not is my earnest 
prayer! and that your Lordship will believe me, 


. My dear Lord, with great esteem, 
Your devoted and faithful Servant, 
Gerorce Harris. 


* A “ despondie” is an Hindostanee word, which appears in the Re- 
venue transactions. Lord M. had applied it in a ludicrous sense to those 
who “‘ desponded” of success in the war. 

+ Mrs. Harris and the General’s children weré eo left at Madras, under 
the Governor General’s care. : 


472 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO Feb. 


No. CXLVIIL. 
The Earl of Mornington to Lieutenant General Harris. 
(Secret.) 


Sir, . Fort St. George, 25th Feb. 1799. 


The intelligence lately received from Seringapatam renders 
it probable that Tippoo Sultaun will take the field immedi- 
ately at the head of the main body of his army. 

He may, therefore, attempt either to obstruct your progress 
towards Seringapatam by force, or to negotiate with you; in- 
terposing his army between yours and that city, and endeay- 
ouring to protract the negotiation with the same views which 
he has already. manifested, of gaining time, until the sup- 
posed season for the siege shall have elapsed. 

Although the general principles of my instructions of the 
22d instant would furnish a sufliciently distinct rule for your 
conduct in any of these cases, I think it may be satisfactory 
to you to receive a more particular explanation of my senti- 
ments. 

If the Sultaun should attempt to oppose your progress by 
force, no instruction can be necessary to induce you to re- 
pell it. . 

No attempt which, at any time, or from any position, he 
may make towards negotiation, must be suffered to retard 
your progress towards Seringapatam; and if his army should 
occupy any position which shall appear suspicious, or embar- 
rassing to your line of march, you will attack him if you 
should think it advisable; having first dismissed his vakeels, - 
if they should be near your camp. 

You are invested with a discretional power of deciding the 
time when it may be expedient to admit any vakeel from the 
Sultaun. In exercising that discretion, the primary consi- 
derations must be the security of your army, and the success 
of the expedition. If either of these considerations should 
at any time render it necessary to decline any overture from 
the Sultaun, you will take care to apprize him that, at a 
proper season, you will be ready to listen to his proposals. 

At whatever period of your march you may think fit to ad- 
mit an embassy from Tippoo Sultaun, you will understand it 


1799, THE EARL OF MACARTNEY. 473 


+o be my intention, applicable to every possible case, that no 
treaty, either preliminary or definitive, should be concluded 
with him, until your army shall have effected a junction with 
that of Bombay, and shall be in a situation to commence the 
siege of his capital with a reasonable prospect of success. 

If Tippoo Sultaun’s army should meet yours in the field, 
and the result shall be, as (under providence) I trust it will, 
a signal victory to the British arms; you will not consent to 
negotiate; but you will continue to advance towards Serin- 
gapatam. The result of such an action might possibly be the 
immediate reduction of that city. In this case you will pro- 
ceed according to my former instructions, applicable to the 
case of a successful siege. But if the fall of the city should 
not be the immediate consequence of the supposed victory in 
the field, you will propose to Tippoo Sultaun, at whatever 
period of time you may deem most expedient, the preliminary 
articles marked B, from which you will not depart. 

If the person of the Sultaun should fall into your hands 
after any.action with his army, you will not on that account 
-delay your march to his capital. 

You will observe, from the whole tenor of my instructions, 
that it is my decided opinion, that no treaty can be safely 
concluded with Tippoo Sultaun until your army shall either 
be in actual possession of his capital, or shall command the 
effectual means of securing its reduction. 

I take this opportunity of suggesting to you the indispen- 
-sable precaution of never admitting any vakeels from Tippoo 
Sultaun within the precincts of your camp. If any confer- 
ences shall become necessary, they must always be holden at 
such a distance from your lines as to preclude the possibility 
of any effect of the treachery of the enemy. 

Iam, &c. 
Mornineron. 


No. CXLVIII. 


Lhe Earl of Mornington to the Earl of Macartney, Governor of the Cape of 
Good Hope. 


My Lorp, Fort St. George, 26th Feb. 1799. . 

I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your 
Lordship’s letters of the 11th and 18th of September, and of 
the 18th of October. 


BIA THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March, 


The Sceptre, conveying the transports from the Cape, ar- 
rived here on the 7th of January, with the troops under the 
command of General Baird. Owing to the heavy sailing of 
two of the transports, a considerable part of the Scotch bri- 
gade did not arrive until some days after the convoy. They 
reached this place in sufficient time, however, to join the 
grand army} and they now form a part of General Harris’s 
force in the field. ‘This seasonable reinforcement, the timely 
arrival of which must be attributed to the alacrity and vigour 
of your Lordship’s Government, has not only placed the 
safety of these possessions beyond the reach of all immediate 
danger from the enemy, but will, I trust, enable me to obtain 
effectual security from him against any advantages which he 
might have expected to derive hereafter from his alliance 
with the French. 

I have sent the 84th to Bombay to reinforce that garri- 
son. 

The reports of the state of the French army in Egypt since 
the victory of Bekir are so vague and contradictory, that it is 
difficult to draw any certain conclusion from them. It ap- 
pears, however, that the French army is not yet destroyed. 
No authentic advices from the Red Sea have been received 
by me since the 26th of August, and I am, therefore, ignorant 
whether Commodore Blankett has yet reached his station, 
but whatever may be the state of affairs in that quarter, the 
early measures which I adopted for the defence of India, 
added to your Lordship’s assistance, preclude all apprehen- 
sion. of any mischief, 

By this despatch I have transmitted to Mr. Secretary Bar- 
nard an abstract of the state of political affairs in India, which 
will apprize your Lordship of the circumstances of our actual 
situation with respect to Tippoo Sultaun and the other coun- 
try powers. 

In consequence of your Lordship’s recommendation, I have 
shewn every mark of civility and attention to Captain Michell. 
Although it was not in my power to comply with your Lord- 
ship’s wishes, in his favour, by giving him a Company’s freight 
home. [I have been enabled to allow him to take in cargo, 
on private account, under certain regulations lately establish- 
ed in Bengal; this indulgence will, I trust, secure him against 
any possibility of loss by his voyage from the Cape to this 


1799. COLONEL WILLIAM PALMER. 4W5 


place. I have, at his particular request, permitted him to 
touch at the Cape. 
TI have the honour to be, &e. 
Mornineron. 


No. CXLIX. . 
The Earl of Mornington to Colonel William Palmer. 


(Private.) 


Sir, Fort St. George, March 3d, 1799. 

IT employ this private mode of communication for the pur- 
pose of informing you of a circumstance which has just now 
come to my knowledge. 

An original letter from Ambajee Scindiah’s principal com- 
mander in Hindostan has been found amongst the papers of 
Vizier Ali, which were taken at the attack of Mahdoo Doss’s 
Garden, from which it appears that a treaty has been secretly 
concluded by Ambajee, on the part of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, 
with Vizier Ali. 

The agents which have negotiated this treaty, on the part 
of Vizier Ali, are Hakeem Namdar Khan, and Kamgar Khan, 
and Iolah Induman. ; 

The treaty itself is not in possession of Government, but 
from the letter from Ambajee, and from the letters from Kam- 
gar Khan, Namdar Khan, and other papers belonging to 
Vizier Ali, there can be no doubt that the principal objects 
of this treaty are of the most hostile nature to the Company, 
and that they are proposed to be accomplished by placing 
Vizier Ali on the Musnud of Oude, by means of the assist- 
ance of Scindiah, and by the establishment of an union of 
interests between Scindiah and Vizier Ali. 

You will be cautious not to disclose your knowledge of this 
circumstance to any person whatever, but you will endeavour, 
consistently with this caution, to obtain every information 
which may tend to throw light on the motives and objects of 
this flagrant act of treachery on the part of Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah; and you will keep a vigilant eye on all his proceed- 
ings, giving the earliest information of them to me, to the 
Government of Fort William, and to the Resident at Hyder- 


476 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March, 


abad. The papers which have reached me from Calcutta do 
not enable me to ascertain the precise time when the negotia- 
tion with Ambajee was reduced to the form of a treaty, but it 
appears that the negotiation commenced some months previ- 
ous to Ambajee’ s arrival at the city of Muttra, for the pur- 
pose of arranging the affairs of Scindiah in Hindostan, and 
that it terminated in a treaty either during the residence of 
Ambajee at the city of Muttra, or shortly after his departure 
from thence. The considerable force now under the com- 
mand of Sir James Craig, will remain assembled on the fron- 
tier of Oude, and I should hope that the knowledge of that 

circumstance would prevent Scindiah or Ambajee from making 

any movements, of a hostile tendency, to the interests of the 

Company. There is every reason to suppose, by the last ac- 

counts from Oude, that the person of Vizier Ali will soon be 

apprehended, nor is there the least ground for entertaining 

any alarm with respect to the number or character of his 
adherents. : 

The army, under the command of General Harris, will 
enter Mysore in the course of a few days, and the general 
appearance of circumstances in that quarter, affords me every 
reason to hope that I shall soon be at liberty to take effectual 
measures for frustrating the designs of Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 
It is possible, however, that, in the interval the rashness and 
violence of his character may impel him to make some attempt 
either against the Peishwa or the Nizam. You will endeavour 
to give the earliest intimation of any symptom which you may 
be able to discover of such a disposition on his part. 

On the flight of Vizier Ali from Benares, I addressed let- 
ters to all the neighbouring powers of Hindostan, requiring 
them respectively to deliver up to justice the person of the 
assassin, in case it should fall into their hands. Amongst 
others, a letter was despatched to Ambajee, as the principal 
officer of Dowlut Rao Scindiah on the spot. I enclose a copy 
of my letter to Ambajee, which I desire you will communicate 
to Dowlut Rao Scindiah, together with my request, that he 
will despatch such orders to Ambajee as shall promote the 
object of my letter to the latter. I do not expect that this 
communication will lead to any disclosure of Scindiah’s real 
sentiments with respect to Vizier Ali, but it may be useful 
with a view. to the effectual concealment of my knowledge. of 


1799. CAPTAIN KIRKPATRICK, 477 


Scindiah’s treachery, and may tend to quiet his apprehen- 
sions, and to prevent his motions, until a favourable moment 
shall arrive for calling him to account. In communicating 
the letter in question to Dowlut Rao Scindiah, you will ex- 
press my confident expectation, that Vizier Ali will be appre- 
hended and brought to justice before he can reach the domi- 
nions of Scindiah; and you will endeavour to impress Dowlut 
Rao with a just idea of the insignificance and weakness of 
Vizier Ali, whose only claims to notice are to be found in the 
atrocious depravity of his disposition, and in the execrable 
enormity of his crimes. 
I am, &c. 
MornincTon. ° 


No. CL. 
The Earl of Mornington to Captain Kirkpatrick. 


(Private.) 
Sir, Fort St. George, March 3d, 1799. 


I enclose for your information a copy of my letter of this 
date to the Resident at Poonah, and I recommend the im- 
portant intelligence which it contains to your most serious at- 
tention, relying on your discretion for an exact observance of 
the same secrecy which I have enjoined Colonel Palmer to 
observe. It does not appear to me advisable, in the present 
moment, to hazard the disclosure of Scindiah’s views, in their 
full extent, to Azim ul Omra; but I think it would be highly 
necessary, in my name, to point that minister’s particular at- 
tention to the probability of some attempt on the part of 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah against the 'Nizam’s territories, during 
the progress of our operations against Seringapatam. With 
this view, it will be prudent to assemble whatever force can 
be collected in his Highness’s dominions at the station which 
may be deemed best calculated for resisting any such attack, 
observing, as far as may be practicable, the necessary cau- 
tion of concealing the quarter from which danger is appre- 
hended. 

You have been already apprized of the embassy which I 
have despatched to the Rajah of Berar. The moment ap- 


478 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, To March, 


pears to approach when the advantage to be derived from the 
connection with the Court of Nagpore may become highly 
important in the scale of our political relations. It would be 
desirable to cement this connection through the means of the 
Court of Hyderabad; and perhaps, ultimately, to form a de- 
fensive alliance, of which Scindiah as well as Tippoo should 
be the object. To such an alliance (if it were possible to 
anticipate any vicissitude of the irresolute and capricious po- 
licy of Baagy Rao) it might be supposed that he would rea- 
dily accede ; the advantages of it to his power and authority ' 
being obvious and considerable ; indeed it is difficult to fore- 
see any other issue to the present distractions of the Govern- 
ment of Poonah than the total ruin of the Peishwa’s authority 
and power, or the reduction of Scindiah’s influence and force: 
and it is equally evident, that the Peishwa can never obtain 
the means of effecting such a reduction without the assistance 
of the Nizam and of the British force. Until the war with 
Mysore shall be brought to a conclusion, it will not be pru- 
dent to undertake any hostile operations against Scindiah, 
and it must depend upon the nature of his views, as well as 
of his means of carrying them into effect at the conclusion of 
the war with Mysore, whether it may be necessary or a a 
‘dient to turn our arms against him. 
If he should pursue his present perfidious and unprincipled 
scourse, every consideration, both of justice and policy, will 
require us to take the most effectual measures for the reduc- 
tion of his power, and as no improvement can reasonably be 
expected in the character of his policy, we must now lay the 
foundations of such a systeni as may enable us to defeat his 
unwarrantable and destructive views. I enclose a letter for 
Mr. Colebrooke, Resident at Nagpore, which I have left open 
for your perusal, and-of which a copy shall be sent to you by 
‘the first opportunity. 
, Iam, &e. 
MornineTon. 


1799. H. COLEBROOKE, ESQ. 479 


No. CLI. 


The Earl of Mornington to H. Colebrooke, Esq. Resident with the Rajah 
of Berar, Nagpore. 


(Enclosed in the Governor General’s letter to ‘Captain Kirkpatrick of the 
3rd March, 1799.] 
Sir, 


With this letter you will receive copies of my private des- 
patches of this date to the Residents at Poonah and Hyder- 
abad. 

You will understand the injunctions of secrecy contained in 
those despatches to apply to yourself, as well as to those to 
whom they are immediately addressed. 

My verbal instructions to you on your departure from Fort 
William, proceeded no further than to direct you to endeavour 
‘to ascertain and report to me the character, disposition, views 
and interests of the Rajah of Berar; the nature and extent 
of his resources and military force, and the best means of 
availing ourselves of his alliance, in the event of hostilities, 
either with Zemaun Shah or Tippoo Sultaun. 

The local position of the Rajah’s territories appears to 
render him a peculiarly serviceable ally against Dowlut Rao 
Scindiah, if the progress of that chief’s unjustifiable: designs 
should induce a necessity of reducing this ‘power in Hin- 
dostan. 

The enclosed letters will afford sufficient proof ef the pro- 
‘bability of such a contingency, against which early precau- 
tions must be taken. 

I, therefore, wish you to turn -your-attention immediately to 
the consideration of a treaty of defensive.alliance, against the 
‘detected projects of Scindiah, between the Rajah of Berar, 
the Nizam, and the Company, with power to the Peishwa to 
accede to it whenever he shall think fit. 

The fundamental principle of the treaty should be.a reci- 
procal guarantee of the respective possessions of the con- 
tracting powers, including the rights of their allies. 

However evident the hostile designs of Scindiah may be, 
in the actual state of affairs, it is not prudent to propose to 
the Rajah of Berar, or even to the Peishwa or to the Nizam, 
a treaty of defence nominally against Scindiah. Even the — 


480 SIR ALURED CLARKE, TO March, 


preliminary measures for ascertaining the disposition of the 
Rajah of Berar on this subject, must be taken with the great- 
est caution. The object of our apprehension should appear 
to be Tippoo Sultaun; and although “ any other enemy of 
the contracting powers” may be named in general terms, no 
suggestion should yet be given by which the name of Scindiah 
could be brought into question. The Rajah of Berar, as an 
estate of the Mahratta empire, is a party to our defensive en- 
gagements with the Peishwa against Tippoo Sultaun. But 
these engagements do not preclude a more particular connec- 
tion, founded on the same basis, and directed to the same 
general objects. 

A treaty might, therefore, be proposed to the Rajah, the 
immediate and ostensible object of which should be to 
strengthen and define his defensive engagements against 
Tippoo Sultaun, but the terms of which should be such as to 
admit the insertion of Scindiah’s name, if such a measure 
should become necessary previously to the conclusion of the 
treaty. 

With these suggestions in your mind, I wish you to pro- 

ceed to collect such information as may be safely attainable 
concerning the degree of assistance which we might expect 
from the Rajah of Berar in any contest with Scindiah; and I 
desire you also to commence the negotiation of a treaty 
grounded on the principles which I have stated, You will 
‘take care not to encourage any sentiment in the mind of the 
Rajah incompatible with the feudatory duties which he owes 
to the Peishwa. I have no reason to believe that he now en- 
tertains any sentiment of this nature, but I warn you against 
the possible effects of any such disposition. 

You will omit no.endeavour to facilitate the intercourse be- 
tween Nagpore and Hyderabad, and you will regularly trans- 
mit copies of all your despatches to me to the Resident at 
the Nizam’s Court, with whom it might also be desirable that 
you should open a private correspondence. You will trans- 
mit to the Government at Fort William copies of all your 
despatches to me. 

Iam, &c. 


Mornineron. 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 481 


No. CLII. 


(Private.) 


Sir Alured Clarke to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Dear Lorp, . Fort William, March 5th, 1799. 


Your letter of the 19th last, reached me on the 3rd instant, © 
and relieved my mind extremely by the manner in which you 
mentioned the progress of the army, and the extent of the 
provision that the supply of treasure sent from hence afforded 
it; as I was very apprehensive lest the delay of its arrival at 
Madras should have been attended with serious inconveni- 
ence. *Cooke made a more expeditious voyage from the 
mouth of the river than we expected, and he seems to have 
moved with redoubled alacrity in pursuit ‘of the enemy you 
heard of, and that he afterwards learnt was blocking up this 
port, and capturing our vessels at the Sand-heads, where he 
met with the formidable ship La Forte on the night of the 
28th, and took her after an engagement of one hour and forty 
minutes. The action was highly honorable to him, and the 
British navy ; and in these points of view must be gratifying 
to us all; but alas! the melancholy cloud that is thrown over 
the bright prospect by the severe, if not mortal wound that 
our truly gallant friend has received; and the loss of that 
worthy officer, Captain Davis, of your Lordship’s family who 
accompanied him, has cast a cruel gloom on the spirits of 
every one, and grieved me to a degree that I cannot describe; 
but which I have reason to think your own feelings will ena- 
ble you to estimate. 

My dear Lord, with great truth and esteem, 
Your most obedient, 
And most faithful humble servant, 
ALURED CiaRKE, 


* Captain Cooke, of his Majesty’s ship the Sydille, who was sent by the 
Governor General in pursuit of the Ze Forte. He was an officer of the 
highest merit ; he died of the wounds received in this gallant action. 


VOL. I. QI 


482 LIEUT.-GENERAL STUART, TO March, 


No. CLIII. 
(Private.) 
Sir Alured Clarke to the Earl of Mornington. 
My Dear Lorp, Fort William, March 8th, 1799. 


. The vexatious conduct of the Burmahs on our eastern 
frontier, where we were so slenderly provided with troops, 
and the check we met with on the attack of one of their 
posts, has given me some uneasiness. I, therefore, on find- 
ing the 76th regiment could be left with us, determined to 
send part of the Ist european regiment to Chittigong by sea, 
with a few pieces of heavier ordnance than was there before, 
in order to force their stockades, which were too strong for 
light artillery, if that should become necessary; and to put 
the whole under the command of Major General Deare ; and 
arrangements were making for it, but yesterday we received 
an account of the Burmahs having evacuated their works 
with an intention to quit our territories, leaving letters, sealed 
up in bamboos, attached to poles bearing flags, directed for 
our Commanding officer; copies of which with the rest of the 
correspondence shall be sent to you. What their real inten- 
tions may be it is difficult to know, but these strange letters 
manifest a determination to persevere in the recovery of the 
Mugg refugees, who they say we protect, and withhold from 
them contrary te right and justice; and that there can be no 
peace between them and the English, while the Muggs and 
we are one. I, therefore, still think it right to send the ad- 
ditional ordnance and stores, with a smaller detachment of 
Europeans than I at first intended, as they can easily be 
brought back if not wanted, and General Deare will have 
orders to examine the country thoroughly, and report his 
opinions of the best posts, and fittest means to afford it pro- 
tection against the incursions of these people, by either land 
or water in future. 

I am, with true respect and esteem, 
My dear Lord, your most obedient 
And most faithful humble servant, 
ALURED CLARKE. 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. : 483 


No. CLIV. 
Lieut.-General Stuart to the Earl of Mornington. 
My Lorp, Seedapore, 8th March, 1799. 


I had the honour to address your Lordship on the 20th 
ultimo, and having marched from Cananore on the following 
day, agreeably to my intimation of that date, I arrived at the 
top of Poodiacherrim Ghaut, on the 25th of the same month. 

Linformed your Lordship, that it was my intention to as- 
sume a defensive position close to the frontiers, and there 
await, in conformity to General Harris’s instructions under 
the 24th of December, his further orders. 

In pursuance of this plan I moved the corps successively 
forward, and placed them in such situations, as might enable 
me the most promptly, to form the proposed junction with 
the principal army. 

On the 2nd instant, the right brigade consisting of three 
native battalions under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Mon- 
tresor, took up their ground at Seedasere, the boundary of 
the Coorga country, and about seven miles distant from Peria- 
patam. : 

The main body of the army, with the park and provisions, 
remained: at Seedapore and Ahmootenaar; the first eight 
miles and the latter twelve, from the advanced position. 

It may be necessary to inform your Lordship, that I was 
in some measure compelled from the nature of the country, 
which is every where covered by thick jungle, to place the 
army in several divisions; but I had a further view in oecu- 
pying the post at Seedasere, in order to preserve a more 
ready communication with General Harris, as this was the 
only spot from whence the signals established between the two 
armies could be observed. Although I had no reason to ap- 
prehend any immediate attack, I thought it advisable to 
adopt the precaution of encamping the corps at such short 
distances, as would either enable me to move without much 
loss of time into the enemy’s territory, or to support, if occa- 
sion should require it, any quarter that might stand in need 
of assistance. 

In the course of the morning of the 5th, an extensive en- 
campment was unexpectedly observed to be forming on this 


484: LIEUT.-GENERAL STUART, TO March, 


side of the fort of Periapatam. This circumstance was dis- 
covered at JO o’clock in the forenoon, as the enemy were 
taking up their ground, by a party of observation on the 
summit of the high hill of Seedasere, which commands a 
view of the Mysore almost to the environs of Seringapatam. 
Before the evening, this encampment assumed a very formi- 
dable appearance and covered a great extent of ground. 

We were able to count from 3 to 400 tents, amongst the 
number some of large dimensions were distinguished, and 
particularly one of a green colour, that seemed to denote the 
presence of the Sultaun. However much the probability of 
of this circumstance might be strenghtened by the respecta- 
ble appearance of the encampment, it was contradicted by the 
evidence of two hurcarrahs, who had recently arrived from 
Seringapatam. These men generally reported, that Tippoo 
had marched with all his forces-on the 20th ultimo, to oppose 
the progress of the Madras army, and that the Benky Nabob 
commanded the only force in the field, that temained in the 
neighbourhood of Seringapatam. This force was represented 
to be encamped at Caneambaddy and to consist of 5000 
Piadas or irregular infantry, who were said to be intended as 
a covering party to 7000 Brinjaries, and directed to bring as 
much provisions, as they could collect about Periapatam to 
the capital. 

In this state of uncertainty, I thought it prudent to rein- 
force Lieut.-Colonel Montresor’s brigade with an additional 
battalion of Sepoys, and waited for more correct intelligence, 
which I expected hourly, to act with the whole of my forces 
as affairs might render necessary. 

On the morning of the 6th, Major General Hartley went 
forward to reconnoitre, and at break of day from the hill of 
observation, the whole of the enemy’s army was discovered to 
be in motion; but their movements were so well concealed by 
the woodiness of the country and the haziness of the atmos- 
phere, that it was impossible to ascertain their object, nor in 
fact was this discovered, until they had penetrated a consi- 
derable way in the jungle, and commenced an attack upon 
our line, which happened between the hours of 9 and 10. 

The enemy pierced through the jungles with such surety 
and expedition, that they attacked the rear and the front of 
our line almost at the same instant. This despatch prevented 


1799. - THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 485 


more than three of our corps being engaged, as the fourth, 
which was posted two miles and a half in the rear, was una- 
ble to form a junction, from the enemy having cut in between 
them and Seedasere. The communication was effectually 
obstructed by a column, which, according to the reports of 
our prisoners, consisted of upwards of 5000 men under the 
command of Baber Jung. 

Fortunately before the enemy had accomplished their pur- 
pose, Major General Hartley had time to apprise me of their 
attack, and remained himself to give any assistance that might 
be necessary. The best position was assumed for repulsing 
the enemy, and in this alarming situation the corps defended 
themselves with so much resolution, that the Sultaun’s troops 
were unable to make any impression. The brigade was on 
every side completely surrounded, and had to contend against 
a vast disparity of numbers, besides other discouraging cir- 
cumstances. : : 

As soon as I received intelligence of the perilous situation 
of the right brigade, I marched to their assistance with the 
two flank companies of his Majesty's 75th regiment and the 
whole of the 77th, I arrived about half past two in sight of 
the division of the enemy, who had penetrated into the rear, 
and possessed themselves of the great road leading to Seeda- 
sere. The engagement lasted nearly half an hour, when after 
a smart fire of musketry on both sides, the enemy were com- 
pletely routed, and fled with precipitation through the jungles 
to regain their column, which still continued the attack in 
front. On arriving at Lieut.-Colonel Montresor’s post, I 
found his men exhausted with fatigue, and their ammunition 
almost expended. At 20 minutes past 3 the enemy retreated 
in all directions. 

For this decisive, and, I hope your Lordship will allow, 
brilliant success, considering the small number of troops who 
engaged, under very great disadvantages, probably the flower 
of Tippoo Sultaun’s army, I feel myself peculiarly indebted to 
the judicious disposition for defence made by General Hart- 
ley. He embraced the opportunity of observing the motions 
of the enemy from the hill, I have above mentioned, and was 
thus enabled to advise Lieut.-Colonel Montresor of the best 
method for defeating them. I beg leave also to inform your 
Lordship, that my best thanks are due to Lieut.-Colonel 


486 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March, 


Montresor for his very active exertions, and to the officers 
and men, including the artillery of his brigade, for their gal- 
lant and steady behaviour throughout the whole of this ardu- 
ous affair. Lieut.-Colonel Dunlop and the European divi- 
sion under his command, are likewise entitled to my particu- 
lar approbation for their spirited conduct, which finally routed 
the enemy. 

‘Our loss on this occasion is far less than could reasonably 
have been éxpected, and I have the honour to enclose for 
your Lordship’s information a return of this circumstance. 

It was impossible to ascertain the exact loss sustained by 
the enemy; but it must have been heavy, as in the course of 
so long an action they were often exposed én crowds to the 
fire of grape shot and vollies of musquetry. Several men of 
distinction were killed, and some wounded officers have been 
made prisoners. I have the honour to enclose the informa 
tion of Mozdin Khan Bhukhshy and the Commander of a 
Kutchery, the prisoner of greatest rank, who has fallen 
‘wounded into our hands; but concurring reports state that 
Meer Ghofar is amongst the slain. 

As thé arrival of General Harris at Seringapatam will not 
happen at so early a period, as he first intended, the imme- 
diate possession of the post of Seedasere was no longer an 
object of such consequence, and to retain it, while Tippoo 
continued in force at Periapatam, became an affair of serious 
difficulty. The secresy and expedition, with which he had 
planned his late enterprise, and the correct intelligence, that 
the leaders of his columns appeared ¢o have obtained of the 
private routes through the Coorga jungles, led to an opinion, 
that he would not remain satisfied with this abortive attempt, 
but might endeavour to penetrate by another direction to the 
southward, still more open than the passage of Seedasere, 
where he would only be opposed by Coorgs. This consider- 
ation derived a greater weight, as if he succeeded in forcing 
this entrance, it would throw him into our rear and put him 
in all probability in possession of the great depdt of rice col- 
lected by the Coorga Rajah. These motives have induced 
me to relinquish the post at Seedasere, and to collect the 
whole of my force at this place. I have accordingly made a 
disposition, either to defend my position against the Sultaun, 
if he should again adventure to attack it, or to move in de- 


1799. SIR ALURED CLARKE. 487 


fence of any part of the Coorga Rajah’s territories that the 
enemy may threaten, provided it shall endanger our magazine 
of provisions ; otherwise I shall remain on the defensive, until 
I receive advice from General Harris. 

Since the action of the 6th, the enemy have continued in 
their camp at Periapatam, nor have J any intelligence either of 
the Sultaun’s designs, or of the motives, that induced him to 
undertake his present enterprise. It is not likely that he will 
remain longer in this neighbourhood, than after he receives 
intelligence of General Harris having entered the Mysore. 

As my communication with General Harris is become inse- 
sure, I must take the liberty of requesting your Lordship to 
inform him of such part of these particulars as may appear to 
you necessary. 

I have the honour to subscribe myself most respectfully, 

My Lord, your Lordship’s 
Most obedient humble servant. 
J. STuaRT. 

P.S. By some prisoners, who have been just now brought 
in by the Coorga Rajah’s people I am informed, that the loss 
of the enemy was very great, and that many men of the first 
distinction fell. They mention Seyed or Meer Ghofar and 
the Binky Nabob, who led the center attack among the 
killed. It is added, however, that the Sultaun is collecting 
more forces, and is determined to make a second attack. 


* No. CLV. 
(Private and Secret.) 
The Earl of Mornington to Lieut.-General Sir Alured Clarke. 


My Dear Sir, Fort St. George, 8th March, 1799. 


1. A letter received to day from Mr. Barlow, enclosing an 
extract of news from Ambajee’s camp, of the 4th and 5th of 
February, appears to require that I should furnish you with 
a particular statement of my sentiments, with regard to the 
distribution and conduct of our military force on the north 
western frontier of Oude. 

2. In every private letter which I have written to you since 


488 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March, 


the retreat of Zemaun Shah appeared probable, I have uni- 
formly desired that a respectable force should be maintained 
on that frontier, with a view to check the possible designs of 
Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 

8. I am persuaded, therefore, that notwithstanding the se- 
paration of Sir James Craig’s army, you have still left a con- 
siderable body of troops in the vicinity of those districts, 
which would probably become the theatre of war in the event 
of hostilities with Scindiah, or with those who command his 
army in Hindostan. 

4, The papers found in Vizier Ali’s house aftet his flight, 
leave no doubt that Ambajee has concluded a treaty with 
Vizier Ali of a tendency evidently hostile to the Nabob 
Vizier, and to the Company; and Scindiah must be respon- 
sible for the acts of Ambajee, who is his avowed Lieutenant, 
and who refers directly to his authority in the papers relating 
to the treaty with Vizier Ali. 

5. It is unfortunate and unaccountable, that the Magistrate 
of Benares, should not have forwarded to Calcutta at a much 
earlier period the papers relating to this treaty; nearly.a 
month has been lost by this strange and censurable delay. 
Had any success attended Vizier Ali’s efforts in Gorruck- 
pore, this delay might have been of fatal consequence. One 
evil has already arisen from it, which however I trust may 
soon be remedied, I mean the dispersion of Sir James Craig’s 
army; a measure which would not have been recommended 
by me nor adopted by you, if we had been in possession of 
the papers of Vizier Ali. 

6. My wish is, that you should without delay reassemble in 
Oude, such a force as you may deem adequate to the object 
of checking not only the army now under the Command of 
Ambajee, but eventually the whole of Scindiah’s force, if that 
Chief should return into Hindostan. You will also keep in 
view, the probability of early offensive operations against the 
dominions of Scindiah. 

7. The reassembling of the army may possibly alarm Am- 
bajee and Scindiah, and an explanation may be demanded of 
the motives of such a step. You will ascribe it to the escape 
of Vizier Ali from Benares, to the probability of his attempt- 
ing to join Zemaun Shah, and to the consequences which that 
event might produce. 


1799. SIR ALURED CLARKE. 489 


‘8. The force being assembled, which you may deem neces- 
sary for the accomplishment of the stated objects, you will 
regulate its operations according to the following sugges- 
tions. 

9. If Ambajee or Scindiah, or any part of the forces of 
either, should commence actual hostilities against the Com- 
pany or the Nabob Vizier, or should make any movement 
evidently of an hostile nature against the possessions of either, 
you will of course repel the aggression; and you will further 
take such steps as may appear most likely to distress the 
enemy, limiting, however, the operations of the army to the 
countries situated within the Dooab, with the exception of 
the City of Agra which you will seize, if it should appear ad- 
visable to possess it. 

10. If hostilities should commence in the manner supposed 
in the preceding paragraphs, you will use every endeavour to 
excite the Rajpoots and other tributaries against Scindiah, 
and to induce the Rajahs of Jynagur and Jodepore to enter 
zealously into the war; you will at the same time take the 
proper steps for supporting and encouraging the exertions of 
the partizans of the Bhyes and Lukwaje Dada, together with 
all persons in the family or service of Scindiah, who may be 
disaffected to his Government. 

11. By remaining within the Dooab, (under the exception 
stated, with respect to the city of Agra,) you will afford more 
effectual protection to the possessions of the Vizier and. of 
the Company than you could expect to furnish, if your army 
were to advance furthey into the hereditary dominions of 
Scindiah, where, as well as in his possessions between the 
Chumbul and the Jumna, he will be sufficiently distressed by 
the operations of the Rajpoots and of other internal, and do- 
mestic enemies. 

12. Unless the possession of Delhi should be deemed ab- 
solutely essential from military considerations, the operations 
of our army should not be directed against that city. What- 
‘ever advantages might be expected in any collateral view 
from that possession, the political embarrassments whieh 
must be the immediate consequence of its falling into our 
hands are so numerous and inextricable, as to render me pe- 
culiarly anxious to avoid the possibility of such an‘event. 

13. The movement of Ambajee into Scindiah’s possessions 


490 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March, 


in the Dooab, would become suspicious in proportion to the 
magnitude of the force employed in a position so favorable to 
the invasion of Oude. And if the whole or the greater part 
of the army of Ambajee should pass the Jumna, with what- 
ever motive, no doubt will arise in my mind, that, with the 
knowledge which we possess of the engagements existing 
between Ambajee and Vizier Ali, the justice of our attacking 
the former under such circurnstances would be incontroverti- 
ble; I am equally satisfied of the policy of reducing the power 
of Scindiah, whenever the opportunity shall appear advan- 
tageous. But while Scindiah shall remain in the Deccan, 
and while our armies shall be engaged in war with Tippoo 
Sultaun, Scindiah will possess considerable means of embar- 
rassing us in that quarter; for this reason it is extremely de- 
sirable to avoid hostilities with him until either his return to 
Hindostan, or a peace with Tippoo Sultaun shall place our 
affairs in a condition, which may enable us to punish the 
treachery of Scindiah with more effect. I consider the junc- 
tion of Scindiah’s army with that of Ambajee, even if their’ 
combined object should evidently be the attack of Oude, as 
an event much less formidable to us in the present moment, 
than the consequences to be apprehended from the operations 
of Scindiah’s army alone, either at Poonah, in the dominions 
of the Nizam, or in Mysore. Notwithstanding, therefore, 
the just suspicions which would arise from the arrival in the 
Dooab of the whole or of the greater part of Ambajee’s 
force, hostilities must not be considered as the necessary con- 
sequence of such a movement. 

14, If, however, that movement should be evidently con- 
nected with a design of invading the possessions of the Na- 
bob Vizier, and of the Company, and if the success of such 
a movement would essentially facilitate the prosecution of 
that design, self defence must require you to anticipate the 
projects of the enemy by the seasonable commencement of 
hostilities. 

15. But you will never forget, that every consideration of 
policy should induce us to abstain from hostilities with Scin- 
diah in the present moment, and you will accordingly give 
the strongest caution to the officer who shall command the 
army to be assembled in Oude, not to proceed to extremity 
unless the safety of our possessions, or of those of the Vizier 


1799. SIR ALURED CLARKE. 491 


should absolutely demand the attack of Ambajee’s army. If 
Vizier Ali should effect his escape and should be received by 
Ambajee, previously to the arrival of the latter in the Dooab, 
you will demand the delivery of Vizier Ali’s person according 
to the established practice of all civilized nations, which 
authorizes the demand of the persons of assassins and rob- 
bers flying from justice. The refusal of Ambajee is not in 
this case, however, to be deemed a sufficient ground of hosti- 
lity. But if Ambajee shall arrive inthe Dooab with the whole 
or with the greater part of his army, if Vizier Ali in that po- 
sition should accompany Ambajee’s forces, and Ambajee 
under such circumstances shall refuse to deliver him up to the 
Company’s Government, I authorize you to commence hosti- 
lities against Ambajee. In any case in which hostilities shall 
be commenced you will understand it to be my wish, that they 
should be prosecuted according to the principles stated in 
paragraphs 9, 10, 11, 12, of this letter. 

16. If Scindiah should return to Hindostan from the 
Deccan, and on any pretence should enter the Dooab with his 
whole army, or with a considerable part of it, such. a step 
would be so evident a proof of his design to fulfil his engage- 
ments with Vizier Ali, that I have no hesitation in authorizing 
you in this case to commence hostilities without delay. 

Tam, &c. &c., 
MornineTon. 


No. CLVI. 
Licut.-Colonel Read to the Earl of Mornington. 
My Lorp, Camp near Ryakota, 12th March, 1799. 


I have particular satisfaction in acquainting your Lordship, 
that I have just returned from the army, after having deliver- 
ed over 25,000 loads of différent articles of supply in safety, 
which upon a calculation delivered into General Harris, ap- 
pears to be a month’s provision for 30,000 fighting men and 
40,000 followers. 

My Lord, your Lordship’s, 
Most obedient humble servant, 
ALEXANDER Reap. 


492 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March, 


No. CLVIL. 
From the Governor General to Haujee Khulleel. 
Fart St. George, 15th March, 1799, 

I have been informed, by the honorable Mr. Dunean, of 
the zeal you have manifested in promoting the suecess of the 
concerns entrusted to Mehedy Ati Khaun, which has afforded 
me great pleasure and satisfaction. I entertain a high sense 
of these your laudable endeavours, and, considering you as a 
sincere friend and well wisher of the English, I look with 
confidence to experience, still further, the benefits of this 
good disposition in the continuance of your labours and ex- 
ertions. May the Almighty daily add to the number and ce- 
lebrity of your good qualities. I beg you to consider me at 
all times solicitous for your welfare, and desirous of your at- 
tachment. As a testimony of the satisfaction which your con- 
duct has offorded me, I have transmitted a Khelaut for you 
through Mehedy Ali Khaun. You will no doubt consider it 
as a mark of my sincere regard, and continue disposed, as 
hitherto, to promote the service of the British nation. For 
‘further particulars I refer you to Mr. Duncan’s letters. 


No. CLVIII. 
The Earl of Mornington to Rear Admiral Rainier. 


Sir, Fort St. George, 16th March, 1799. 


While I offer you my most cordial congratulations on an 
event so honourable to your command, and to the reputation 
of the British arms in India, as the capture of the French fri- 
gate La Forte by the Sybille, it is with inexpressible sorrow 
that I condole with you on the probable (I fear almost certain) 
fate of the gallant and able officer who has so brilliantly dis- 
tinguished himself on this occasion. My particular friendship 
for him will render his loss a most serious object of regret to 
me. J am still willing to flatter myself that his wounds may 
not prove mor tal, and his having survived the action so long, 
affords” 4 faint ray of hope that he may not be lost to his 
“friends and to his country. Captain Davies was one of my 


4 


1799. REAR-ADMIRAL RAINIER. 493. 


Aides-de-Camp and Fort-Adjutant at Fort William. He 
obtained my permission to accompany Captain Cooke as a 
volunteer. 

I take this opportunity of recommending again to your 
serious consideration the necessity of stationing some of your 
strongest ships at Bombay as soon as the navigation of the 
Red Sea shall be opened. The necessity of this suggestion 
would become less urgent if you should soon learn that Com- 
modore Blankett had reached his station, and was superior to 
the enemy in that quarter, or if you should receive authentic 
accounts of the destruction of the French army in Egypt. 
But in any event the garrison of Bombay has been so much 
reduced by the necessary drafts for the coast of Malabar, 
that it would be extremely desirable to protect the harbour 
of Bombay during the whole of the approaching monsoon by 
a strong naval force. I have already stated to your Ixcel- 
lency, in a former despatch, that this is an object of great 
anxiety to the Government at home, and all the consideration 
which I have been enabled to give to the subject, induces me 
to take the liberty of adding my opinion to theirs, and of 

- submitting the matter to your judgment with an anxious hope 
that it may appear to you in the same light in which I have 
viewed it. If your Excellency should intend any distribution 
of your force, founded on the principle which I have stated, 
an early communication of it to the Government of Bombay 
would tend to quiet their alarms. 


I have the honour to be, &c. 
Mornineron. 


No. CLIX. 
The Marquis Cornwallis to the Earl of Mornington. 


My pear Lorp, Dublin Castle, March 18th, 1799. 


T little thought when we parted that my first letter to you 
would have been dated from this place, but my evil stars have 
determined that I never should enjoy quiet or comfort, and 
after relieving me from what I then thought a painful task, (a 
second embarkation for India) have driven me into a situation 


494 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March, 


ten times more arduous, and in every respect more intolerable. 
You have many friends that will send you Irish news, and 
as I can say nothing on the melancholy situation of this un- 
happy country that can afford you satisfaction, I shall not 
enter into a detail of our calamities. Your letter, dated July 
5th, gave me much concern from the account you give of your 
health, the failure of which is the only thing which alarms me 
about yourself or your government; in all other respects I 
have no doubt of your complete success. 

With the most sincere good wishes for your welfare, power 
and happiness, 

I am, my dear Lord, 
Most truly yours, 


CornwaLtis. 


No. CLX. 


The Earl of Mornington to the Resident at Poonah. 


Sir, Fort St. George, 19th March, 1799. 


The attempt of the Court of Poonah to divert the services 
of the detachment, under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel 
Little, from their proper object, does not surprize me. It is 
consistent with the policy which for some time past has di- 
rected its conduct towards the British Government. You 
will continue steadily to resist the attempt whenever it may 
be renewed. 

You will be pleased to furnish me, as soon as possible, with 
as full and distinct an account of the Guyckwar family, and 
of the views and disposition both of the reigning Rajah and 
of the Court of Poonah, with respect to the succession to that 
principality, as you may be able to procure without betraying 
any extraordinary solicitude or curiosity on the subject. 


Iam, &c. &c. 
MornInecrTon. 


1799. THE HON. COURT OF DIRECTORS. 495 


No. CLXI. 
The Earl of Mornington to the Honourable the Court of Directors. 


Hon. Sirs, Fort St. George, 20th March, 1799. 


My separate despatch, under date the 21st November, for- 
warded by the Eurydice, will have apprized your Honourable 
Court of the measures which I took for the purpose of re- 
storing to his Highness the Nizam the power of fulfilling his 
defensive engagements with the Company. 

At the same time my endeavours were employed with equal 
assiduity to give vigour and effect to the treaties subsisting 
with his Highness the Peishwa, The return of Nana Fur- 
naveese to the administration afforded for some time a just 
expectation that our alliance with the Mahrattas would 
speedily be restored with additional vigour and advantage, 
but the increasing distractions of the Mahratta empire unfor- 
tunately frustrated the wise counsels of that experienced and 
able statesman, and disappointed my views at the Court of* 
Poonah. I had, however, the satisfaction to ascertain that 
the disposition of that Court, under the administration of 
Nana, continued perfectly favourable to the British interests, 
and that want of power would be the sole cause of its inac- 
tion in the event of a war with Tippoo Sultaun. 

From the moment of my arrival at Fort St. George all the 
inhabitants of this settlement, and every officer, civil and 
military, appeared to be animated by an unanimous deter- 
mination to discharge their respective duties with a degree of 
cheerfulness and ardour correspondent with the exigency and 
importance of the occasion; and I was soon satisfied that the 
disposition, of which I lamented the appearance in the months 
of July and August, had either been subdued by the just 
exercise of authority, or corrected by reflection, and by the 
more full disclosure of the views of the enemy. The zeal, 
alacrity, and public spirit of the bankers and commercial 
agents at Madras, as well as of the most respectable of your 
civil servants at this Presidency, enabled me, within a few 
weeks, to raise a large sum of money, by loan, for the public 
service. Previous to my departure from Bengal, I had re- 
mitted twenty lacs of rupees in specie for the use of this 


496 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March, 


Presidency; I now despatch the Sybille to Calcutta for a 
further supply; and the extraordinary exertion of his Excel- 
lency thé Vice-President in Council, assisted by the diligence 
and ability of Mr. Thomas Myers, the Accountant-General 
of Bengal, furnished me with an additional aid of twenty lacs 

within so short a time, that the movement of the army was not 
delayed for an instant on account of a deficiency of treasure, 
and Lieutenant-General Harris was provided with a sufficient 
supply of specie to maintain his army in the field until the 
month of May. 

Tippoo Sultaun remaining silent for a eonalderable time, 
after the receipt of my letter of the 9th of January, I con- 
cluded that his object must be to delay his answer until the 
season should be so far advanced as to render the capture of 
Seringapatam impracticable during the present year. 

In the mean while the advices from Bussorah, Bagdad, 
Constantinople, and Bombay were of so uncertain a nature as 
to leave me still in doubt with respect to the condition of the 
French army in Egypt; the only safe conclusion which could 
‘be drawn from those advices being, that the French still main- ' 
tained the possession of that country with a large army. 

No intelligence had been received from the Red Sea re- 
specting the arrival of any of his-Majesty’s ships on that 
station, nor had I been able to ascertain, with any degree of 
accuracy, what means the French might either have provided, 
or might find on the spot to enable - them to reach the Sul- 
taun’s dominions. 

In addition to these circumstances, I knew that, while 
Tippoo Sultaun had declined to receive an ambassador from 
the Honourable Company, and had omitted to answer my 
late letters, he had despatched native vakeels from Seringd- 
patam, who, together with M. Du Buc, (one of the leaders of 
the French force, raised in the Isle of France under M. 
Malartic’s proclamation) were on the point of embarking at 
‘Tranquebar with an avowed mission from the Sultaun to the 
Executive Directory of France. 

On the 3rd of February I had received no answer from the 
Sultaun to my letter of the 9th of January; although the 
communication between Seringapatam and Fort St. George 
does not require, at the most, a longer time than eight, and 
is sometimes effected in four, days. 


1799.. THE HON. COURT OF DIRECTORS, 497 


In order, therefore, to defeat the object of the Sultaun’s 
silence, and to avail myself of the actual superiority of our 
force, and of the advantages of the present season, before the 
French could effect any junction with him, I determined to 
commence hostilities without delay, and to suspend all nego- 
tiation, until the united forces of the Company and of their 
allies should have made such an impression on the territories 
of Mysore, as might give full effect to our just representa- 
tions, _ 

With these views, on the 3d of February, I directed Lieut.- 
General Harris to enter the territory of Mysore with the 
army assembled under his command; and on the same day I 
issued orders to Lieut.~General Stuart, to be prepared to 
cooperate from Malabar, and I signified to Rear-Admiral 
Rainier, and to the several allies of the Company, that I now 
considered the British Government in India to be at war with 
Tippoo Sultaun. 

At length, on the 18th of February, I received from Tippoo 
Sultaun the letter marked No. 7,* informing me, that, “ being 
frequently disposed to make excursions and hunt,” he was, 
‘*‘ accordingly, proceeding upon a hunting excursion,” and 
desiring that I would “ despatch Major Doveton slightly at- 
tended;” or “ unattended.” 

But the season for negotiation, through the pacific chan- 
nels, so often offered by me, was now elapsed. After mature 
deliberation, on the grounds already stated, I had directed 
the advance of the army into the territory of the Sultaun, 
and I had signified to the allies my determination to proceed 
to hostilities. To have delayed the advance of the army, 
would at once have thrown the advantages which I then pos- 
sessed into the hands of Tippoo Sultaun, and have rendered 
the siege of his capital impracticable during the present sea- 
son. On the other hand, an embassy, combined with the 
hostile irruption of our army into Mysore, would have been 
liable to the imputation of insincerity towards Tippoo Sultaun, 
and while it bore the appearance of indecision in the eyes of 
the allies, would have promoted, and perhaps, warranted a 
similar degree of instability in their councils and operations. 

The design of this tardy, reluctant, and insidious assent to 


* See p. 433. 
VOL. I. 2k 


498 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO” © . March, 


the admission of an embassy from the British Government 
could be considered in no other light than that of a new arti- 
fice for the purpose of gaining time, witil a change of cir- 
cumstances and of season might enable the Sultaun to avail 
himself of the assistance of France. This conclusion was 
now confirmed by my knowledge of the actual embarkation 
of M. Du Buc and two native vakeels on an embassy: from . 
Tippoo to the Executive Directory of France, an event which 
took place at Tranquebar on the 7th of February. «4 

I, therefore, replied to the letter of Tippoo,Sultaun in the 
terms of the enclosure, No. 8,* in which I have declared 
Lieut.-General Harris to be the only person now authorized 
by me to receive ‘and to answer whatever communications the 
Sultaun may think fit to make, with a view to the restoration 
of peace on such conditions as appear to the allies to be in- 
dispensably necessary to their common security. This letter 
I directed General Harris to forward to the Sultaun, on the 
day on which the army under his command should pass the 
frontier, and at the same time I instructed him to issue, in 
the name of the allies, the accompanying declaration marked 
No. 9.+ 


* See p. 453. 
+ The following is a copy of the declaration :— 

The Proclamation of Lieut.-General George Harris, Commander-in-Chief 
Of all his Majesty’s and the Honourable Company’s forces on the coasts of 
Coromandel and Malabar, to the Zemindars or Poligars, Desmooks, De- 
spondies, Canoongoes, Naurgours, Potails, Shambogrues, and to all Aumul- 
dars, Serishtadars, Kelladars, and other inhabitants of Mysore, who shall 
receive the Company’s Cowle. 


Whereas Tippoo Sultaun having concluded an offensive alliance with 
the French, the inveterate enemies of the English, the Peishwa, and the 
Nizam of Decan rejected all overtures on their part for effecting an ac- 
commodation, and giving proofs that he only waited the arrival of the 
French to involve all India in a war; the allies have sent their armies into 
this country, under my command, to frustrate his ambitious designs, and 
to secure their possessions against the future attempts of such insidious 
enemies. : 

These being the views of the allies, I come not to make war upon the 
defenceless inhabitants of this country, but to receive you under their 
protection, and promise you perfect security under their government, 
facilitate the carrying these intentions into execution. Lieut.-Colonel 
Alexander Read, the same officer under whose administration you expe- 


1799. THE HON. COURT OF DIRECTORS. 499 


The Nizam’s contingent consists of above 6000 of the Ho- 
nourable Company’s troops subsidized by his Highness, of 
about the same number of his own infantry, (including a pro- 
portion of M. Peron’s sepoys, now commanded by British 
officers,) and of a large body of cavalry. 

This force, under the general command of Meer Allum, 
formed a junction with the British army on the 19th February: 
and it is with the greatest satisfaction that I remark to your 
Honourable Court the beneficial effects which the Company 
has already derived from the recent improvement of our alli- 
ance with the Court of Hyderabad. The Nizam’s contingent 
actually arrived in the vicinity of Chittoor, in a state of pre- 
paration for the field, before General Harris was ready to 
proceed .on his march from Vellore. 

I have annexed to this despatch the last return of Lieut.- 
General Harris’s army, previous to his passing the frontier ; 
an army more completely appointed, more amply and liberally 
supplied in every department, or more perfect in its discipline, 
and in the acknowledged experience, ability, and zeal of its 


rienced last war the benefits of a British Government, is again appointed 
to superintend the affairs of all the districts dependént on Mysore that 
may be reduced by the armies of the English ; and as a further indication 
thereof, cowle flags shall be distributed over the country, and safe-guards 
sent to all the villages in the vicinity of the armies, to secure the inhabi- 
tants from depredation. 

These measures being taken, and the allied armies sufficiently powerful 
to afford all the districts in their rear effectual protection, you will re- 
main in your villages, proceed in the cultivation of your lands,-and enjoy 
all the blessings of profound peace. 

Benefitting so considerably by the liberal policy of the allies, it will 
become a duty on your part to merit their protection by serving them as 
obedient subjects, and rendering them the dues of the Sirkar, in the ex- 

. action of which will he evinced that moderation and justice, which distin- 
guish the British from all the other nations of Europe in their conduct 
towards natives of India. 

The general good of the people under them being the study of their 
Government, it evidently follows, that, whoever shall render them parti- 
cular services during the present war, such as.aiding Colonel Read in 
ascertaining the sources of the public revenue, in regulating the police, 
in procuring supplies for the army, or in giving intelligence of the 
enemy’s designs, may be sure of rewards suitable to the importance and 
success of their endeavours. 

Written at Head Quarters, Georce Hanris, 

" 5th March, 1799. 


500 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March, 


officers, never took the field in India. The army on the coast 
of Malabar is in an equally efficient and respectable condi- 
tion, and the extraordinary efforts which have been made by 
Lieut.-General Stuart and Major-General Hartley, seconded 
by the cordial attachment and unremitting assiduity of the 
Rajah of Coorga, have collected within a very short period 
of time a supply so abundant, that I am induced to transmit 
the particulars of it to your Honourable Court, as a testimony 
of the distinguished merits of those valuable officers, and of 
the loyalty and active exertion of that faithful tributary of the 
Honourable Company. 

A considerable force, under the command of Lieut.-Colonels 
Read and Brown, will cooperate with Lieut.-General Harris 
in the southern districts of the Carnatic and Mysore. 

Under these circumstances, General Harris entered the 
territory of Mysore on the 5th of March, with orders to pro- 
ceed directly to Seringapatam. 

Having thus submitted to your Honourable Court, accord- 
ing to the order of dates, a detailed relation of the events 
which have led to the war in which we are actually engaged, 
and having declared to you the motives and objects of my 
conduct in every stage of this important transaction, I must 
request your permission to conclude this despatch, with such 
reflections as arise in my mind from the review of my past 
measures, and from the prospect of their ultimate conse- 
quences and permanent effects. 

From the first disclosure of the nature and object of Tippoo 
Sultaun’s embassy to the Isle of France, every principle of 
justice and policy demanded from your Government in India 
that an instantaneous effort should be made to reduce his 
power and resources before he could avail himself of the ad- 
vantages of the alliance which he had concluded, The defect . 
of means is the sole consideration which can justify me for 
not having made that effort at the early period when its suc- 
cess would have placed the security of your possessions on 4 
foundation, which the invasion of India by a French force 
could not have impaired. For without the aid of some na- 
tive power it is scarcely possible that the French should ever 
make any permanent impression on your empire in India; 
and no native power (excepting Tippoo Sultaun) is so infa- 
tuated as to be disposed to assist or receive a French army. 


1799. THE HON. COURT OF DIRECTORS. 501 


The progress of events since the date of my orders of the 
20th of June, 1798, has not only confirmed the principles of 
justice and policy, by which an attack upon the Sultaun was 
at that time demanded, but has manifested, that the designs 
of France as well as of the Sultaun, were of a much more ex- 
tensive and formidable nature, than any which have ever been 
attempted against the British Empire in India, since the hour 
of its first foundation. 

While the magnitude and danger of these designs were 
gradually disclosed, I had the satisfaction to feel, that the 
means of averting them were augmenting in a proportion 
nearly equal by the success of the negotiations at Hyderabad, 
and by the progress of the military preparations which I had 
ordered throughout your possessions. 

At the commencement of the month of February the crisis 
arrived. in which I was called upon to form my ultimate deci- 
sion on the important question at issue with Tippoo Sultaun, 
and to determine the. final result of the whole system of my 
measures. 

On the one hand, the apparent establishment of the French 
army in Egypt, and the uncertainty of the state of our naval 
power in the Red Sea, rendered the dangef still urgent from 
that quarter; while Tippoo Sultaun’s repeated evasions of 
my proposals for negotiation, combined with his embassy to 
the Executive Directory of France, under the conduct of 
M. Du Buc, appeared to preclude all hope of detaching 
the Sultaun, from his recent alliance with the enemy. On 
the other hand, I now possessed ample means of frustrating 
the most dangerous effects of that alliance, by a seasonable 
application of the powerful force which the treachery and 
aggression of the Sultaun had compelled me to collect at 
a heavy expense to your finances. 

Your Honourable Court will determine hehe in this 
state of affairs my orders of the 3rd of February were pre- 
mature; and whether I should have been justified on the 13th 
of February in recalling those orders, for the purpose of ad- 
mitting at that late period a negotiation, which would have 
enabled Tippoo Sultaun to defeat every object of the arma- 
ment of the allies for the present season, and would have 
afforded him ample time to reap the full benefit of his con- 


502 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March, 


nection with France before the season for besieging his capital 
should return. 

In deciding these important questions, you will necessarily 

consider; what degree of reliance could be placed on the sin- 
eerity of the Sultaun’s disposition to conclude an amicable 
adjustment with your Government at the very moment, when 
he had actually despatched on an embassy to the Executive 
Directory of France the commander of the French troops, 
faised in the Mauritius and admitted into the Sultaun’s ser- 
vice for the express purpose of carrying on a war of aggres- 
sion against your possessions in India. 
. The admirable condition of your armies on both coasts, 
and the unequalled perfection of their equipment in every 
department, added to the extraordinary spirit and animation 
with which the campaign has been opened, afford every 
reason to hope that the issue of the war will be speedy and 
prosperous, and that it must terminate in a eonsiderable re- 
duction of Tippoo Sultaun’s resources and power. 

-The wisdom of your Honourable Court will anticipate the 
extensive benefits which must result to your interests from an 
event now become essential to the peace and security of your 
possessions in India, 

The policy of the treaty of Seringapatam certainly was not 
to maintain Tippoo Sultaun’s power in such a state as should 
leave him a constant object of alarm and apprehension to the 
Company. That he has been justly so considered for some 
years past, cannot be doubted by any person acquainted with 
the records of any of your Governments in India. The pre- 
sent is the second. crisis, within the last three years, in which 
the Government General has thought it necessary to assem- 
ble the army on the coast of Coromandel for the sole purpose 
of checking his motions ; and the apprehension of his inten- 
tions has obstructed our operations against our European 
enemies in India during the course of the present war. 

The continuance of Tippoo’s power on its actual scale, and 
under such circumstances, must have proved to the Company 
@ perpetual source of solicitude, expense, and hazard.’ But 
the engagements which he has contracted with the French, 
the public proofs which he has given of his eagerness to re- 
ceive in Mysore as large a force as they can furnish, combined 


1799, THE HON. COURT OF DIRECTORS. 509, 


with the prodigious magnitude.of their preparations, and the 
incredible progress of their army, evidently directed to the 
destruction of the British power in India, form new and pro- 
minent features in our political situation in this quarter of 
the world. 

Admitting the wisdom of that policy which dictated the 
preservation of Tippoo Sultaun’s power, at the close of the 
last war with Mysore, the spirit of our present Councils must 

‘be accommodated to the variation of circumstances, and to 
the actual position, character, and views of our enemies. 

In such a conjuncture of affairs I am persuaded that your 
honourable Court will be of opinion, that no object can be 
deemed, so urgent, or so necessary to the safety of your pos- 
sessions, as the effectual reduction of the only declared ally 
of France now existing among the native powers of India, 

If Tippoo Sultaun had been disposed to content himself 
with the quiet possession of his present dominions, if he could 
have been brought to a sense of his own peril in forming a 
connection with the French, the representations which I ad- 
dressed to him would have produced an early and salutary 
impression; whatever speculative opinions might have been 
entertained with respect to his interests, views, and power, 
the justice and moderation of the British Government would 
never have disturbed his tranquillity. But he resolved to 
attempt the recovery of his lost dominions at the hazard of 
those which he still retains ; and, in the ardour of his passion- 
ate pursuit, he overlooked not only the certain destruction of 
‘his own independence (the inevitable consequence even of the 
most prosperous success of any alliance with France ;) but 
also the predominant influence of the English East India 
Company, and the vigilance of its Governments, which would 
probably detect his treachery, and turn against his own em- 
pire the ruin which he had meditated against theirs. 

The secrecy of his councils, the promptitude of his re- 
sources, his constant and active state of equipment for war, 
added to the facility of his intercourse with the French 
through his remaining territories on the coast of Malabar, 
are the most dangerous circumstances in the actual condi- 
tion of his power and dominion, and constitute his principal 
means of offence. 


504 GENERAL HARRIS, TO March, 


If success should attend your arms in this war, I entertain 
a firm confidence that those dangers will either be wholly 
averted, or so considerably diminished, as to afford to your 
government in India the prospect of durable security, and 
genuine peace. 

I cannot close this letter without repeating to your honour- 
able Court the cordial expression of my entire satisfaction in 
the zealous and honourable co-operation of Lord Clive, as 
well as of all the Members of this Government. The bene- 
ficial effect of their cheerful and ready concurrence in for- 
warding all my views, is manifest in the rapid progress and 
perfect completion of the equipments of the army in the field, 
and furnishes a striking and salutary example of the inestima- 
ble advantages of unanimity and concord among your ser~ 
vants in India, ‘ 

‘ I have the honour to be, 
Honourable Sirs, with the greatest respect, 
your most obedient and faithful Servant, 


Mornineron. 


No. CLXI. 


The Earl of Mornington to Lieut.-General Stuart. 
Sr, Fort St. George, 21st March, 1799. 


I take the earliest opportunity to congratulate you on the 
brilliant and important success of the troops under your com- 
mand on the 6th of March. The victory is highly honourable 
to your ability and resolution, as well as to the promptitude 
and valour of those who executed your orders. I sincerely 
hope that the effect of this success may be felt not only in 
the additional security of the supplies collected in Coorg, 
but in the tranquillity of Malabar, and in accelerating the 
conclusion of the war. 

I request you to express to General Hartley, to Colonel 
Montresor, and to the several officers under your command, 
named in your despatch, the high sense which I entertain of 
their conduct on the 6th of March. 

Sincerely wishing that fortune may continue to throw in 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 505 


your way the happy means of adding to your own reputation, 
and to the security of the British power in India, 
I have the honour to remain, 
your faithful servant, 
Mornineron. 


No, CLXIIL. 
Copy of a Letter from General Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Lorn, Camp at Malvelly, 27th March, 1799. 


The army:marched this morning, many horse were seen as 
it approached Malvelly, and a large force appeared posted on 
a high commanding ridge, three miles beyond that place. 
The ruins of the fort were occupied by a part of our advanced 
guard, when at 10 o'clock a. m. Tippoo Sultaun opened a 
canonnade from several heavy guns, so distant, that I paid it 
little attention, and ordered the ground to be marked for en- 
campment; the shot, however, falling in our lines, and horsé 
menacing our picquet, the lst European brigade, and tw6 
cavalry corps, were ordered to support it on the right, while 
Colonel Wellesley’s division advanced on our left; this brought 
on a general action, in the course of which, a small body of 
horse charged the Ist European brigade, some individuals 
piercing the line, but most of them falling before it. Colonel 
Wellesley’s division turning the right flank of the enemy, gave 
occasion to General Floyd, with three regiments of cavalry, 
to disperse a cutchery of infantry, cutting many of them in 
pieces. The enemy retired about one o'clock, having been 
driven completely from every position he attempted to main- 
tain. It was my wish to have encamped on the ground he 
quitted, but a total want of water, obliged me to return to the 
ground I had first taken up at Malvelly. The whole of the 
enemy’s force was, I believe, in the field; their loss I cannot 
ascertain; ours is trifling. The conduct of the troops on this 
occasion was such as I could not but approve; our baggage 
was, during the action, well secured by the left wing of thes 
army, under Major-General Popham. I shall hereafter have 
the honour to transmit accurate returns of the small amount 
of our loss. I shall march to-morrow morning to a large tank 


506 SIR JOHN ANSTRUTHER, TO March, 


in the direction of the Cavery, to,secure water by approaching 
the river. 

Captain Kinnedy, of the 19th dragoons, Leonard and Stra- 
chan, native cavalry, Moore, 74th, are wounded. Part of his 
Highness the Nizam’s horse were engaged, and behaved ex- 
tremely well. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 
Gerorce Harris. 


No. CLXIV. 


Sir John Anstruther, Chief Justice at Bengal, to the Earl of Mornington. 


My pear Lorp, 7 Calcutta, 27th March, 1799. 


I had the pleasure of your very kind letter yesterday, and 
feel very much obliged to you for your attention at a period 
when so many important objects press upon your mind. 

You may believe the success of your measures gives me 
yery sincere pleasure, both upon public and private grounds. 
I was early satisfied of the necessity of the vigorous exer- 
tions of the governor of this country, and I am perfectly con- 
vinced, however forward the army may now be, that it would 
still have been at the gates-of Madras had you not gone to 
that settlement. Men concerned in the Government of India 
before your arrival, appear not only totally to have over- 
looked the nature of the war we were engaged in and the 
enemy we had to contend with, but to have contracted 4 
narrow limited view of the political interests of England in 
India, every difficulty was a reason for inaction, and temporary 
pecuniary embarrassment afforded a satisfactory ground for 
neglecting the essential, permanent and political interests of 
the country; you have taught them a larger way of viewing 
the question, and shown them that difficulties vanish before 
activity, courage, and perseverance. It was by the vigour of 
our Councils, and the active energy of our preparations, that 
we acquired this country, and it will cease to be ours if for 

any length of time our Government wants these qualities. By 
this time every state in India, and what, perhaps, is of as 
great consequence, every man in the Company’s service must 
be convinced they will not be wanting during your Govern: 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 507, 


ment; the consequence is, that this brush once over, you will; 
during your stay in India, have peace abroad and exertion at 
home. In all new Governments, but especially in all Indian 
Governments, much more depends upon the individual chas 
racter of the Governor than men are willing to allow, espe- 
cially those who have only looked to the old governments of Eu- 
rope, these may and have goneon with little variety or change by 
the force of custom and habit, such governments as this never 
could so go on; and I believe since the French revolution it 
will be long before the European governments do so again. 

Every day. increases our anxiety to hear from the army, 
although few have any doubt of the event, and the prepara- 
tions and exertions seem almost to set fortune at defiance. 
Tam not sure that I have made up my mind to wish submis- 
sion on the part of Tippoo without some action which shall 
disperse or destroy part of his army, and tarnish his military 
reputation. A treaty following a battle operates more pow- 
erfully upon the mind than one which leaves the army entire. 

‘We alk wish your presence here as soon as the more im- 
portant affairs will allow; there seems much fo do to regulate 
the submission of the provinces as well as the dominions of 
Oude. It does appear as if these provinces were not quite 
free from the turbulent spirit which agitates the world. Many 
here are disposed to ascribe it to the mild spirit of our Go- 
vernment, and the deerease of respect for the European 
character, and particularly to the diminished visible effects of 
authority, in consequence of the equality of rights introduced 
by the late system for the administration of justice; and, as 
usual in India, instead of correcting the present, would pro- 
pose to recur to the old. 

It may be here, and probably it is, that being more ac- 
quainted with the European character, acquaintance has 
diminished respect, and that security, while it has banished 
fear, has led a corrupt, unprincipled people, in many instances, 
to abuse that security, and to use it as the means of misusing 
a freedom of action they are not yet quite fitted to possess. 
It may also be true that they are as yet short sighted enough 
to ptefer present advantage to distant retribution. Yet still 
I am satisfied, that if the system be vigorously adhered to 
they will not only feel its benefits, but dread its effects, 
equally with the old. The existing evil seems to be the delay 


508 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March, 


and arrear of judicial business, which afford a security to 
injustice, in no way the fault of the system. This will proba- 
bly call for much of your attention. It strikes me that many 
of the regulations are passed with a distrust of the instru- 
ments who are to execute them, and in consequence all dis- 
cretionary authority is at an end, and every trifling dispute 
which: might be settled by a magistrate, like a justice of 
peace, in a summary way, is loaded with all the form and 
guarded with all the care as if it was a dispute about the 
Zemindary of Burdwan. 

I have insensibly got into a subject very foreign to your 
present business, which, anxiously as we wish you here, I 
hope will not be till it is completed; at all events, whatever 
you leave to be done, will be much better done for your hav- 
ing been upon the coast. 

lam sure amidst the pleasure you felt at the capture of 
La Forte, poor Cooke’s and Davies's fate would grieve you. 
I am sorry to say that poor Cooke is still in a very dange- 
rous way; after apparently recovering as well as possible, he 
was taken last week with a fever, and upon Friday and Sa- 
turday was in very great danger; upon Saturday an incis- 
sion was made into the wound in his side, and a seton 
passed through part of it. Monday and Tuesday he was 
rather better, although still feverish &nd very weak; his 
wound also put on a better appearance; to-day he is much 
the same, but still there are considerable apprehensions, more 
especially as the fever is not accounted for from any appa- 
rent cause. 
. * Tam, my dear Lord, 

Your’s, very sincerely, ever, 
J. ANSTRUTHERS. 


1799, COLONEL PALMER. 509 


No. CLXV. 


The Earl of Mornington to R. Liston, Esq., his Majesty’s Envoy Extraor- 
dinary.and Minister Plenipotentiary to the United States, Philadelphia, ' 


Sir, Fort St. George, April 1, 1799. 


I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your let- 
ters of the 22nd June and 17th July. 

TI have issued the necessary orders to the Board of Trade 
at Calcutta to forward by every means-in their power the 
views of the Captains of the American vessels recommended 
by you, and you may rely upon my manifesting every disposi- 
tion to favour such American ships as may find it expedient 
to touch at any port within the limits of the MexerainenicGs: 
neral of the British possessions in India. 

I have, &e. 
Mornineron, 


— 


No. CLXVI. 
The Earl of Mornington to Colonel. Palmer, Resident at Poonah. 


Sir, Fort St. George, 3rd April, 1799. 


From the tenor of your latest despatches, I conclude that 
Lieutenant-Colonel Little’s detachment. must have been re- 
called frem Jyeghur before you can receive this letter. 

The reasons which induced me to order the recall of the 
detachment must be obvious to the Durbar of Poonah; and, 
I imagine they have already been fully stated to you. It is, 
however, desirable that the whole subject of the late negoci- 
ations at Poonah and of the conduct of the Peishwa should 
undergo the most detailed and formal discussions—I, there- 
fore, direct you either at an audience, to be demanded for the 
purpose, dr by a written memorial to state to the Peishwa 
and to Nana Furnavese, without reserve, the whole course 
of my sentiments on this occasion, observing the general out- 
line of the statement contained in this letter. 

At the period of my arrival in Bengal, the Peishwa’s affairs 
were in the lowest condition of disorder and distress ; and the 
destruction of his authority, if not of his office, was menaced 


510 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


by Dowlut Rao Scindiah. In this crisis Baagy Rao urged 
the most earnest entreaties for the assistance of the Company's 
troops, and also for my good offices with the Nizam, who at 
that moment possessed the means of affording considerable 
assistance to the cause, either of the Peishwa or of Scindiah. 

‘The laws of my country restrained me from aiding the 
Peishwa in the manner required by himself, until the period ar- 
rived when the hostile preparations of Tippoo Sultaun released 
me from all restraint with respect to such engagements with 
any of the country powers as might appear te me beneficial in 
the event of hostilities with that Prince. I then embraced the 
earliest opportunity to offer to the Peishwa the aid which he 
had required in troops, as well as my mediation with the Ni- 
zam, on conditions not only just and liberal, but calculated to 
strengthen and perpetuate the internal authority of the 
Peishwa’s Government, by the accession of the whole conso- 
lidated weight of the triple alliance. The circumstances 
under which my propositions were made, as well as the nature 
of those propositions, and the various explanatory discussions 
by which they were followed, sufficiently demonstrated my 
utter repugnance to any officious interference in the Peishwa’s 
affairs, or to any intrigue calculated to favour the views of any 
party or individual at the Court. of Poonah, my object was 
evidently to give efficacy to the publiceengagements of the 
State by acceding to the declared wishes of the reigning 
Prince, to be extricated from .the usurpation of one of his 
feudatory Chiefs, and my offer of affording to the Peishwa a 
retreat at Bombay in the most desperate state of his affairs, 
is an unequivocal proof of the aecenty of my wishes for his 
safety and honor. 

To propositions founded on the Peishwa’s repeated and 
anxious solicitations; and directed to no other objects than 
the equal .and reciprocal benefit of the Company, of the 
Peishwa himself, and of the Nizam, I was surprised and dis- 
gusted to receive the unmerited return -of jealousy, distrust, 
‘and evasion. Since that period your despatches have abounded 
with the proofs of a system of studied neglect, of mysterious 
reserve, and of ungenerous suspicion, wholly irreconcileable 
with the character and spirit of alliance and friendship. 

Under these circumstances, the proposition for employing 
a-detachment of the Company’s troops with the Peishwa’s con- 


1799. COLONEL PALMER. 511 


tingent in the eventual prosecution of hostilities against Tippoo 
Sultaun, did not originate with me, but with the Peishwa 
himself. In acceding to that proposition, I manifested a pecu- 
liar consideration for the embarrassments of his Highness’s 
situation by waving the Company’s just title to an augmen- 
tation of the former subsidy; proportiomed to the actual 
increase of the charges of the detachment. - In this instance, 
a degree of indulgence was shewn to the Peishwa’s pecuniary 
difficulties, which has not been extended to the Nizam, whose 
present subsidy is calculated upon the actual charges of the 
detachment in his Highness’s-service. 

In order to comply with the wishes of the Peishwa for the 
service of the detachment in question, J made considerable 
sacrifices of interest and convenience, in the confidence that 
his Highness applied for the detachment with a sincere desire 
of cooperating, to the extent of his power, with the Company 
and the Nizam, against the common enemy. 

But it appears that, in this instance also, my compliance 
with the Peishwa’s own wishes has only served to excite in 
his mind fresh emotions of distrust, and to open a new scene 
of subterfuge and insincerity. Every artifice of vexatious 
delay has been employed to frustrate the necessary means of 
enabling the detachment to move from Jyeghur. It has been 
placed in a position, where its services can contribute nothing 
to the common cause. The necessary funds for its subsist- 
ence have been neglected; :and your repeated attempts to 
draw the attention of the Peishwa to your just representations 
have been treated with.a disregard, which demonstrates that 
in applying for the use of the detachment, the Peishwa had 
nothing less in view than to employ it .in active operations 
against the enemy. 

Such conduct has a necessary tendency to impair the effi- 
ciency of the triple alliance, .and to encourage the hopes of 
Tippoo Sultaun. 

The detention of the Sultaun’s vakeels-at Poonah, in con- 
tempt of my repeated remonstrances, must. produce effects of 
the same mischievous tendency. The-arguments of Nana, 
drawn from the last war with Mysore, are not applicable to 
the present case. The connection between the Court of 
Poonah and the Company had not at that time been-so de- 
fined and cemented as to render the admission of vakeels from 


512 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


Tippoo Sultaun incompatible with the spirit of the subsisting 
treaties. But under the present circumstances, the Peishwa 
must be considered to be actually at war with the Sultaun; 
and in this case, therefore, the reception of ambassadors, in 
opposition to the declared sense of the allies actually engaged 
in the war, is nearly equivalent to a violation of faith, and to 
a dissolution of the alliance. 

These considerations compelled me to direct that the de- 
tachment under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Little should 
quit a position in which its services must be equally lost to 
the Peishwa and to the Company. 

I am fully aware of the justice of Nana’s observations on 
the present distracted state of the Peishwa’s Government, and 
its consequent inability to engage with effect in foreign war. 
It would be equally unjust and ungenerous to take advantage 
of any failure in the Peishwa’s engagements, arising from a 
defect of power, and from the unfortunate condition of his 
affairs ; even in this view, however, I might remark, that the 
actual distress of the Peishwa js to be attributed principally, 
if not solely, to his unaccountable rejection of my propositions 
of the 8th July, 1798,* which would have placed his dignity, 
authority and power, on an immovable foundation. 

If the Peishwa had candidly declared his present inability 
to assist in the war against Tippoo, accompanying that de- 
claration by any satisfactory proofs of good faith, or good 
will, I should have lamented, but I never should have cen- 
sured his misfortune. But the dismission of the vakeels of 
Tippoo Sultaun, an amicable attention to the just representa- 
tions of the British Resident, and a more upright and sincere 
policy in the demand of the detachment were within the 
power of the Peishwa, even in his present reduced condition, 
and the ancient friendship subsisting between his family and 
the Company, as well as the peculiar anxiety which | have 
manifested for his prosperity and honour, entitled me to ex- 
pect from him, in his intercourse with the British Government, 
a disposition of more candour, integrity, and justice. What- 
ever may be my disappointment, it shall not influence my 
conduct in the event of any treaty of peace with Tippoo 
Sultaun. 


* See page 96. 


1799, GENERAL HARRIS. : 513 


It is evident, that, if the Peishwa, either from want of will 
or power, shall continue neutral in the war, he cannot be 
entitled, on any ground of right, to share with the other 
allies the eventual advantages i; the terms of peace. 

My confident expectation is, that the allies will speedily 
reduce the. vindictive spirit of Tippoo Sultaun to submission 
without the aid of the Peishwa; and if that event should take 
place, notwithstanding the perverse and forbidding policy of 
the Court of Poonah, I shall not fail to secure for the Peishwa 
an equal participation with the other allies in any cessions 
which may be enforced from Tippoo Sultaun. I authorize 
you to make this declaration, in the most unequivocal terms, 
to the Peishwa and to Nana. If even this declaration shall 
fail to excite the Peishwa to employ every practicable effort 
to fulfil his defensive engagements with the Company, I trust 
it will, at least, serve to prove the disinterested attachment of 
the British Government to every branch of the triple alliance. 

T am, &c. 
MornineTon. 


No. CLXVIL 


a 
The Earl of Mornington to Lieutenant-General Harris. 
Sir, Fort St. George, April 3rd, 1799. 


I take the earliest opportunity of congratulating you, on the 
important success of the Troops under your Command en- 
gaged with Tippoo Sultaun’s Army on the 27th, of March, 
and I request that you will signify to the Officers and Men, 
who distinguished themselves on that day, my cordial appro- 
bation of their services. 

It gives me particular pleasure to learn from you that the 
Nizam’s forces have conducted themselves with so much 
credit, and I must also request you, to convey my thanks to . 
them, in the most public manner. 

Tam very happy to inform you, that Mrs Harris is quite well, 
and highly pleased at this early instance of your success. I 
entertain no doubt that victory will continue to attend the 
powerful army under your Command. 

1 have the honour to be, &c. 
Morniyeron. 
VOL. I. : 21 


514 GENERAL HARRIS, TO April, 


No. CLXVIII. 
& 
Lieut.-Gen. Harris, to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Lorn, Camp before Seringapatam April, 5th, 1799. 


have particular satisfaction in reporting to your Lordship 
that the army under my command, encamped this morning 
before Seringapatam ; taking up the position, which with little 
variation it will be expedient to occupy, till the Division under 
General Stuart joins me. A strong detachment, commanded 
by Major General Floyd, marches to morrow morning to facili- 
tate the junction, and I take the occasion of addressing your 
Lordship, by what I consider as a safe channel of communi- 
cation, to report generally what I have by various hircarahs 
attempted to transmit to your Lordship as the Army advanced 
on its march. 

T left. Killamungalum on the 10th of March ; and our first 
movement shewed a very serigus deficiency in the Bullock 
department, particularly in those attached to the Commissary 
General of Stores. The succeeding march of the 12th, al- 
though short and with an intermediate day of halt, marked 
this deficiency more strongly ; crippled in our movements 
from this cause, our marches have been tedious though short; 
our halts have been frequent and our progress has been slow, 
unremitting attention to every species of arrangement by which 
the store department could be assisted or lightned, was in- 
dispensably necessary: some losses were daily sustained. The 
zeal of individuals was called forth with considerable advan- 
tage, and we have succeeded in surmounting these difficulties, 
and taking our position before the capital of Mysore, with an 
ordnance equipment which I hope is amply sufficient for its 
reduction. 

The army marched by the route of Anicul, Talgautpo- 
ram, Cagliaporam, Kankanhilly, and Sultanpett to Malavelly 
where I arrived on the morning of the 27th of March: The 
army of 'Tippoo Sultaun occupying the heights beyond the 
town from which at about 10 o’clock he commenced a distant 
cannonade ; some shot falling in the line marked for our camp, 
and a body of horse menacing the picquets of our right, it 
became necessary to advance corps for their support, which 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 515 
led to a general action. The Infantry line of the Enemy 
was on commanding ground in rear of his artillery. His 
Cavalry advanced under cover of his cannon, and a cutcherie 
or Brigade of Infantry was pushed forward in front of each 
flank of his Line, mixed with many rocket men. The right 
wing of the army under my command formed on the picquets 
of the right; Colonel Wellesley’s division, advanced from a 
considerable distance on the left to attack the right flank of 
the enemy, and Major General Floyd with the 19th and two 
regiments of native cavalry moved between these corps. The 
25th dragoons and a native regiment keeping in check a body 
of the enemy’s cavalry, which had assembled on our right, 
while the left wing of the army and a regiment of native 
cavalry remained halted to protect our stores and baggage. 
The weak state of the artillery bullocks considerably retarded 
the advance and formation of our line, with which they were 
unable to keep pace. A small body ofhorse, profiting by this 
circumstance, made a daring charge on the Ist. European 
brigade ; they were received wxh firmness, and repulsed with 
considerable loss; their infantry in front of our right, being 
at the same time driven from their position. On the left, the 
corps of infantry called the Kerim Ketcherie advanced on 
Colonel Wellesley’s column. His Majesty’s 33rd. regiment 
which opposed soon put them in confusion, and the cavalry 
under Major General Floyd advancing at this moment to the 
charge, cut them to pieces. Six colours were taken. The 
retreat of the enemy soon became general; their cannon were 
drawn off, and at two o'clock the action had entirely ceased ; 
our line halting on the heights whence theirs had been driven: 
a total want of water preventing our encamping there, the 
line returned to the ground originally marked for its: encamp- 
ment at Malavelly. The loss of the enemy as collected from 
various accounts received since the action, amcunted to near 
two thousand killed and wounded; a return of the casualties 
of this army is enclosed. 

At an early period of our march it had occurred to me, that 
if it were possible to cross the Cavery, at a ford some distance 
below Seringapatam, the measure might be attended with 
considerable advantage, by embarrassing the motions of the 
enemy, defeating the preparations he might have made to 
oppose us on the Northern side of the river, and facilitating 


516 GENERAL HARRIS, TO April, 


our"communication with the army of Malabar and the force 
under Colonel Brown and Read. In addition to these induce- 
ments the ford was said to b& easy; we had reason to hope 
the country was still undestroyed, and the southern part of 
Seringapatam was considered as the least capable of defence. 
The destruction of the tanks on the road from Malvelly to 
Arakeery, rendered an oblique movement towards the Cavery 
less liable to suspicion than it might otherwise have been, and 
we arrived on the 29th of March at Sosilly on the Cavery, 
before any measures had heen taken to oppose our movement, 
by destroying forage, or driving off cattle, of which we here 
procured a considerable supply. ‘The army crossed the river 

the next day without difficulty, and after halting on the 30th 

to arrange our departments, marched on the succeeding 

morning towards Harwelly, the weak state of our cattle, the 

barren nature of the soil, the total destruction of forage, which 
immediately followed our passage of the river, and the 
necessity for regulating our marches by the situation of water, 
the road leaving the river at some distance on the right, 
obliged us to make five marches from Sosilly to our present 
camp, three of which have been in sight of Seringapatam, 
‘Numbers of horse have daily watched our motions, but, al- 
though the ground was favourable, no attempt has been made 
to oppose our progress. 

The detachment with Major General Floyd consists of H. 
M. 73rd regiment, three Bengal and two coast battalions of 
Sepoys with their guns, and one regiment of European and 
three of native cavalry, with their galloper guns ; and a party 
of the Nizam’s horse. During the absence of this party, I shall 
be employed in preparing materials for the more active ope- 
ration of the siege, which wil commence with the junction of 
General Stuart’s force and I am happy to add that on this side 
of the river, I apprehend no want of materials for the siege. 
We have a sufficient stock of provisions to subsist the troops 
beyond the time, when the union of our forces, from the op- 
posite coasts may enable me to spare an army of sufficient 
force, to cover our communication with the stations, whence 
our supplies are prepared to join us; the cattle now with the 
camp mustin the mean time suffer greatly, but this is no longer 
an object of consequence. 

Numbers of people are employed on this side of Seringa- 


1799, THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 517 


patam, in repairing the fort. It seems to us to require all 
their labour, appearing to be in a very imperfect state.* 

I cannot conclude without expressing to your Lordship, in 
the strongest terms, the obligations I feel myself under to 
Meer Allum Bahadur, for the promptitude with which he has 
in every instance met my wishes in the cooperation, required 
from the forces of His Highness the Nizam. Their aid in 
transporting the shot, has been of the greatest use, and it is 
an act of justice due to Captain Malcolm, to report to your 
Lordship that his unceasing zeal, in pointing out the manner 
in which the contingent could promote the common cause 
of the allies, has been equalled only by the chearful readiness 
shewn by Meer Allum, in adopting his suggestions. 

I have the honor to be, 
My Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient 
and faithful Servant, 
Grorce Harris, 


No. CLXIX, 


The Earl of Mornington to Colonel William Palmer. 
Sir, Fort St. George, 7th April, 1799. 


However proper it might be on general grounds that you 
should accompany the Peishwa in the event of his being 
obliged to retire from Poonah, yet as it is to be apprehended 
that your doing so might lead to an interruption of the com- 
munication between Bombay and the other Presidencies, 
which it is of peculiar importance to maintain in the present 
conjuncture, I must desire that*you will suspend the execu- 
tion of that measure, in the event of the Peishwa’s flight, 
until you shall receive my further instructions on the subject. 

Tam, &c., 
MornineTon. 


* Lord Cornwallis’s attack was directed to the northern side of the 
Fort of Seringapatam, Tippoo therefore expected General Harris to make 
his attack on the same quarter, where he had prepared means of resist- 
ance; but General Harris’s most judicious and able movement to the 
southern side of the Fort, had all the effect of a surprise, and entirely 
disconcerted Tippoo’s plans of defence. 


518 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


No. CLXX. 


= 
Lieut.-Gen. Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 
My Lorp, Camp before Seringapatam, 7th April, 1799. 


After crossing the Cauvery on the 30th ultimo at Sosilly, 
where the army halted the next day, I advanced by easy 
marches to this place, and took up my position within two 
miles south-west of Seringapatam without opposition. On 
the 5th of this month, wishing to occupy the post where Gen. 
Abercromby’s picquets were attacked in 1792, and the large 
tope and village of Sultanpetta, both were attacked the 
night of our arrival, but owing (in great measure) to the 
darkness of the night, the attack on the first only was par- 
tially suecessful. We sustained some loss from the fire of the 
enemy, which continued heavily till late next morning, when 
the posts were again attacked with perfect and rapid success. 
They give this army a very strong position, and greatly con- 
fine that of the enemy. Major Colin Campbell, of the 1st 
native regiment ; Lieutenant George Nixon, and Tulla, of the 
12th; and Fitzgerald, of the 33rd, were killed; in these 
attacks Lieutenants R, Nixon aud King of his Majesty’s 12th 
regiment, “and Brooke of Bengal artillery, wounded. Gen. 
Floyd marched on the morning of the 6th to join General 
Stuart, with his infantry and four cavalry corps, twenty field- 
pieces, and a body of the Nizam’s horse. This force I con- 
sider superior to any thing that can be opposed to it by the 
enemy. ‘The army has now taken up its position for the 
siege. 

Gerorce Harris. 
seks, igh sche Rigen 
No. CLXXI. 


The Earl of Mornington to the Hon. Jonathan Duncan, 

Sir, Fort St. George, 7th April, 1799. 

Although I have already addressed to you my public con- 
gratulations upon the brilliant and important victory gained 
by Lieut.-General Stuart over the flower of the army of 
Mysore, commanded by Tippoo Sultaun in person, on the 
6th of March, I cannot omit the repetition of my sense of the 
honour of that day in this private communication. 


1799. THE HON. JONATHAN DUNCAN. 519 


The merits of Generals Stuart and Hartley, as well as of 
Colonel Montresor and the other officers have seldom been 
equalled and never surpassed in India; and the most happy 
consequences may be expected from this early and decisive 
success, not only in bringing the present war to a speedy and 
honourable conclusion, but in establishing the character of 
our arms among the refractory inhabitants of Malabar. We 
may reasonably hope that the effects of this victory will long 
be felt in the dejection of Tippoo’s adherents on that coast, 
and among our subjects in the settlement of tranquillity and 
order on permanent foundations. 

You wiil have learnt with satisfaction by the extraordinary 
Gazette forwarded from hence, that Tippoo Sultaun’s army 
met with an equally warm reception from General Harris on 
the 27th of March. To this intelligence I have thé satisfac- 
tion to be able to add, that all my private accounts from Gen. 
Harris’s army leave no doubt that the whole of that immense 
equipment will reach Seringapatam in time to commence the 
siege under circumstances which must render the fall of the 
place inevitable, unless prevented by the previous submission 
of the enemy. This is the universal opinion of every officer 
of experience and judgment in the army. 

I shall take an opportunity hereafter of communicating to 
you the terms of peace on which I am resolved to insist. 

I approved your instructions to Agha Abul Hussun, sent 
on a mission to Scind, in consequence of my former sug- 
gestion. 

The prospect of establishing a British factory in that coun- 
try appears to me to be a very desirable object, not so much 
with a view to commercial as to political advantages. I, 
therefore, wish that you should by all means encourage the 
favourable disposition of Futteh Ali Khan, and endeavour, if 
possible, to settle a factory in Scind. Whenever such a fac- 
tory shall be established your attention will of course be 
directed to facilitate the means of communication with it, as 
the most probable mode of obtaining authentic information 
relating to Zemaun Shah. I do not see the necessity of en- 
tering into any engagements with Futteh Ali Khan, which 
might hereafter impose on us the obligation of supporting 
him against Zemaun Shah by any further exertion than by 
furnishing him with arms and ammunition. To this extent 


520 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO. April, 


I authorize you to afford him whatever assistance may appear 
necessary. Assistance of this nature will, probably, be sufhi- 
cient to induce him to admit a British factory ; but if the fac- 
tory cannot be established otherwise than by contracting 
extensive engagements for the eventual support of Futteh 
Ali, the object must be relinquished. 

I entirely approve your plan of raising a corps for garrison 
duty at Bombay. On this subject I would only suggest two 
considerations which I wish you to keep in view in any mi- 
litary association or militia corps which either has been or may 
be formed under your Government. First, the necessity of 
maintaining, in the fullest extent, the unqualified right of 
your Government to command the personal services of all its 
subjects in the event of danger to the Presidency. 

Secontlly, to admit no constitution or establishment of any 
military corps which shall exempt it from the constant con- 
troul of Government, as well in the appointment of officers, 
-as in every matter of discipline and subordination. An at- 
tention to these principles is essentially necessary to the 
preservation of the authority and vigour of Government. 
And it is not difficult to conciliate these principles with every 
degree of encouragement to the voluntary zeal and loyalty of 
the subject. I have found no impediment in establishing the 
militia at Calcutta under a system which equally secures the 
power of Government and the ease and honour of the indivi- 
duals serving in the militia. 

I observe a complaint of the general ignorance of the junior 
servants, sent to the coast of Malabar, in the native lan- 
guages. I,wish to receive from you a particular report on 
this subject, accompanied by the suggestion of such regula- 
tions as may appear to you most eligible for the purpose of 
encouraging and enforcing the study of the native languages 
among the junior servants of your Presidency, 

I received with much gratitude your offer of assistance at 
Benares, and I consider your readiness to return to your 
former station in that country as a strong proof of your zeal 
for the public service. I need not assure you that I shall 
most willingly accept the offer of your services, if upon my 
return to Bengal I should find it necessary to call for them. 

Youlare aware that the arrangement could not be made in 

the only manner in which it could be acceptable to you with- 


1779. THE HON. JONATHAN DUNCAN. 521 


out a total alteration of the judicial and other establishments 
now existing at Benares. I have appointed Mr. Vanderhey- 
den to succeed to Mr. Cherry’s station, and I have great 
hopes that under Mr. Vanderheyden the present system may 
answer the desirable end of composing the unhappy commo- 
tions which have lately disturbed the peace of that country. 
If my hopes should be disappointed I shall not forget your 
obliging and public spirited offer. 

I entirely approve your proceedings with respect to the 
French supposed to have been at Muscat, and I cannot re- 
commend to you more earnestly than I feel the absolute 
necessity of keeping a most vigilant eye on the proceedings 
of any French who may arrive in Persia, or on your side of 
India. 

Tam very glad to hear of your intention to visit the coast 
of Malabar in October. I should hope, at an early period, to 
receive a full statement of the actual condition of that pro- 
vince, as well as of the means of improving its system of 
police and revenue. I suspect that your present settlement 
is founded upon a principle wholly irreconcileable with the 
tranquillity of the country. It appears to me that we have 
not kept faith with the different Rajahs and Chieftains ac- 
cording to the terms on which we received the country at the 
conclusion of the last war with Mysore. You will set me 
right if I have conceived an erroneous opinion on the subject ; 
but if the fact be as I suppose, you may be assured that I 
shall be ready to repair the breach which has been made in 
the national faith at any expense, being convinced that it 
will ever be impossible to introduce order into,any coun- 
try in contempt of the confidence and respect of the inhabi- 
tants. ; 

I wish you to understand that I shall always be happy to 
receive from your Government the fullest details, either pub- 
lic or private, relating to your local department, with this 
single reservation, that your communications shall not be 
given in a manner either to impede the prompt execution of 
those measures which I deem necessary for the public ser- 
vice, or to draw me into any controversial public correspon- 
dence in defence of my own orders. With my most cordial 
assurance of every sentiment of personal confidence, and of 


522 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


every disposition to assist you in the discharge of the import- 
ant duties confided to your particular care, 
I have the honour to be, Sir, 
with the highest respect and esteem, 
your most faithful Servant, 
Morwninerton. 


No. CLXXII. 


From Lieut.-General Harris to the Earl of Mornington, enclosing a Letter 
Jrom Tippoo Sultaun to General Harris, received the 9th April ; and his 
answer. 


My Lorp, Camp before Seringapatam, 9th April, 1799. 

I this morning received a letter of the 6th, from General 
Stuart, who was to march on the 7th, in consequence of a 
letter he had received from me, of the 4th, informing him of the 
intended march of Gen. Floyd’s detachment, which I trust will 
join the Bombay army this day, near Periapatam. I expect 
their united force here the 14th instant. I also this day re- 
ceived a letter from Tippoo Sultaun, a copy of which and of 
my proposed answer is inclosed. The persons who brought 
it were informed that “a reply would be sent when neces- 
sary.” Nothing else has occurred deserving of report. 

Gerorce Harris, 


From Tippoo Sultaun to General Harris. 


The Governor-General Lord Mornington, Behauder, sent 
me a letter, copy of which is enclosed. You will 
understand it. I have adhered firmly to treaties;. what 
then is the meaning of the advance of the English armies and 
the occurrence of hostilities. Inform me. What need I say 
more ? 


From General Harris to Tippoo Sultaun. 
10th April, 1799. 
Your letter enclosing copies of the Governor-General’s letter 
has been received. For the advance of the English and 
Allied armies and for the actual hostilities, I refer you to the 
several letters of the Governor-General, which are sufficiently 
explanatory on the subject. 


1799. TO THE COMMISSIONERS OF MALABAR. §23 


No. CLX XIII, 


The Earl of Mornington to the Commissioners of Malabar. 
GENTLEMEN, Fort St. George, 10th April, 1799. 

The details contained in your letters of the 12th and 17th 
January, of the measures which had then been adopted, under 
my orders, for the purpose of establishing large magazines of 
grain in the district of Coorga, afforded me the highest satis- 
faction, and the distinguished success of those measures, as re- 
ported in your subsequent advices, has sufpassed my most 
sanguine expectation. 

The zeal and ability, with which this important service has 
been executed, reflect the highest credit on all the civil and 
military officers concerned in conducting it. My particular 
approbation and acknowledgements are due on this occasion to 
Major-General Hartley, to Mr. Uthoff and to Capt. Mahony. 

The Rajah of Coorga has seconded my views, and the ex- 
ertions of the Company’s servants on this occasion, with a de- 
gree of spirit, energy, and fidelity, which confirm the high 
character he had justly obtained in the late war. I have 
expressed my sense of his zealous attachment and honourable 
services in a letter to him, which will be forwarded to you by 
the Persian translator, with a copy for your information. I 
think it proper to apprise you that I have determined, (as a 
testimony of the satisfaction which his conduct has afforded 
me, and with a view of encouraging the imitation of his 
example among the other tributories of the Company,) to re- 
linquish the tribute at present payable by the Rajah, and to 
substitute some annual acknowledgment of the ‘Company’s 
claim to his allegiance. The Government of Bombay will 
receive the necessary directions from me for giving effect to 
this arrangement. 

Ihave no doubt that the exertions of the Rajah to collect 
grain for the use of the army will be continued, (as long as they 
shall be necessary) with the same spirit which has hitherto 
distinguished them ; and I am equally confident that those 
exertions will be ably and zealously seconded by you, and by 
those under your orders on the coast of Malabar. 

I approve your appointment of Captain Mahony to be resi- 
dent with the Rajah of Coorga; and the instructions with which 
you furnished Captain Mahony on that occasion. 


524 MAJOR-GENERAL FLOYD, TO April, 


In one of your letters which is without date, but which 
appears to have been written about the 5th of March, you 
have thought it necessary to assure me, after a representation 
of the defenceless state of the province of Malabar, “ that 
you are disposed to submit to temporary inconveniencies, and 
evils, even to a considerable extent, rather than purchase pre- 
sent tranquillity at the expense of making permanent sacrifices 
either to Tippoo Sultaun, or any of the native Chiefs of Mala- 
bar, of a nature unbecoming the dignity or rightful interests 
of the Company.” 

Entertaining the high sense which I have already expressed 
of your merits in the discharge of your proper duties, I am 
concerned to be under the necessity of observing that the 
tenor of this passage is utterly incompatible with the depend- 
ent and subordinate nature of the commission under which 
you act. It is your duty to submit implicitly to whatever 
inconveniencies may result from the execution of the orders 
proceeding from the superior authorities of the British 
Government in India, and arising not from partial or local, but 
from general and comprehensive views of the public interests. 
Your authority is not competent in any case, or for any 
purpose whatever, to make either a permanent or a temporary 
sacrifice of the rights, dignity, or intersts of the Company to 
Tippoo Sultaun or to any other power. 

It is my duty to call your attention to any point in which 
you may appear to have formed an erroneous opinion of the 
limits or nature of your powers; and I now discharge that 
duty with a full conviction of the uprightness of your inten- 
tions, and of your sincere zeal for the promotion of the public 
service. 

I approve the letters despatched by your Resident to the 
Pychy Rajah and to Yemaun Nair, of which copies were 
enclosed in your letter of the 16th March; and I concur in 
opinion with you, that those persons are not likely to aid the 
cause of Tippoo Sultaun, particularly after the defeat which 
that Prince has lately sustained from the army under the 
command of General Stuart. Accordingly, I am happy to 
think that the tranquillity of the province of Malabar will not 
be disturbed by the open or secret movements of those 
Nairs. 

I entirely agree with you in your construction of the letter 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 525 


from Ayappin to the Rajah of Coorga, a copy of which was 
enclosed in your despatch of the 25th March ; and I desire you 
will signify to the Rajah of Coorga, that I have viewed with 
the utmost contempt and indignation, this weak, and insidious 
attempt of Tippoo Sultaun to cast doubts upon the faith of an 
Ally, whose attachment, fortitude, wisdom, and integrity have 
secured the affection and admiration of the British Govern- 
ment. 

I entirely approve the spirit and substance of the instruc- 
tions contained in the extract of your President's letter to the 
Resident with the Rajah of Coorga, under date the 30th ult., 
and enclosed in your despatch of the same date. It is my 
anxious desire that you should continue to recommend senti- 
ments of humanity and moderation, not only to the Rajah of 
Coorga but to all the other tributaries of the company on the 
coast of Malabar, whenever the occasion may admit of your 
interposition to mitigate the unavoidable calamities of war. 


Iam, Gentlemen, &c. 
Morninoron. 


No. CLXXIV. 


Major-General Floyd to the Earl of Mornington. 
My Lorp, Camp at Periapatam, April 10th, 1799. 

As it is possible General Harris’s despatches may not have 
reached you, I beg leave to give a short statement of events, 
as far as have come to my knowledge. 

On the 27th of March the enemy was seen, in force, on 
the high ground west of Malavilly. General Harris, with the 
right wing, attacked the enemy in front. Two regiments of 
cavalry supported. Colonel Wellesley, with the Nizam’s army, 
took a most judicious situation on the enemy’s right flank, 
and attacked it, and threw it intoconfusion. I was observing, 
with three regiments of cavalry, between the right flank of 
Colonel Wellesley and the left of General Harris, and 
charged and destroyed a great number of the enemy’s infan- 
try, taking six stands of colours, About the same period, a 
number of the enemy’s horse had charged the European bri- 
gade of the right wing; several of them were killed, and the 


526 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


rest fled; the infantry also were repulsed by ours, and the 
whole retired out of our reach. It seems, from subsequent 
accounts, that about 500 wounded men reached the enemy’s 
camp, and that their loss was about 2000 men. Our loss 
amounted to about 7 or 8 killed, and about 40 wounded— 
and about 45 horses killed and wounded. No officer killed, 
and four only wounded. Ihave no copy of the return by me. 

On the 29th March the army encamped at Sosilly, on the 
bank of the Cavery. Here we found a great collection of 
inhabitants, and cattle, and rice, and a good deal of paddy 
and other grain. The army was considerably refreshed. 

30th of March, the army had all crossed the river at a good 
ford. 

5th of April, the army took its situation before Sermgapa- 
tam at the west point of the fort. That night Lieut.-Colonel 
Shawe took possession of a post between seventeenand eighteen 
hundred yards from the fort. An attack was also made by 
Colonel Wellesley on a tope, but the troops were withdrawn 
on our part—a spent ball, as I have heard, struck the Colonel 
on the knee, but it did not prevent his walking. 

6th April, early in the morning, I marched off for Peria- 
patam with four regiments of cavalry, one regiment European 
(73d,) and five battalions native infantry, and about 2000 of 
the Nizam’s horse. All last night, and most of this day, 
there was a continued peal of small arms, and, occasionally, 
heavy guns. We still hear heavy guns at intervals, but I 
have no account whatever since we left the army. 

8th April, I encamped at Periapatam. My signals were 
answered, and I had communication with General Stuart that 
night. 

9th April, I rode over to General Stuart, and after some 
arrangements, returned to camp; immediately a considerable 
number of the enemy’s horse appeared, and hovered round 
most of the day without effecting anything, but with some 
slight loss on their part. 

10th April, General Stuart joined me this day, with rice 
and some other, articles for between 30 and 40 days for his 
army, and a quantity of military stores. We proceed to-mor- 
row to join the army at Seringapatam, and shall probably 
reach it in five marches. Having no cypher I refrain from 


1799 GENFRAL HARRIS. 527 


some particulars; the troops are, in general, healthy, and in 
high spirits, and full of good will. 
I have the honour to be, 
with great respect, my Lord, 
your most obedient and humble Servant, 
J. Froyp, M. G. 

On my marching from hence to-morrow, the communication 

will be entirely closed on this side. 


No. CLXXV. 


The Earl of Mornington to Lieut.-General Harris. 
Sir, Fort St. George, 17th of April, 1799. 


‘I had yesterday the satisfaction to receive your letter of 
the 7th instant, and I congratulate you on the complete suc- 
cess with which you have established your position for the 
siege of Seringapatam. 

I approve and admire the judgment and alacrity which 
mark the detachment of the force under General Floyd on 
the same morning on which you established your posts, by 
the action you describe. 

The position which you have taken, among other advan- 
tages, is highly important in the facility which it would afford 
you of detaching a force against any body of French which 
might effect a landing on the Malabar coast, either before or 
during the approaching monsoon. [ trust that our great 
naval superiority will secure us from this danger; but you 
will learn from General Stuart that I have considered the 
possibility of the event, and have been anxious to provide 
against it. I wish you to give the matter your joint and 
serious consideration. 

I beg you will offer my hearty thanks to those officers and 
corps who distinguished themselves in the attacks of the 5th 
and 6th instant. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 


Mornineron, 


528 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


No. CLX XVI. 


The Earl of Mornington to his Excellency Sir Alured Clarke. 
My Dear Sir, Fort St. George, 17th April, 1799. 

Thave just received the communication which you instructed 
Mr. Barlow to make to me on the subject of the message ad- 
dressed to you by Shums-ud-dowlah. 

I entirely approve your judgment in referring so delicate. 
and important a question to my decision. Whatever tempo- 
rary inconveniences may occasionally result from the delay 
incident_to such references, the principle on which they are 
founded ought to be strictly observed in all cases of great 
moment. It is equally certain that no disadvantages can 
arise from such a system of precaution which will not ulti- 
mately be overbalanced by its general benefits and permanent 
effects. The main spring of such a machine as the Govern- 
ment of India can never be safely touched by any other hand 
than that of the principal mover. 

I am persuaded that you have taken the proper steps to 
secure Calcutta against the danger of a sudden attack from 
the river. If the Imaum should assist General Buonaparte 
(whom I believe to be still in Egypt, with 17 or 18,000 men,) 
their object would be to sail directly up the Hoogly, and to 
surprize Calcutta. 

I am concerned to observe the slow progress made by 
Major-General Stuart against Vizier Ali and his banditti. I 
scarcely know a point of more importance to our interests in 
India than the capture or death of that young assassin, and 
the early dispersion of his followers. 

; I am, &c. 


Mornineron. 


No. CLX XVII. 


The Earl of Mornington to the Court of Directors. 
HonovraB Le Sirs, Fort St. George, 20th April, 1799. 
I now proceed to submit to you a detail of the operations 
of the armies in Mysore. 
The army of Bombay, under the command of Lieutenant 
General Stmart, marched from Cananore on the 21st of Feb., 


1799. THE COURT OF DIRECTORS. 529 


arrived at the head of the Poodicherrum Ghaut on the 25th 
of the same month, and took: post at Sedapore and Sedasere 
_on the 2nd of March, for the protection of the large supplies 
which had been collected at Verajunder Pett, in the district 
of Coorga. From these positions, on Lieutenant-General 
“Harris's approach, Lieutenant-General Stuart intended to 
form a junction with the army of Madras. 

The army of Madras, under the command of Lieutenant+ 
General Harris, entered the territory of Mysore on the 5th of 
March, and its operations commenced by the reduction of 
several forts upon the frontier. Some of these forts sur- 
rendered without any resistance, and none of them were 
defended with spirit, although the Sultaun appears, from the 
improved establishment on which he had placed their garri- 
sons, to have provided as well as he could for a different 
result. 

The progress of the army of Madras, owing to its ample 
equipments in every department, particularly in that of the 
ordnance necessary for the siege of Seringapatam, was una- 
voidably slow. Its movements, however, were but little im- 
peded by the enemy. Considerable bodies of horse hovered 
about its line of march, but without any other effect than 
that of rendering the communication with the Company’s ter- 
ritories extremely difficult. Some parties of horse attacked 
the Nizam’s contingent, and his Highness’s cavalry are 
reported by General Harris to have conducted themselves 
with great spirit, 2 circumstance which may partly be attri- 
buted to the improvements recently introduced into. the disci- 
pline and establishments of his Highness’s cavalry at the 
recommendation of the British Resident under my instruc- 
tions. 

At the period when the army of Madras entered Mysore, 
Tippoo Sultaun was supposed to be encamped in the vicinity 
of Maddoor, and to be preparing to move in the direction of 
Bangalore for the purpose of opposing the progress of the 
Madras army, in the event of Lieutenant-General Harris 
actually passing the frontier. But it soon appeared that 
although the Sultaun had so recently affected‘a disposition to 
admit an embassy from the British Government, he had pro- 
bably no other view than to conceal the design which he had 
formed of striking a sudden and early blow against the army 

VOL. I. 2M 


530 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


‘of Bombay. For without allowing me the same time to 
answer his last letter which he had taken for replying to those 
addressed by me to him, and without waiting to hear of the 
actual commencement of hostilities on the part of the British 
Government, he came to.the resolution of attacking the army 
of Bombay then assembled beyond the line of his frontier, in 
the district of Coorga, under the. command of Lieut.-General 
Stuart. — * 

For this purpose Tippoo, taking with him the flower of his 
army, appears to have marched from his camp near Cenapa- 
tam, on the 28th of February, (when General Harris was still 
within the Company’s territories,) and moving rapidly in the 
direction of Periapatam, to have arrived there on the morn- 
ing of the 5th of March, (being the same day on which Lieu- 
tenant-Gen. Harris entered Mysore on the eastern frontier.) 

On the 6th of March Tippoo Sultaun passed his own fron- 
tier, and attacked a detachment of the army of Bombay, un- 

der the:command of Lieut.-Gen. Stuart, the total strength of 
whose entire army did not amount to more than 6000 fighting 
men. . The. attack: of the Sultaun’s force was resisted by a 
body net exceeding 2,000 men, and the Sultaun’s army was 
finally defeated and totally dispersed, before General Stuart 
could collect the whele of his divided force. It is with infi- 
nite satisfaction that I enclose for the information of your 
honourable Court the paper marked No. 1, containing Gen. 
Stuart’s account. of this brilltant and important action which 
took place at Sedasere on the 8th of March.* 

After this signal defeat, Tippoo retreated precipitately to 
his camp at Periapatam, and remained there until the 11th of 
March without making any further attempt to-molest the 
army. The loss sustained by Tippoo’s army on the 6th of 
March appears to have amounted to near 2,000 kiled, . 
wounded, and prisoners, which inchided several officers of 
rank, and some of eonsiderable distinction. That sustained 
by the army of Bombay will appear in Lieut.-General Stuart's 
letter. , airs 

Adveérting to the great disproportion of numbers,. and to 
other circumstances of disadvantage, I am confident that your 
honourable Court will be of opinion, that the conduct and 


See p. 483. 


1799. THE COURT OF DIRECTORS. 531 


success of the army of Bombay on that day has seldom been 
equalled, and never surpassed in India. 

Under this impression I take the liberty of recommending 
to your favourable notice the several officers and corps 
named by Lieut.-General Stuart, in his letter of the 8th of 
March,* and I am anxious to request your particular atten- 
‘tion to the distinguished conduct of Lieut.-General Stuart 
and Major-General Hartley, as well as of Lieut.-Colonel 
Montresor and of Lieut.-Colonel Dunlop. Major-General 
Hartley had already received a public testimony of my parti- 
cular approbation of his extraordinary merit in collecting 
stores and provisions in the district of Coorga, previously to 
the arrival of General Stuart on the coast of Malabar. 

Tippoo returned from Periapatam to Seringapatam, and 
arriving at the latter place on the 14th of March, moved from 
thence immediately to meet Lieut.-Gen. Harris and the army 
of Madras. ” 

Lieut.-General Harris had advanced on the 26th of Mar ch 
to a position between Sultanpett and Malavelly, having met 
with no considerable impediment fromthe enemy. The ene- 
my made their appearance in force on that day, but without 
attempting to disturb our-army. On the 27th of. March, 
when the army reached its ground at Malavelly, Tippoo 
opened a distant cannonade upon it, which, though at first 
disregarded. by Lieut.-General Harris, ultimately led to a 
general engagement, in which the enemy was completely 
defeated, and driven from every. post which he attempted to 
‘maintain: our loss on this occasion was very inconsiderable, 
only seven rank and file being killed, and a few men (includ- 
ing four officers) wounded, while that of the enemy is sup- 
posed to have amounted to near 700. 

I refer your honourable Court to Lieut.-General Harris's 
letter of the 27th of March,+ which forms part of the enclo- 
‘sure No. 1, for a more particular account of this important 
victory, requesting also your attention to the merits of: the 
several officers.and corps distinguished by the notice of 
Lieut.-General Harris. 

General Harris marched on the 28th a few miles to the 
southward of Malavelly, without the least interruption from 


* See page 485 + + See page 505. 


532 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


the enemy, from whence it may be inferred that Tippoo Sul- 
taun was considerably dispirited by the defeat which he had 
sustained on the preceding day, added to the previous suc- 
cess obtained over him by the army of Bombay. 

On the 29th of March General Harris happily accom- 
plished a movement which must have greatly astonished and 
disconcerted the enemy: instead of proceeding in the direc- 
tion of Arakerry and Karagat, Lieut.-Gen. Harris suddenly 
turned towards the River Cavery, where finding a ford at 
some distance above the junction of the Cavery and Copany, 
he immediately crossed the Cavery with a part of his army, 
and occupied strong positions on both banks of that river, at 
the distance of about fifteen miles from Seringapatam. This 
movement was also made without the least opposition on the 
part of the enemy, who indeed does not seem to have enter- 
tained the most distant suspicion of the British General's 
design. 

Lord Cornwallis, at a more advanced period. of the year, 
having in vain sought for a practicable ford to the southward 
of Seringapatam, Tippoo probably concluded that Lieut. 
General Harris would have pursued his Lordship’s route to 
the ford of Caniambaddy, northward of Seringapatam, for the 
purpose of effecting a junction from thence with the army of 
Bombay. It is difficult to account otherwise for-'Tippoo’s 
inaction. while General Harris executed this arduous and 
important movement. 

The advantages of the position thus acquired by General 
Harris must prove considerable. In addition .to the imme- 
diate acquisition of cattle and forage, it must facilitate the 
junction with the army of Bombay ; it must afford additional 
security to the abundant magazines which have heen, formed 
in the Coorga country, and favour the safe approach of our 
convoys from the southern districts, and from the Barramahl 
by the pass of Coveriporam ; and it promises to open to our 
army that range of forage, situated to the southward of Se- 
ringapatam, which Tippoo seems to have reserved for the 
consumption of his own army. 

Lieut.-General Harris, with his whole army, having crossed 
the Cavery on the 30th of March, halted near the village of 
Soselly on the 31st; on the Ist of April he moved towards 
Seringapatam, and on the 5th encamped two miles south- 


1799. THE COURT OF DIRECTORS. 538 


west of that city, havirig experienced no opposition from the 

enemy since the 27th of March. On the morning of the 6th 

of April, after an engagement in which the enemy appears to 

have made considerable resistance, Lieut.-General Harris 

took possession of Sultanpetta and an adjacent tope or grove, 

and about the same time Major-General Floyd, with a strong 

detachment, was sent to effect a junction with the army of 
Bombay: on the morning of the 6th of April Lieut.-General 

Stuart received at Sedapore a note from Lieut.-Gen. Harris, 

announcing the arrival of the latter at Seringapatam, and 

also signifying that Major-General Floyd was to be detached 

from the army of Madras on the 6th of April for the purpose 

already stated. In consequence of this intelligence, Lieut.- 

General Stuart “had determined to march from Sedapore to’ 
Sedasere on the 7th of April, and it is probable that the 
junction of the army of Bombay with the detachment under 
the command of Major-General Floyd was effected on the 
8th in the neighbourhood of Periapatam. The last accounts 
received by me from General Harris are dated on the 7th 
instant, when he states that he had taken up his position for 
the siege of Seringapatam. 

Tippoo Sultaun, on the 7th of April, had not returned any 
answer to my letter of the 22nd of February, nor had he 
manifested any disposition to propose a negotiation. Lieut.- 
General Harris is instructed to propose preliminary articles 
of peace to the Sultaun before the British batteries shall be 
opened against Seringapatam. 

While General Harris’ was advancing towards Seringapa- 
tam, Lieut.-Colonel Read was employed in reducing the 
country to the northward of Ryakottah. His operations 
were intended to have embraced a wide range, and he had 
made considerable progress in them, when the more urgent 
service of convoying to the army the large supplies which 
were collected in the Barramahl, made it necessary for him 
to change the direction of his march. He is now drawing 
together in the vicinity of Coveryporam the numerous brinjar- 
ries and other supplies intended for the army encamped 
‘before Seringapatam, which place it is hoped he may be able 
to reach early in May. ’ 

To the southward of the Carnatic and of Mysore, Lieut.- 
Col. Browne, at the head of a respectable detachment, began 


534 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


his operations by the reduction of Carroor, which surren- 
‘dered to him, without any serious resistance, on the 5th of 
April, On the 8th he sent a detachment against Errode, 
and marched himself on the 9th to reduce Aravacourchy. 
He would, however, be obliged to suspend his intended ope- 
rations in the district of Coimbatoor, and to unite his detach- 
ment to that of Col. Read, with the view of forming a force 
sufficiently strong to give due protection to the large and 
important supplies proceeding to Seringapatam. 

Aravacourchy, which had been considerably strengthened 
since last war, surrendered to Lieut.-Col. Brown on the 10th 
instant. 
; I have the honour to be, &e. 

‘Mornrxerox. 

P.S. 22nd April, 1799.—After closing my letter I had the 
satisfaction to receive despatches from Generals Harris and 
Stuart. 

I congratulate your honourable Court on the successful 
junction of the detachment under General Floyd with the 
‘army of Bombay. ‘The final junction of the whole army of 
Bombay with the army before Seringapatam was expected to 
take place about the 13th instant. It may be safely affirmed 
not to be in the power of Tippoo, even materially, to. retard 
‘this junction, which,. when effected, must excite a serious 
alarm in the mind of the Sultaun for the ancl of his capital 
if not of his person. 

Your honourable Court will perceive that Lieut. Geieal 
Harris, in his progress to Seringapatam, encountered the 
same difficulties which were experienced. by Lord Cornwallis 
from the failure of the cattle provided for the service of the 
army, which, although amply sufficient in point of number at 
the commencement of the expedition, appear to have rapidly 
decreased on the entrance of the army into Mysore; the cli- 
mate and water of that country are represented to be 
extremely unfavourable to the cattle of the Carnatic. The 
‘delay which arose from this unavoidable contingency seems 
to have been considerable; but your honourable Court will, 
no doubt, view with satisfaction the spirit and firmness with 
which this difficulty was met by the Commander-in-Chief, 
and the zealous exertion of the whole army by which he was 
enabled to proceed on his march, 


1799, THE SECRET COMMITTEE. 535 


No. CLXVIIL. 
The Earl of Mornington to the Secret Committee of the Honourable Court 
of Directors. 
Honouras.e Sirs, Fort St. George, 22nd April, 1799. 


The distractions in the Government of Poonah have in- 
creased to such a degree as to preclude all hope of assistance 
in the war with Tippoo Sultaun, from that quarter. On the 
other hand, however, this state of confusion in the Mahratta 
empire equally prevents the possibility of any attempt against 
your interests. 

The sudden flight of. Vizier. Ali from Benares having ena- 
bled the magisttate of that city to secure the papers of the 
assassin, a scene of the utmost importance to your interests 
has been disclosed by the examination of those authentic 
documents. Copies of the several papers which fell into our 
hands were transmitted to.me, and under my orders several 
persons involved in the designs of Vizier Ali have been ap- 
prehended in different parts of the provinces. The inspec- 
tion of their papers has led to further discoveries, and al- 
though [cannot yet communicate to you a detailed account of 
the nature and objects of the designs and the views of those 
who have been apprehended or of their chief, I am already in 
possession of sufficient evidence to prove that a conspiracy 
had been formed for the purpose not only of restoring Vizier 
Ali to the throne of Oude, but also of favouring the invasion 
of Zemaun Shah, and of expelling the English nation from 
the provinces of Bengal, Bahar, and Onn 

The leaders of the conspiracy having been apprehended, and 
every precaution having been taken to prevent disorder or tu- 
mult, I do not expect that any of the intended objects of the 
conspirators can now be effected. It appears more probable, 
that the premature disclosure of the conspiracy, and the sea- 
sonable measures which have been taken for averting its evil 
consequences, will disconcert and’ intimidate such accom- 
plices as may happen to elude the vigilance of Government. 

But the complexion of this trapsaction leads to serious 
reflections on the condition of your possessions in Bengal and 
the provinces. The defective state of the police in the pro- 
vinces and the several great cities will require immediate 


536 GENERAL HARRIS, TO Apvil, 


attention. You will observe that the persons concerned in this 
treason are almost exclusively Mahommedans, and several of 
them of high rank. It is a radical imperfection in the con- 
stitution of our establishments in India, that no system ap- 
pears to have been adopted with a view either to conciliate 
the good will or to controul the disaffection of this descrip- 
tion of our subjects, whom we found in possession of the 
Government, and whom we have excluded from all share of 
emolument, honour, and authority, without providing any 
adequate corrective of those passions incident to the loss of 
dignity, wealth, and power. 

The last accounts from Bengal state, that Vizier Ali was 
still in the neighbourhood of Goruckpoor at the head of a 
considerable body of banditti; but as the Rajahs of Napaul 
and Betoul had abandoned his cause, and a considerable de- 
tachment of our troops under the command of Major-General 
Stuart, had advanced within a few miles of his position, no 
-doubt appeared that his followers would soon be dispersed, 
and a confident hope was entertained that his person would 
fall into our hands. 

I have the satisfaction to inform you, that notwithstanding 
the export of forty lacs of rupees in specie to this Presidency, 
and the actual commencement of hostilities with Tippoo Sul- 
taun, the discount upon all the public securities in Bengal 
has experienced a considerable diminution during the course 
of the last month; and with the aid of the supplies in specie 
which we expect from England, I flatter myself that I shall 

. be enabled, within a short period of time, to direct an enlarge- 
ment of the commercial investment at all the Presidencies. I 
am naturally impatient to return to Bengal, but the expe- 
rience of every hour convinces me more strongly that the 
avewed projects of Tippoo Sultaun, combined with his ac- 
knowledged means of carrying them into effect, have been 
among the most efficient causes not only of the decline of 
public and private credit in Bengal, but also of encouragement 
to the disaffected and disorderly class of your subjects. I 
am, therefore, persuaded that the effectual reduction of Tip- 
poo’s means of mischief, is indispensable to the welfare and 
tranquillity of all your possessions, Under this impression I 

! feel it to be my duty to remain at this Presidency so long as 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 537 


my presence can in any degree contribute to the energy and 
vigour of our military operations. 

It is a most extraordinary circumstance, that we have not 
yet received any authentic intelligence of the condition of the 
French army in Egypt, nor of that of our naval defences in 
the Red Sea. By the ships lately arrived from the Cape I 
learn that Commodore Blanket was in the Mozambique chan- 
nel towards the end of October, that he had met with adverse 
winds, and was apprehensive that he should be obliged to 
bear up for Bombay. Since that period I am entirely igno- 
rant of his course or condition. 

By the latest accounts from Constantinople it appears that 
General Buonaparte’s army still consisted of 17 or 18,000 
fighting men. ; 

T have the honour to be, &c. 
MornineTon. 


No, CLXXIX. 


_  Lieut.-General Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 

My Lorp, Camp before Seringapatam, 22nd April, 1799. 

On the 18th instant I had the honour to address to your 
Lordship a report of the proceedings of the army to that 
date, which was given in charge to_General Floyd, who on 
the 19th marched with the cavalry, a brigade of native in- 
fantry, and the Nizam’s horse, to meet Colonel Read near 
Cauveriporam, and assist in escorting the Brinjarries to camp. 
That morning a battery was opened on the north side of the 
Cauvery, to enfilade the enemy’s entrenchments in front of 
our intended attack. The 20th, in the evening, the most ad- 
vanced. of these was carried by our troops, and a parallel 
established on the spot on that night; the letter of which, a 
translation is annexed, was received from Tippoo Sultaun. 
On the night of the 21st a battery for six guns was erected 
near the ruins of the powder mill, and as a violent attack was 
made before day of the 22nd on all General Stuart’s posts, 
four guns and two howitzers opened from this battery on the 
fort this morning with considerablg effect, in destroying its 
defences and reducing its fire. 

Yesterday, after consulting the Commissioners appointed 
to assist me in subjects of political arrangement, and with 


538 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


Meer Allum Bahadur, I determined, in reply to the Sultaun, 
to transmit a draft of preliminaries founded on your Lord- 
ship’s paper B., with such alterations as the change of cir- 
cumstances seemed to require in the security exacted—addi- 
tional hostages in lieu of forts, which now we have no time to 
receive. I have required as hostages four sons of the Sultaun 
and four of his principal officers, to be selected by me. These, 
with the treasure to be sent in forty-eight hours to camp, or 
I reserve to myself the power of extending the demand even 
to the possession of Seringapatam. The letter was sent this 
day at noon. A duplicate of your Lordship’s letter of the 
29th ultimo has been received from the Coorga country. The 
particular accounts you require cannot now be sent. We 
want only provisions and cattle at present. Money will be 
necessary next month. Of rice we have collected, by various 
modes, enough to subsist our fighting men to the middle of 
May. 
I have the honour to be, &c. 
Georce Harnis. 


Translation of a Letter from Tippoo Sultaun to Lieut-General Harris, 
bearing no date, but received in camp before Seringapatam on the evening 
of the 20th April, 1799. 

In the letter of Lord Mornington it is written that the 
clearing up of matters at issue is proper, and that, therefore, 
you having been empowered for the purpose, will appoint 
such persons as you judge proper for conducting a conference 
and renewing the business of a treaty. You are the well 
wisher of both Circars. In this matter what is your pleasure, 
inform me, that a conference may take place. 


_A true Translation, 
_ Barry Cross. 


No. CLXXX. 


The Earl of Mornington to Lieut.-General Harris. 
Sir, é Fort St. George, April 23rd, 1799, 


Various circumstances, of which the general nature is 
stated to you in another despatch of this date, combine to 
render it desirable that Tippoo Sultaun’s power and resources 
should be reduced to the lowest possible state, and even ut- 


1799. GENERAL HARRIS. 539 


terly destroyed, if the events of war should afford the oppor- 
tunity. 

One ofthese circumstances is the equivocal conduct of the 
Mahrattas, which leads me to conclude that they will afford 
us no assistance against Tippoo, and to apprehend that they 
may assist him, if any favourable occasion should occur. 

The victory of the 27th of March, combined with that of 
the 6th of March, has, I trust, induced you to adopt draft 
B* as the basis of any propositions ‘which you may have 
made to Tippoo, previous to opening your batteries against 
Seringapatam. 

If Tippoo should have agreed to preliminary articles 
founded on draft B., in framing the definitive treaty, you will 
express the cessions of territories and the payments of money 
in such terms as shall leave at my option the Peishwa’s pro- 
portion of either. 

For this purpose, the preamble to any definitive treaty 
which you may conclude, should not contain any specification 
of the allies. The Company only should be specified, and 
the allies be included in general terms, according to the fol- 
lowing draft. 

“ Definitive treaty, &c. between the Honourable English 
Company and their allies, concluded by Lieut.-General Harris 
on the part of the said Company and of their allies, by virtue 
of powers from the Governor-General, &c.” 

The name of Meer Allum, or of the Nizam, should not ap- 
pear in the treaty; you will treat under powers from me. I 
have little apprehension that Meer Allum will disapprove the 
terms and form of this preamble; but if he should entertain 
any doubts on the occasion, they would be immediately re- 
moved by apprizing him, in confidence, that the arrangement 
was designed to exclude the Mahrattas from an equal parti- 
cipation in the successes of the war, excepting on conditions 
which should operate to the particular benefit of the Nizam’s 
Government. 

Upon the same principle, and with the same view, it will be 
necessary that those articles of the definitive treaty regarding 
cessions, and specifying the several districts and forts to be 
respectively ceded to the allies, should be so qualified as to 


* See p. 463, 


540 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


place the share to be allotted to the Peishwa at the disposal 
of the Company and of the Nizam. 

After a specification of the several districts to be ceded 
respectively to the Company and to the Nizam, the schedule 
of the territory to be ceded to the Peishwa might be qualified 
according to the following draft. 

“ But whereas the Peishwa has borne no part in the pre- 
sent war, and all the expenses of it have been defrayed by 
the Company and the Nizam, it is hereby declared that the 
foregoing districts shall be deemed to belong to the Peishwa 
only on condition of the said Peishwa making, within a period 
of two months from the date of this treaty, a satisfactory ad- 
justment with the Company and the Nizam, on account of the 
burthen of the war having exclusively fallen on them; and in 
default of the Peishwa’s making such a satisfactory adjust- 
ment, the districts to be ceded by the present treaty to the 
Peishwa, shall be deemed to belong to the Company and to 
the Nizam, who shall be at liberty to divide them as they 
shall judge proper.” 

I wish the terms of any treaty which you may conclude 
with Tippoo Sultaun, to be regulated by the principles which 
I have laid down in the present letter. 

I also wish (if you have entered into no engagements with 
Tippoo Sultaun when you receive this letter) that the power 
and resources of that prince should be reduced to as lowa 
state as possible. You are, therefore, authorized to proceed 
to any extremity which you shall consider practicable, with- 
out exposing us to the expense of a protracted and tedious 
war; or endangering the safety of your army, or any of the 
-advantages already acquired. 

In the event of any treaty with Tippoo, you must now ob- 
tain the utmost possible degree of security for his faithful 
execution of its stipulations. If this question is still open, I 
authorize you to demand the temporary possession of the fort 
of Seringapatam, to be holden as an additional pledge of se- 
curity; provided that your superiority shall be so decisive as 
to entitle you to require such a concession. 

I desire that the names of Lieut.-General Stuart and of 
Major-General Hartley be added to the commission appointed 
to assist you in all matters of negotiation. The knowledge 

« which those officers possess of the interests of the Company: 


1799. THE NABOB OF THE CARNATIC, 541 


on the coast of Malabar, will prove very useful to you; and 
I authorize you to make any variation, in the terms of peace, 
relating to Malabar, which may be suggested by those officers. 
T have the honour to be, &c. 
. MorNINGTON. 


No. CLXXXI. 
The Earl of Mornington to his Highness the Nabob of the Carnatic. 
Fort St. George, 24th April, 1799. 
May IT PLEASE Your HIGHNEss 

1. Within a few days subsequent to my arrival at this Pre- 
sidency, I had the honour to inform your Highness of the state 
of the differences existing between the Honourable Company 
and Tippoo Sultaun, and conformably to the tenth article of 
the treaty of 1792. I explained to your Highness, in the 
fullest manner, the probability of an approaching rupture 
with that prince. 

2. The conduct of Tippoo Sultaun since that time having 
rendered war absolutely necessary for the security. of the 
allied powers, hostilities have actually commenced. 

3. The third article of the treaty of 1792 stipulates that, 
‘in the event of war breaking out in the Carnatic, and countries 
appertaining to either party, and dependent on the Carnatic, 
or contiguous thereto, it is agreed, for the better prosecution 
of it, that as long as it shall last, the said Company shall pos- 
sess full authority over the Carnatic, except the Jaghurs be- 
longing to the family of the said Nawaub, and. except also 
certain charities, and shall collect the revenues thereof, the 
said Company hereby engaging that, during such war, they 
will pay to the said Nawaub one-fifth share of the net revenue 
arising therefrom.” 

4. Under this article it is now become the right of the Com- 
pany to exercise that full authority over the Carnatic which 
is thus formally acknowledged to be necessary for the better 
prosecution of war. 

5. Your Highness, I am persuaded, is also satisfied, that it 
is now become my indispensable duty, without delay, to assume 
the revenues of the Carnatic conformably to the third article 
of the treaty of 1792, unless some new arrangement can now , 


542 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


be framed, with the consent of both parties, which shall af- 
ford equal security to the common interests of your Highness 
and of the Company, for the vigorous and effectual prosecu- 
tion of the war. 

6. Iam aware that both your Highness and your respected 
father have ever been disinclined to the assumption of the 
Carnatic by the Company, in the manner specified by the 
article in question, and entertaining an anxious and sincere 
desire, not only to promote your. Highness’s interests and 
welfare, but to respect your inclinations and sentiments to 
the utmost extent compatible with the security of the Carna- 
tic, I am induced to submit to your Highness’s consideration 
the plan of a new arrangement between your Highness and 
the Company, which, if it shall prove acceptable to your 
Highness, will preclude the necessity of resorting to the sti- 
pulations of the third article of the treaty of 1792, and of 
assuming the whole of the Carnatic, not only during the pre- 
sent, but during any future, war. 

7. In framing an arrangement on this foundation, I have 
endeavoured to extend its provisions with the view of com- 
prehending the whole state and condition of your Highness's 
connection with the Company, as well as the equitable adjust- 
ment of the various subjects of complaint, which your Highness 
has been pleased to represent to me since the period of my 
taking charge of the general Government of India. 

8. Before I proceed to the details of this plan, I shall sub- 
mit to your Highness’s consideration some observations, which 
as they proceed from my good wishes for your prosperity and 
happiness, I. trust you will receive with the cordiality of 
friendship. ; 

9. Your Highness’ s situation. for .some years past, has 
neither been satisfactory to yourself, nor advantageous to the 

‘interests, either of your own subjects or of the Company. 

10. Your stipulated monthly payments, under, the treaty of 
1792, are not only moderate in their. amount, but. cannot be 
stated to bear a due proportion to, the increased military 
charges, now defrayed by the Company, for the defence of” 
the Carmatic. 

11. Your Highness will never forget that the amount of 
these payments was settled by Lord Cornwallis, under an in- 
dulgent modification of the treaty of 1787, the benefits of 


1799. THE NABOB OF THE CARNATIC. 543 


which the Company cheerfully relinquished, for the purpose 
of relieving his Highness, the late Nabob of the Carnatic, 
and ultimately your Highness from distress of circumstances — 
and from anxiety of mind. 

12. Moderate as these payments are in their amount, they 
have proved the source of continual vexation to the late Nabob 
of the Carnatic and to your Highness ; and you have never been 
able to realize them.in the Company’s Treasury, without the 
utmost degree of difficulty and embarrassment, arising from 
unfortunate defects in the administration of your affairs. 

13. These embarrassments have occasioned the adoption of 
temporary expedients, for the purpose of removing the pres- 
sure of the moment; and the consequences of resorting 
to such expedients have been injurious not only to the 
peace of your Highness’s mind, but to the permanent interests 
and happiness of your subjects, and to the foundations of the 
opulence and prosperity of the Carnatic. 

14, The truth of this faithful and amicable representation, 
will, I am persuaded, produce a just impression on your High- 
ness’s mind, when you reflect on the large amount of those sums 
of money applied to defray the exorbitant rates of interest, on 
all the various loans occasioned by the necessity of discharg- 
ing-your monthly payments. 

15. These loans have usually been accompanied by assign- 
ments of territory to the creditors, whose vexatious manage- 
ment of the revenues assigned, has been the continual cause of 
of the most aggravated calamities to the inhabitants of the 
Carnatic. 

16. In these transactions the loss has fallen on your High- 
ness, your subjects, and your friends, and the illicit profit has 
enriched those, who (to use the words of your respected father, 
addressed to Lord Cornwallis) “never approach your Durbar 
for any other purpose, than to pursue their habitual views of 
plunder and rapine.” 

17. Upon the whole, the final result of this system has been, 
that your Highness’s mind has continued in a perpetual state 
of solicitude and alarm, from the difficulty of satisfying the Com- 
pany’s claims, of which the moderation and, justice cannot be 
contested. That the resources of your country have fallen 
into a state of progressive decay; and that the Company re- 
gularly receiving your Highness’s monthly payments into thee 


544 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, To April, 


treasury, has viewed with unavailing regret, the rapid approach 
of that crisis in the Carnatic, when every source of public 
revenue and credit, as well as of private opulence, industry, 
and population must be reduced to the lowest condition. 

18. Neither your Highness nor the Company can reflect 
with satisfaction on the regular discharge of your monthly pay- 
ments, when those payments are known and acknowledged to 
be effected by means, which aggravate your Highness’s em- 
barrassments, and rapidly exhaust the territorial security 
pledged to the Company for the military subsidy. 

19. The collateral operation of this unhappy system is not 
less injurious, than its direct tendency. The notoriety of those 
embarrassments which compel your Highness to resort to the 
expedient of loans and assignments of territory, leads to a 
general expectation of the approaching failure of your monthly 
payments and consequently of a speedy transfer of the pledged 
districts to the management of the Company. 

20. A constant expectation of war for some years past has 
further countenanced the notion, that the Company’s manage- 
ment must soon be extended over a large part of your High- 
ness’s territories, under the 3rd article of the treaty of 1792. 

21. These expectations have precluded the possibility of 
introducing for the relief of your Highness’s subjects,’ any , 
improvement founded on fixed and durable principles. 

22. 'The Carnatic, therefore, in addition to the calamitous 
misrule of those who have governed it, under temporary assign- 
ments of territory, has been subjected to all the accumulated 
evils of a divided Government and of a fluctuating and pre- 
carious authority. 

23. These sentiments relating to your Highness’s situation 
are not the result of my judgment alone; I submit them to you'as 
the result of the deliberate judgment of the Honorable Court 
of Directors, and of his Majesty’s Ministers, formed upon a 
full, dispassionate, and impartial investigation of the relation 
in which your Highness ‘stands towards the Company, and of 
the whole state of your affairs. 

24, The principles of sound and comprehensive policy, the 
duties of respect and regard for your Highness, as well as 
those of humane consideration for the welfare of your subjects 
demand, that the Company and his Majesty’s Ministers should 
look beyond the mere convenience of the present hour to the 


1799. THE NABOB OF THE CARNATIC. 545 


certain operation of evils, menacing he permanent resources 
of your country. 

25. The apprehension of the approach of that period, when 
the necessary effect of these evils must break forth to the 
entire ruin of the interests of your Highness and of the Com- 
pany in the Carnatic, has induced the Court of Directors, 
and the Government of Fort St. George, to urge with earnest- 
ness the necessity of a new arrangement with your Highness. 
They have, however refrained from insisting to its full extent 
on that claim of justice and right, which the Company derives 
from the letter as well as the general substance and spirit of 
the treaty of 1792, according to the established maxims of 
public law and national faith. 

26. Under that treaty, your Highness’s faith is unequivocally 
pledged never to grant tunkwahs or assignments of revenue 
on the districts composing the security of your monthly pay- 
ments to the Company. 

27.1 am aware that the same article has also provided for the 
avoidance of all such tunkwahs or assignments as shall be found 
to exist on any of the pledged districts, which shall pass into 
the hands of the Company under the operation of the preced- 

. ing articles of the treaty. But this provision cannot be viewed 
in any other light than that of an extraordinary precaution, 
to establish an additional security for the interests of the 
Company. It cannot be construed to absolve your Highness 
from the positive obligation, which you have contracted in 
specific terms, “ not to grant tunkwahs or assignments on any 
account on the revenues of the districts, responsible for any 
arrears, which may accrue in the payment of the stipulated 
kists.” 

28.’ If the treaty of 1792, has not provided a sufficient se- 
curity for the due performance of this obligation, and if the 
neglect of this obligation threatens to defeat the primary object 
of the whole treaty, and to destroy the fundamental principle of 
your Highness’s connection with the Company, the contract- 
ing parties must resort to the general law of nations, to sup- 
ply the defective provisions of an engagement, which it is 
their mutual interests to preserve inviolate, according to its 
true tenor and original spirit. 

29. The permanent establishment of an adequate territorial 
security for the payment of your Highness’s share of the 

VOL. I. 2N 


546 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


expence of defending the Carnatic, is the principal object of 
the treaty of 1792. ‘The treaty, therefore, would become nu- 
gatory and delusive, if no remedy could be provided against the 
continuance of a system, whose unrestrained progress must 
ultimately deprive your Highness of the power of satisfying 
your engagements to the Company, and must leave the Com- 
pany bereft of all means of recovering the ruinous conse- 
quences of such failure. Your Highness’s own discernment, 
will at once enable you to judge, whether it was the intention 
of Lord Cornwallis in signing the treaty of 1792, to provide 
areal, substantial, and lasting security for the Company’s 
military subsidy, or to sanction a system of disorder, by which 
the whole value and efliciency of that security must be annihi- 
lated before the Company could derive any benefit from it. 

30. It is not necessary at present to trouble your Highness 
with a, more detailed representation on this part of the subject, 
~—the plan which I now have the honor to submit to you, is 
calculated to preclude all such discussions, and I have revived 
the subject in this place, merely for the purpose. of pointing 
your attention to one of the principal causes, which have ren- 
dered a new arrangement with your Elighness indispensable. 

31, Your Highness, I am persuaded, cannot reasonably view 
the proposition for a new arrangement proceeding from the 
Company, with any degree of jealousy or alarm; I must 
repeat the observation (and I recommend it with all the ear- 
nestness of friendship to your most serious consideration) 
that a similar jealousy on the part of the Company, would 
have bound his Highness, the late Nabob, and your Highness 
to the stipulations of the treaty of 1787. 

32. If the Company had pertinaciously adhered tothe letter 
of that treaty, and had insisted on a strict performance of the 
engagements contracted under it, I leave it to your Highness's 
candour and justice to declare, what would have been the 
actual condition of your affairs? But the Company then 
waved its undeniable rights under a subsisting treaty, and 
consented to a new arrangement at your solicitation and for 
your benefit. The Company has, therefore, a just claim to 
your Highness’s favourable attention on the present occasion, 
and I trust, that under this impression, your Highness will 
not receive my earnest proposition for a modification of the 
treaty of 1792, with any other sensation, than those with which 


1799. THE NABOB OF THE CARNATIC. 547 


Lord Cornwallis received your respected father’s application 
for a modification of the treaty of 1787. 

33. In proceeding to submit to your Highness the details of 
my proposed plan, I shall in the first instance state certain gene-~ 
ral principles, which appear to me necessary to be observed 
for the common benefit of all parties. 1st—That the new 
treaty shall comprehend the adjustment of every branch of 
your Highness’s affairs, as connected with your relation to 
the Company, and shall leave no question open to future dis- 
cussion. 

2nd.—That whatever adjustment shall now take place, 
shall be so framed as to afford the utmost degree of practi- 
cable security against the possibility of future change in order 
that the new treaty may become a final and conclusive settle- 
ment between your Highness and the Company. 

8rd.—That with a view to secure the stability of the new 
treaty, as well as to provide an adequate remedy for the evils 
already enumerated in this letter, effectual provision be made 
that no part of the Carnatic shall remain or fall under a di- 
vided Government, or a fluctuating or precarious authority. 

34. Referring to these general principles, the first object of 
consideration in the state of your Highness’s affairs, is your 
debt to the Company, This now consists, 

- First.—Of the balance as reported by Messrs. Woolf and 
Place, on the Ist July, 1793—35,06,135. 

Second.—Balance of the Kistbundy Account, as per ac- 
count, made up to 9th Sept., 1791—19,98,008. 

Third.—Balance of the new Cavalry Loan, with interest at 
8 per cent., to the 12th October 1798—11,62,770. Total— 
66,66,911. , 

35. The two first articles of this debt at the earnest desire 
of his Highness, the late Nabob of the Carnatic, were referred 
to the arbitration of the Governor-general in Council, in the 
year 1793, and a Committee was appointed in Bengal, for the 
purpose of assisting the Governor-General in deciding upon 
them. This Committee has never yet delivered in any report, 
but having myself entered into a minute examination of the 
whole of these disputed accounts, and having considered with 
impartiality, the respective claims of your Highness and of 
the Company, I have no doubt that upon the balance of these 
accounts, you will be found justly indebted to the Company 


548 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


to a very large amount. If, however, a new arrangement 
sheuld be acceptable to your Highness, I am ready on the 
part of the Company to consider whether it may not be prac- 
ticable to compromise the whole of this claim, amounting to 
55,04,141 pgs. as well as the amount of any claim arising out 
of the payments made by the Company to your Highness’s 
consolidated creditors of 1787. ‘The extreme solicitude ma- 
nifested by the late Nabob of the Carnatic, to induce Lord 
Cornwallis to place these disputed accounts in a way of adjust- 
ment, by which his Highness bound himself to submit im- 
plicitly to the award of the Governor-General in Council, 
with relation to them, are sufficient testimonies of the 
importance and value of the concession which the Company 
may be disposed to make to your Highness in this article dur- 
ing the course of the negotiation. 

36. With regard to the advance made by the Company to 
the late Nabob, for the discharge of his Highness’s debt, deno- 
minated the new cavalry loan, I am satisfied that this branch 
of your Highness’s debt to the Company should be liquidated, 
partly by an arrangement, stated from the 37th to the 41st 
paragraph of this letter, and partly (in the manner already 
proposed by your Highness to Sir John Shore,) by the appli- 
cation of the sum of 6,21,105 pagodas, after your Highness’s 
present guaranteed debt shall have been liquidated by the 
operation of that fund. 

37. The great pressure of the material branches of your debt 
to the Company would thus be entirely relieved by their in- 
dulgence, and the period of the discharge of your new cavalry 
debt would be settled in such a manner that it could never 
interfere with your convenience—a stipulation may be inserted 
in the Treaty, binding the Company never to apply to your 
Highness for any advance of money on account of the new 
cavalry debt, previous to the period when its liquidation 
shall commence by the operation of the fund assigned for that 
purpose. 

38. Your Highness has, at different times, preferred certain 
claims with respect to the Ramnad surplus, and to the Peish- 
cush of Sadras, and to the pearl fishery of Ceylon. 

39. Your Highness has been informed that the whole ques- 
tion respecting Ramnad has been referred to the Court of 
Directors. If, however, I should be enabled to conclude a 


1799, THE NABOB OF THE CARNATIC. - 549 


new Treaty with your Highness, I shall be ready to decide the 
question of Ramnad without waiting for the result of the 
reference to the Honourable the Courtof Directors. And 
being anxious to pay every attention to your Highness’s 
just claims I shall direct the balance of the revenues of Ram- 
nad remaining (after the deduction of all expences according 
to the 9th article of the agreement of 1795, concluded by 
Lord Hobart,) to be carried to your Highness’s credit in the 
account of the new cavalry debt, immediately after your ac- 
ceptance of the general arrangement which may be concluded 
between your Highness and the Company, in consequence of 
this letter. 

40. I propose to direct, that the whole amount of the 
Peiscush, due to your Highness, since Sadras has been in the 
hands of the Company, shall be carried to your credit in the 
same account. 

41. Your Highness’s share of the pearl fishery has been cal- 
culated on principles which admit of no contest, to be one- 
fifth part of the number of boats employed in the whole fishery 
in each season, and an equivalent sum of money has-been 
allowed to your Highness in your general account. Imme- 
diately after the execution of the new Treaty, I shall direct 
this sum also to be carried to your credit on the same account, 
and in the same manner as the two preceding sums. The 
Governor of Ceylon being now at this Presidency, in conse- 
quence of having received my orders to meet me here for the 
purpose of settling the affairs of his Government under my 
directions, if the proposals stated in this letter should meet 
your Highness’s approbation, I shall direct the Governor of 
Ceylon to form a Treaty with your Highness, securing to you 
the’regular payment of your share of the pearl fishery. The 
payment to be made by the Governor of Ceylon into your 
Highness’s treasury. i 

42. The Governor of Ceylon will state to your Highness the 
great injury which would arise to the fishery from suffering 
any persons to interfere with those to whom it is farmed. 
And J, therefore, trust that your Highness will not desire to 
send any boats to the fishery. The punctual payment of your 
just share appears to me to be the most advantageous settle- 
ment which can be made for your interests, as well as for 
those of the Government of Ceylon. 


550 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


43. Having thus manifested my desire to attend to the 
several objects which I know to be interesting to your High- 
ness, I am further to inform you that I am ready, by an article 
of the new Treaty, to relinquish the right of the Company 
to the assumption of the Carnatic during the present, and 
during all future wars, on the following conditions. 

44. That your Highness shall place under the exclusive ma- 
nagement, controul, and authority of the Company, in perpe- 
tuity, a territory, equal to secure the receipts of the whole 
of your monthly payments into the Company’s treasury, which 
payments are of course to cease from that time. The terri- 
tory to be placed under the management of the Company, is 
described in a memorandum annexed to this letter. Your 
Highness will observe, that I have included the southern 
division of the Arcot province, although not one of the mort- 
gaged districts, with a view to preserve in your Highness’s 
management the countries surrounding your capital, and that 
the territorial revenues, under each authority respectively, 
may be as compact as circumstances will admit. In place of 
the northern division of Arcot, I propose to hold a district in 
the southern division of that province, to the amount speci- 
fied in the annexed memorandum. I shall also for the conve- 
nience of both parties, be ready to exchange districts in the 
southern division of Arcet, adjoining to those of the center 
in place of the Jaghire lands, which your Highness holds to 
the southward of the Coleroon, for a similar purpose of avoid- 
ing the evils of a divided authority. 

45. If the territory, placed under the management of the 
Company, should produce more than the stipulated amounts 
of 12, 56, 400..15..54, the whole of the surplus shall be paid 
into your Highness’s treasury, upon an account to be settled 
every third year, or more frequently, when a permanent set- 
tlement of the revenue of the Carnatic shall take place. 

46. On the other hand, if, from any accident of season, or 
from any other casualty, any deficiency should arise in the 
revenue of the countries managed by the Company, the loss 
shall fall exclusively on the Company, and your Highness 
shall not be responsible for any part of it. 

47. With respect to the districts remaining in your High- 
ness’s hands, your Highness shall not be accountable for any 
increase of their produce under your management, nor shall 


1799. THE NABOB OF THE CARNATIC. 551 


the Company be responsible hereafter for any contingent 
diminution of it. 

48. As the expence of maintaining and repairing the several 
forts contained in the districts to be placed under the Com- 
pany’s management will necessarily be transferred to the 
Company—an annual sum will be allotted for the purpose, 
chargeable on the assigned revenues. The amount of this 
sum will be settled with your Highness’s approbation during 
the negotiation of the new Treaty. 

49. I have already observed to your Highness, that the in- 
crease of military charges, for the defence of the Carnatic, has. 
rendered the amount of your subsidy disproportioned to its 
original object; on every principle of justice the Company 
would be warranted in proposing to your Highness an aug- 
mentation of your military subsidy. But, as I am anxious ta 
preserve to your Highness the full enjoyment of an ample 
and unincumbered revenue, I have endeavoured to provide a 
fund for the increase of the military subsidy without any 
diminution of your actual receipts. 

50. I propose, therefore, that whatever claims on the part of 
your Highness, or of the Company, remain in doubt respect- 
ing the Polygars, under the Treaty of 1792, should be now 
fully adjusted with the Company, and I am willing to accept 
that adjustment in lieu of all claims for an increase of your 
military subsidy, proportioned to the increased expence of 
defending the Carnatic. 

51. The principle which induced the Company to seek the 
transfer of the Polygar Peishcush will not admit any consider- 
able augmentation of the annual payments from those Tribu- 
taries. If the Company should hereafter deem it to be a wise 
policy to increase the Peishcush of the Polygars, that increase 
must be very moderate, and must be considered as a commu- 
tation for the military services of the Polygars. 

52. Under a new Treaty, founded on the basis described, I 
entertaiu no doubt that your Highness’s clear revenue would 
be considerably increased, and I am persuaded that you will 
concur with me in this opinion, when you refer to the former 
and present value of the countries which will remain in your 
Highness’s hands, and when you recollect the.extent of your 
charges for collection and other contingencies, and the enor 


552 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


mous sums which you are compelled to waste every year on 
account of interest and charges attending loans of money. 

53. Under such a Treaty the evils of a divided Government, 
and of an unsettled and ill-defined power, would cease 
throughout the Carnatic. The authority of the Company 
and that of your Highness could never interfere with each 
other, and the new settlement would bear such unequivocal 
marks of permanency and security as would inspire general 
confidence, facilitate the introduction of an improved system 
of management, and revive the decaying principles of general 
industry, productive labour, and individual affluence. 

54, In order to render this settlement perfect in all its parts, 
and to secure your Highness’s future ease and comfort under 
all possible contingencies, it will be expedient to establish 
some certain fund for the satisfaction of those private credi- 
tors of the late Nabob of the Carnatic and of your Highness, 
whose claims now stand without security. 

55. The operation of the sum of 6,21,105 pagodas will 
have liquidated the whole of the ¢onsolidated private debt 
guaranteed by Parliament in the year 1794. 

56. After that period, by your Highness’s agreement with Sir 
John Shore, the whole of this fund would be made applicable 
to the new cavalry debt, but I propose that only half the sum, 
namely, 3,10,552 pagodas 8 fanams, be appropriated to the 
payment of the interest and principal of the new cavalry debt, 
and the remaining half to the discharge of such just unconso- 
lidated debts due by your father and by your Highness to 
individuals as shall, after the most strict examination, receive 
the sanction of your Highness and of the Court of Directors. 

57. After the liquidation of the new. cavalry debt, I propose 
that the whole fund of 6,21,105 pagodas shall be applied to 
the payment of the unconsolidated debt, according to the 
principles stated in the foregoing paragraph, and when the. 
whole of the private debts (thus sanctioned by your Highness 
and by the Court of Directors) shall have been discharged, I 
propose that the full amount of the sum of 6,21,105 pagodas 
shall be annually paid in cash by the Company into your 
Highness’s treasury. 

58. Thus, Sir, have I submitted to your Highness the outline 
of the only plan which appears to me to promise the hope of 


1799. THE NABOB OF THE CARNATIC. 553 


order to your affairs, of tranquillity to your mind, and of se- 
curity to the interests of the Company committed to my 
charge. 

59. Under the new arrangement your Highness would be 
relieved from all urgent demands either of a public or private 
nature, and you would possess a much more ample revenue 
than you now enjoy, with the additional satisfaction of re- 
flecting that your possession was liable to no disturbance, 
either from the contingency of war, or from any casual failure 
of your resources. You would be at liberty to direct your 
undivided attention to the cultivation and improvement of 
those resources to the utmost practical extent ; and you never 
could feel the necessity of injuring the main springs of your 
revenue for the purpose of meeting the exigency of occasional 
difficulty. 

60. Whatever increase of produce might arise in the dis- 
tricts managed by the Company, would be a new source of 
wealth to your Highness, and you would feel a personal 
interest in every improvement which the Company might be 
enabled to introduce into the system of your revenues. 

61. With these observations I shall conclude, earnestly en- 
treating your Highness to give your most serious attention to 
this letter. The opportunity is now peculiarly favourable to 
the final adjustment of your Highness’s affairs; if you suffer 
it to pass away without improvement, events may intervene to 
aggravate your Highness’s embarrassments, to postpone, or 
even to preclude, all final arrangement of your affairs, and 
ultimately, to involve you in. inextricable distress. 

62. If the general principles which I have suggested, with 
the freedom and sincerity of friendship, should meet your 
Highness's approbation, they may speedily be reduced to the 
form of a Treaty, and I may be enabled, before my return to 
Bengal, to have the satisfaction of laying the foundation of 
perpetual ease to your Highness’s mind, and of progressive 
improvement to this fertile, but declining, country. 

63. Your Highness will observe, that throughout the whole 
of this letter, I have avoided any reference to your fate failure 
in your engagements to assist the Company in the present 
exigency, by the immediate payment of a part of the new 
cavalry debt; I trust you will attribute my silence on this 


554 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


recent transaction to my earnest desire of abstaining from 
any discussion which can be painful to your Highness. 


I have the honour to be, 
With great respect and attachment, 
Your Highness’s most faithful, and humble servant, 
MorNINGTON. 


No. 1. 


Memorandum of Sums, which, in the event of a general arrangement taking 
place between his Highness and the Company, it is proposed to carry to his 
eredit in part payment of the Cavalry Loan Debt. 


Sadras Peishcush, for three years, 4,350..27 ; Ramnad surplus, 57,820; 
Share of the Pearl Fishery for 1797, 54,892..26..65; Ditto for 1798, 
56,488..12; Ditto estimated for 1799, 56,488..12. Total proposed to be 
credited in part of the Cavalry Loan Debt,.2,30,040..5 .65. 

Unadjusted. Balance due by his Highness the Nabob to the Company, 
which it is proposed to compromise in the event of his Highness agreeing 
to the proferred final arrangement of his affairs. 

Balance as per account current, the result of an investigation of 
Messrs. Woolf and Place, 35,06,135..20..17; Balance of his Highness’s 
Kist Bundy account closed July 1790, 19,98,006..10..22. 55,04, 141..30..39. 
Total balanees and claims to be adjusted, 57,34,182..24 sterling pagodas. 


No. 2. 


Memorandum of the districts, with the estimated amount of their net revenue, 
to be placed under the exclusive management, controul and orders of the 
English East India Company, by his Highness the Nawaub, 8c. of the 
Carnatic, by the proposed treaty, in lieu of his Highness’s payment of 
pagodas, 12,56,400..15..54. 


4 


Setwadoo, including Calicut, &c., 9,800; Palnaud, 24,657; Ongole, 
93,334 ; Nellore, 3,31,783; Trichinopoly, exclusive of Jaghires, 2,51,139; 
Madura, 64,945; Tinnevelly, 4,06,508 ; Southern Division of Arcot to 
the amount of, 2,01,157; *Sadras Peiscush, 1,450. Total sterling pa- 
godas, 13,84,773. 


* Sadras being within the Company’s Jaghire, is here inserted on the 
principle of preserving distinct the authority of the Company and his 
Highness in their respective districts. 


1799. THE HON. JONATHAN DUNCAN. 555 


No. 3. 


Memorandum of the Districts and Revenue estimated to remain with his 
Highness and family. 


Arcot Province, exclusive of the portion placed under the management 
of the Company, 3,09,215; Jaghires, 2,13,421. 

Estimated surplus payable to his Highness from the districts under the 
Company’s management, 1,28,373 pagodas. Deduct supposed amount 
required for the repairing forts, 20,000. Surplus, 1,08,373. 

Estimated revenue from the Pearl fishery, 50,000. Total sterling pa- 
godas, 6,81,009. To which add the amount that will revert to his 
Highness when his public and private debts are liquidated, 6,21,105. 
£5,20,845..12 per annum, and his total clear revenue will be, 13,02,114 
pagodas. 

It is here proper to remark, that there is greater room for improve- 
ment in the revenue of the Arcot province, where his Highness’s districts 
are situated, than in any other in the Carnatic. Its former value was esti- 
mated at 12,54,655 sterling pagodas. It is in these Memoranda only 
estimated, including Jaghire, at 6,58,283 sterling pagodas. Decrease in 
the present estimate, 5,96,372 sterling pagodas. 

From whatever causes this extraordinary failure has arisen, there can 
be no doubt that the province of Arcot, now protected by the Company’s 
extended boundary, must progressively improve under good management, 
and consequently his Highness’s revenue must increase; it will also in- 
crease from similar effects in those districts under the management of the 
Company. 

A true Copy, N. B. Epmonstong, 
Persian translator to Govt. 


No. CLXXXIL 


The Earl of Mornington to the Hon. Jonathan Duncan, Esq. 


> 


Sir, Fort St. George, 24th April, 1799. 


Shums-oo-Doulah, the brother-in-law of the Nabob of 
Bengal, having been detected in a design to invite Zemaun 
Shah to invade Hindostan for purposes hostile to the British 
possessions, has been lately taken into custody, and among 
his papers, which were secured upon that occasion, have been 
found letters from Shaikh Khulfaun, and other persons of 
note at Muscat, to the address of Shums-oo-Doulah and of the 
Nabob of Bengal, the contents of which afford the strongest 
reason to believe that some scheme, injurious to the British 


556 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


interests, has been in agitation between these parties. The 
language is studiously obscure, and all explanation is referred 
to the verbal communications of the agent employed to nego- 
tiate between the parties. The specific object of the negotia- 
tion, therefore, cannot be traced in these papers, but it evi- 
dently appears to have been commenced by the people of 
Muscat; a circumstance which, added to other indications in 
these letters, renders it probable that the whole has its origin 
in the machinations of the French. 

As Shums-oo-Doulah has offered to make an ample disclo- 
‘sure of all he knows respecting the various conspiracies which 
have lately been discovered, and as the agent Shaikh T’hamass, 
who by the late accounts was at Moorshedabad, will in all 
probability be apprehended, I trust we shall soon obtain satis- 
factory information upon the subject; in the meantime, how- 
ever, I think it necessary to apprize you of what has already 
come to light, and to desire that you will keep a vigilant eye 
upon the port of Muscat, with a view to defeat the design, 
which there is reason to suspect that Government entertains 
of affording assistance to the French. 

I request that you will convey the substance of this infor- 
mation to the Admiral, with my request that he will direct his 
attention to the port of Muscat. 

JT have the honour to be, Sir, 
Your most faithtul Servant, 
MorNINGTON. 


No. CLXXXIII. 
The Earl of Mornington to Colonel Palmer, Resident at Poonah. 


Sir, Fort St. George, 25th April, 1799. 

The accounts of the treacherous designs of the Peishwa, 
and of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, are rendered probable by the 
weakness, profligacy, and necessitous condition of both, as 
well as by the general tenor of their recent proceedings. 

I have received from the Resident at Hyderabad commu- 
nications, corresponding in all the leading points with your 
intelligence. 

T hope to learn that, in consequence of this discovery, you 
have suspended the execution of that part of my instructions 


1799. COLONEL PALMER, 557 


of the 3rd instant which authorized you to declare to the 
Peishwa, “ that, notwithstanding the perverse and forbidding 
policy of the Court of Poonah, I should not fail to secure to 
him an equal participation with the other allies in any ces- 
sions which might be enforced from Tippoo Sultaun.” 

The treachery and intended hostility of the Peishwa de- 
prive him of any claim to ,consideration on the part of the 
British Government. His conduct would justify a declara- 
tion of war. For the present, however, it will be sufficient 
merely to withhold the assurances authorized in my letter to 
you of the 8rd instant; and I accordingly direct you not to 
communicate them to the Peishwa, or to his ministers, if you 
shall not have communicated them before this letter shall 
reach you. 

But it is necessary to adopt a stronger and more decisive 
mode of proceeding with regard to Dowlut Rao Scindiah, 
whose unsatisfactory reply to your remonstrance against his 
admission of vakeels from Tippoo, renders it an indispensa- 
ble duty to impose some restraint on his unprovoked and un- 
principled projects of plunder and rapine. 

I, therefore, direct you to signify, in my name, to Dowlut 
Rao Scindiah, without delay, either verbally or by writing, 
“ that reports have reached me of his hostile designs against 
the Nizam; that I sincerely hope, and-am willing to believe, 
those reports to be groundless. You will add, that his High- 
ness the Nizam, being now cordially and actively engaged in 
the war against Tippoo Sultaun, conformably to the defensive 
treaty of triple alliance, any attempt against his Highness the 
Nizam’s dominions would be equivalent to an attack upon the 
Company. The British Government, therefore, could not 
wiew with indifference any such attempt on the part of any 
power whatever,—accordingly it is my determination, in the 
event of any violation of the territory of the Nizam, by what- 
ever power, to support his Highness with the whole force of 
the Company.” 

Instead of making a similar declaration to the Peishwa, it 
will be sufficient to apprize him of the communication which I 
have directed to be made to Scindiah ; he cannot fail to apply 
my admonition to himself; if it should excite in him any ap- 
prehensions for the consequences of his late connection with 
Scindiah, he will be the more encouraged to detach himself 


558 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


from that chieftain, by the hope which our silence is calcu- 
lated to lead him to entertain, that we have not discovered 
their intrigue ; on the other hand, were he to know that I 
was fully apprized of the extent of his treacherous designs, 


despair might impel him to unite himself more closely with 
Scindiah. 


T am, Sir, &c. 
Morninerton. 


No. CLXXXIV. 
The Earl of Mornington to Major Bannerman. 


Sir, : Fort St. George, 25th April, 1799. 

I am extremely concerned to learn the death of the Dewan 
of the Rajah of Travancore, as well on account of his attach- 
ment to the interests of the Company, as from motives of re- 
spect for the character of his ability and prudence. 

I am sensible of the difficulties which may attend the 
choice of a new Dewan, and I, therefore, authorize you to 
interfere as far as you may judge it advisable, in the recom- 
mendation of a proper person to succeed to that office. I 
rely, implicitly, on your honour and integrity on this delicate 
point, being persuaded, that in recommending a person to fill 
the office of Dewan, you will be guided by no other motive 
than an equal consideration of the interests of the Company 
and those of the Rajah of Travancore. 

Tam, &ce. 
MornincTon. 


No. CLXXXV. 


The Earl of Mornington to his Excellency Lieut.-General Harris. 

Sir, Fort St. George, 26th April, 1799. 

The danger of an early attack upon the dominions of the 
‘ Nizam by Doulut Rao Scindiah, either singly or in concert 
with the Peishwa, appears to have increased since my letter 
of the 23rd instant.* The greatest and most efficient part of 
the Nizam’s army being now employed in Mysore; and the 
state of gur force in the Carnatic not admitting of any prompt 


* Vide page 538. 


1799 GENERAL HARRIS. 559 


or effectual aid in troops from us, it is, therefore, extremely 
desirable that the Nizam’s contingent, now serving with you, 
as well as the Company’s subsidiary troops (or Lieut.-Colonel 
Dalrymple’s detachment) should be at liberty, as early as 
possible, to return to Hyderabad for the protection of his 
Highness’s territories. 

The early capture of Seringapatam would, probably, ena- 
ble you to admit, without danger or inconvenience, the de- 
parture of the Nizam’s contingent, and of the subsidiary 
troops. Leaving it to your discretion to determine the period 
of their dismission, J trust that you will not detain them a 
moment after you shall judge your army (exclusive of the 
Nizam’s contingent and subsidiary force) to be sufficient for 
the prosecution of the war against the Sultaun. 


I have the honour to be, &c. 
MornincTon. | 


No, CLXXXVI. 


Lieut..General Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 

My Lorp, Camp, before Seringapatam, 27th April, 1799. 

Our approaches to the fort were advanced 250 yards on the 
night of the 24th, and a battery of four guns was erected on 
the 25th, which destroyed the defences of some which bore 
on our attack. This opened with considerable effect yester- 
day morning, and in the evening the enemy’s entrenchments 
in advance were attacked and carried, not without an obsti- 
nate contest, which continued through the night. Our troops 
now occupy these works, and their lodgement will, I trust, 
this night be made secure. The possession of these works is 
of great importance as it gives us the ground on which the 
breaching battery must be erected, and every circumstance of 
the siege promises favourably. The enemy have disputed 
every inch of ground, and the spirit and conduct of the 
troops on every occasion, (and we have had several) which re- 
quired animated exertion, has been such as I cannot applaud 
too highly. 

I have the honour to be, &c4 
Georce Harris. 


560 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


No. CLXXXVII. 


Lieutenant General Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Lorp, Camp, Seringapatam, 28th April, 1799. 


I yesterday reported to your Lordship the successful attack 
made the preceding evening on the advanced work of the 
enemy. In the course of last night, the position occupied by 

‘our troops was strongly secured. ‘This morning a letter from 
Tippoo Sultaun, of which I annex a translation, was received. 
In reply, I have referred to the terms forwarded on the 22d, 
as those only on which I would treat, declining to admit any 
vakeels unless they were accompanied by the hostages and 
specie, in consequence of those terms being agreed to, and 
insisting on an answer by three o’clock to-morrow. 

This night our breaching battery will be built, and its fire 
tomorrow will probably have considerable effect on the Sul- 
taun’s determination, no offer to negociate shall for an instant 
delay our military operations, and every appearance of their 
present state and progress is extremely favourable. 


I have the honour to be, &c. 
Gerorce Harris. 


Translation of a Letter from Tippoo Sultaun to Lieut.-General Harris, 
having no date, but received in Camp before Seringapatam, on the 
28th April. 1799. . 


I have the pleasure of your friendly letter and understand 
its contents. The points in question are weighty, and without 
the intervention of Ambassadors, cannot be brought to a con- 
clusion ; I am, therefore, about to send two gentlemen to you, 
and have no doubt but a conference will take place; they will 
personally explain themselves to you; what more can I write. 


A tre translation, 
Barry Cros. 


1799. GENERAL HARRIS. 561 


No. CLXXXVII. 


The Earl of Mornington to Lieut..General Harris. 
Sir, , : Fort St. George, 28th April, 1799. 

Current accounts render it probable that Tippoo Sultaun 
will attempt to retire from Seringapatam to Chittledroog, or to 
some other of his strong hill forts. To counteract this at- 
tempt, you will employ the whole activity, skill, and zeal of 
your army ; and you will omit no effort to intercept the Sul- 
taun, if he should move out of his capital for the purpose of — 
effecting such an escape. 

If the Sultaun should escape and Seringapatam should fall 
into the possession of the British army, the power and reputa- 
tion of Tippoo will certainly suffer a great blow, but while he is 
able to keep an army in the field, and to maintain himself in 
any strong position, our efforts to reduce him to the last ex- 
tremity must be unremitted. 

In the event supposed, after properly securing the posses- 
sion of Seringapatam, and storing it as amply as it may be in 
your power with grain; you will resume your operations 
against the enemy, with as little delay, and with as much 
vigour as possible. 

You can best judge whether it would be practicable to un- 
dertakethe siege of Chittledroog, (supposing Tippoo to retire 
to that place) during the approaching monsoon. If you can 
pursue the enemy during the monsoon, without too great 
hazard to the health or safety of your army, every considera- 
Hon of policy will require such a pursuit. 

- Should so vigorous a prosecution of the war be impracti- 
ans or inexpedient during the monsoon, you will employ the 
interval in securing the resources of the Enemy’s country ; 
endeavouring (as far as can be done without too great a dis- 
persion of your force) to establish yourself in all the districts 
of Tippoo lying to the southward of the Cauvery ; (including 
Periapatam) and opening a direct communication to the north- 
ward of that river between Seringapatam and Ryakottah, by 
seizing such places as may be necessary in that line. ; 

In all your operations under the case supposed in the pre- 
sent letter, you must keep in view as much as possible, the 

VOL I. Zo 


562 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


object of affording every practicable degree of protection to 
the Nizam’s frontier, until you shall be able in pursuance of my 
instructions of the 26th instant, to dismiss from Mysore his 
Highness’s contingent and subsidiary troops, under the com- 
mand of Lieut.~-Colonel Dalrymple. 

Iam, &c. 


Mornrineton. 


No. CLXXXIX. 
The Earl of Mornington to the Hon. Jonathan Duncan. 


Sir, Fort St. George, April 30, 1799. 


. 1. Concurrent accounts render it probable that Tippoo Sul- 
taun will attempt to retire from Seringapatam to Chittledroog, 
or to some other of his strong hill forts. 

2. If the Sultaun should escape, and Seringapatam should 
fall into the possession of the British army, the power and re- 
putation of Tippoo will certainly suffer a great blow, but while 
he is able to keep an army in the field, and to maintain him- 
self in any strong position, our efforts to reduce him to the 
last extremity must be unremitted. 

3. In the event supposed, it would be the object of General 
Harris, after properly securing the possession of Seringapa- 
tam, to resume his operations against the enemy with as little 
delay and with as much vigour as possible. 

4. Whether it would be practicable to undertake the siege of 
Chittledroog (supposing Tippoo to retire to that place) during 
the approaching monsoon, General Harris alone is competent 
to judge; but at whatever period this expedition may be un- 
dertaken, the distance of the supposed field of action from 
Seringapatam and its vicinity to the Mahratta frontier, make 
it peculiarly desirable to secure to our army not only the re- 
sources of the adjacent Mahratta possessions, but the efficient 
cooperation of a considerable Mahratta force. 

5. Neither the state of the Peishwa’s authority, nor of his 
inclination to our cause, would justify the least expectation of 
the requisite cooperation from him; Purseram Bhow is the 
only Mahratta chieftain who is able to afford us the aid in 
question. 


1799. THE HON. JONATHAN DUNCAN: 563 


6. The present position of this chieftain’s force, and the re- 
lative situation.of the country under his management, with 
respect to Chittledroog and Bednore, render it particularly 
desirable to engage his cordial services, while the well known 
antipathy subsisting between him and Tippoo Sultaun offers 
a reasonable presumption that Purseram Bhow would be dis- 
posed, by a reasonable prospect of advantage, to assist in the 
reduction of the Sultaun’s power. 

7. With a view, therefore, to the accomplishment of this es- 
sential object, I wish a direct communication to be opened 
between the Company’s Government and Purseram Bhow. 

8. It has occurred to me that this communication can best 
be opened and maintained from the coast of Malabar, (perhaps 
from Goa,) from which place to the residence of Purseram 
Bhow, the route would probably be found sufficiently easy 
and secure. , 

9. It is my wish that Lieut.-Colonel Little and Mr. Uthoff 
should be employed on this mission, and that for this pur- 
pose they should proceed with as little delay as possible to 
Goa, there to hold themselves in readiness to repair either 
jointly or separately to the residence of Purseram Bhow, 
whenever they shall receive authentic information of the flight 
of Tippoo Sultaun from Seringapatam, whether to Chittle- 
droog or to any other of his strong hill forts. 

10. The main point which they must endeavour to carry 
with the Bhow is, his immediate and cordial cooperation at the 
head of the largest force in cavalry which he can assemble, 
with our army in Mysore, for the purpose of prosecuting the 
war against Tippoo with the utmost vigour. 

11. The subordinate points relating to the specific manner in 
which the Bhow shall cooperate with our army in Mysore, 
must be adjusted in concert with General Harris, according 
to whose advice and requisitions the Bhow must engage to 
regulate all his movements. Without waiting, however, for 
any specific requisition from General Harris, the Bhow must 
be required to engage to advance, without loss of time, in the 
direction of Chittledroog, or of such fortress as may be occu- 
pied by the Sultaun. 

12. The Commissioners will, of course, endeavour to obtain 
the concurrence of Purseram Bhow in these measures, on the 


564 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO April, 


most reasonable terms, without prescribing the nature or ex- 
tent of the encouragement to be held out to him. 

13. I authorize the Commissioners to pledge the Company’s 
Government to secure to Purseram Bhow, from the territories 
which may be obtained from Tippoo Sultaun by the allies, a 
Jaghire of such amount as they shall deem adequate to the 
service required. I also authorize them to promise to the 
Bhow, at the expiration of the war, a sum of money limited 
by the same principle. They may also advance to the Bhow 
immediately, for the purpose of enabling him to move into the 
enemy’s country a sum of money, not exceeding a month’s 
subsistence, for such force as he shall bring into the field. 
This advance will not be made unless the Bhow should abso- 
lutely require it. 

14. The Commissioners must have the necessary credit given 
them for drawing on your Government for any such advance 
as they shall judge requisite to be furnished to the Bhow. 

15, Itis notimprobable that Purseram Bhow may require to 
be joined by a detachment of the Company’s troops. I should 
have no objection to complying with such an application did 
circumstances admit of it; but as this is not likely to be the 
case, I can only authorize the Commissioners to assure him, 
that he shall be joined, if he desires it, by a detachment of 
the Company’s troops, on his approaching or reaching the 
army of General Harris. 

16. I shall direct Mr. Uthoff to proceed to Goa by the first 
opportunity, in order that he may be prepared to repair from 
thence to Purseram Bhow’s residence on receiving intelli- 
gence of the event stated in the 9th paragraph of this letter. 
In this event, both the Commissioners, if at Goa, will proceed 
together ; but if only one of them should be arrived at Goa, 
he must proceed without waiting for the other, and execute 
singly the objects of the commission. 

17 I should repose perfect confidence in the ability either of 
Mr. Uthoff or of Lieut.-Colonel Little, to accomplish the 
objects of the proposed embassy, and my view in calling for 
the services cf both, is solely to provide equally against the 
accidents of season to the northward or southward of Goa. 

I have the honour to be, Sir, 
your most faithful servant, 
MorninorTon. 


1799. SIR ALURED CLARKE. 565 


No. CXC. 
The Eurt of Mornington to Lieutenant General Harris. 
Sir, Fort St. George, 30th April, 1799. 

I entirely approve of your determination not to negotiate 
with the Sultaun, I trust that, before this letter can reach 
you, you will be in possession of Seringapatam. You will 
observe, that my instructions to you, in the event of your 
obtaining possession of the place were, that you should nei- 
ther open nor conclude any negotiation without special au- 
thority from me. I am persuaded that you will pay particular. 
attention to this instruction, and if you should be in posses- 
sion of the place, that you will use every exertion to furnish 
me, without delay, with such information as may enable me 
to provide effectually for the complete and lasting security of 
the Company’s interests in this quarter. I have made, and 
shall continue to employ, every possible effort ta provide for 

. the ample supply of your army in every respect. 


I have the honour to be, &c. 
MorninGTon, 


‘No. CXCI. 
The Earl of Mornington to his Excellency Sir Alured Clarke. 


My pear Sir, Fort St. George, 30th April, 1799. 

I request that, immediately on receiving this letter, you will 
appoint a committee “to take into consideration the state of 
the police in Calcutta, and in the cities of Moorshedabad, 
‘Dacca, Patna and Benares, and also in the several districts 
under the Company’s Government, within the provinces of 
Bengal, Bahar, Orissa and Benares; and to report the same, 
together with such new regulations as may appear best 
adapted to the present circumstances of the said cities and 
districts.” 

To this committee I wish that the magistrates of the se- 
veral cities and districts should be required forthwith to 
report the state of the police within their respective depart- 
ments, together with such amendments as appear necessary 
and practicable for the improvement of the same. 


566 - LORD CLIVE, TO April, 
¢ 


I wish the committee to consist of Mr. Barlow, Mr. Haring- 
ton, Mr. Macklew, and Mr. Blaquiere, with any other names 
which Mr. Barlow may suggest. The report of the committee 
to be transmitted to me, from time to time, during my absence 
from Bengal, and no measure to be adopted until I shall 
have had an opportunity of signifying my wishes to you. The 
committee cannot be appointed too soon nor proceed too early 
to report upon the police of Calcutta and of the several cities. 
It would be desirable that Mr. Barlow should communicate 
with Sir John Anstruther, from time to time, and should sig- 
nify to him my request, that he will be so good as to aid the 
committee with his opinion during the progress of their en- 
quiry. The judges have been already requested to furnish 
me with their advice respecting the state of the police at Cal- 
cutta, and I flatter myself that, with their assistance, added 
to the detailed report of the proposed committee, I may be 
enabled to establish such a system of regulation as shall tend 
to secure, on a more durable foundation, the good order and 
tranquillity of the cities and provinces under the peculiar 
charge of the Government of Bengal. 

Believe me, my dear Sir, &c. 
MornineTon. 


No. CXCII. 
[This letter was accidentally omitted under its proper date.] 
Lord Clive to the Secret Committee of the Court of Directors. 
GENTLEMEN, Fort St. George, 17th April, 1799. 
Understanding that the Governor-General transmits to you 


. 


by the present despatch a full and detailed account of the 


war in which we are engaged with Tippoo Sultaun, and of the 
circumstances, and motives which have determined his Lord- 
ship in the choice of the measures which he has pursued re- 
lative thereto, I should remain satisfied with what is written 
in the letter of this Government of this day’s date to the Se- 
cret Committee, did it not occur to my mind that it may be 
satisfactory to you to know more explicitly my sentiments 
upon the actual state of our affairs respecting the war; and 
that I should not do justice to the Governor-General if I did 
not express my sense of the conduct which has put us in a 


1799. THE SECRET COMMITTEE. 567 


situation of such fair and well grounded expectation as that- 
in which we are now placed. Upon my arrival here the end 
of August last, I entertained the most serious apprehensions 
of the Sultaun’s invading the Carnatic, which, had he done, 
very difficult would it have been to have assembled the whole 
of our army, and vain would have been the hope of collecting 
a sufficiency of supplies and cattle to enable us to undertake 
the siege of Seringapatam this season, and finish the war in 
one campaign. But the fortune of the Company prevented, 
and possibly the complete success of the measure of annihi- 
lating the French party, and increasing the subsidiary force 
at Hyderabad, planned with so much wisdom by the Governor 
General, and executed with so much ability by Colonel 
Roberts, under the direction of the resident, Captain Kirk- 
patrick, confounded the Sultaun, and deterred him from 
bringing upon the Carnatic so severe.a calamity. 

From the time I was acquainted with the views and inten- 
tions of the Governor-General, it became the object of my 
constant solicitude, in conjunction with the other members of 
this Government, to promote his measures by the most zea- 
lous and cordial cooperation; and we had the gratification 
upon his Lordship’s arrival here the end of the last year, to 
receive this full and entire approbation of the exertions that 
had been made, and of the advanced state in which he found 
our preparations for war. Since that period, the same 
wisdom and energy which had characterised the, Governor- 
General’s Councils has guided our exertions; and we have 
had the satisfaction to know that the most formidable and 
best equipped British army that ever took the field in India, 
combined with a respectable force from the Nizam, entered 
*Mysore the 5th oflast month. Bombay has not been less for- 

ward in its exertions, and the two victories obtained by 
General Stewart the 6th March, and by General Harris on the 
27th, are presages of future success, and serve to evince how 
little able Tippoo is, without French aid, to contend against 
the force which is assailing him. The distracted state of the 
court of Poonah, whose friendship may be deemed equivocal, 
the effectual assistance of the Nizam, the close connection sub- 
sisting between that Prince and the Company, and the power- 
ful state of: our armies, encourage us to expect a speedy 
and glorious termination to the contest. The irreconcilable 


? 


568 _ GENERAL HARRIS, TO , May, 


-hatred of the Sultaun, and the uncertain state of the French 
in Egypt, of whom we have no accounts to be depended upon 
since August last, when Buonaparte was still at the head of 
17 or 18,000 men, authorize and point out the necessity of 
continuing the war till we can obtain complete security, and 
establish the foundations of a durable and undisturbed peace. 
The expenses of preparation have from their extent been un-’ 
avoidably great; but as we have reason to expect that if the 
war is not entirely finished in one campaign, the weight of it 
will, I trust, upon the whole, prove an economical one, and 
that the acquisitions we may gain, and the security we shall 
derive from them, will amply repay the expenses we shall 
have incurred. 

Concurring as I do in the views of the Governor-General, 
bearing testimony to the wisdom and decision of his councils, 
and sensible of the advantages which must ever result from 
the person who has the controul of the Company’s affairs, 
and the means of drawing for the resources of the three Pre- 
sidencies, being as near the scene of action as possible in a ¢ 
contest like the present, I desire to assure you of my con- 
tinuing to give my utmost support and most cordial coopera- 
tion to measures which bid fair to reflect so much honour upon 
Lord Mornington’s administration, and to secure the most 
solid advantages to the Company and the British Empire. 
In these sentiments Iam most heartily joined by the other 
members of this Government. 

I have the honour to be, with the highest consideration 
and respect, 


Gentlemen, 
your obliged and most faithful Servant, 
CiivE. «’ 
No. CXCIII. 


Lieutenant-General Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 
My Lorp, Camp, Seringapatam, 4th May, 1799. 
Ihave the pleasure to inform you, that this day, at one 
o’clock, a division of fhe army under my command assaulted 
Seringapatam; and that at half past two o'clock the place 
was completely in our possession. ‘Tippoo Sultaun fell in the 
assault. Two of his sons, the Sultaun Padsha, and Mayen 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 569 


ud Deen, are prisoners, with ‘many of the principal Sirdars. 
Our success has been complete ; I will forward to your Lord- 
ship details hereafter.* 
I have the honour to be, &c. 
G. Harris. 


No. CXCIV, 
Lieut.-General Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Lorp, Seringapatam, 7th May, 1799. 

On the 4th instant + I had the honour to address to your 
Lordship a hasty note, containing in few words the sum of 
our success, which I have now to report more in detail, 

The fire of our batteries, which began to batter in breach 
on the 30th of April, had, on the evening of the 3rd instant, 
so much destroyed the walls against which it was directed, 

A that the arrangement was then made for assaulting the place 
on the following day, when the breach was reported practi- 
cable. The troops intended to be employed were stationed 
on the trenches early on the morning of the 4th, that no ex- 
traordinary movement might lead the enemy to expect the 
assault, which J had determined to make in the heat of the 
day, as the time best calculated to ensure success, as their 
troops would then be least prepared to oppose us. 

Two flank companies of Europeans, taken from those regi- 
ments necessarily left to guard our camps and out-posts, fol- 
lowed by the 12th, 33rd, 73rd, and 74th regiments, and three 
corps of grenadier sepoys, taken from the troops of the three 
;Presidencies, with 200 of his Highness the Nizam’s troops, 
formed the party for the assault, accompanied by 100 of the 
artillery, and the corps of pioneers, and supported in the 
trenches by the battalion companies of the regiment De Meu- 
ron, and four battalions of Madras sepoys. Colonel Sher- 


* Received at Fort St. George the 11th of May, 1799. This despatch was 
inclosed in a sealed quill, and conveyed through Mysore by a secret mes- 
senger—the country being then filled with Tippoo Sultaun’s troops and 
adherents. ‘his circumstance accounts far the long delay in his arrival 
at Madras. 

+ See preceding page. 


570 GENERAL HARRIS, TO’ May, 


brooke and Licut.-Colonels Dunlop, Dalrymple, Gardner, 
and Mignon, commanded the several flank corps, and Major- 
General Baird was entrusted with the direction of this im- 
portant service.* 

At one o’clock the troops moved from the trenches, crossed 
the rocky bed of the Cavery under an extremely heavy fire, 
passed the glacis and ditch, and ascended the breaches in the 
Fausse Braye, and rampart of the fort, surmounting in the 
most gallant manner every obstacle which the difficulty of the 
passage, and the resistance of the enemy presented to oppose 
their progress. Major-General Baird had divided his force 
for the purpose of, clearing the ramparts to the right and left ; 
one division was commanded by Colonel Sherbrooke, the 
other by Lieut.-Colonel Dunlop; the latter was disabled in 
the breach, but both corps, although strongly opposed, were 
completely successful. Resistance continued to be made from 
the palace of Tippoo for some time after all firing had ceased 
from the works; two of his sons were there, who, on an as- 
surance of safety, surrendered to the troops surrounding 
them, and guards were placed for the protection of the family, 
most of whom were in the palace. It was soon after reported 
that Tippoo Sultaun had fallen. Syed Saheb, Meer Saduc, 
Syed Gofar, and many others of his chiefs were also slain; 
measures were immediately adopted to stop the confusion, at 
first unavoidable, in a city strongly garr isoned, crowded with 
inhabitants, and their property in ruins, from the fire of a 
numerous artillery, and taken by assault. The princes were 
removed to camp. 

. It appeared to Major-General Baird so important to ascer- 
tain the fate of the Sultaun, that he caused immediate search 
to be made for his body, which, after much difficulty, was‘ 
found late in the evening in one of the gates under a heap of 
slain, and placed in the palace. The corpse was the next 
day recognized by the family, and interred with the honours 
due to his rank, in the mausoleum of his father. 

The strength of the fort is such, both from its natural posi- 
tion and the stupendous works by which it is surrounded, 
that all the exertionseof the brave troops who attacked it, in 
whose praise it is impossible to say too much, were required 


* See General Baird’s report in Appendix. 


1799, THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 571 


to place it in: our hands. Of the merits of the army I have 
expressed my opinion in orders, a copy of which I shall for- 
ward to-morrow; and I trust your Lordship will point out 
their services to the favourable notice of their king and 
country. 

I am sorry to add, that on collecting the returns of our loss 
it is found to have been much heavier than I had at first ima- 
gined. An accurate statement shall be sent to-morrow.* 

On the 5th instant Abdul Khalic, the elder of the princes, 
formerly hostages with Lord Cornwallis, surrendered himself 
at out out-posts, demanding protection. Kerim Saheb, the 
brother of Tippoo had before sought refuge with Meer Al- 
lum Behadur. A Cowl Namah‘was yesterday despatched to 
Futteh Hyder, the eldest son of Tippoo, inviting him to join 
his brother. Purneah and Meer Cummer ul deen Khan have 
also been summoned to Seringapatam. No answers have yet 
been received, but I expect them shortly, as their families are 
in the fort. 

This moment Ali Reza, formerly one of the vakeels from 
Tippoo Sultaun to Lord Cornwallis, has arrived from Meer 
Cummer ul Deen Khan to ask my orders for 4000 horse, now 
under his command. Ali Reza was commissioned to declare 
that Meer Cummer ul Deen would make no conditions, but 
rely on the generosity of the English. He desired merely to 
state, that his claim to the Jaghire of Gurramconda was well 
known, as was his family and character. If these and his 
connexion with the unfortunate family of the Tippoo Sultaun 
should give him a claim to this ancient possession of his 
house, his sense of obligation would bind him ever to the Bri- 
tish interests. If this could not be granted to him, he hoped 
‘he might obtain permission to retire with his family to Hydera+ 
bad. On this subject I have promised to ask your Lord- 
ship’s pleasure ; he will shortly arrive, and as the army of the 
late Sultaun look up chiefly to him, I hope through his 
means to be enabled at once to restore tranquillity. Monsieur 
Chapuy and most of the French are prisoners. They have 
commissions from the French Government. 

I have the honour to*e, &c., 
George Harris. 


* See Appendix. 


572 GENERAL HARRIS, TO May, 


Abstract of a return of killed, wounded and missing, at the assault of Sering- 
apatam, on the 4th May, \799. 


Europeans Killed.—2 captains, 6 lieutenants, 3 serjeants, ] drummer, 
and 58 rank and file. 

Wounded.—\ lieut.-colonel, 4 captains, 8 lieutenants, 3 ensigns, 2 con- 
ductors, 12 serjeants, 5 drummers, and 228 rank and file. 


Missing.—1 serjeant and 3 rank and file. 
Natives Killed.—-\3 rank and file. 
Wounded.—\ Jemadar, two drummers, and 31 rank and file. 
Missing. —2 rank and file. 
P. A. AGNEW, Military Sec. 


Names of Officers killed and wounded on the assault, 


Killed.—Lieutenant Mather, 75th; Captain Owen, 77th; Lieutenants 
Lalor, 73rd, (flank company’s) Farquhar, Prendergast, Hill, and Shawe, 
74th ; Captain Cormick, pioneers. 

Wounded.—Lieutenants Turner, Broughton, and Skelton, 75th; Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Dunlop and Lieutenant Laurence, 77th; Lieutenant Webb, 
Bombay regiment; Captain Lurdy and Lieutenant Mackey, Meuron, 
flank companies ; Lieutenant Shawe, 76th, serving with.12th regiment ; 
Captain Mac Leod, Lieutenant Thomas, Ensigns Antiland Guthrie, 73rd 
regiment ; Captain Caldwell, engineers ; Captain Prescott, artillery. 


P, A. AGNEW, Military Sec. 


Copy of General Orders, dated Camp at Seringapatam, 5th May, 1799. 


The Commander-in-Chief congratulates the gallant army, which he has 
the honour to command, on the conquest of yesterday. The effects aris- 
ing from the attainment of such an acquisition, as far exeeed the presenty 
limits of detail,as the unremitting zeal, labour,and unparalleled valour of 
the troops surpass his powers of praise. For services incalculable in their 
consequences, he must consider the army as well entitled to the applause 
and gratitude of their country at large. 

While Lieut.-General Harris sincerely laments the loss sustained in the 
valuable officers and men, who fell in the attack, he cannot omit to return 
his thanks in the warmest terms to Major-General Baird, for the decided 
and able mannerin which he conducted the assault, and the humane mea- 
sures which he subsequerly adopted for preserving order and regularity 
in the place. He requests Major-General Baird will communicate to the 
officersand men, who on that great occasion acted under his command, the 
high sense which he must ever entertain of their atchievements and merits. 


e 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, 578 


The Commander-in-Chief requests that Colonel Gent and the corps of 
engineers under his orders, will accept his thanks for their unremitting 
exertions in conducting the duties of that very important department, and 
his best acknowledgements are due to Major Beatson for the essential as- 
sistance given to this branch of the service, by the constant exertions of 
his ability and zeal. 

The merit of the artillery corps is so strongly expressed by the effects of 
their fire, that the Commander-in-Chief can only desire Colonel Smith 
to assure the officers and men of the excellent corps under his command, 
that he feels most fully their claim to approbation. 

In thus publicly expressing his sense of the good conduct of the army, 
the Commander-in-Chief finds himself called upon to notice in a most 
particular manner the exertions of Captain Dowse, and his corps of pio- 
neers, which during the present service, have been equally marked by 
unremitting labour, and the ability with which that labour was applied. 

On referring to the progress of the siege, so many occasions have oc- 
curred for applause to the troops, that it is difficult to particularize indivi- 
dual merit ; but the gallant manner in which Lieutenant-Colonel Shawe, 
the Hon. Colonel Wellesley, Lient.-Colonel Moneypenny, the Hon. Lieut.- 
Colonel St. John, Major Macdonald, Major Shelly, and Lieut.-Colonel 
Wallace, conducted the attacks on the several out-works and posts of the 
enemy, demand to be recorded, and the very spirited attack led by Lieut.- 


‘Colonel Campbell of H.M. 74th regiment, which tended so greatly to 


secure the position our troops had attained in the enemy’s works, on the 
26th ultimo, claims the strongest approbation of the Commander-in- 
Chief. 

The important part taken by the Bombay army from the commence- 
went of the siege, in all the operations which have led to its honourable 
conclusion, has been such as well sustains its long established reputation. 
The gallant manner in which the post at the village of Agrar was siezed 
bythe force under Colonel Hart —the ability displayed in directing the fire 
of the batteries established there—the vigour with which everyattack of the 
enemy on the out-posts of that army was repulsed—and the spirit shewn 
in the assault of the breach, by the corps led by Lieut.-Colonel Dunlop, 
are pointsof particular notice, for which the Commander-in-Chief requests 


_Lieut.-General Stuart will offer his best thanks to the officers and troops 


employed. 


Lieut.-General Harris trusts that Lieut.-Gen. Stuart will excuse his thus 
publicly expressing his sense of the cordial co-operation and assistance 
received from him during the present service, in the course of which, he 
has ever found it difficult to separate the sentiments of his public duty 
from the warmest feelings of his private friendship. 


Extract from General Orders, dated Seringqpatam, 8th May, 1779. 


Lieut.-General Harris has particular pleasure in publishing to the army, 
the following extract of a report, transmitted to him yesterday by Major- 
General Baird, as it places in a distinguished point of view the merit of 


574 GENERAL HARRIS, TO May, 


an officer on the very important occasion referred to, whose general gal- 
lantry and good conduct since he has served with this army, have not 
failed to recommend him strongly to the Commander-in-Chief. 

“* If where all behaved nobly it is proper to mention individual merit, I 
know no man so justly entitled to praise, as Colonel Sherbrooke, to whose 
exertions I feel myself much indebted, for the success of the attack.” 


P. A. AGNEW, Military See. 


No. CXCV. 


The Earl of Mornington to the Hon. Jonathan Duncan. 
Sir, Fort St. George, 8th May, 1799. 


The exemplary conduct and distinguished character of the 
Coorga Raja having rendered me desirous of manifesting 
some public testimony of my approbation of his recent services, 
the remission of his annual tribute to the Company appears 
to me to be a measure, which would combine the effects of an 
honourable distinction and of a profitable reward. My inten- 
tion is that of the whole amount of the Rajah’s present tri- 
bute, which I understand to be about 24,000 rupees, a sum 
not exceeding a thousand rupees be reserved to the Company, 
or that in place of tribute,.some article of considerable value 
be annually required from him, as an acknowledgment of his 
allegiance to the British Government; I request, that after 
having determined the nature of the acknowledgement to be 
required, according to your own judgment, you will take the 
necessary measures for carrying my intentions into effect. I 
think the arrangement should be made to take place from the 
day of the junction of the army of Bombay with the detach- : 


ment commanded by Major-General Floyd. 
Tam, &c. 


Mornineton. 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 575 


No. ,CXCVI. 


4 


Lieut. General Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Dear Lorn, i Seringapatam, May 9th, 1799. 
That I most sincerely congratulate your Lordship on our 
most fortunate successes, I feel you will give me entire credit 
for, without my dwelling further on the point. The Almighty 
has been pleased to grant a victory so complete in all its events, 
as to leave nothing on my side to ask, but that your Lordship 
will come and regulate the political concerns for the benefit 
. of all concerned. oh 
You may be assured that every order or wish of yours sig- 
nified to me, shallin future, as heretofore, be carried into exe- 
cution with all possible despatch, but for the good of our coun- 
_ try, I really think your presence necessary. For my part, 
politics have never been my study, exclusive of which, my 
constitution is evidently giving way to the anxieties I have 
already gone through, and I am fearful will fail altogether un- 
less allowed to recruit in quiet. I cannot expect the world 
shall allow that the anxieties of the expedition were propor- 
tionally great*to the shortness of the period in which it has 
* been executed, but I best know, that had mine been divided 
into as many years as we have been months, they would still 
have worn me down—added to this, I am not as equal to 
bodily fatigue as I thought myself, from all which, I shall be 
much obliged, by your Lordship making such arrangements 
as tolet me return ‘as soon as convenient after our meeting 
here. In the meantime, you may depend that the same active 
measures, which under Providence, have so greatly tended to 
‘insure our success shall still be continued, and that we shall 
not sit down content with having taken the capital, but proceed 
with all possible despatch to secure the country. 
I am, with the greatest regard, 
My Lord, 
Your very faithful and obliged 
Friend and Servant, 
Georce Harris. 


P.S.—I have every reliance your Lordship will have no ob- 
jection to my son’s taking home the colours of the fort. 


576 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO. May, 


No. CXCVII. 


Lord Clive to the Hon..Henry Dundas. 

My pear Sir, " Fort St., George, 11th May, 1799. 

Although Lord Mornington writes to inform you of the - 
news received yesterday, and confirmed to-day, of the’fall of 
Seringapatam upon the 4th instant, I cannot allow his Lord- 
ship’s overland express to depart without conveying “to you 
the supreme gratification I have in being able to offer you my 
‘warmest congratulations upon that event having taken place 
within the short period of two months from our army having 
entered the frontier of the’ enemy. ‘The wisdom which has _ 
presided over and directed the conduct of this short war, the © 
merit of which rests almost solely with the Governor-General, 
the extent of our preparations, and the vigour with which 
the army was equipped, and the celerity with which the great 
object of the campaign has been carried into execution, ren- 
der the taking Seringapatam, with its concomitant circum- 
stances of the flight and fall of the Sultaun, of the families of 
that Prince’s principal officers having fallen into our power, 
and of the immense quantity of rice and provisions, and pro- 
bably of treasure captured, one of the most brilliant and 
useful achievements of this or any other age. No event so 
important has occurred since the battle of Plassey in this 
country; that laid the foundations of our greatness in India, 
and this last glorious success will, I trust, confirm that great- 
ness, and place in our. power the means of: durable, advan- 
tageous, and honourable peace. The details of the siege and 
storm have not yet reached us, but from the circumstance of 
the Forlorn Hope having employed only six minutes to cross 
the rocky bed of the river, and to reach the top of the breach, « 
it is reasonable to believe that our loss has been small. Time 
does not permit of my troubling you further at present, it is 
more than probable that Lord Mornington will be under the 
necessity of proceeding to Seringapatam, in which case I shall 
accompany him, and you may be assured that nothing will 
give me more satisfaction than to have the honour of address- 
ing you from that place. 

I have the honour to be, 
with great esteem and respect, dear Sir, 
your much obliged and faithful servant, 
Curve. 


~ 


1799.. THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 577 


No. CXCVIII. 
The Earl of Mornington to the Coste of Directors. 
HonouraBLe Sirs, Fort St. Géorge, 11th May, 1799. 


No-particular comment is required from me to’ illustrate 
the numerous advantages which cannot fail to flow from the 
brilliant and decisive atchievement announced to your Ho- 
“nourable Court in the despatch of the Governor-General in 
Council of this date.* But I cannot refrain from offering to 
you my separate and most cordial congratulations on an event, 
the glory of which has never been surpassed (if it has ever 

‘ been equalled), in the history ‘of the military transactions of 
the British nation in India. 

The fall of Seringapatam, under all the circumstances 
which accompanied that event, has placed the whole of the 
kingdom of Mysore, with all its resources, at the disposal of 
your Government; and the only power in India to which the 
French could look for assistance, or which could be deemed 
formidable to your interests, is now deprived of all vigour, if 
not’entirely extinct. When your Honourable Court recol- 
lects that these advantages have been acquired within four 
months-from the date of my arrival at this Presidency, and 
within two from the period of the army’s entrance into My- 
sore, E trust you will be of opinion that your servants have 
not been deficient in alacrity or diligence. 

When Lieutenant-General Harris took the field, I thought - 
it my duty to invest him with the most efficient and extensive 
powers which it was possible for me to delegate; and he has 
carried with him to the gates of Seringapatam the full vigour 
.and energy of your supreme Government. To the judicious 
exercise of this ample authority, combined with the liberal 
supplies which had been provided for the army, may be as- 
cribed in a great measure the unparalleled rapidity and promp- 
titude of its operations. I have the further satisfaction to add 
that the particular detail’ of those operations, which I shall 
hereafter submit to your Honourable Court, will furnish the 
most brilliant examples of judgment, skill, discipline, firmness 


* The despatch adverted to is in substance the same as his Lordship’s 
etter to the Court of Directors. 
VOL. I. 2P 


578 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, ‘To May, 


and valour, under many trials pf all those distinguished qua- 
lities. 

The dreadful fate of Tippoo Sultaun cannot be contem- ” 
plated without emotions of pain and regret; but I trust it will 
serve as a salutary lesson to the native Princes of India, and 
will prove the danger of violating public engagements, and in- 
viting foreign invasion for the prosecution of schemes of am- 
bition and hatred against the British power. He was interred 
within his own capital on the day following its capture, in the 
mausoleum of his father, with the honours of war, paid to his 
temains by the British army. I am persuaded that your Ho- 
nourable Court will derive peculiar satisfaction from the in- 
telligence that his family and palace suffered no insult r= 
violence during the heat of the assault, and have since been 
protected with the utmost care. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 
MorNINGTON. 


No. CXCIX. 
Earl of Mornington to Lieut.-General Harris. 


Sir, Fort St. George, 12th May, 1799. 

I had yesterday the satisfaction to receive your letter of 
the 4th instant, advising me of the capture of Sering gapatam,. 
and of the death of Tippoo Sultaun. - 

With the warmest sensations of admiration, affection, and 
attachment, I offer my cordial thanks and zealous congratula- 
tions to you, and to all the officers and privates composing 
the gallant army, which has achieved this glorious and deci- 
sive victory with a degree of energy, rapidity and skill, unpa- 
rallelled in this quarter of the globe, and seldom equalled i in. 
any part of the world. 

Tt has afforded me peculiar satisfaction on this important 
occasion to learn, that every possible attention has been-paid 
to the families of Tippoo Sultaun, and to those of his Chief- 
tains.. 

Although I have not yet received directly from you any 
official details of the circumstances attending the assault and 
capture of Seringapatam, it is evident that the acquisition has 
been attended with circumstances of a nature to facilitate a 
final and satisfactory arrangement of the country. 


1799. GENERAL HARRIS. 579 


I entirely approve all your proceedings of a political na- 
ture (as far as you have reported them to me) relative to the 
negotiations with the Sultaun previously to the assault of the 
city. Yéu have faithfully pursued the spirit of my instruc- 
tions, and departed from the letter only in such cases as 
would have compelled me to adopt similar alterations of prin- 
ciples and measures if 1 had been on the spot. . 

The subject of a final adjustment of Mysore i is however so 
complicated and delicate as to appear to require my presence 
at Seringapatam. For this reason, {intend forthwith to pro- 
ceed to Ryakottah ; from which fortress I can advance to 
Seringapatam, if such a measure should appear to be neces- 

» sary. In the meanwhile I have determined to despatch my 
brother, Mr. Henry Wellesley, and Lieut.-Colonel Kirkpa- 
rick to Ryakottah, with orders to proceed tu the army when- 
ever the communication shall be sufficiently open, for the 
purpose of acting with the commissioners appointed under my 
instructions of the 22nd of February, and of ascertaining a 
variety of points of detail on which it is necessary that I 
should be fully and accurately informed previously to the for- 
mation of any definitive adjustment of the affairs of the King- 
dom of Mysore. . 

But it is requisite immediately that the Company should 
obtain full possession of all Canara (including Bilguy and the 

~ heads of all the Ghauts communicating between Canara and 
the Upper Country), as well as of the Coimbatoor Country. 
You: will, therefore, without delay require from the proper 
persons the most peremptory and unequivocal orders for the 
immediate delivery to the Company's officers of all the forts, 
and of all other public property comprehended in these 
countries. 

For the purpose of taking possession of Canara, you will 
{unless you should deem it imprudent) as soon as possible 
detach the army of Bombay, or such part of it as may be ne- 
cessary. It appears probable that you may safely detach the 
army of Bombay on this service ; on the other hand, the pos- 
sibility of a French invasion in India from the Red Sea makes 
it desirable that the army of Bombay should return to the 
Coast of Malabar, and that we should obtain possession of 
Canara as soon as possible. 

For the purpose of securing the Coimbatoor country, it 


580 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO May, 


will perhaps be sufficient if you send thither the detachment 
under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Brown as soon as may 
be practicable. 

The Barrahmahl at present containing an inconsiderable 
force, you will return Lieut.-Colonel Read's detachment as 
soon as you may judge expedient. 

At the same time that you demand from the proper autho- 
rities the necessary orders for the surrender to the Company 
of the specified countries and forts, you are to require si- 
milar orders for the prompt and unconditional delivery to the 
officers of his Highness the Nizam of the forts and districts 
of Gooty Bulheri, Gurrumconda and Colar, with the excep- 
tion only of any forts in the two latter, which may be situated 
at the head of passes leading from the table land of Mysore 
into any of the districts of the Company, or of the Nabob' of 
the Carnatic, it being my intention that all such forts shall be 
occupied by the Company’s troops. 

For the purpose of occupying and securing these coun- 
tries it will be necessary that the contingent of his Highness 
the Nizam, and the subsidiary detachment should move to- 
wards the north-east as soon as possible. - 

The country and principal forts situated between the north 
bank of the Cavery and Colar, may be occupied for the pre- 
sent either by the necessary detachments from your army 
or by Colonel Read. The ultimate allotment of this tract is 
a point for future consideration. 

The Sirdars, on whose ready acquiescence and submission 
the Company and the Nizam must depend for an early and 
easy possession of the forts and countries which have heen 
mentioned, must be plainly informed that the measure of 
favour and protection to be extended to them will be regulated , 
by the alacrity and sincerity with which they shall exert 
themselves to satisfy the allies on this occasion. 

With regard to Bednore, and other parts of the late Tippoo 
Sultaun’s possessions bordering on the Mahratta frontier, 
I wish those countries to remain unoccupied for the pre- 
sent, until I shall have determined what portion of terri- 
tory shall be assigned to the Peishwa.* Accordingly, no 


* The necessity for this deliberation is explained in the Governor-Ge- 
neral’s letter to General Harris (paragraph 6) of the 23rd April, 1799 (see 


1799. GENERAL HARRIS. 581 


orders for the delivery of any forts, or the cession of any 
districts to the Mahrattas must be issued by the Sirdars in 
authority without my specific requisition; and they must be 
apprised that I shall hold them responsible for the conduct 
of their respective managers and subordinate officers in the 
countries in question. 

All the French whom you may be able to secure-(and you 
will make the most diligent enquiry after persons of that na- 


p. 538), where the following letter is referred to, and which would have 
been printed in its proper place could it then have been found. 


The Earl of Mornington to Generat Harris. 


Sir, Fort St. George, April 23rd, 1799. 

Since the date of my instructions to you of the 22d and 25th of February, 
circumstances have occurred which render it absolutely necessary to re- 
duce the power of Tippoo Sultaun as much as possible, and desirable to 
make certain modifications of the articles of peace transmitted to you 
with those instructions. 

Of these circumstances the following paragraphs contain some of the 
leading points. 

1. Ihave received fresh proofs of an obstinate adherence on the part 
of Tippoo Sultaun to his connexion with the French; to whom he has 
recently despatched M. Dubue and two Native Vakeels on an Embassy 
from Tranquebar. 

2. I am still ignorant of the actual condition of the French army in 
Egypt; and of the means possessed by General Buonaparte of aiding the 
Sultaun. 

3. Commodore Blanket was not arrived in the Red Sea on the 31st of 
December; I fear he has lost his passage; consequently the mouth of the 
Red Sea may not be adequately guarded at the return of the periodical 
opening of the navigation. 

4. Zemaun Shah may be enabled to resume his designs against Hindos- 
tan; and recent discoveries in Bengal prove those designs to have been 
nore immediately dengernus to the British interests than I had sup- 
posed, 

5. Dowlut Row Scindiah has been discovered to entertain hostile de- 
signs against the Company and the Nizam; and I have reason to suspect 
that a secret correspondence subsists between him and Tippoo. 

6. The Peishwa appears to have entered into Seindiah’s views against the 
Company and the Nizam. 

The nature of this conveyauce does not admit of my making such de- 
tailed reflections as arise from these circumstances, or of my stating other 
points intimately connected with them, you will receive my instructions, 
founded on the considerations above mentioned, in another despatch of 


this date. 
MORNINGTON, 


£82 GENERAL IEARRIS, TO May, 


tion) must be sent to the Presidency by the first favourable 
opportunity. 

I wish you to send a detachment of your army to meet me 
at Ryakottah whenever you deem it prudent to spare such a 
force. By the first opportunity you will inform me how far 
the state of Mysore may either require or admit of my pro- 
ceeding to Seringapatam. 


Lam, &c. 
Mornineron, 


No. CC. 


Lieut.Gen. Harris to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Lorp, Seringapatam, May 13, 1799. 


I have forwarded: to your Lordship, by various hircarahs. 
an account of the success of the army in the assault of Se- 
ringapatam, with copies of the orders issued on that occasion. 
In those orders I expressed my approbation of the conduct of 
the troops in general, and my sense of the merits of those 
officers whose behaviour had attracted particular notice. 

It remains for me to state what is in justice due to those 
whom, for obvious reasons, I could not present in the same 
manner to your Lordship’s notice; these are officers on the 
general staff, in my family, and others whose zeal induced 
them to forward the public service by the exertion of their 
abilities, in aid of departments to which they were not offi- 
cially attached. 

In every point of view I must call your Lordship’s particu- 
lar attention to the Adjutant-General of the army. His 
general character as an officer is too well established by a 
long and distinguished course of the most meritorious service 
to require my testimony; but the particular exertion of his 
talents on the present service in directing, regulating, and 
assisting the progress of our departments, when embarrassed 
by all the difficulties attending a deficiency of conveyance for 
an uncommonly extensive equipment during the advance of 
the army.; and the ability, zeal, and energy displayed by him 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 583 
in superintending the various operations of an arduous siege, 
where he was ever present, stimulating the exertions of 
others, or assisting their judgment and labours with his own, 
claim from me to be stated to your Lordship in the most for- 
cible terms. It is my earnest wish that my sentiments on this 
subject may be publicly recorded, and it is my firm opinion 
that if the success of this army has been of importance to 
the British interests, that success is to be attributed in a very 
considerable degree to Lieut.-Colonel Close. 

From the officers more immediately in my family, I have 
derived all the assistance, in the conduct of the public service, 
which I had reason to expect from their experience; and I 
am highly indebted to your Lordship for the indulgence with 
which you attended to my wishes ia the selection of Lieut.- 
Colonel Agnew and Captain Macauley as my confidential 
staff. 

The gentlemen of the commission named by your Lordship 
to assist me with their advice, on subjects of a political nature, 
have in every instance where I have found it expedient to 
refer to their judgment, acted in a manner with which I am 
particularly satisfied. Your Lordship is in possession of 
their proceedings on the subject of the various overtures for 
negotiation made by Tippoo Sultaun; and the orders I have 
since received on this head leave me no ground to doubt your 
Lordship’s approbation of the line of conduct which they 
have uniformly pursued, 

Major Dallas has strong claims to be particularly recom- 
mended to your Lordship’s notice. The readiness with which 
he came forward to exert his personal influence with the 
principal natives in the bullock department, at a period when 
it seemed scarcely possible to move forward the public stores. 
The effectual aid which he gave to the store departinent by 
his personal assistance in its arrangements; and the duty 
equally important and laborious, which he voluntarily took 
upon himself, of seeking and securing forage for the public 
cattle during the marches of the army, are amongst the 
many instances in which his zeal has been distinguished, and 
which entitle him to the attention of Government. 

In the department of the Quarter-Master-General the con- 
duct of Lieut.-Col. Richardson and Major Allan has been 


very satisfactory to me. Captain Turing has ably assisted 


584 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO May, 


Lieut.-Coft Close in the Adjutant-General’s office; and Capt. 
Orr, of the guides, has merited great praise by his judgment, 
diligence, and activity, in conducting the marches of the army, 
and of all the detachments of importance, which, since our 
encampment here, it has been necessary to make under Major- 
General Floyd. 

Captain Macleod, of the intelligence department, has been 
employed in the management of the bazars of the army, in the 
arrangement of the brinjarries, and on a variety of services not 
specially the duty of any regularly established office, but 
which required a perfect knowledge of the customs of India, 
and the strictest integrity in the person charged with their 
execution. I have on all such occasions given my full confi- 
dence to Captain Macleod, and his conduct has shewn him 
deserving of the trust. 

I have thought it a necessary part of my public duty to 
make this report to your Lordship for the information of 
Government, and have the honour to be, 

My Lord, your Lordship’s most obedient, 
and faithful servant, 


Grorce Harris. 


‘ 


No. CCI. 
The Earl of Mornington to Lieut.-General Harris. 


Sir, Fort St. George, 15th May. 1799. 


I have already expressed to you in my answer to your note 
of the 4th instant, my distinguished sense of the invaluable 
services of the admirable army under your command, and 
having now received the details of the assault of the 4th, I 
shall immediately issue a General Order in Council respect- 
ing the conduct of the rapid and brilliant campaign which 
terminated with such lustre on that memorable day. 

My private and military secretaries will set out for Serin- 
gapatam by Ryakottah this evening, charged with instructions 
for your guidance until my arrival can take place. In the 
mean while I authorise you to assure Meer Cummur-ud-Deen 
Khan that I receive with great satisfaction his unconditional 
submission to the generosity of the British power: and that 
he may rely with confidence on my countenance and protec- 


1799. GENERAL HARRIS. 585 


al 

tion; you will add, that in concert with his Highness the 
Nizam I will readily take into consideration Meer Cummur- 
ud-Deen’s claim to the Jaghire of Gurrumconda, but it would 
be premature at present to enter into any specific engage- 
ment on that head. However, I empower you to declare to 
Meer Cummur-ud-Deen immediately in my name, that if I 
shall be satisfied with his services in the restoration of tran- 
quillity, I will make an ample and liberal provision for him, 
fully equal to whatever may appear to be his just claims. As 
it may tend to inspire Meer Cummur-ud-Deen with additional 
confidence, I enclose a letter for him under my own hand and 
seal. 

You will inform all the Sirdars, and persons lately in high 
office in the government of Mysore, that the degree of favour 
and protection to be extended to them by the Company and 
the allies will be regulated aecording to the fidelity with 
which they shall respectively render an account of all the 
property of the Sircar under their charge; referring in parti- 
cular to the stable horse; to the draft and carriage cattle; 
and to all arms, ordnance, and ordnance stores, belonging to 
the Sircar. 

I desire that you will issue such orders as you may judge ne- 
cessary to the different asophs and aumils of Tippoo Sultaun’s 
government, requiring them to hold the public property of 
every description at present in their charge, as well as the 
revenue which may hereafter be collected, at the disposal of 
the allies; and apprising them that a regular account of all 
such property and revenue will be taken with the greatest 
accuracy as soon as circumstances will permit. I think it ex- 
pedient that all these orders should be issued in your own 

_ hame until my arrival at Seringapatam, as well for the purpose 
of giving the greater degree of force to them, as of obviating 
any jealousies which might arise from the immediate appoint- 
ment of officers on the part of the Company for the collection 
of the revenues. 

I have no doubt that you have adopted every necessary 
measure for securing to persons of every description the safe 
and undisturbed possession of their private properties. 


Iam, &c. &e. 
Mornineton. 


586 *;HE EARL OF MORNINGTON, To — May, 


No. CCI. 
General Orders of the Governor General in Council. 


Fort St. George, 15th May, 1799. 

The Right Hon. the Governor General in Council, having 
this day received from the Commander-in-Chief of the allied 
army in the field, the official details of the glorious and deci- 
sive victory obtained at Seringapatam on the 4th of May, 
offers his cordial thanks and sincere congratulations to the 
Commander-in-Chief, and to all the officers and men com- 
posing the gallant army which achieved the capture of the 
capital of Mysore on that memorable day. His Lordship 
views with admiration the consummate judgment with which 
the assault was planned, the unequalled rapidity, animation 
and skill with which it was executed, and the humanity which 
distinguished its final success. Under the favour of Provi- 
dence, and the justice of our cause, the established character 
of the army had inspired an early confidence, that the war in 
which we were engaged, would be brought to a speedy, pros- 
perous, and honourable issue. But the events of the 4th of 
May, while they have surpassed even the sanguine expecta- 
tions of the Governor General in Council, have raised the 
reputation of the British arms in India to a degree of splen- 
dour and glory unrivalled in the military history of this quar- 
ter of the globe, and seldom approached in any part of the 
world. The lustre of this victory can be equalled only by 
the substantial advantages which it promises to establish, by 
restoring the peace and safety of the British possessions in 
India on a durable foundation of genuine security. The Go- 
vernor General in Council reflects with pride, satisfaction, and , 
gratitude, that, in this arduous crisis the spirit and exertion 
of our Indian army have kept pace with those of our country- 
men at home; and that in India, as in Europe, Great Britain 
has found, in the malevolent designs of her enemies, an in- 
creasing source of her own prosperity, fame, and power. 


By order of the Right Hon. the Governor General in 
Council, 


J. WrBBE, 
Secretary to Government. 


? 
1799. TUE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS, 587 


No. CCHI 
The Earl of Mornington to the Right Hon. Henry Dundas. 


My pear Sir, Fort St. George, 16th May, 1799. 


Yesterday I received the enclosed despatch from Lieut.- 
General Harris,* containing the details of the capture of Se- 
ringapatam ; they require no comment; and I am persuaded 
that no solicitation is necessary on my part to induce you to 
recommend the incomparable army which has gained this glo- 
rious triumph to the particular notice of his Majesty, and to 
the applause and gratitude of their country. The uncondi- 
tional submission of Cummur-ud-Deen, accompanied by that 
of Futteh Hyder, will, I trust, much facilitate the means. of 
making a new settlement. I am on the point of setting out 
for Seringapatam, and I have no doubt. that, in any possible 
case, I shall be able to add to the annual revenues of the 
Company, in the peninsula of India, a sum not less than 
twelve lacs of pagodas, with the additional advantage of con- 
tracting and strengthening our frontier, and of establishing a 
continuity of our territory from the coast of Coromandel to 
that of Malabar. 

In our present situation the arrival of a French force in 
India would be rather a desirable event than otherwise, as I 
am confident that the result must be an accession of reputa- 
tion and honour to our troops, and the disappointment and 
ruin of the enemy. If the French should be established in 
Egypt, it might be advisable to consider whether an expedi- 
tion might not be fitted out from India to cooperate, by way 

_ of the Red Sea, with any attempt which might be undertaken 
from the Mediterranean. I cannot venture to prepare any 
such expedition without orders from England; but if I should 
receive them, you may be assured that they will be executed 
with alacrity and diligence not only by me, but by the whole 
army in India, - 

Believe me, my dear Sir, 
Yours most faithfully and affectionately, 
Mornineron. 


* See page 569. 


588 SIR J. ANSTRUTHER, TO May, 


Na. CCIV, 


Lord Clive to the Chairman of the Court of Directors of the Honourable 
East India Company. 


Sir, Fort St. George, 16th May, 1799. 

I have the greatest satisfaction in offering to you my 
warmest congratulations upon the fall of Seringapatam, and 
upon the events which have since led to the extinction of the 
power of-an inveterate enemy, who has for a series of years 
kept this Presidency in a state of constant inquietude, uncer- 
tainty, and expense. By the late despatches from hence you 
will have been made fully acquainted with the grounds and 
reasons upon which the line of conduct adopted by his 
Lordship has been pursued, and with the measures which 
have terminated in this most important conquest. The wis- 
dom with which the plans of the Governor-General have 
been combined, was equal to the extent of the danger which 
threatened us; and the vigorous efforts which have been 
made for the completion of our military equipments were pro- 
portionate to the urgency of the occasion, which required all 
the energy of your Governments in India, while the ability, 
zeal, and valour which have been displayed in the execution 
of this arduous enterprize, have effected an achievement, the 
brilliancy of which has seldom been equalled in any part of 
the world. 

In reflecting upon this important and unparalleled success, 
it is a cause of just triumph that the British councils have 
never departed from their characteristic moderation, and that 
we have been compelled, by the inveterate hatred of an im- 
placable enemy, to adopt those decisive measures which have , 
ended in the final subversion of his power, and in establishing 
a basis of lasting tranquillity throughout this part of your 
possessions. From the magnitude of this event we derive a 
just relief from the regret, which the loss of any part of that 
gallant army must inspire; and in the consequences which 
must follow it, we shall find more than a compensation for 
the expences which have been incurred in the prosecution of 
this necessary war. 

The fall of Seringapatam, the death of the Sultaun, the 
surrender of the ptincipal part of his family, with the submis- 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, 589 


sion of the most powerful of his chiefs, warrant the expecta- 
tion of a speedy and permanent arrangement of the whole of 
his dominions. The advantages to be gained from an in- 
crease of revenue, it might not be difficult to estimate; but 
the solid benefits to be derived from an extension of commerce, 
and from the preservation of lasting tranquillity, which, un- 
der the blessing of Providence, it may now be in the power of 
those entrusted with the direction of your affairs in India to 
command and maintain, it is scarcely possible to appreciate. 
I have the honour to be, 
with the greatest respect and esteem, Sir, 
your most faithful and obliged humble servant, 


CuiveE. 
No. CCV. 
Chief Justice Sir J. Anstruther to the Earl of Mornington. 
My Dear Lorp, Calcutta, 17th May, 1799. 


It is with the most sincere satisfaction and heartfelt plea- 
sure that I congratulate you upon the most brilliant and glo- 
rious event which ever occurred in our Indian history. ‘The 
news of the fall of Seringapatam and the death of Tippoo, 
and your complete and decisive success is just announced to 
us. 

Every man in the country will feel his security increased, 
and his character raised by the destruction of a power long 
looked up to as the only one capable of resisting the force of 
our arms. The events of last war, which, after two years of, 
I may say, defeat, ended in the third in a politic peace, proved 
to every native power the ability of a native power to resist 

” even a confederacy against him with effect, at least, if not with 
success. It was reserved for the promptitude and vigour of 
your Government to shew our power irresistible—to render 
our empire permanent and secure in India, and your own 
name immortal. 

All your friends will, no doubt, highly rejoice, but I who 
know the difficulties you had to encounter, the counterac- 
tions you had to experience, feel a degree of pleasure in the 
event not only as a public man and your private friend, but 
very considerably increased by the anxiety which my know- 


590 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO May, 


ledge of those very circumstances has occasioned to me. 

Most heartily indeed do I rejoice. May every other plan you 

have be equally successful; and may you long enjoy, in the 

bosom of your friends and family? your well earned fame. 
Adieu, your’s affectionately, 


J. ANSTRUTHER. 


No. CCVI. 


Lieutenant-General Sir Alured Clarke to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Dear Lorp, Fort William, 17th May, 1799. 

The great and glorious news we have received of the fall 
of Seringapatam, amd its late monarch, has filled me too full 
of joy to admit of my waiting the receipt of a letter from you, 
ere I offer my most hearty congratulations on it, which I beg 
leave now to do, with sincere assurances of my taking a par- 
ticular interest in the personal satisfaction that your Lordship 
must, from peculiar circumstances, feel on the occasion. 

The wisdom of that policy which dictated the measures 
that led to this brilliant and most important event, and your 
Lordship’s persevering exertions to surmount the numerous 
difficulties that occurred in the execution of them, do you the 
greatest honour ; and cannot fail of producing those marks of 
approbation and gratitude from your king and country which 
such conduct so highly merits. 

I am extremely anxious to see more detailed accounts of 
the various transactions from the army. Harris’s success, 
exclusive of public considerations, gives me sincere pleasure; 
and I earnestly hope that he and his gallant troops may de- . 
rive every possible benefit of honour and profit that their 
zealous services and brilliant conquest can entitle them to. 

“I will do myself the honour of writing to you again soon; 
and in the meantime, 
I remain, with true respect and esteem, 
My dear Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient, 
and most faithful humble servant, 
ALURED CLARKE. 


1799. THE SECRET COMMITTEE. 591 


P. 8S. Iremember your observations of “ humbling Tippoo 
before the anniversary of your entering upon the duties of 
this Government ;” which took place precisely this day twelve- 
months. . 


a 


No. CCVI. 


The Earl of Mornington to the Secret Committee of the Court of Directors. 


HonouraBte Sirs, Fort St, George, 19th May, 1799. 


The accidental detention of the Sarah Christiana packet 
enables me to forward to your honourable Committee, by this 
despatch, documents of great importance, explanatory of the 
nature of the connexion between Tippoo Sultaun and the 
French republic. 

These papers were found in the palace of Seringapatam, 
and were transmitted officially to my military secretary by 
the secretary of the commission appointed to assist Lieut.- 
General Harris in all matters of a political nature. 

The paper No. 1* is a letter from Tippoo Sultaun to the 
Executive Directory, and appears to be an attested copy of 
that which was despatched by M. Dubuc with two native 
vakeels of the 7th of February, 1799. The letter, however, 
is dated the 20th of July, 1798, at which time the military 
preparations in the Carnatic had scarcely commenced. 

Your Honourable Committee will observe, that, Tippoo 
Sultaun, in the most distinct manner, states the nature of his 
late embassy to the Isle of France to have been the same 
which I have described in my minute‘of the 12th of August, 
and in my letter to Tippoo Sultaun of the 8th of November, 
notwithstanding that he had endeavoured to put a different 
‘ colour on the transaction in his letter to me of the 18th of 
December, 1798, received at Fort St. George the 25th of the 
same month. 

It is equally remarkable that he does not attempt to allege 
against the British Government any ground of complaint 
since the conclusion of the last war. 

The object of his offensive and defensive alliance with 
France appears to have been not merely the recovery of his 
former dominions, but the expulsion of the English from all 


* See Appendix. 


592 GENERAL ORDERS, OF THE May, 


their rich possessions in India, and the utter annihilation of 
their power in Asia. 

You will further observe, that he declares it to be his in- 
tention to commence the attack on the first favourable occa- 
sion; and on the whole, that he professes to make common 
cause with France, under the most solemn protestations of 
fidelity and zeal to the republic. 

The paper, No. 2,* is a note of the demands which Tippoo 
Sultaun’s ambassadors were authorized by him to make upon 
the Executive Directory at Paris. They correspond in sub- 
stance with the requisitions announced in M. Malartic’s pro- 
clamation at the Mauritius.}+ 

In the articles 5 and 6 you will perceive that the Sultaun © 
intended to commence his operations in the heart of the Car- 
natic, in concert with a French army to be landed at Porto ' 
Novo, and that he did not propose to wait the actual arrival 
of the French force, but was resolved to make himself master 
of the coast of Coromandel as soon as he should find it con- 
venient, after having received notice of the motions of the 
French. 

In article 7 it appears that the Portuguese colonies in this 
quarter of India were to have been divided between Tippoo 
Sultaun and the French. All the articles of this paper de- 
mand particular attention, as tending to prove, in the most 
conclusive manner, the entire devotion of this infatuated 
Prince to his alliance with France. This paper also is dated 
on the 20th July, 1798; both documents are signed in the 
Sultaun’s own hand wyiting, according to the abbreviated 
form of signature, which he was accustomed to use in all his 
letters and other official documents. This mode of signature 
is usual among the natives of Hindostan, and no doubt can 
be entertained of the authenticity of the papers. 

Your Honourable Committee will observe, that the letter 
from 'Tippoo Sultaun to me, which was received at Fort 
St. George on the 13th of February, must have been written 
subsequently to the despatch of the papers now enclosed, as 
M. Dubuc, with the Sultaun’s two vakeels, embarked at 
Tranquebar on the 7th of February. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 
Mornineron. 


¥ 


* See Appendix. + See Introduction. 


1799. GOVERNOR-GENERAL IN COUNCIL. 693 


No. CCVIII. 
Major General Sir J. H."Craig to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Lorp, Cawnpore, 24th May, 1799. 


Though I shall not be the foremost, I can assure your Lord- 
ship that I shall not be the least sincere in my congratulations, 
on the glorious event of the capture of Seringapatam. The fall 
of the Sultaun, and the destruction of the power of his-family, by 
the.capture of his sons, which so fortunately distinguished it, 
have completed the success; and to the energy and vigour 
of your Lordship’s administration, Britain and the India 
Company will be indebted for the most important and bene- 
ficial event, that has arisen from the efforts of their arms, 
since the battle of Plassy established us in these provinces. 
Nor will the value of your Lordship’s services be estimated 
alone, by their immediate effects in the established security of 
our possessions in the Carnatic. In my mind, at least, they carry 
with then, a still higher price in the restoration of our na- 
tional character. This, your Lordship has already rescued 
from the contempt into which it had fallen; and to the wis- 
dom and spirit of your Lordship’s measures shall we owe the 
returning respect and awe, with which the Native Powers 
will, I doubt not, view us in future. 


I have the honour to be, 
My Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient 
and faithful humble Servant, 
J. H. Crarca, 


No. CCIX. 
General Orders of the Governor General in Council. 


Madras, May 24th, 1799. 


The Right Honourable the Governor-General in Council 
directs the Commander-in-Chief of the allied army in the 
field to assure the officers on the general staff of the army, 
those corhposing the confidential staff of the Commander-in-’ 
Chief, and those whose zeal, ability, and exertion, have been 
distinguished in aid of the departments to which they were 

VOL, I. Re 


594 THE HON. JONATHAN. DUNCAN, TO May. 


not officially attached, that his lordship entertains the highest 
sense of their several eminent-services during the late glorious 
campaign in Mysore. 

The conduct of the Adjutant-General, Lieut.-Colonel Close, 
has amply justified the implicit confidence reposed by the 
Governor-General in Council in his extensive knowledge, ap- 
proved experience, superior talents, ardent valour, and inde- 
fatigable activity. 

The uniform zeal, perseverance, and fortitude, with which 
Lieut.-Colonel Close has exerted all these great qualities, in 
every trial of difficulty and danger, entitle him to the praise, 
respect and esteem of the Governor-General in Council. His 
Lordship feels himself bound, by every obligation of justice 
and public duty, to recommend the extraordinary'merits of 
Lieut.-Colonel Close to the particular approbation of the 
Honourable the Court of Directors, and to the applause and 
gratitude of his country. 

The selection which the Commander-in-Chief had so judi- 
ciously made of Lieut.-Colonel Agnew and Captain Macaulay, 
for his confidential staff, was confirmed by the Governor-Ge- 
neral in Council, with a just expectation that his Excellency 
would derive considerable advantage to the public service 
from their able assistance. 

The Governor-General in Council is happy to record a 
public acknowledgment of the distinguished conduct of Major 
Dallas, and to assure that officer that his Lordship has a just 
sense of the important services which he has rendered in his 
successful superintendence of the laborious departments under 
his charge. 

It is very satisfactory to his Lordship to remark, that the 
conduct of the Quarter-Master-General’s department under 
Lieut.-Colonel Richardson and Major Allan, and that of the 
department of the guides under Captain Orr, has met with 
the approbation of the Commander-in-Chief; his Lordship 
desires that his public thanks may be conveyed to those offi- 
cers, and on this occasion his Lordship thinks it proper to 
publish to the army the particular thanks which he had al- 
ready directed the Commander-in-Chief to convey to Major 
Allan and Captain Orr, for the essential services rendered by 
them on the 22nd March last, after the battle of Mallavelly. 

His Lordship is also happy to concur in the honourable 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 595 


testimony borne by the Commander-in-Chief to the merits of 
Captain Turing and of Captain Macleod, and directs that 
his thanks may be conveyed to those meritorious officers. 

In all ranks and departments of the allied army, his Lord- 
ship has observed, with sincere pleasure, a general spirit of 
harmony and concord, which (under the happy auspices of 
the Commander-in-Chief) has united every heart, head, and 
hand, in the common cause, signalized each progressive ope- 
ration of the campaign, with a peculiar character of alacrity 
and ardour, and crowned its early conclusion with victory, 
triumph, and renown. 

By order of the Right Honourable the Governor-General 
in Council, 
‘ J. WessE, 
Secretary to Government. 


No. CCX. 
The Hon. Jonathan Duncan 2 the Earl of Mornington. 


My Lorn, Bombay, 25th May, 1799. 


In acknowledging the news of your Lordship’s glorious 
successes, I request of your Lordship to accept of my sin- 
cerest congratulations, as well as of my cordial wishes, that 
all the future measures of your Lordship’s administration may 
be attended with equal proportionate lustre and advantage to 
the State. The bigotted Mussulmen here can hardly yet be- 
lieve that their champion is fallen. 

To-morrow there is to be a thanksgiving in our church for 
the Divine blessing on the British armies on the late occasion, 
of which I hope your Lordship will approve. 

If your Lordship find leisure, the papers about Malabar 
may be taken up and decided on by your Lordship before 
the expiration of the leases in September render it necessary 
for me to act, and if in view to the late events, or from any 
other circumstance, your Lordship see any fundamental al- 
teration necessary in the management of affairs in that quarter, 
I beg to assure your Lordship that it is my unfeigned desire 
that no consideration of delicacy or proposed accommodation 
towards me may for a moment interfere with your Lordship’s 
views for the good of that country, to see which well esta- 


596 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO June, 


blished, is either the first, or, at least, one of the first wishes 
of my heart. 
I have the honour to be, my Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient, humble Servant, 


Jon. Duncan. 


No. 
From the Earl of Mornington to the Court of Directors. 
HonouraBLe Sirs, ‘ Fort St. George, 6th June, 1799. 


I have received intelligence from Seringapatam that Futteh 
Hyder, eldest son of Tippoo Sultaun, Purneah, the Dewan 
of the Sultaun, and Meer Cummin-ud-Deen, have sur- 
rendered themselves to Lieutenant General Harris at Serin- 
gapatam. The whole of Tippoo Sultaun’s sons, thirteen in 
number, together with all his sirdars of note, are now at 
Seringapatam. 

The primary objects of General Harris's attention, after the 
fall of Seringapatam, were to disband the late Sultaun’s army, 
and to obtain possession of the principal strongholds throughout 
his dominions. The measures necessary for the first of these 
objects were accordingly taken through the agency of Pur- 
neah.. The Silledar horse, of their own accord, returned to 
their lands. Some discussions however took place with regard 
to the disposal of the Bargeer, or stable-horse, which were at 
length terminated on the 18th ultimo by the assistance of Pur- 
neah. The corps, formerly Lally’s, has surrendered, and the 
Europeans, composing it, together with those under Monsieur 
Chapuy, recently arrived from Mauritius, were secured, and 
have been sent prisoners of war into the Carnatic. Upon the 
whole, I have the satisfaction to inform your Honourable 
Court that the late Sultaun’s army is now entirely disbanded. 

The stable-horses, elephants and camels, belonging to the 
Circar have been delivered up, and many of the former have 
been allotted to complete deficient corps of the Company's 
cavalry, while others, not calculated for that service, have been 
appropriated to the use of his Highness the Nizam. | 

In the meantime, the necessary measures have been pursued 
for taking possession of the remaining parts of the Sultaun’s 


1799. THE COURT OF DIRECTORS. 597 


dominions. On the 13th ultimo, the army of Bombay, under 
the command of Lieutenant General Stuart, marched on its re- 
turn to Malabar by the way of Coorga, with the intention of 
detaching troops to take possession of the district of Canara. 
This army arrived at Cannanore on the 22nd ultimo, at which 
period the rains had not commenced. Circular orders were . 
addressed by Lieutenant-General Harris to the commandants 
of the principal fortresses in Canara, and supported by si- 
milar requisitions from the Meer Sudder, or general superin- 
tendant of garrisons, under the late Sultaun’s government, re- 
quiring the surrender of their respective forts to the British 
troops, and giving them general assurances of favour and 
countenance. There is every reason to believe that the forts 
will be quietly delivered up, in which case troops will be im- * 
mediately detached by Lieutenant General Stuart to occupy 
them. 

Similar measures have been adopted to obtain the surrender 
of the forts in other parts of the late Sultaun’s dominions; and 
as far as our troops have yet proceeded, with uniform success. 

The villagers have returned *to their occupations in most 
parts of the country, and the strongest symptoms have ap- 
peared of a general disposition to submit to the orders of the 
British Government without opposition or reluctance. 

I have great satisfaction in informing your Honourable 
Court that the whole of the late Tippoo Sultaun’s records 
having been fortunately secured; they are found to contain 
a series of correspondence between the Sultaun and the 
French. I have now the honour to transmit to your Honour- 
able Court a complete copy of the whole series. No comment 
upon them can be necessary. The circumstances under which 
they were found, as well as the internal evidence which they 
contain, render their authenticity indisputable.* 

I am now occupied in framing a general arrangement of the 


* The whole of these papers (occupying a large volume) were printed 
at Calcutta, and translated by N. B. Edimonstone, Esq., then filling the 
high and responsible station of Persian Translator to Government, now a 
Director of the East India Company, and one of the best informed men 
on all Oriental subjects, whether of a political or literary nature. Mr. 
Edmonstone's aid in the preparation of the present work has been freely 
and generously accorded. 

* 


598 - THE MARQUIS CORNWALLIS, TO Sept. 


affairs of Mysore, which I hope to be able to effect in a short 
space of time, upon principles calculated to promote the in- 
terests and honour of the Honourable Company, and to secure 
future tranquillity and safety to our Eastern dominions. 
I have the honour to be, &c. 
Mornineron. 


| No. CCXII. 
Major General Baird to the Earl of Mornington. 


Camp, 23 miles W. of Seringapatam, June 27th, 1799. _ 

My Lorp, 

I am at aloss to express to your Lordship the warm feel- 
ings of pleasure and gratitude, which I have experienced in 
the perusal of your Lordship’s letter of the 23rd which I had 
the honor to receive yesterday. Your Lordship’s approbation 
of my conduct on the memorable 4th of May, in the command 
of those brave troops whose exertions, crowned with signal 
success the wisely concerted plans of your Lordship, affords 
me a gratification of the most flattering nature. In compliance 
with your Lordship’s desire, I beg leave to reply that any mark 
whatever of honor which my Gracious Sovereign, or of favor 
which the Hon. Court of Directors may please to confer 
through your Lordship’s intercession will be received by me 
with the utmost gratitude and respect, but to a Soldier I con- 
sider the order of the Bath the highest, of all military honors. 

Ihave the honor to remain, my Lord, with the greatest 
respect and esteem. 

‘Your Lordship’s most obedient 


and humble Servant, 
D, Barrp. 


No. CCXIII. 
‘the Marquis Cornwallis to the Earl of Mornington. 


My (eke Lorp, Phoenix Park, 20th Sept., 1799. 


Captain Tweedale, who brought the first account of your 
’ - gloriaus success, landed at Galway, and as he passed through 


4 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 599 


Dublin, sent to me your most welcome letter of the 18th of 
May. Exclusive of my public feelings on the great event 
which it announced, I beg leave to assure you, that none of 
your friends could more sincerely rejoice, at the well deserved 
lustre which it must reflect on your administration. 

You have now, my dear Lord, every thing in your power, 
supported by the unanimous voice of your grateful country, 
and you will use that power, with wisdom, energy, and mode- 
ration. J wish I could say that things in this island wore as 
prosperous an aspect, but there remains still too much dis- 
affection and treason on one side, and too much violence on 
the other ; on the whole, however, we are better than we have 
been, and the idea of union proves more popular, and gains 
ground both in and out of Parliament. 

I am, with very sincere regard, 
My dear Lord, 
most faithfully yours, 
CoRNWALLIs. 


[The following letters are here inserted as they refer to the 
transactions related in this volume.] 


No. CCIV. 
The Right Hon. Henry Dundas to the Earl of Mornington. 
; (Private.) 
My par Lorp, Whitehall, 13th August, 1798. 


I have been duly favoured with your Lordship’s very im- 
portant letters from the Cape of Good Hope of the following 
dates (No. 1) 23rd of February,* (No. 2) 28th of February,} 
and (No. 3) 7th of March,} 1798. 

In my secret letter of the 16th of June last§ I wrote to your 
Lordship very fully on the subject of the hostile views of 
Tippoo Sultaun, as they had been stated to us by recent 


* See page I. + See page 17. 
} This was a brief note, mentioning his Lordship’s continued detention 
at the Cape, owing to the La Virginie requiring so much repair. 
§ See page 348. . 


600 THE RIGHT HON, HENRY DUNDAS, TO Nov. 


despatches from the Cape, and also relative to the armament 
fitted out from Toulon, under the command of General Buo- 
naparte. I at the same time enclosed copy of a proclamation 
said to have been issued by the Governor of Mauritius,* as 
well as the latest intelligence relative to the expedition above 
alluded to, by which it appeared that Egypt and India were 
the ultimate objects of the great preparations that had been 
made. Having in that letter fully detailed the measures pro- 
posed to be adopted at home, and pointed out such as ap- 
peared to be proper to be carried into execution by your 
Lordship in India, I shall not at present enter into any fur- 
ther detail on those subjects, but shall content myself with 
referring you to the despatches you will receive by this con- 
veyance, through the Secret Committee, for a detail of the 
measures adopted by Government for the better security of 
our Indian possessions. 

In my letter of the 16th of June I observed that I had, to 
a certain extent, given your Lordship my opinion upon part 
of the subjects to which you had called my attention in your 
despatches from the Cape, and stated my intention of re- 
serving my sentiments on other matters of detail and of a less 
pressing nature, for some future conveyance; this I intended 
doing by the present opportunity: but as the ships are to be 
despatched immediately, and of which I was not informed till 
this morning, it is my intention to answer those letters, as well 
as any I may receive in the mean. time, by the first ships of 
the ensuing season. 

I am anxious to hear of your safe arrival in India, and of 
your having entered upon the very important functions com- 
mitted to your charge, and in which I most cordially wish you 
success, 

I am, my dear Lord, 


Yours very sincerely, 
Henry Dunpas. 


* See Introduction. 


1798, THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. «601 


No. CCXV. 
The Right Hon. Henry Dundas to the Earl of Mornington. 
(Private.) 
My pear Lorp, Whitehall, 27th November, 1798. 


I have been duly honoured with the receipt of your Lord- 
ship’s letters from Madras, dated the 8th of May,* and ano- 
ther from Calcutta, dated the 23rd of June last. 

I most sincerely congratulate your Lordship on your arri- 
val at Fort William, and upon your assumption of the Go- 
vernment of that Presidency; and trust you will soon find 
little or no inconvenience from the climate, though it may 
appear dreadful at first. 

By the present overland despatch, I can ‘do little more than 
advert to the contents of the letters from your Lordship, the 
receipt of which I have above acknowledged. 

One point, however, in your letters from Madras affords 
me the highest satisfaction, I mean where you state the coast 
army to be in the finest condition, and to be one of the no- 
blest bodies of men in the world. I trust your Lordship will 
find the Bengal army far more respectable as to order and 
discipline than has been generally supposed; Lord Teign- 
mouth has spoke very favourably to me of it, and especially 
of the troops in the upper provinces, and has done ample 
Justice to the abilities and exertions of General Craig. 

His Lordship has left with me the rough draft of the con- 
fidential letter he wrote to your Lordship, to be delivered to 


* This was a brief note, mentioning his Lordship’s arrival at Madras 
on the 26th of April, 1798; that the main object of his mission to the 
Presidency at Fort St. George (relative to the Nabob of Arcot) had not 
been accomplished ; that the army was in the finest possible condition ; 
that General Harris would make a good Commander-in-Chief in Bengal; 
and that his Lordship would sail for Fort William on the 9th of May. 

+ This is a brief letter, stating the Governor General’s arrival at Fort 
William on the 17th of May; transmitting the Mauritius proclamation, 
and expressing an opinion that the judicial business ought to be separated 
from that of the Council. 


602 THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS, TO Nov. 


you on your arrival at Calcutta.* I have not had time as yet 
to attend to the same, but from the conversations I have had 


* The following is an extract of the letter referred to :-— 
From the Governor-General Sir John Shore to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Lorp, Calcutta, March 7th, 1798. 


After an absence of three months and a half, I returned to the Presi- 
dency from Lucknow on the 2nd instant, and with every inclination to 
communicate to your Lordship my detailed sentiments on the state of 
affairs in this country, I must plead the apology of incessant occupation 
and interruption, for a hurried address, neither conformable to my own 
wishes nor probably to your expectations. 

As the transactions in which I have been lately engaged have Beenie 
a large portion of my time and solicitude, I shall first briefly speak of 
them. 

Upon the sudden death of the late Nabob Vizier, on the 21st of Sep- 
tember last, we were compelled to admit the succession of his declared 
son Vizier.Ali Khan, in opposition to universal opinion, that he was of 
spurious origin. For the principles on which this admission was first 
made, and afterwards confirmed, I refer your Lordship to my public 
Minutes, which will sufficiently evince the embarrassment and hesitation 
attending it. The state of affairs at Lucknow soon assumed an appear- 
ance which threatened the subversion of the influence and interests of 
the Company there, and compelled. me to undertake the arduous task of 
attempting an arrangement of them at the moment when I wag preparing 
to embark for Europe. I left Calcutta on the 25th of November, and in 
the progress of my journey to Lucknow, I found grounds of more seri- 
ous alarm, and every indication of unprovoked hostile opposition. My 
determination upon it was the result of events which left me without op- 
tion, and in its progress led to an enquiry, which established, upon the 
most solid evidence, the spurious birth of the successor to Asoph ud 
Doulah, and of all his reputed sons, a determined opposition little short 
of open hostility to the Company, and compelled me to change the line 
of succession, and establish the Nabob Saadit Ali Khan, the eldest sur- 
viving son of Sujah ud Doulah, on the Musnud of Oude, as the legiti- 
mate and rightful successor to the late Nabob. 

This is a summary account ef the most important occurrence of my 
Administration, the particulars of which are detailed in my public Mi- 
nutes. In the perusal of them, your Lordship will participate the embar- 
rassment attending a situation involving the interests, the justice, and 
reputation of the Company, risk, danger, and great personal responsi- 
bility, and without precedent or parallel. .I have the fullest confidence 
that your Lordship’s judgment on the occasion will concur with mine, 
and I most earnestly recommend to you an early declaration of your de- 
termination, to support the Nabob Saadit Ali Khan, in conformity to the 


* 


1798, THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 603: 


with Lord Teignmouth, I have no doubt but he has stated his 
sentiments in the most friendly and unreserved manner. 


treaty which I have concluded with him, as essentially necessary to-im- 
part confidence to him, and suppress the intrigues and apprehensions 
incidental in India to a change in the adininistration of this country. In. 
the documents referred to, your Lordship will find ample details of my 
transactions at Lucknow, of the conduct and characters of the natives 
there, and of every circumstance necessary to inform your judgment. 

But as I consider our connection with Oude as one of the most impor- 
tant and delicate amongst our political relations in this country, and as 
no information can supply the advantages of personal observation, I can- 
not but recommend to your Lordship the propriety of visiting that coun- 
try whenever the state of affairs and season will admit; and allow me 
further to suggest to your Lordship that the notification of such.an inten- 
tion to the Nabob Saadit Ali Khan, in your letter to him announcing 
your accession, may be attended with some advantage. 

I have communicated, agreeably to usage, to all the native powers with 
whom we are connected, the information of your Lordship’s accession: 
and of my departure, in terms suitable to the occasion, and the rank and 
character of your Lordship. 

The power of the British nation in India is most respectable, and their 
political reputation is most generally respected. It has ever been my 
anxious endeavour to promote it, by a steady adherence to every engage- 
ment, by the sineerity of my public conduct, and by an attention to 
avoid any interference or measure, which could excite jealousy or dis- 
gust. The political forbearance of the Company has not failed to make 
a sensible impression on the Mahrattas, Nizam, and throughout, of which, 
if time admitted; I could mention some striking and important instances, 
but it is not in the nature of things to be expected that we can ever have 
all the credit which our conduct deserves, with those who act upon diffe- 
rent principles, and who limit their forbearance by the extent ef their 
power. Such is the case with every Asiatic Prince, and the actual power 
of the Company is their only solid security, whilst it is, however, strongly 
supported by their reputation for political justice and sincerity. 

The ambition of Scindiah appears unbounded, and in prosecuting the 
dictates of it, he has equally appealed to treachery and violence; his 
power is, in fact, a military usurpation, which, however irresistible at 
present, may be shaken or subverted by the same treachery and ambition 
in those by whose assistance it has been established. The Mahratta chief- 
tain wko commands the army of Scindiah in Hindostan, Ambajee, is not 
without apprehensions of his master, and he made some indirect over- 
tures to me for an eventual union with the Company, against the ap- 
prehended violence of his master. The Rajah of Berar submits to the 
usurpations of Scindiah, from inability to resist them only, and the num- 
bers of Mahratta chieftains who have been degraded or ill treated by him, 
would, probably, avail themselves of any fair opportunity for gratifying 


+ 


604 THE RIGHT HON, HENRY DUNDAS, TO Dee. 


I have carefully perused your orders to Madras and Bombay 
received from the latter Presidency, in consequence of the 
proclamation issued at the Mauritius; and it is a pleasing cir- 
cumstance to find that, at the exact period we were framing 
our orders here on that subject, you were anticipating them 
by the orders issued by your Government. 

As your Lordship must before now be in possession of the 
orders of the Secret Committee of June last,* I shall not here 
add any thing farther. 


their resentment, or to re-establish themselves. It will require uncom- 
mon abilities in Scindiah to render his present power solid and perma- 
nent, and any serious misfortune to him would probably be succeeded by 
convulsions which might shake his power in Hindostan to its foundation. 
The Rajahs of Jeypore and Joudpore, and many others, would probably 
seize the opportunity of shaking off the Mahratta yoke; and if Seindiah 
should ever provoke a contest, with the Company, much advantage, I am 
convinced, might be obtained from their assistance. 

The power of the Nizam, as well as his health, is rapidly on the de- 
cline, and his Minister, Azim ul Omrah, has long pressed a closer union 
with the Company. Although I foresee great embarrassments, and the 
possibility of serious evils from the subversion of the power of the Nizam, 
I see still greater in an union which would impose upon us the prevention 
of it. This is the result of much deliberation on this important subject. 

Tippoo will certainly avail himself of any fair opportunity to re-esta- 
blish the power and reputation which he lost in his former contest with us. 

Whether Zemaun Shah will ever invade Hindostan is a matter of doubt- 
ful speculation, although I give him credit for the determination. If we 
were assured of no hostile intentions on his part towards us or our allies, 
the event might, perhaps, operate to the advantage of our interests, by 
diminishing or destroying the Mahratta influence in Hindostan, under the 
uncertainty attending his designs, and the possible danger arising from 
his approach towards the frontiers of Oude, the question of a defensive 
union with the Mahrattas occurred. Without pretending to decide upon 
it, I am more inclined to rely upon our own strength, than enter into any 
union with the Mahrattas to oppose Zemaun Shah, which might carry our 
arms beyond the dominions of the Nabob Vizier. 

I cannot conclude without expressing my sincerest satisfaction at your 
Lordship’s appointment, my most cordial wishes for the prosperity of 
your administration, and my personal respect and esteem for your Lord- 
ship's character. 

I have the honour to be, my Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient, humble Servant, 
J. Suore. 


* They were received by the Governor General on the 18th of October, 
1798. 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 605 


I shall anxiously expect the details your Lordship has pro- 
mised relative to Arcot and Tanjore, the finances of the 
Company, and the general politics of India. On the latter 
subject I intended to have written to your Lordship by an 
early opportunity, but shall defer it till I am favoured with 
your promised detail; and, indeed, by the pleasing change 
that has taken place in public affairs, by the glorious victory 
of Admiral Nelson, as well as from the uncertainty of the 
designs of Tippoo; it is not at this present moment necessary 
to enter particularly on the subject. I am confident your 
Lordship is feelingly alive as to the necessity of vigilantly 
watching of and guarding against the designs both of Tippoo 
and the French, as well as the other powers of India, who 
may be inimical to the interest of the British nation in India. 

Tam happy your Lordship is pleased with the appointment 
of Lord Clive to the Government of Madras; I trust he will 
do honour to our choice ; in this opinion I am much confirmed 
by what Lord Teignmouth has stated to me, that his Lord- 
ship constantly grew upon him in the several conversations 
he had with Lord Clive at the Cape. As your Lordship will 
receive by this conveyance several letters, which we have 
directed the Secret Committee to transmit, it will be unneces- 
sary for me to enter into any detail of their contents. 

Lady Jane joins me in sincere respects. 


I have the honour to be, my dear Lord, 
yours faithfully, 
Henry Dunpas. 


No. CCXYVI. 
The Right Hon. Henry Dundas to the Earl of Mornington. 
(Private.) 
My Dear Lorp, London, 29th December, 1798. 


I have wrote to you many occasional letters sincé the one 
I wrote to you in the month of June last; but few of them 
were sent, because from the total want of information for a 
long time, of what was passing in Egypt and the Levant, 
and afterwards from the rapid change which was produced 
in those quarters by Nelson's splendid victory, I was literally 


606 THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS, TO Nov. 


not in a situation to give to you any new idea beyond what 
I have detailed in my letter in the month of June; I have 
contented myself:at present with barely alluding to Nelson’s 
victory, and the state of affairs in the Mediterranean and 
Egypt, because I know from the steps that have been taken 
to convey information of those transactions directly to India, 
your Lordship and the Government in India are informed of 
them as soon as we are here. I have felt myself perfectly at 
ease with regard to what was going on in India amidst the 
arduous points on which I liad every reason to believe you 
would be called upon:-to act, beeause from your own letters, 
particularly the one recently received of date 6th July, com- 
pared with what I had wrote to you in the month of June, 
when the scene first opened, I had the satisfaction to perceive 
that our ideas were so much in unison as to leave me no 
room to doubt that your conduct would be precisely what I 
could wish. I know not yet whether anything decisive has 
happened to Buonaparte and his army in Egypt, if there has 
you have heard it long before you can receive this. Our 
last authentic accounts were that he and his army were 
labouring under every species of difficulty, and recent re- 
ports, not however sufficiently authenticated have reached 
us, that he himself had been. murdered at Cairo, and the 
remains of his army of course put into great dismay and con- 
fusion. This is all that at present I am in a situation to 
state to you with any authenticity, at the same time from 
every collateral circumstance entertaining the most sanguine 
hopes that he and his whole army must go to destruction. 
This feeling, however, has not and shall not relax my in- 
tention to give to you in India evéry aid of men and money 
that I possibly can, keeping always in view that you are or 
may be involved in hostilities and consequently in expense. 
If no French assistance arrives, which is not likely to arrive, 
I take it for granted that you will be enabled to shape your 
conduct with regard to Tippoo exactly as circumstances may 
dictate to your own judgment and discretion. 

The pressure of other business and the uncertainty whe- 
ther this letter may go to you by sea or overland, in the first 
instance, prevent me at this moment writing to you more at 
lengtlt;‘but it is my intention to take the first days of the 
holidays to write to you at full length in answer to your 


1798. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. - 607 


letter of the 6th July, and I shall at the same time detail to 
you without reserve, every idea that occurs to me respecting 
India. Being possessed of these sentiments, it must be left 
entirely to your own judgment to apply them as.circumstances 
may suggest. 

As for our situation at home, it is every thing we could 
wish; we have followed the blow given in the Mediterranean 
by Lord Nelson, in the capture of Minorca, of which the 
accounts are received within these few days. The authentic 
accounts are not yet arrived, but we are in daily expectation 
of hearing of the recapture of Malta; and our success in the 
Mediterranean has emboldened Naples to take up arms against 
France in*Italy, whether this: circumstance, or indeed any 
other, will induce Austria and Russia to act upon their true 
interests by returning to a confederacy against France.remains 
to be proved.. 

Russia has shewn them a noble example. Laying aside all 
former jealousies and animosities she proffered her. aid to 
the Ottoman Porte, when the French directed their attacks 
against Egypt; and amidst all the extraordinary events 
which the present times have exhibited to the world; it is 
not the least extraordinary to see a Russian fleet in the 
Levant. So however stands the fact. 

As to our civil and domestic situation it is equal to the 
proudest wish of our hearts. Founded chiefly on the volun- 
tary zeal and exertions of the country we have not less than 
240,000 men in arms within the island, and we may carry that 
principle as far as we please. No democrat dare show his 
face ;—Government popular in every ale-house ;—Our com- 
merce and revenue flourishing beyond all former example ;— 
Public credit thoroughly restored, and in order to render it 
so beyond future peril, the idea of raising a great part of the 
supply within the year, has become so universally recognised 
and approved, as to enable Mr. Pitt to bring forward the 
measure of raising ten millions annually by a direct tax, upon 
income, and against the measure not a murmur without doors, 
but the reverse, and -in Parliament the opposition has been 
so feeble as not to be worth mentioning. As long, therefore, 
as our enemies shall choose to be distracted so long are we 
in a condition to carry on the war, and the wealth of the 
country is so great as to make the burden of it to be little 


608 THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS, TO March, 


felt. The most pressing subject now remaining is the situa- 
tion of Ireland, all the attempts of France to invade it have 
been discomfited, either by the surrender of their troops when 
landed, or by the eapture of their fleets and troops by the navy, 
without permitting them to land. Notwithstanding all our 
exertions at home for our own security, and notwithstanding 
‘the appropriation of considerable force to our distant pos- 
sessions and the Mediterranean, we have been enabled to 
send to the assistance of Ireland within the year not less 
than 25,000 troops, consisting partly of regular force, but 
chiefly of fencible and militia regiments who have volunteered 
the service. It is now decided that the plan of Union is to 
be immediately brought forward, and the whole strength of 
Government applied to carry it through. For the reason I 
have given to you I cannot write to -you to day more in de- 
tail, but I flatter myself the short sketch I have given you 
of the leading points worthy of being communicated to you 
will afford you not an unpleasant morsel. 

Lady Jane is well and desires to be kindly remembered to 
you, and I remain, - 

My dear Lord, 


Your’s sincerely, 
Henry Dunpas. 


No. CCXVII. 


The Right Hon. H. Dundas to the Earl of Mornington. 


Wimbledon, 18th March, 1799, 
My pear Lorn, [Received 5th Aug. 1799.} 

As the ships at present despatched are under orders to 
sail, it deprives me of the opportunity of writing to you upon 
the important subjects treated of in your letters, lately ar- 
rived overland. These letters are so voluminous that they 
are not yet decyphered; and from what is reported to me as 
to the pfogress made in decyphering, I have great doubts if 
these despatches will be ready to be brought under my view 
before the ships actually sail. From your general letter to the 
Secret Committee, I perceive that the subjects of those unde- 
cyphered papers are of a very interesting nature, and your 


1799, THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. + 609 


Lordship may be assured. of hearing from me by the first 
opportunity after I have considered them. 

It is my intention, in my present letter, to advert to some of 
the general topics to which you have referred in your letter! 
of an earlier date, and the subject of which I may not have‘ 
exhausted in any former communication. ~ 

It is impossible for me not to begin with noticing the letter .” 
recently received, enclosing the Treaty you have made with 
the Nizam.* Your Lordship has long before this time antici- 
pated the satisfaction I have derived from that transaction, 
which has been completed in so masterly and effectual 4 man- ° 
ner. Long before this, I trust, it has been carried into final « 
execution. ‘I have long felt uneasy from the circumstance of 
the French force in the service of the Nizam; and it was, 
perhaps, the circumstance of all others which gave me the 
most uneasiness, when I became satisfied that the powerful 
armaments under Buonaparte were destined for Egypt, as his 
best road for the annoyance of our Indian possessions. Your 
Treaty with the Nizam effectually puts an end to every alarm 
upon that part of the business, and whether you consider it 
negatively as removing the French force from our neighbour- 
hood, or positively in respect of the additional strength it 
affords to ourselves and the aid it gives to our finances, it is 
a transaction which tells in our favour in a variety of ways, 
and was well worth accomplishing at any risk, even if the 
Mahratta powers had been dissatisfied with it. I do not, 
however, see any real foundation for their being so, and I 
trust it will not be long before I shall hear that your Lordship 
has been able, by proper exertions with the Mahrattas, to 
connect them with the Nizam and us still more closely upon 
the principles of a common interest of defensive alliance 
against 'Tippoo, and every power in alliance with France. 

Upon the subject of the Rajah of Berar, it is only neces- 
sary for me to say, that in so far as my general knowledge 
and recollection of Indian affairs enable me at present to 
decide, it appears to me that he has always been friendly to 
the British interests in India; and I should conceive that in 
no respect a close connection with him can be prejudicial to 
our defensive system, and the desire of preserving the gene- 


* See Appendix. 
VOL. I. 2R 


610 THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS, TO March, 


ral peace of India, which, if it can be observed with honour, 
is certainly our wisest system; and as it is most likely to be 
disturbed by the hostility of Tippoo, it of course follows that 
every connection which strengthens our power against him 
must be ultimately beneficial to the Indian interests of Great 
Britain.* This naturally leads me to advert to the views of 
Zemaun Shah, and the situation of Scindia as connected with 
that subject. 

It was some time ago the fashion, in my opinion, too much 
to undervalue the menaces of Zemaun Shah respecting India, 
but I think that opinion is gradually wearing away as it ought 
todo. You are more in the way of collecting accurate infor- 
mation than I am; but if the French were ever to obtain such 
a footing as to enable them seriously to distress us, I have 
long thought that it would be a material poinf of the plan to 
obtain the co-operation of Zemaun Shah. And even if Tip- 
poo himself, from any misguided ambition, should be induced 
to undertake any extensive project against us, I must always 
believe that his best endeavours would be used to obtain the 
assistance of Zemaun Shah. I take it for granted, Mr. 
Jones, at Bagdad, transmits regularly to India the informa- 
tion his situation there enables him to collect; but in case, by 
any accident it should not have reached you, I herewith send 
you acopy of the information} recently received from him on 
the subject of Zemaun Shah, and comparing it with others, 
it strongly confirms me in the belief of his hostile designs, and 
that we ought to keep a very watchful eye upon the motions 
of that Prince, whose talents, military force, and pecuniary 
resources, afford to him the means of being a formidable op- 
ponentt .It would be too strong for me to state, that under 
no given circumstances our own forces were to go beyond _ 
our own provinces and the territories of the Vizier; but the 
temptation must be very great, and the advantage very evi- 
dent, to induce us todo so. The means of resisting any in- 
tended aggression on the part of Zemaun Shah appear to be 
the following. First, to encourage and keep up those dis- 


* See the Governor General’s letters to H. Colebrooke, Esq. at p. 479 ; 
and to Colonel Palmer at, p. 126. 

t “The information alluded to by Mr. Dundas not having been received 
in time will be forwarded under a separate cover. W. Capzut.” 

}. See Zemaun Shah’s letters in the Appendix. 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 611 


tractions and animosities within his own territories, the ap- 
prehensions of which must always, to a certain degree, keep 
him in a state of alarm, and which obliged him to return ra- 
pidly from his last attempt to invade Hindostan. Secondly, 
every encouragement should be given to the Seiks and Raj- 
poot tribes to harrass and distress him in his progress. But 
lastly, what of all others appears most material is, upon the 
ground of his own danger, to engage Scindia cordially in that 
defensive system of alliance, which it is our interest, by every 
means, to strengthen and confirm, with a view to the security 
of our Indian empire. It is perfectly obvious, that if ever 
Zemaun Shah gains a material footing in Hindostan, Scindia 
and his power must fall the first sacrifice to his ambition. 

Under these circumstances I do not think your Lordship 
can do a more essential service to the interests of your coun- 
try in India than by using your best endeavours to soothe 
and heal those jarring animosities which annihilate the force 
of the Government of Poonah, and render them an easy prey 
to the restless ambition either of Tippoo Sultaun or of Ze- 
maun Shah. Nothing can more effectually tend to secure 
this object than persuading Scindia to abandon that system 
of wickedness, perfidy, and intrigue, which he is now pursu- 
ing at Poonah, and engaging him to return to the care and 
protection of his own territories which require his best atten- 
tion, and must ultimately tend to gratify his ambition, and 
consolidate his power, more than any advantages he can hope 
to attain by aiming at more remote or distant objects of am- 
bition. I cannot more strongly convey to your Lordship the 
importance I attach to the suggestions I have laid before you, 
than by stating it as my opinion, that if you are able to con- 
solidate in one defensive system the Nizam’s power, the 
Mahratta power, and the power of Great Britain in India, we 
have nothing to fear in that quarter of the globe from any 
combinations that can be formed against us. 

Upon the subject of Tippoo Sultaun I have little to say in 
this letter, further than to express my approbation of the line 
of conduct you have pursued relative to that restless Prince. 
You will have seen long before this, from the letter I wrote to 
you. in the month of June last, how much the principles upon 
which you have acted correspond with the suggestions I laid 
before you at that time, when the object of Buonaparte’s 
expedition was not ascertained, but which for the reasons I 


612 THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS, TO March, 


then gave, I was satisfied was intended for the prosecution of 
those objects which afterwards proved to be the case. The 
first thought which you seem to have entertained, viz., that 
of attacking Tippoo in consequence of his conduct at Mauri- 
tius, was a very natural feeling, and there can be no doubt 
that the Ambassadors he sent there, and the alliance he 
appears to have formed upon principles hostile to us, would 
have fully justified you in any measures you might have 
thought proper to adopt. His conduct was tantamount to a 
declaration of war against us, but still 1 think you judged 
well in not bringing it to that extremity. By the line of con- 
duct you have pursued towards him, you have asserted the 
pride and honour of the British name, which must never for 
a moment be let down; but you have done it in a manner to 
enable you to review, deliberately, your resources, and to 
arrange your force in such a manner as will enable you to act 
with effect, if the humility of his acknowledgments is not ade- 
quate to what our power and the justice of our cause entitle 
us to demand. By this delay, likewise, you have accom- 
plished the important point of strengthening the connexion 
with the Nizam, and of disbanding that pernicious French 
force which had grown up within his territory. Besides this 
you have received the additional confidence naturally result- 
ing from the military force which has been sent to you from 
this country and from the Cape, and I likewise trust that 
the bullion which has been sent from this country has reached 
you before this time, and has tended to enliven your circula- 
tion and resources. It shall not be my fault if much more is 
not done in the same line in the course of the present season, 
but Ido not enlarge upon that subject at present, as I will 
have occasion to advert to it in a letter upon the trade and 
finances of India, which I intend to write to you time enough 
Ihope to go by the present conveyance. Neither has the 
delay been attended with any detriment to your affairs. 

It is unnecessary to trouble you with any details with 
regard to the situation of the French army in Egypt. Our 
information of what passes there is so slow and tedious, I 
trust that the means which have been taken to supply you 
with intelligence from thence have kept you as well and 
early informed in India, if not more so than we are at home; 
but from what we have learnt from various quarters, I flatter 
myself Lord Nelson’s splendid victory, and the exertions of 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 613 


our fleet in the Mediterranean, leave us little reason to ap- 
prehend any danger at present to India from the French 
force which has landed in Egypt. I trust that army will 
find its grave in Egypt, and consequently as Tippoo must 
be well informed of those circumstances, you will not find 
that his expectation of a French succour will add much pride 
or vigour to his communications with you. 

As your Lordship is perfectly familiar with the different 
points of which I have treated in this letter, I have not 
thought it necessary to trouble you with minute details on 
each topic; but I flatter myself I have said enough to make 
you perfectly acquainted with my sentiments on those leading 
points of Indian policy. The result of the whole is, that our 
security rests, primarily, on our own reputation and power; 
but that, in order to render our exertions efficient and perma- 
nent, it ought to be our unceasing care to keep the power of 
the Nizam and of the whole branches of the Mahratta confe- 
deracy in a strict amity with us for the purpose of establish- 
ing an impregnable barrier against all Asiatic ambition, whe- 
the racting separately or in co-operation with European allies ; 
as an essential ingredient of this system, I have no hesitation 
in stating that your Lordship is warranted to consider the 
nourishing and maintaining any French force or French men, 
within any of their territories, as an insurmountable bar 
against any close connexion with us. 

It still remains for me to state to you my opinion upon 
one or two separate points on which you desire to be 
advised. 

You desire to know what is meant by a considerable 
French force which is the expression generally used in the 
‘instructions from home on the subject of Tippoo Sultaun 
receiving French force into his country. The application of 
the principle to the particular occasion must be left to the 
exercise of sound discretion, but as a general principle, I 
have no hesitation in stating that we are entitled under the 
circumstances of the present times, to consider the admission 
of any French force into his army, be it greater or smaller, 
as direct hostility to us. 

I remain, my dear Lord, 
your’s very faithfully, 
Henry Dunpas, 


614 THE SECRET COMMITTEE, TO June, 


No. CCXVIIL 


From the Secret Committee of the Court of Directors to the Earl of 
Mornington. 


My Lorp, East India,House, London, 18th June, 1799. 


As it must be satisfactory to your Lordship to be in- 
formed of our sentiments upon the leading points in your ad- 
ministration, so far as they have hitherto come to our know- 
ledge, we shall briefly communicate them to you by the pre- 
sent despatch. 

Tanjour.—We very much approve of the judicious arrange- 
ments formed by your Lordship‘at Madras preparatory to 
carrying into execution the orders relative to the Tanjour 
succession. * 

Wynaad District.—For the reasons which have been as- 
signed, we concur entirely in the propriety of your Lordship’s 
decision for relinquishing the Wynaad district to Tippoo 
Sultaun. 

Subsidiary Treaty with the Nizam.t—Without entering 
by this despatch into the particulars of the negociations with 
the Nizam, which produced the late important arrangement 
we have only to express, in the highest terms of approbation, 
our sense of the wisdom of your Lordship’s conduct in effect- 
ing the same. And as no doubt can be entertained that the 
introduction of French officers into the service of the native 
Princes, with a view of establishing the most certain means 
of subverting the British power in India, formed part of a 
regular system of French policy, the entire destruction of 
French influence at the Nizam’s court and in his armies, 
must be considered as an object of the utmost importance to 
the peace and security of the Company’s possessions: 

We observe what is stated in your Lordship’s minute of the 
12th August, 1798, with respect to the sovereignty of the 
Decan being in Secunder Jah, the eldest son of the present 
Soubah, the Nizam. Although, under present circumstances, 
no apprehension can be entertained of a disputed succession, 
we think it necessary to follow up the idea suggested by your 


* See Governor General’s Minute on Tanjore, 31st May, 1798, p. 41. 
+ See Appendix. 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON. 615 


Lordship on this occasion, and to direct that, upon the death 
of the Nizam, Secunder Jah be considered as the lawful suc- 
cessor, and that his right, if necessary, be supported by every 
possible exertion on our part. 
Tippoo Sultaun.—In the minute of the 12th August®* your 
Lordship takes a very able and comprehensive view of the 
situation of affairs with Tippoo Sultaun. As no doubt could 
be entertained of the positive infraction of the Treaty of Se- 
ringapatam on the part of the Mysore chief, it were to be 
wished that the state of the Carnatic army for offensive ope- 
rations had been such as to have enabled you to act upon the 
first suggestions contained in that minute, consisting of five 
propositions :—We shall not, however, regret if the necessity 
of proceeding to actual hostilities shall have been averted by 
-Tippoo Sultaun consenting to receive Major Doveton on the 
part of the allies, and by his acquiescence in the three pro- 
positions contained in the subsequent part of your Lordship’s 
minute beforementioned. But should a war be rendered in- 
evitable we trust that its conclusion will be marked by his 
cession to the Company of the whole maritime territory re- 
maining between the ghauts on the coast of Malabar, agreeably 
to your Lordship’s original idea upon the subject, which 
would effectually secure us against any apprehension from 
any future junction between the forces of Tippoo Sultaun and 
those of the French, and by his relinquishing the Coimbetore 
country, which would greatly tend to the security of the Car- 
natic, and enable us to reduce the military expences on the 
coast. At all events Tippoo Sultaun might be induced to 
assign over the Coimbetore country to the Company upon the 
receipt of a reasonable adequate revenue for the same, as a 
farther security against any hostile attempts on his part in 
future. In the event of a war with Tippoo Sultaun the re- 
spective countries of the Nabob of Arcot and the Rajah of 
Tanjour will of course come under the Company’s manage- 
ment, and we direct that they be not relinquished without 
special orders from us, or from the Court of Directors for that 
purpose in order to afford sufficient time for the formation of 
arrangements for relieving those Princes from all incumbrances 
upon their revenues. 


* See page 159. 


616 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO June, 


In conelusion of this despatch we have only to express our 
approbation of the reasons which so zealously induced your 
Lordship to repair to Madras; our entire reliance on the wis- 
dom and firmness of your Lordship’s measures for the sup- 
port of the British possessions in the East Indies during the 
present arduous contest; and our full approbation of pose 
which have been already adopted to meet every possible’ 
exigency. 

Although your Lordship’s determination to proceed to 
Madras was influenced by the very critical situation of affairs 
with respect to Tippoo Sultaun, we observe with great satis- 
faction, by your minute of the 2nd January last, that in the — 
exercise of your authority at that settlement it is not your in- 
tention to interfere in the details of that Government, a mea- - 
sure which must naturally tend to the support of that dignity: 
and consequence which we always wish should be maintained | 
by the respective governors and councils ‘at the subordinate 
Presidencies. At the same time we’-have the farther satis-, 
faction to witness the most zealous and-cordial ¢d-operation of 
Lord Clive and his Council in such measures as may be pro- 
posed by your Lordship for the Companys s safety and pros-, 


perity. 
We are, 


Your affectionate friends, 
- Srep. Lusuineron. 
-Hueu Ineus. 
Joun Mansur. . 


No. CCXIX. 


My Dear Sir, 
The Earl of Mornington to the Right Honourable H. Dundas. 


Sir, ‘ Fort St. George—1799, 


You will not be surprised at any degree of earnestness 
which I may feel to promote the interests of that gallant army 
by whose assistance I have effected the late important and . 
happy resolution in the affairs of the British Nation, on this 
side of India.. 


1799. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 617 


Your own zeal for the public service, and the honorable 
support which it has always been your peculiar pride and 
pleasure to afford to those who have cooperated with you in 
the great cause in which we are all engaged, inspire me with 
a confident expectation, that I shall find in your sentiments 
a degree of cordiality, and ardour correspondent with my 
own. 

The army at lage have received in the captured property, 
taken at Seringapatam, a reward in some degree proportioned 
to their merits, and it is. rather the Provides of the Com- 
marider in Chief than mine to appreciate and recommend to 

notice the conduct of the officers. of inferior rank to that of 
Génerals on the Staff. I shall therefore: ‘confine, my recom- 
mendations to that rank. _. ; 

I have already had repeated occasion. ‘ible express to you my 

feelings of. public,.and private, : ‘gratitude towards . Lieut.- 
General Harris as well as to explain the strong grounds on 
which both those sentiments ‘are founded in my mind * The 
share‘which General Harris has received, of the prize. ‘taken’ 
at Seringapatam has placed his fortune above the want of any 
public aid;+ otherwise I have. no doubt that the magnitude 
7 


* 


* Upon the itscandion in Council at Fort St Geugé a July, 1798), 
relative te furnishing pecuniary funds for the detachment of the army or- 
dered by the Governor General to-be sent to Hyderabad, ‘Geseral Harris, 
then acting Governor, offered to be responsible in his private funds for the” 

-sum required to put'the troops in motion (see p 156). This most generous’ 
and: patriotic offer completely silenced all opposition ; and orders were 
immediately issued for the advance of the troops to Hyderabad. 

+ The following is General Harris’s letter to the Governor General on 
this subject. 


My pear Lorn, Camp, 27th June, 1799. 

Your favour of the 23rd reached me yesterday evening, and be assured 
made me very happy, as I can so readily fall in with your Lordship’s flat- 
tering wish, that I should repose my whole confidence in your favourable 
disposition towards me. Your kindness and pleasant manner with me, 
has put every gloomy idea to flight, and already most of them are even 
forgot. However, my dear Lord, you are far exceeding my humble 
wishes, and [ really think those of Mrs. Harris, or rather you would do 
so if you preferred the request to his Majesty—to grant to me the dignity 
of a baron of Great Britain. 

I am highly sensible of your Lordship’s friendship, and any mark of 
his Majesty’s favour would always be received by me with respect, but as 


618 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO June, 


of his services would have insured to him a liberal and muni- 
ficent provision from the East India Company. 


I certainly do not wish these high honours, so, I should be truly sorry you 
should lay yourself under obligations for what, to say the truth, would 
annoy me exceedingly. Indeed, my dear Lord, you could not have puz- 
zled me more—supposing I was solicitous to succeed—than by the ques- 
tion, what title I would chuse to take? 

An humble clergyman’s son, thrown very early,in life into the army, 
entirely a soldier of fortune, with scarcely any assistance save his own 
exertions, is little likely to have any hereditary place he would chuse to 
commemorate; and in my instance the 5th regiment was near six and 
twenty years my constant home. 

Your Lordship’s wise policy and extraordinary exertions have thrown 
me into affluence equal to my most sanguine wishes, but what is affluence 
to my military rank, weuld be very moderate to support the honours you 
propose, and no doubt as I am above the want of a pension, so 1 think 
it most likely I shall keep clear of soliciting our honourable employers 
on that head, unless you should persist in forcing these honours on me; 
so take care. In respect of George and the colours, be so good, my dear 
Lord, to use your own good pleasure; for my part, I have no doubt they 
would be very safe by the Cornwallis, as I understand she is a most ex- 
cellent sailer; and it would certainly be an object to have George in such 
good company as Beatson and Allan. I am rejoiced to hear your Lord- 
ship’s determination of not leaving the coast before September, as that 
will surely give me the opportunity of a few days at least in your society, 
and which Mrs. Harris will inform you I much wish for, and I may add, 
even under the threat of the ¢riumphal entertainment, which your Lord- 
ship is perfectly right in suspecting, as I perceive you do, I am not very 
ambitious of receiving. Years are creeping fast upon me, and I feel the 
the desire of retirement, which has always been my wish, growing daily 
stronger. Under these circumstances, the vanities of the world weigh 
but little. Indeed, the utmost I feel, is to close this campaign with sa- 
tisfaction to your Lordship, and then those are welcome to the honours 
who are anxious for them. My Sovereign, I should hope, will receive 
me with some attention whenever I may get home, as having all my life 
endeavoured faithfully to do my duty by him, my country, and those who 
have employed me. I wish your Lordship may not think me too prolix, 
but aware of the difficulty of avoiding honours, without being suspected 
of more vanity than if I sought them, I have entered into a detail of my 
own concerns, which I could only submit to the eye of friendship. 

Thus, my dear Lord, it will please me most to let the matter take its 
change, giving me such credit as you think me deserving of, for believe 
me in this respecg,1 am very ambitious. No one can set a higher value 
on your commeddations than, : 

‘ My dear Lord, 
your very faithful and obliged friend and servant, 
George Harnis. 


1799. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 619 


Under Lieut.-General Harris’s actual circumstances: I 
should hope that His Majesty might deem it proper to con- 
fer a distinguished mark of honer, upon that deserving 
officer; and impressed as I am with the importance’ of the 
conquest achieved under Lieut-General Harris’s command, I 
trust that His Majesty, will confer no honors on General 
Harris below those of the order of the Bath, and of a Peerage 
of Great Britain. It is my duty to state to you that any 
honors inferior to these would not meet the public opinion 
entertained in India, with respect to the importance of the 
late victories, nor satisfy that sentiment of honorable pride 
which they have diffused through every.branch of the civil and 
military service in this country. J must therefore make it my 
most anxious and earnest request to you that you will omit no 
endeavour to obtain for Lieut.-General Harris, the honors which 
he has so well merited. Lieut.-General Stuart Commander- 
in-Chief of the army of the Bombay, has long been distin- 
guished for the ability and eminence of his services in India. 
During the late War he has added considerably to his former 
laurels, and the victory obtained by the troops, under -his 
command at Sedasere, must ever be remembered as one of the 
mest brilliant events, in our military history in India. His 
health is now declining, and he proposes to return to Europe 
in the approaching season. His circumstances, even with 
the addition of his prize money, will be moderate ; and cer- 
tainly no military character in this quarter of the Globe, 
whether considered on the greund of jong service, eminent 
success, or approved integrity, ever was a more proper object 
for the munificence of the EastIndia Company. 1 also trust that 
the splendid and important victory of Sedasere will recom- 
mend Lieut.-General Stuart to His Majesty for the order of 
the Bath. It is impossible te. bestow too much commendation 
‘on the conduct of Major-General Baird in the assault of 
Seringapatam. A more judicious operation conducted with 
more heroic gallantry. and spirit never was achieved, and 
when you recollect: the decisive consequences of the success 
of that day, effecting within the course of two hours the entire 
destruction of our most formidable enemy in India, I am 
persuaded you will concur with me, in an anxious solicitude 
to see the gallant leader of the assailants of Tippoo Sultaun’s 
capital rewarded in a manner suitable te his exertions, and to 


620 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO June, 


their beneficial effect. I have made it my particular business 
to enquire into Major-General Baird’s circumstances; andI 
have ascertained that they are by no means affluent : It would 
therefore be a peculiar satisfaction to me if the East India 
Company should exercise their known liberality in his case. 
When it is remembered, that in the course of active and 
arduous service during the former war he fall into the hands 
of Tippoo Sultaun and suffered a long and cruel imprisonment 
in the dungeons of that Fortress, which on the 4th of May 
1799, submitted to his irresistible valour and skill, I am per- 
suaded that his claim to public reward and honor will be 
deemed peculiarly inferesting, and powerful. I should also 
hope that his extraordinary merits on the 4th of May would 
induce His Majesty to consider him as a proper object for the 
order of the Bath, I enclose a letter from Major General 
Baird, which reflects the highest credit on his sentiments of 
honor and public spirit.* 

The commander in Chief has made avery favorable report 
to me of the conduct of Major General Floyd who commanded, 
the cavalry during the war, I understand that General Floyd 
proposes to return soon to Europe, and that his principal 
object is to obtain a regiment. The commander in Chief has 
also made a very favorable report to me of the conduct of 
Major-Generals Bridges and Popham, of the Company’s Ser- 
vice, during the Campaign. And I have already had occasion, 
in my letters to the Court of Directors, to applaud the services 
of Major-General Hartley, on the Coast of Malabar. 


* See p 598. 

+ A letter from General Floyd to the Governor General, dated Banga- 
lore, the 26th August; 1799, contains the following passage on this subject. 
«© My Lorp, : 

When you did me the honour to give me your thanks for my poor ser- 
vices in the late war, and to offer me the very material assistance of your 
influence in my personal pursuits, whether of honours or of other advan- 
tages, I mentioned to your Lordship how much I should be gratified 

. should His Majesty honour me with the command of a regiment of cavalry. 
I am sensible my military situations thust be determined by opinions al- 
ready formed of me during a practice of several years, Iam always ready 
and happy to receive your Lordship’s command, and I have the honour to 
be, with the greatest respect, 
My Lord, 
your most obedient and most humble Servant, 
; J. Fuoyp. 


1799: THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 621 


It appeared to me that even those parts of this letter which 
relate to the bounty of the East India Company, would be 
more properly addressed to you, than to the Court of Direc- 
tors, who might deem it presumptuous in one of their servants 
to affect to point out to them the proper objects of their 
liberality on such an occasion as the present. You will, how- 
ever, make whatever use of this letter may appear to you most 
advisable. 

With regard to the several able and gallant officers, whom 
I have named, their persons were entirely unknown to me 
previously to my arrival in India, nor have I any knowledge of 
their respective families or connections in Europe. The ser- 
vices which they have rendered to the public, form the sole 
ground of my own acquaintance with them, and the only 
motive of the interest which I take in their welfare and honor. 
I know that the same circumstances will be their best recom- 
mendation to your countenance and protection. 

Believe me, Dear Sir, 
with great respect and regard 
Yours, most faithfully and affectionately, 
MornInaTon. 


No. CCXX. 


Address from the Inhabitants of Fort St. George to the Right Honourable 
the Earl of Mornington. K. P. Governor-general, &e. &e. * 


My Lorp ; 

WE the undersigned inhabitants of Madras, impressed with 
a deep sense of the glory and advantage derived to the British 

-empire from your lordship’s administration, beg leave to ap- 
proach your lordship with our sincere congratulations on the 
successful termination of the war with Tippoo Sultaun. 

The dawn of your lordship’s government opened to us the 
early prospect of restoring the national interests in India, to 
that security and elevation which had been acquired by the 
victories, justice, and wisdom of the Marquis Cornwallis; the 


* This address was agreed to unanimously at a public meeting, Major 
General Ross in the chair ; it was presented to the Governor General by a 
deputation of the principal inhabitants, and received in presence of Lord 
Clive, the Members of Council, Lieutenant General Stuart, &c. 


622 ADDRESSES, June, 


removal of a power, festering in the centre of our possessions, 
and corroding one of our most important alliances, evinced, 
as well your lordship’s foresight of the dangerous cloud, 
which was collecting, under the councils of France, as the 
decision and energy with which your lordship prepared to 
meet the impending storm. 

A prudence less penetrating, or a vigour less active, might 
have been appalled at the difficulties of supporting a war 
against the kingdom of Mysore; but it was the peculiar 
energy of your lordship’s mind, to anticipate the growth and 
maturity of those difficulties, to estimate the true extent of 
our own power, to seize the critical period of action, and to 
create resources, by inspiring a confidence and energy, cor- 
respondent to the extent and importance of your lordship’s 
measures, 

The result of those measures we now view with triumph 
and exultation, in the complete subversion of the power of 
Tippoo Sultaun, of whose enmity the determined inveteracy 
rendered peace undesirable ; and whose infatuated attachment 
to the implacable enemy of England, rendered war unavoida- 
ble. The rapidity with which this great event has, under 
Providence, by your lordship’s wisdom, and the gallantry of the 
army, been achieved, has left on our minds impressions of 
admiration, at a conquest unequalled in its importance, in 
the annals of British India. 

The brillancy of this conquest has spread a blaze of glory 
over the meridian of your lordship’s government; and from 
the extensive influence of its effects, we have a just confidence 
that your lordship’s career in India will close by diffusing 
throughout Hindostan, the calm of genuine peace, and undis- 
turbed tranquillity. 

Feeling in our immediate situation the first consequences 
of your lordship’s success, we beg leave to offer your lordship 
our warmest acknowledgments, and, while we contemplate the 
benefits we now enjoy, we are unable to express our gratitude 
in terms adequate to our sense of the decisive termination with 
which the zilliant achievements of the Marquis Cornwallis 
and the ‘victory of ‘Adtniral Lord Nelson have been crowned 
by the Earl of Mornington. 


Madras, 26th June, 1799. 


1799. AND REPLIES. 623 


The Earl of Mornington’s reply. 
GENTLEMEN, 


The zeal which distinguishes your congratulations on the 
prosperous termination of the late campaign in Mysore, is 
suitable to the character of British subjects, animated by the 
glorious success of a just and necessary war, and by the happy 
prospect of an honourable and secure peace. 

It would not become me either to depreciate the efforts 
which have been made for your defence, or to disclaim the 
share which my public duty required me to take in them. 

It would have been criminal in me to have neglected any 
precaution, or to have declined any exertion which, in my 
judgment and conscience, appeared necessary to the important 
object of frustrating the avowed designs of the enemy, and of 
providing for the safety of the valuable interests committed to 
my charge. 

In the discharge of this duty I am happy to declare, that I 
have received the most cordial assistance from every class and 
description of the inhabitants of this settlement. 

My acknowledgments of the honourable, generous and dis- 
interested support of Lord Clive, and of the zealous co-opera- 
tion of the members of the council, are not perhaps introduced 
with strict propriety on this occasion; but his lordship will | 
pardon my eagerness to offer to him a public tribute of my 
sincere gratitude, respect, and esteem. 

In all the principal civil and military officers throughout 
every branch and department of this government, I have found 
an unanimous spirit of alacrity and diligence, equalled only by 
their eminent abilities and extensive knowledge. The same 
spirit has marked the conduct of the commercial houses, and 
of the banks established in this settlement ; by their season- 
able assistance I was enabled, in the most critical period of 
our military preparations, to avail myself of the resources of 
this presidency, to an extent unexampled in its history. 

By these aids, and by the extraordinary exertions of the 
governments of Bengal and Bombay, 1 was empowered to call 
forth that gallant army, whose transcendant achievements 
have delivered the Carnatic from the perpetual alarm of 
invasion, and converted the strength of our implacable enemy 


624 ADDRESSES, August, 


into a new source of security and power to us, and to our 
allies. 

It is, therefore, in your energy and zeal, and in the co-ope- 
ration of all the British governmenis of India, that I trace the 
primary causes of our recent victories, and anticipate the 
settlement of a peace as propitious to our interests, and 
honourable to our national character, as the events of the war 
have.been glorious to our military reputation. 

Concord, unanimity, and prompt obedience, combined with 
a faithful and assiduous discharge of public duty, and a high 
sense of public honour in the public service, will render the 
Supreme government of these extensive possessions a grateful 
task, in the severest trials of difficulty and danger. 

With such an union of loyalty and public spirit, we may 
confidently expect to counteract every device and machination 
of our enemies; to detect their intrigues, to disappoint their 
treachery, to repel their violence, and to perpetuate the British 
empire in India on the solid foundations of humanity and 
valour, justice and power. 


Madras, 26th June, 1799.’ 
MornincTon, 


No. CCXXI. 
Address of the Inhabitants of Bombay to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Lorp, Bombay, 3rd Aug. 1799. 
We the undersigned British subjects, civil and military, 
now residing in Bombay, beg leave to offer to your Lordship 
our sincere congratulations on the termination of the war with 
Tippoo Sultaun; a war founded in necessity and justice, pro- 
secuted with extraordinary vigour, and crowned with unex- 
ampled success. In the accomplishment of this great object, 
whether we consider your Lordship’s penetration in fathom- 
ing the perfidious designs of the Sultaun, in alliance with the 
French nation, in violation of a solemn Treaty, and without a 
pretence of provocation, to attack the British possessions in 
India,—the subsequent solicitude evinced by your Lordship 
to conciliate the Sulthun’s friendship, and by recalling him to 
a sense of his obligations, to avert the calamities of war—the 
policy, when every overture of conciliation bad been disre- 
garded, obviating the menaced aggression by an immediate 


1799. AND REPLIES. 625 


appeal to arms, or the vigorous adoption of all the various 
measures essential to a successful prasecution of the war, 
every thing equally excites our admiration and applause ; and 
while the transcendent achievements of a gallant army, in ex- 
ecution of your Lordship’s measures, and in the final conquest 
of the Sultaun’s kingdom, have added new and never fading 
laurels to their brow, it is matter of exultation to every Bri- 
tish subject to observe your Lordship, in the moment of tri- 
umph, and in the plenitude of power and conquest, exhibit- 
ing to the descendant of a deposed Prince, to our allies, and 
to the world, a fresh instance of British honour, British faith, 
generosity, and justice. 

In the result of this conquest, as unprecedented in the ra- 
pidity of its completion, as it is unequalled in its importance, 
we behold the entire extinction of a cruel and relentless foe, 
a valuable acquisition of territory and power, the strength of 
our alliances in India increased, a destructive confederacy 
dissolved and defeated ; which, whilst it affords us the fairest 
prospect of a permanent internal tranquillity and security, 
relieves us also from the apprehension of external violence 
and invasion, by giving us a well grounded confidence, that 
it must effectually frustrate the machinations and intrigues of 
the Directory of France, the inveterate and implacable foe of 
England, and the common enemy of established order, liberty, 
and government, in every part of the world. 

In addition to these important benefits, arising from the 
glorious termination of the Mysore war, we entertain the. 
pleasing hope that the brilliant achievements in India, so 
opportunely aiding the splendid successes of his Majesty's 
arms in other quarters of the globe, will, from the extent of 
their influence, have a forcible operation in restoring to us 
the blessings of a general, permanent, and honourable peace. 

Impressed with a deep sense of the honour and advantage 
derived to the British empire under your Lordship’s Govern- 
ment, feeling in common with his Majesty’s subjects in every 
other part of India, the immediate effect of your Lordship’s 
recent measures, which peculiarly call for our warmest ac- 
knowledgments of respect and gratitude, and fully confiding 
in your Lordship’s wisdom, integrity, and justice, that the 
powers of Government will ever be directed to the true inte- 
rests of the people, we cannot omit this occasion of assuring 

VoL. I. 2s 


626 ADDRESSES, August, 


your Lordship that we shall not, without regret, behold the 
arrival of the moment that shall put a period to your Lord- 
ship’s administration of the Government in India.* 
We have the honour to be, 
My Lord, 
With great respect, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient humble servants. 


The Earl of Mornington’s Reply. ~ 
GENTLEMEN, 

It is peculiarly satisfactory to me to receive the honourable 
testimonies of personal esteem, and to observe the cordial 
expressions of zeal for the public service contained in your 
able and animated address. 

The vigorous prosecution and prosperous issue of the late 
war with Tippoo Sultaun are to be ascribed, under Provi- 
dence, to that unanimous spirit of prompt obedience and 
cheerful co-operation which I found in every part of the Bri- 
tish possessions, and in every branch of the public service in 
India. This happy disposition proceeded not more from a 
sense of duty and a regard for the principles of subordination, 
than from a general conviction of the justice of our cause, and 
of the indispensable necessity of frustrating, by a seasonable 
effort, the systematic treachery of our faithless, implacable, 
and infatuated enemy. 

The distinguished part which the Settlement of Bombay 
has borne during the late crisis in the labours and honours of 
the common cause has repeatedly claimed my warm approba- 
tion, and will ever be remembered by me with gratitude and 
respect. In your liberal and voluntary contribution towards 
the exigencies of your native country, and towards the de- 
fence of the Presidency under whose Government you reside,} 


* This address was passed unanimously at a great public meeting con- 
vened by the present Sir Charles Forbes, Bart., a gentleman who in India 
as well as in England has pre-eminently distinguished himself by his no- 
ble public spirit—an expansive mind, and a truly Christian philanthropy. 

+ The Bombay Presidency, with Bengal and Madras, was equally zealous 
to promote the success of the Governor-General’s measures; the yolun- 
tary loan towards prosecuting the war in Europe amounted to upwards 
of 300,000 rupees, of which Mr. Duncan generously contributed 25,000; 
Lieut.-Gen. Stuart, 20,000 ; Major-Gen. James Rivett, 12,000; Mr. Page 


1799. AND REPLIES. 627 


and in the alacrity with which you have given your personal 
services for the military protection of Bombay, I have con- 
templated with pleasure the same character of public spirit, 
resolution, and activity, which has marked the splendid suc- 
cesses of the -gallant army of Bombay from the commence- 
ment to the close of the late glorious campaign. 

The extensive power which the result of the war has placed 
in the hands of the allies has enabled them to conclude the 

_ pacification on such principles of moderation and equity, as 
afford a reasonable prospect of permanent security and 
repose. 

Your unsolicited assurances of confidence and esteem con- 
firm my desire and hope of deriving from the recent settlement 
of Mysore the inestimable advantages which it promises to the 
interests and honour of Great Britain, and to the peace, hap- 
piness, and prosperity of the native inhabitants of India. 

I have the honour to be, 
Gentlemen, 
Your faithful servant, 
MorninoTon. 


No. CCXXII. 


Address of the British Inhabitants of Calcutta to the Right Honourable 
the Governor General. * 


My Lorp, Calcutta, 21st August, 1799. 


We, the British inhabitants of Calcutta, impressed with a 
deep sense of the great benefits which the public interests 
have derived from the wisdom and energy of your Lordship’s 
Councils, in the glorious termination of the late war with 


(M.C.) 12,000; Mr. J. Forbes, 8,000. The corps of Fencibles raised 
by the Presidency was 1,006 strong, of which Six Charles (then Mr.) 
Forbes equipped and paid 50 men. It is to these patriotic acts and to 
the heroism displayed by the Bombay army, especially in the battle of 
Seedasere, (see p. 483), that the Governor-General refers in his Lordship’s 
answer to the address. 

* As at the other Presidencies this address was unanimously agreed to 
ata public meeting, convened by the sheriff (Mr. Ewer), and signed by 
all the European gentlemen of the Presidency. There were also addresses 
from other parts of India, and from the Hindoo gentry, and other native 
inhabitants, all breathing a spirit of loyalty to the British Government, and 
gratitude for the result of the Governor Geveral’s exertions. 


628 ADDRESSES, Sept 


Tippoo Sultaun, beg leave to present our sincere congratu- 
lations on the splendid events which have crowned your Lord- 
ship’s measures with such rapid and complete success. 

The fall of Tippoo Sultaun and his capital, the capture of 
his sons, the submission of his chiefs, and annihilation of his 
power, must secure to the Company’s possessions the bless- 
ings of internal tranquillity ; increase, beyond calculation, the 
resources, strength and stability of the British empire in the 
East; and, while they reflect the highest honour on the Ge- 
neral and the army by whose brilliant victories your Lord- 
ship’s objects have been accomplished, must transmit your 
Lordship’s name with distinguished lustre to posterity. 

The restoration of the injured race of Princes, whose do- 
minions their rebellious subject Hyder Ali had usurped, and 
whose immediate descendant your Lordship has raised from 
a prison to a throne; the liberal provision your Lordship has 
bestowed on the family and chiefs of our implacable and cruel 
enemy, the late Sultaun of Mysore; and the partition of the 
conquered countries,* demand our warmest applause; and 
cannot but increase the confidence of the native powers, in 
the justice and clemency of the British nation. 

To your Lordship’s vigilance, energy and wisdom, Great 
Britain is indebted for all these great events; which, com- 
bined with the invaluable result of your Lordship’s previous 
negotiations at the Court of Hyderabad, have not only re- 
lieved the British possessions and those of their allies from 
the constant apprehension of invasion by a restless and am- 
bitious Prince, whom no moderation could appease, but must 
also extinguish every hope our inveterate enemies of France 
so anxiously cherished, of involving these happy countries in 
the calamities and horrors which they have spread over so 
many other regions of the globe; and will, we trust, under 
Divine Providence, essentially contribute to the final deliver- 
ance of Europe, from the chains which they have imposed, 
and to the ultimate object of every just and necessary war, a 
lasting, safe, and honourable peace. 

We beg leave to offer our most respectful congratulations 
to your Lordship on your safe return to the chief seat of 

‘Government; where we earnestly hope you will long continue 


* This refers to the settlement of the Mysore territory, which will be 
detailed in the subsequent volume. 


1799. AND REPLIES. ; 629 


to preside, and add ta those great and numerous claims on 
the public gratitude, which, by such important and distin- 
guished services, your Lordship already has acquired. 
We have the honour to be, : 
with the highest respect, my Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient, humble Servants, 


Reply of the Right Honourable the Governor General to an Address pre« 
sented to his Lordship by the British Inhabitants of Calcutta on the 2\st of 
September, 1799. 


GENTLEMEN, 


I receive this distinguished mark of your youand with sen- 
timents of satisfaction and gratitude, proportioned to my ex- 
perience of your approved loyalty and public spirit, and of 
your just sense of the interests and honour of the British 
empire in India. 

The prosperous termination of the late campaign in Mysore 
is a proper subject of public congratulation. The British 
arms have seldom achieved a conquest of greater lustre or 
value, and never were employed in a cause of more urgent. 
necessity, or of more manifest justice. The progress of our 
success has revealed additional justifications of our original 
appeal to the sword; and the final triumph of our arms has 
been enhanced by the satisfactory. reflection, that the war, 
which terminated in the destruction of our enemy, originated 
in his implacable hatred, flagrant treachery, and unprovoked 
aggression. 

Under the blessing of Providence, favouring the justice of 
our cause, the rapid and uninterrupted course of our victo- 
ries is to be ascribed to the admirable valour, skill, and dis- 
cipline of the gallant officers and troops employed in Mysore; 
to the predominant influence of the British character in India; 
and to the intrinsic vigour of our extensive resources and 
established power. 

It was my duty to make a seasonable use of these eminent 
advantages; and in the unanimity of our counsels; in the 
zeal, talents, and happy subordination of every branch of the 
civil and military service throughout the British possessions, 
I found the principles of that spirit of alacrity and ardour, 


630 ADDRESSES, Sept. 


which ‘accelerated the equipment of the army, and secured 
the early success of the war. 

My thanks have already been offered to the governments 
and inhabitants of the Presidencies of Fort St. George and 
Bombay, for the distinguished part which they have borne 
respectively in the late arduous crisis of affairs. 

I am happy to avail myself of this public occasion to de- 
clare, that, from this Presidency I received the most effectual 
and timely aid, to an extent, which fully justified my confi- 
dent expectations of cordial cooperation from the respectable 
hands, which, during my absence, administered the Govern- 
ment of Bengal. 

In reviewing the more immediate causes of our success, I 
cannot repress a tribute of gratitude to him who laid the 
foundations of that strength which it has been m lot to call 
into action. The name of the Marquis Cornwallis is inse- 
parably connected, with the fame and power of Great Britain 
in this quarter of the globe; and will continue to be an ob- 
ject of affection and reverence as long as wisdonf, fortitude, 
and intégrity shall be respected, or any sense retained of jus- 
tice, clemency, benevolence, public faith, or military glory. 
The final conquest of Mysore recalls the memory of that 
glorious war, in which the first shock was given té& the hostile 
power of Tippoo Sultaun: it must never be forgétten, that, 
under the auspices of the Marquis Cornwallis in that war, 
the supply and movement of our armies in Mysore were first 
reduced to a system of regularity and order; and our officers 
acquired that experience and skill so conspicuous in the able 
and masterly operations of the late campaign.* Under the 


* The following letter was written by the Marquis Cornvallis to the 
Earl of Mornington, on receiving the intelligence of the Governor-Ge- 
neral’s reply to the Calcutta Address. 


Dublin Castle, March 2nd, 1800, 
My pear Lorp, 


Your answer to the Address of the inhabitants of Calcutta,#on your re- 
turn to Bengal, was gratifying to me in proportion to my esteem for the 
person who honoured my services with such flattering approbation. 

If I am to derive any credit from posterity for my endeavours to esta- 
blish order, honesty and dignity in the Government of our Indian empire, 
it is to you, my dear Lord, that my fame will be indebted ; fut unless you 


1799. AND REPLIES. 651 


same auspices, the whole system of our defensive alliances in 
the peninsula of India was founded; and the national faith 
was maintained in a degree of purity and lustre, which in- 
spired a general confidenge in the British Government, and 
disposed the native powers to strengthen and cement their 
connection with the Company on the solid basis of reciprocal 
interest and mutual security. This favourable disposition 
was confirmed by the prudence, integrity, and honour of my 
immediate predecessor (Sir John Shore); and in the impor- 
tant negotiations, which it has been my duty to conduct, I 
have derived considerable assistance from the advantageous 
impressions of the British character, which I found deeply 
fixed in the minds of our allies. 

Possessed of such powerful means, I have been enabled 
not only to prosecute the war with success, but to conclude 
the partition of our conquests on principles of moderation and 
equity, conformable to the laws, the honour, and policy of the 


had gone to Bengal, the transient fruits of my labour would soon have 
been done away and totally forgotten. 

Your correspondents in England will probably tell you that every thing 
is going on well in Ireland, and that the union will be carried with ease; 
but believe me the task will turn out more difficult than ¢hey imagine, 
and although I trust that we shall ultimately succeed, it will be after a 
long and violent contest. The leaders of opposition are able, and their 
followers are animated with that zeal which vanity, prejudice, and self- 
interest naturally inspire; and since Mr. Grattan has come forward, their 
cause is espoused in distant parts of the kingdom by the lower class, who 
looked on with indifference as long as faction was untainted with disloyalty. 
We have a majority of between forty and fifty, scarcely any of whom will, 
I believe, desert from us, but they are in general cold and languid friends, 
and itis very difficult to procure such an attendance, as the importance 
of the case, and the activity and unfair dealing of the enemy, render ne- 
cessary for our daily security. In the mean time we hear, froin credible 
quarters, that an attack upon us is intended from Brest, which, however 
difficult the enterprize may appear on the part of the enemy, adds Consi- 
derably to the weight of my occupation. 

I shall refer you for the affairs of England, and the general politics of 
Europe, to your better informed friends on the eastern side of St. George’s 
channel, and shall content myself with assuring you that I am, with the 
most earnest wishes for your health and prosperity, 

My dear Lord, 
Most sincerely yours, 
CornWALLis. 


’ 


632 THE RIGHT HON. HENRY ADDINGTON, TO Oct., 


British nation, and affording the most rational promise of 
permanent security to the possessions of the Comparfy, and 
of general tranquillity to India. 

To whatever situation the course of future events may él 
me, the assurances of your personal confidence and esteem 
must always be highly honourable to my character, and grate- 
ful to my recollection. i 

While the administration of this arduous Government shall 
be entrusted to my hands, my earnest endeavours shall be 
constantly employed to secure and improve our recent acqui- 
sitions of territory, wealth, and power, and to guard the 
prosperity and happiness of these opulent and flourishing 
dominions by such effectual precautions as shall avert the 
arts and arms of France, and discourage her spirit of enter- 
prize, or frustrate its ruinous effects. 

Mornineton. 


No. CCXXIII. 


From the Right Hon. Henry Addington to the Earl of Mornington. 


My Lorn, Palace-yard, 5th October, 1799. 

The reward of public approbation and gratitude has, on 
no occasion, been more cordially and deservedly bestpwed, 
than by the inclosed resolutions, which I have the honeur of 
transmitting to your Lordship, in obedience to the commands 
of the House of Commons. 

Wisdom and vigour in council, and talents and exertions in 
the field, have eminently characterized the civil and military 
services in India, during the period of your Lordship’s ‘admi- 
nistration; and the effects of the measures which have been 
adopted, are to be found in the overthrow of a restlesé and 
perfidious power, in the dissolution of a menacing and formi- 
dable confederacy, and in the improved security of the Bri- 
tish possessions in that quarter of the world. 

Allow me, my Lord, so far to indulge my own feelings, upon 
this oecasion, as to assure your Lordship, and those, who, 
under your auspices, contributed to successes so splendid and 
important, that, in fhe discharge of my official duty, I have 
never experienced a higher gratification, than in being the 
channel of affording this additional proof, that great and glo- 


1799. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, 633 


rious services will ever be distinguished by the applause, ad- 
miration, and gratitude of the Commons of Great Britain. 


I have the honour to be, with the utmost respect, 


My Lord, 
Your Lordship’s most obedient, 
and faithful humble servant, 
Henry ApDINGTON. 


No. CCXXIV. 


Vote of Thanks of the Hous or Commons. 
Veneris 4° die Octobris, 1799. 
Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, 


That the thanks of this House* be given to the Right Ho- 
nourable Richard Lord Wellesley, Earl of Mornington, in 
the kingdom of Ireland, and Governor-General of the British 
possessions in the East Indies, for the wisdom, decision, and 
energy, with which he discharged the arduous duties of his 
station, from the time of his taking upon him the said Govern- 
ment to the glorious termination of the late war by the cap- 
ture of Seringapatam ; during which period, by opposing to 
the perfidy of the late Sultaun of Mysore, an uniform 
moderation, dignity, and firmness, and by counteracting with 
equal promptitude and ability, the dangerous intrigues and 
projects of the French, particularly by destroying their power 
-and influence in the Decan, he prepared the way for the rapid 
and brilliant operations carried on under his superintendence 
and direction, the result of which has finally disappointed all 
the designs of our enemies in that quarter, and has esta- 
blished, ona basis of permanent security, the soy and 
prosperity of the British empire in India. 


Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, 


That the thanks of this House be given to the Right Ho. 
nourable Lord Clive, Governor of the settlement of Fort St. 
George, for his zealoys, cordial and honourable concurrence, 


* A similar vote was passed unanimously by the House of Lords. 


634: VOTE OF THANKS Oct., 


in forwarding the wise and dignified views of the Governor- 
General in Council, by which he has furnished a salutary and 
memorable example of the advantage of unanimity and con- 
cord among the persons employed in high stations in the Bri- 
tish dominions in the East Indies, and has, to the utmost of 
his power, promoted the success of those measures, from 
which the most important public benefits have resulted to this 
country. 


Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, 


That the thanks of this House be given to Jonathan Dun- 
can, Esq., Governor of Bombay, for the zeal and promptitude 
of hjs conduct in preparing the army of that Presidency for 
the field, agreeably to the orders of the Governor-General in 
Council, whereby the army was enabled materially to contri- 
bute to the successful and glorious termination of the late war 
in India. 


Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, 


“4 


That the thanks of this House be given to Lidut.-General 
George Harris, for the whole of his able and meriforious con- 
duct in the command of the forces of his Majest¥ and of the 
East India Company, during the late glorious and decisive 
war with the Sultaun of Mysore; and particularly for the 
ability, judgment, and energy, with which: he planned and 
directed the assault of Seringapatam, the success of which 
brilliant achievement has so highly contributed to the glory 
of the British name, and to the permanent tranquillity of our 
possessions in the East. 


Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, 


That the.thanks of this House be given to Lieut.-General 
James Stuart, Commander-in-Chief of the Bombay army, 
‘which so gloriously~éo-operated in the success 6f the late 
campaign‘in India, and also to the Major-Generals John Floyd, 
Thomas Bridges, William Popham, James Hartley,dnd David 
Baird, and to the respective officers of the armies employed 
on that occasion against the enemy, for their distingilished and 
meritorious services. 


{799. OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, 635 


Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, 


That this House doth highly approve of, and acknowledge, 
the services of the non-commissioned officers and private 
soldiers employed against the enemy, in the glorious and de- 
cisive war in the East Indies, and that the same be signified 
to them by the Commanders of the several corps, who are 
desired to thank them for their gallant behaviour. 


Ordered, 


That Mr. Speaker do transmit the said Resolutions to the 
Right Honourable the Governor-General; and that his Lord- 
ship be requested by Mr. Speaker, to signify the same to the 
Governors, Generals, and other officers, referred to therein. 


J. LEY, A. D. Dom. Com, 


Vote of Thanks of the Honourable East India Company. 


At a Court of Directors held on Tuesday, the 24th Sep- 
tember, 1799, the Deputy Chairman, agreeably to an intima- 
tion given on the 20th instant, moving the Court, it was, on 
the question being severally put, Resolved unanimously, That 
the thanks of this Court be given to the’ Earl of Mornington, 
Governor-General, for the able and successful measures 
which he adopted, whereby the complete annihilation of 
French influence at the Court of Hyderabad was happily 
accomplished ; for the ability, firmness, and decision -mani- 
fested by his Lordship in his conduct towards the late Tip- 
poo Sultaun, and for the previous measures which he pur- 
sued for enabling the army to take the field, whereby it was 
put in a situation to-act with vigor against the enemy, and 
to effect the speedy conquest of the capital of the Mysore 
dominions, the happy presage of a lasting peace in India, and 
the consequent increase of prosperity to the East India 
Company. 

Resolved unanimously, That the thanks of this Court be 
given to the Kight Honourable Lord Clive, Governor of 
Madras, for his zealous co-operation with the Earl of Morn- 
ington in the measures proposed by his Lordship; and parti- 
cularly in the exertions which be made for equipping the 


636 VOTE OF THANKS OF THE HON. EAST INDIA COMPANY. 
Madras army for those operations which have redounded so 
much to its honor and to the interests of this Company. 

’ Resolved unanimously, That the thanks of this Court be 
given to Jonathan Duncan, Esq., Governor of Bombay, for 
the zeal and promptitude of his conduct, in preparing the . 
army of that Presidency for the field, whereby it was enabled 
to take a conspicuous share in the glorious achievement of 
the late campaign against the Mysore dominions. 

Resolved unanimously, That the thanks of this Court be 
given to Lieut.-General George Harris, Commander-in-Chief 
of the King’s and Company’s forces employed in the siege of 
Seringapatam, for the very able and judicious manner in 
whith the attack of that fortress was planned. 

Resolved unanimously, That the thanks of this Court be 
given to the officers of the King’s and Company's forces em- 
ployed in the assault of Seringapatam on the 4th of May, 
1799, for the rapidity, animation, and skill, which they mani- 
fested in the execution of this important service ; and to the 
non-commissioned officers and privates for the courage and 
intrepidity of their conduct upon that brilliant occasion. 

Resolved unanimously, That the thanks of this Court be 

. given to Lieutenant-General Stuart, for his able conduct in 

‘the command of the Bombay army previous to its junction, 
and to the officers and men of that army, who were engaged 
in the action of the 6th of March with a chosen body of the 
troops of Tippoo Sultaun, for their able and spirited soins 
upon that occasion. 
- Resolved unanimously, That the thanks of this Cott be 
given to Lieut.-Gen. Harris, and the officers and men of the 
King’s and Company’s forces under his command, for the 
great and important services rendered to the East India 
Company throughout the whole of the late glorious campaign, 
which has terminated to the advantage of the Company and 
the nation, by affording a well-grounded hope that the peace 
of India will be secured on a solid and lasting foundation. 


v3 


APPENDIX 


OF OFFICIAL AND PUBLIC DOCUMENTS. 


A. 


Queries proposed by Lord Morningtonto Major Kirkpatrick, with the Answers 
of the latter, (referred to in the Governor General's letters from the Cape 
of Good Hope, p. 2. 


Question 1st.—What was the origin of the corps disciplined by European 
officers now in the service of the Nizam ? 

Answer.—This corps consisted during the late war in Mysore (or at so 
recent a period as 1792) of no more, I think, than one battalion, at most, 
only of two ; which had been raised not long before the commencement of 
that war by its present chief commander, Raymond, a French adventurer, 
formerly belonging to the corps of Lally. Du Boigne’s, and some other 
regular bodies of infantry (sith field pieces attached) had been formed, an- 
tecedently to this period both by Mhadajee, Scindeah, and Tuckojee 
Holear ; and it was probably in consideration of the important and abuns 
dantly obvious advantages which the former of these chiefs in particular 
had derived from such an establishment that first suggested to Azim ul Omra 
the expediency of a military institution. Raymond’s battalion served dur- 
ing the war, principally, I believe, in conjunction with the detachment of 
the Company’s troops furnished, according to treaty, to the Nizam. 

Question 2nd.—What has been the augmentation of that corps? At 
what periods of time has that augmentation taken place? ‘I'o what causes 
is it to be attributed? And is there any ground for believing that either the 
formation or augmentation of that corps proceeded from any hostile dis- 
position towards the British interests ? : 

Answer.—I am not acquainted with the terms or the extent of Azim ul 
Omra’s original agreement with Raymond, but I deem it probable that it 
-went to the establishment of more corps than were immediately raised. 
Be this as it may, the peace of Seringapatam had not been long concluded 
when the minister authorised, and, I believe, afterwards from time to time 
frequently urged him to complete his corps with all possible expedition to 
fourteen battalions, or regiments, of a thousand men each. Such a large 
augmentation might in some measure appear expedient on account of the 
great extension of territory obtained by the Court of Hyderabad through 
that peace: but I am disposed to think that it sprung principally from a 
desire of preparing for that contest with the Mahrattas so long before in 
contemplation of the minister, and which accordingly followed soon after. 
I see no reason te suppose that the measure was connected either imme- 
diately or remotely, at least in the mind of Azim ul Omra (whatever might 


638 APPENDIX. 


be the case in regard to Raymond) with any views of a nature hostile to 
our interests. 

But although the corps was thus directed to be augmented to 14,000 
men, yet Raymond had not been able to complete it to this establishment 
when the Nizam took the field against the Mahrattas. Its strength at the 
affair of Khurdlah hardly exceeded 11,000 men; but that he should have 
been able to increase it even to this amount within so short a period as 
two years, is a circumstance that no doubt evinces the activity and re- 
sources of himself and officers to have been very considerable. 

Sometime after the return of the army to Hyderabad from the unfortu- 
nate expedition just alluded to, a nominal reduction of Raymond’s corps 
took place ; that is to say, the acting minister, in a fit either of economy, 
or of temporary dissatisfaction with its commander, directed the recruiting 
for it to be discontinued : in consequence of which its remains were com- 
pressed into 10 battalions er regiments of 1,000 men each. 

In this state it appears to have continued till the return of Azim ul 
Omra to Hyderabad ; but, according to the latest accounts the minister 
would seem disposed, if he had not actually agreed, to its being once more 
augmented to at least its formerly intended establishment of 14,000 men. 
If he should absolutely have adopted the measure, either he has done so on 
some particular suggestion of Raymond, or with some sinister view of 
thereby working upon our jealousy of that Frenchman’s growing power. 
For, if he had really judged an increase of the regular infantry of the state 
necessary, his purpose would have been equally well answered by making 
the requisite augmentation upon the rival corps of Finglass. This too is 
the step which he ought rather to have taken consistently with his own 
spontaneous professions on the subject of Raymond to the assistant at Hy- 
derabad immediately upon his return thither from Poonah, when he 
affected at least if he did not feel, considerable uneasiness at the conduct 
and dispositions displayed by that Frenchman in his absence, and no less 
solicitude to cireumscribe within very narrow limits, if not altogether an- 
nihilate his power. Neither the fact, however, upon which the present 
reasoning proceeds (that is to say, the actual augmentation of the corps), 
nor the still more important one of the annexation of Kummum-mait* the 
already enormous territorial assignments held by Raymond is sufficiently 
established to permit of our building any strong conclusions upon one 
or the other. It may, nevertheless, be allowable to observe in this place, 
that there will be but too much ground for fearing, should either or both 
of the points in question turn out to be true that Azim ul Omra 
must have been moved to proceedings so offensive (as he well knows) to 
us, and so much at variance with his own. recent declarations, by a notion 
of the possibility, not to say probability, of the ‘“ French nation,” ac- 

uiring, at no distant period, decided ascendancy in India as well as in 

urope. There can be no doubt of the unceasing endeavours of the French 
party at Hyderabad to instil this notion into every one about that Court; 
and when it is considered that they have from 10,000 to 12,000 tongues, 
by means of which they can diffuse among 2 people, prone from the highest 
to the lowest, to believe the marvellous and striking, their true, false, or 
exaggerated.accounts of the successes and projects of their nation, it will 
not, perhaps, be wondered at that the efforts of the Residency to expose 
their misrepresentations, or counteract their views in them, should not 
always he suceessful. 

Question 3d —What is the present strength of the corps, the state of its 
discipline, and the number of European officers ? Of what nation is the 


* Alluded to in the notes. 


APPENDIX. 639 


majority of those officers composed? And what are the characters and prine 
ciples of those who bear the chief command. 

Answer.—With respect to its present strength the answer occurs (as far 
as circumstances enable me to furnish it with accuracy) in the preceding 
reply ; to which it seems only necessary to add that, besides a field train 
of artillery, consisting of about 30 pieces, and on the whole pretty well 
appointed ; there is attached to the corps a troop of perhaps 60 native 
dragoons (the embryo of a larger body of regular cavalry which Raymond 
manifests a desire of raising). With the exception of an European officer 
to each battalion or regiment (as it is most commonly called) and a sort of 
second to a few of them, all the other Earopeans, to the number I apprehend 
of about 50, constituted, at one time, a separate corps. They have lat- 
terly, however, either been stationed to the artillery, or distributed in the 
character of serjeants among the several regiments ; an alteration that I 
take to be an important improvement in his system. These men consist 
of various nations ; and among them there are, I am sorry to say, but too 
inany English deserters from the Company’s artillery, who have been often, 
but fruitlessly, reclaimed. The parade appearance of the corps is, in ge- 
neral, good; that of Perron’s regiment is particularly so. In other respects, 
however, its discipline would not seem to be very strict ; whiclr most pro- 
bably speaks as a powerful inducement with many of the natives of the 
Company’s as well as of the Nizam’s country, to prefer the service of 
Raymond to ours. Whatever may be the cause, it is too certain a fact, I 
fear, thet this Frenchman has greater facility in recruiting than our Car- 
natic officers experience. 

I believe the number of the officers, properly so called, de not at present, 
or did not lately, exceed 12; and that the whole of these are Frenchmen, 
with the exception, perhaps, of one or more jacobinized Germans. He 
had formerly a Hanoverian of some professional merit in his corps, who 
had been an ensign in His Majesty’s service. This man, however, was 
soon disinissed, and afterwards assassinated by a furious Demonah, in the 
employ of the Chief of the Pungahs. He had also with him at one time a 
French gentleman who had been an officer in the regiment at Pondicherry, 
but openly professing his attachment to royalty, he likewise speedily lost 
his situation, and was finally obliged to quit the country. The best dis- 
posed man in the corps is, or was some time since, one Salnave, come 
mandant of a regiment, and supposed to be secretly averse to the demo- 
cratic party. With the exception of Perron, Baptiste, and perhaps one or 
two more favourites, the oflicers were represented to be dissatisfied with 
Raymond on account of his hardness and want of liberality in pecuniary 
matters. But as they would nearly all appear to be of the jacobinical 
stamp, and have no prospect of bettering themselves elsewhere, this cir- 
cumstance alone will hardly induce any of them to leave him, especially as he 
has contrived to make it very difficult for them to do so without his consent. 
Besides, he possesses a resource (such as it is), for replacing any he may 
lose by desertion or otherwise in his rank of serjeants, most of whom are 
just as likely to be qualified for the commands of corps as the majority of 
those at present holding them. 

Raymond himself would not appear to be a man of vigorous mind ; or, 
in any respect, of a-very decided character. He has never shown himself to 
be much of a soldier ; hut he is artful, seems to have an arranging head, 
and is sufficiently conciliating iv his manner towards those he has to deal 
with, He is an undoubted republican in principle ; but I don’t know that 
he is a violent one. I should rather suppose from the general mould of 
his character, that he was not. I take him to be about forty-five years of 
age. 

Perron, who is his second, is a native of Alsace, and several years 


640 APPENDIX. 


younger than his Chief. He appears to bea far more enterprising and 
active man than the latter, and to be particularly fond of the military pro- 
fession. I understand he is an outrageous Jacobin; as some proof of 
which it may be mentioned that he sent, not long since, to his namesake 
and countryman, the successor of Du Boigne, in the service of Scindeah, a 
silver tree and cap of liberty; the acceptance of which, however, is said to 
have been declined by the latter. Perron, at the head of two regiments, 
was with Azim ul Omra during the latter part of that minister’s stay at 
Poonah; on which occasion he would, of course, not neglect to cultivate 
his namesake, or to disseminate his own principles as well as he could 
among the officers belonging to him. It happens, however, either that 
Scindeah’s Perron is lukewarm in his politics, or that having several Bri- 
tish subjects in his corps (introduced into it by Du Boigne), one of whom, 
named Sutherland, commands a brigade of six or seven battalions ; he does 
not yet consider it safe or prudent to countenance any movements of this 
nature. - 

Baptiste, who stands next in rank to, is not a less bitter Jacobin than, 
Perron ; but he is very much his inferior in point of military endowments, 
What he wants, however, asa soldier is made up for by a certain gasconad- 
ing manner that suits very well the genius of the Court he belongs to, by 
great activity and cunning, and above all, by a large stock of that unprin- 
cipled sort of addresss so useful in the management of low intrigue, and 
the conduct of. pecuniary transactions with the classes he has usually to 
deal with. He is also eminently and peculiarly serviceable to Raymond as 
the main link of his correspondence with Pondicherry, ‘Tranquebar, and 
Marpilly; and as his agent for enticing French and other deserters, both 
native and European, and facilitating their escape to Khummum ; where, 
just at our doors, as may be said, this bustling emissary of seduction, and 
procurator of all materiaksupplies any way connected with, or depending on 
the Carnatic, has ‘established hisdhead quarters. I consider both Perron and 
Baptiste as much abjer men, that-isymore equal to the purposes of mischief 
or such purposes as the Frénch.Gévernment maybe supposed to machinate 
against us in the Hyderabad question—than Raymond; and should accord- 
ingly be sorry to see his command devolve Omeither of them. 

have nothing to add respecting the characters or dispositions of any of 
‘the rest of the officers of this corps to what has already been said generally 
of the whole,—at Jeast not of sufficient interest or certainty to merit 
attention. 

Question 4th.—In what mode is the corps paid and recruited? Of what 
natien are the ranks composed ?—-Where is it stationed? What have been 
its operations? What effects has its existence already produced upon. the 
British interests at the Court of Hyderabad or elsewhere? And what 
dangers are to be apprehended to those interests froma its continuance? 

Answer. —Tiil the period of Azim ul Omra’s captivity the corps had al- 
ways been paid either immediately from the treasury at Hyderabad, or by 
occasional cunkhaws, on the revenue collectors, with the exception only of 
@ permanent assignment, on the revenues of Khummum. proper, which he 
had previously obtained as a fund for the payment of a particular division 
of his corps, nongivally distinguished by the appellation of Solyman Jak’s 
Rissaleh. During the administration, however, of the Roy Reyan, he con- 
trived to procure.on a still better footing the whole Sirear of Maiduck, a 
fertile district, computed to yield about 18 lacks of rupees; and fully ade- 

uate, I believe, to the tota charges of bis corps, as fixed by agreement. 
~This was among the financial arrangements of the Roy Royan in the ab- 
sence of Azim ul Omra that appeared to give the latter the most displea- 
sure, as placing the corps in a higher and more independent view than it 
had hitherto been his own policy to assign to it. We have nevertheless 


APPENDIX. 64:1 


since heard of his being prepared to foltow the example of the Roy Royan 
in this particular, by granting to Raymond another extensive district, 
(namely, Khummum-mait), in addition to what he already held. 

The corps is recruited more or less from all the provinces of the Nizam’s 
dominions, but from none so much as Aurungabad ; partly, I believe, from 
the adjacent Mahratta districts ; and but in too great a measure from the de- 
pendencies of the Carnatic, particularly the northern sircars. The majo- 
rity of the native officers would, more especially, appear to be natives of 
the latter ; and of these a large proportion have been educated in the mi- 
litary service of the Company. Lhad taken some measures before my de- 
parture from Hyderabad for ascertaining, as well as possible, the names. 
and birth-places of all the men of this corps, but in particular of its native 
officers, with the view of thereby obtaining some hold, through the me- 
dium of their families, on such as might prove te belong to the Company’s 
dominions. It may be observed in this place that the pay of the coast 
sepoy in garrison, or cantonment, is less by a rupee (I believe) than that 
of Raymond’s sepoy, whose duty too is easier. If it were raised a rupee, 
the effect would, probably, soon appear both in the decrease of desertion, 
and in a greater facility of recruiting than is experienced at present. A 
proclamation too might be issued, forbidding the natives of our territories, 
under certain penalties, from entering into the military service of foreign 
powers. ; 

The station of the corps has varied according to circumstances, Ray- 
mond seems averse (and several reasons for this may be conceived) to its 
being divided ; and its usual head-quarters are in the vicinity of Hydera- 
bad, where he has established a sort of cantenment for it. Its professional 
services have hitherto been very inconsiderable. Ihave already glanced 
ai those performed by what may be called the root of it, in conjunction 
with one detachment last war ; and which principally appeared in the siege 
of Kopul. At Khurdlah (in 1795) the corps careainly gathered no laurels ; 
but if it did not acquit itself on that occasion with spirit, the Nizam him- 
self, as well as his Minister displayed still less. The rebellion of Rachore, 
headed by the late Darah Jah’s son, was subdued by our detachment; for 
tworegiments of Raymond employed on that service, under the command 
of the Mons. Salnave, mentioned above, had but little share in the business. 
In the insurrection of the late Jah, it happened fortunately for Raymond, 
that the Prince directed his flight to a quarter whither he could not be pur- 
sued by our troops without the consent of the Mahrattas. Rapnione, by 
simply following him to durungahad, where the Prince submitted without 
further struggle, ucquired the credit of having crushed a formidable con- 
spiracy. The military actions of neither party in the course of this short 
contest, were of the least importance. For the rest, the services of the 
corps have heen much of the nature of those performed elsewhere by 
Sebundy or Purgunoah troops. 

The principal effects hitherto produced, or likely hereafter to be pro- 
duced by this corps upon the British interests, are referable to the cir- 

eumstance of its being commanded by men belonging to a nation, and very 
pokey devoted to a Government, which we have abundant reasons to 
believe have nothing so much at heart as the destruction of our power in 
India. It cannot, | am persuaded be requisite to enlarge on the dangers 
liable to proceed from suchasource ; or to expatiate either on the probable 
or possible consequences of so constant, intimate, and unrestrained an in- 
- tereourse as must necessarily subsist, in the case before us, between the 
agents of Jacobinism and under the implacable enemies of Great Britain, 
and the Court of one of our principal allies—that Court too never distin- 
gushed for the inviolability of its engagements; and certainly governed 
ess by views of honour, sound policy or justice, than by the variable ino- 


vo. ‘ 27 


612 APPENDIX. 


tives of supposed safety, of low prudence, of personal ease, and of im- 
mediate advantage. It is plain that so close and mutual a relation between 
the Nizam and the notorious rivals of the English, is but -too well calcu- 
lated, in the present conjuncture, to excite doubts in many of the sincerity 
of his Highness’s friendship for us, and to encourage a notion of the pro 
bability of the French regaining their former ascendancy at Hyderabad. 
Nor is the natural tendency of such a persuasion to promote the purposes 
and aid the operations of Raymond, by gaining him many: useful in- 
struments and adherents, so litthe obvious as to need being further in- 
sisted on. : : ' 

There is, however, one particular danger connected with the point imme- 
diately under discussion, of such an aspect as to challenge the most serious 
consideration. What 1 allude to is the predicament we should be placed in, 
supposing a war with Tippoo to break out, by the unquestionably hostile 
dispositions of Raymond and his officers in general, seconded by the enter- 
prising spirit of some individuals among them, which might in such a case,, 
become more or less transfused into the Commander himself. Jt is manifest 
that though this corps canstitutes the chief—nay, almost the sole strength 
of the Nizam’s army, we should, notwithstanding, be unable to employ it 
against the common enemy, except at a risk, to which its total inactivity 
would be far preferable. But it is likewise obvious that we should not be 
altogether safe in leaving it behind us ; since upon ou sinister accident to 
our arms, or in the possible (happily no longer probable) event ofga French 
armement appearing at such a crisis in India, the temptation todtaymond 
and his officers, openly to attempt something against us, might begome very 
powerful. If time permitted, yet it would not perhaps be necessary to 
pursue this consideration further; the bare mention of the mattog seeming 
sufficient to suggest the whole train of its consequences. Whether the evil 
admits of any eligible remedy, short of the radical one of entirely annihi- 
lating the corps in question, is a point on which different opinions may be 
entertained. My own, however, is, that under the existing circygnstances 
with respect to us and France—circumstances, too, to the continuance of 
which no period can be assigned»-it doesnot. Another prejudicial effect of this 
corps upon our interests, and which, though not of the same political im. 
portance as the one just noticed is, nevertheless, of sufficient magnitude to 
claim attention, has already been touched on, and consists in the induce- 
ments it holds out to our European and native soldiery on the coast, and in 
general to those classes of the inhabitants inclined toa military life, to join 
its standard ; giving birth by this means, to numerous desertions trom the 
Company’s army, and rendering it extremely diflicult to raise recruits fon 
supplying even the ordinary casualities of theservice. This is a mischief 
that, no doubt, might be corrected in a material degree, as far ageregarded 
Europeans particularly, by suitable arrangements of precautionand vigi- 
lance ; while, with respect to the natives, some augmentation ef the Se- 
poy’s.pay, followed by such a proclamation as before suggested, avould be 
found a still more effectual remedy. The evil, however, can never, per- 
haps, be completely removed while we have such a neighbouras Ray- 
mond. rat 

- ek theta fall ng a a tee F » 


ose : Pag : . A t t 
Additional Questions—to bé inserted (with their answers) in the proper places 
among the original ones. ' 


“y 
Question 5th.—Have you any reason for believing that Raymond is in 
correspondence with the French Government in Europe, or that of the Isle 
of France—or with Tippoo Sultaun? 
Answer —I have no yery substantial proof of his being ip.correspopd- 
Bary ; 


, 


APPENDIX. 643 


-ence either with the Government of France, or with that of the Mauritius ; 
though whispers to this effect have reached me from his camp. The 
strongest circumstance I know of, indicating such an intercourse, is his hav- 
-ing fired a salute about two years ago on occasion, as was at least given out 
in his party, and reported to me by one of them, of his having recently 
received the commission and uniform of a general officer from the French 
Government in Europe. ConSidering, indeed, the great activity of that 
Government—the obvious interest it has in attaching Raymond to its 
cause--and the dispositions of the latter and his officers, nothing certainly 
can be more reasonable than to suppose such an intercourse subsists be- 
tween them. : 

The proofs of the existence of a correspondence between Raymond and 
Tippoo Sultaun will, perhaps, be deemed less vague, when one of these is 
stated to be the discovery, a few months ago, by the Assistant at Hyderabad, 
of a secret intercourse between him and the vakeel of the latter (Medina 
Saheb) residing at the Nizam’s Court. It was conducted through the me- 
dium of a third person who, it is remarkable, disappeared immediately 
after his name had been confidentially communicated to Azim ul Omrah by 
Captain Kirkpatrick. 

t is also a fact sufficiently well established, that the last secret agent 
deputed by Tippoo to Hyderabad, (namely, Kadir Hdsain Khan)had charge 
of some letters for Raymond; but whether they were from the Sultaun 

‘himself or only from Vigee’s (formerly ‘Lally’s) corps in the service of 
Tippoo, Thad not the means of ascertaining. sais 

Question 6th.— Does Raymond occupy any fortified posts either on the 
Company’s frontier, or elsewhere? and if he does, what is their strength 
and garrisons ; and what are the advantages he derives, or disadvantages 
we suffer, from his possession of them? 

Answer.—He occupies two or three small forts in the district of Maiduck, 
of which, as has been already mentioned, he is in some sort the renter, 
They are, however, of but little importance in a military view; and are 
in a quarter remote from the Carnatic. 

The only post he holds in our neighbourhood is Khummum, where Bup- 
tiste (otherwise Yalihard) has commanded for several years ; and where a 
regiment of the corps has usually been stationed. The fortifications are 
not, [believe, considerable, but they have been improved, I understand, by- 
Baptiste. It serves Raymond as a magazine; the stores he from time to 
time procures from the Carnatic, being in the first instance deposited here, _ 
and forwarded, as occasion requires, to Hyderabad. It is also conven- 
iently situated for communication with Narpilly (formerly a French post in 
the Guntoor) where Raymond has a store-house, (ostensibly belonging to 
‘the Nizam) in charge of a Frenchman of the name of Z’Empreur. This 
is also the point whence Baptiste’s emissaries issue for the purpose of in- 
veigling deserters, and procuring recruits from the adjacent districts of 
Ongole, Guntoor, &c. It is likewise the principal link in Raymond’s com- 
munication with Pondicherry ; most of his messengers to and from thence; 
all the French fugitives, and many recruits obtained in the same quarter, 
pursuing the route by Aurpal and Khummum. 

.. It is presumed that this hasty sketch of the advantages which Raymond 
derives from the possession of this post, will sufficiently show the detri- 
ment it is of, and may be to us. 

. Question 7th.—What measures have been suggested for the purpose 
of inducing the Nizam to disband this corps, and what have been the ob- 
jections to the adoption of any measures suggested for that purpose? 

Answer. —1 suggested some time in 1795, in a private correspondence 
with the Governor-General and Lord Hobart, under sufficient encourage- 
ment to that end received from the Nizam, through the medium of Meer 


644 APPENDIX. 


Allum, the.expedieney of introducing some select British subjects into his 
Highness’semploy, for the purpose of raising and disciplining for his services 
such a body of troops as would, in the first instance, have served as a coun- 
terpoise to the corps of Raymond; and, perhaps, ultimately have led, by 
gradual reforms, to its complete reduction. At the same time that I started 
this idea, I fully admitted the mischievous tendency, in an absolute view, of 
the general measure ; offering it simply iv ¢errection of an evil that already 
reached to an enormous height, that bore, for obvious reasons, a particu- 
larly threatening aspect at Hyderabad : that called for a speedy remedy in 
that, more pressing than in any other quarter ; and that did not admit, as 
well as I could judge, either of a prompter or more certain one than that 
‘which I, or rather Meer Allum, (not to say the Nizam himself) had recom- 
mended. The Governor-General seemed to be sensible of the necessity of 
the experiment ; and even to have fixed, at one time, upon a person every 
way qualified, 1 believe, for conducting it to a favourable issue. In the 
meanwhile, however, Lord Hobart declared himself to be decidedly averse 
to the measure ; insomuch, that I thought it would be no longer easy or 
prudent to pursue it. Here then it dropped for the present. 

I cannot call to mind, at this time, the particular arguments publict 
opposed by Lord Hobart to the measure ; but, I recollect that-1 myself 
furnished him with the objection that had all along appeared to me (though 
with him it was only of secondary consideration) to be the most forcible of 
the whole; and that was the efoase it might possibly give to the Mahrat- 
tas. Yet, neither was this an insuperable obstacle, since the circumstance 
of there being several British subjects in the service of the Mahrattas them- 
selves, would have furnished (if the affairs had been conducted as 1 pro- 
posed) a sufficient answer to any dissatisfaction they might have manifested 
on the occasion. os 

But though I cannot detail Lord Hobart’s reasoning on the subject, I 
have not forgotten, that it comprehended all the topics obviously adverse to 
such a question considered absolutely ; and that though he did n@t, in my 
judgment, demonstrate the inexpediency of the thing, as an ihsulated 
measure, yet he abundantly proved its danger, as a general one :*f which 
truth no person indeed could be better satisfied than 1 myself had always 
been. 

The Governor-General continuing to deem it extremely ackirable to 
oppose the best check that-cireumstances might admit of to thetgrowing 
power of Raymond, (which, indeed, daily became more and more @larming) 
thought proper to authorise the resident at Poonah to promote, but with 
due precaution, the introduction into Azim ul Oura’s (or rather the Ni- 
zam’s) service, of certain Europeans at that place, who appeared disposed 
to engage in it, and to be of a description likely to answer as some sort of 
counterpoise to that Frenchman. The consequence was, that an American 
named Boyd, and a British subject of the name of Finglass,“ were en- 
tertained by the Minister ; the former bringing with him a ready-formed 
and experienced corps of about 1500 men; but the fatter only a small 
body, which it was settled should be (as it since, I believe, has been) consi- 
derably augmented Mutual disgust, however, soon arising bétween Mr. 
Boyd and the Court of Hyderabad, he quitted the service. Mr. Finglass 
proving more tractable, appears to be rising in favour with the Ministry.— 

am not qualified to speak from my own Knowledge of this man’s but Mr. 

Uthoff, the assistant at Poonah, has reported favourably of his‘character. 

He was formerly, I think, quarter-master of his Majesty’s 19th regiment 

of dragoons. 

It may not be amiss to mention in this place, that on occasionof an alarm 
somewhat hastily taken, in August last, by our detachment at Hyderabad, 

« jn consequence of a report of Raymond’s designing to attack their camp 


APPENDIX. 645 


both Mr. Boyd and Mr. Finglass, on being apprised of the circumstance, 
instantly prepared their corps, and signified their determination, in the 
ened event, of supporting the Company’s troops. 

shall close this head with remarking, that if a fair trial of the project 
suggested (as above related) in 1795, had been made, I think there is a 
considerable probability that Raymond’s would by this time, either have 
ceased to exist, or, at least, to be an object of the reasonable solicitude 
which it excites at present. 

Question 8th.—What measures now appear to you to be the best adapted 
tothe object of inducing the Nizam to disband this corps? 

Answer.—The pressing importance to the British interests in India, of 
effecting (and with as little further delay, too, as possible) the subversion 
of this party, though a point only incidentally considered in the preced- 
ing pages, and by no means any where urged with the force of which it is 
susceptible, may be presumed (as it is, indeed, by the question supposed) 
to be fully established. It only remains then to enquire how this desirable 
object may be best attained. 

he most attentive examination I have been able to bestow on the sub- 
ject, has suggested to me nothing better than the four following modes of 
proceeding. : 
1.—By introducing, with every possible previous attention to their cha- 
racters and principles, British subjects (or other Europeans, being the 
subjects of friendly powers)into the service of his Highness, with a view in 
the first instance, to balancing the French corps, and of ultimately, com- 
pletely suppressing it. 

2.— By pointedly and firmly demanding the dismission of the corps, and 
signifying the determination of ourGovernment to withdraw itself, in case 
of refusal, from its existing engagements with his Highness. 

3.—By holding out suitable inducements to the Enropean and principal 
native officers, as well as to the European serjeants of the corps to quit it, 
and retire into the Company’s dominions: a measure which, if tolerably 
successful, would necessarily either bring about the entire dissolution of it, 
or at least, reduce it to a state of comparative insignificance. 

4.—By meeting the wishes so often expressed by the Nizam’s Govern- 
ment, for a closer connexion with the Company ; and for such an augmen- 
tation of the detachment of our troops already allowed his Highness by 
treaty, as should insome measure preclude the necessity of retaining Ray- 
mond’s corps 

Ishall consider each of these expedients in order. 

lst —Regarding the first of them, however, little remains to be said, 
the subject heing nearly exhausted in the reply to query the 7th._—It would, 
no doubt, under present circumstances, although a foundation for it is al- 
ready laid by the establishment of Finglass’s corps, be of slow operation. — 
Besides the inclination of Azim ul Omra to countenance the measure far- 
ther, is at least uncertain. He may possibly imagine that by manifesting a 
backwardness in this respect, we may be the more readily induced to do 
what be would like still better—thac is, augment our detachment and take 
off some of the restrictions under which it has hitherto acted. It may be 
added, that the Government at home, having thought proper to discourage 
the measure immediately under consideration, (though on what grounds is 
not known to ne) it is the Jess necessary to enlarge on it at present. 

2nd. With the exception of che Peishcush, which, perhaps, no circuin- 
stance short of an open rupture with the Nizam, would warrant our with- 
holding, there seems nothing in the measure suggested in this article that 
might not be vindicated both to the world at large and to the other nem- 
ber of the triple alliance (or the Mahratta state), by a variety of forcible 
arguments deducible from the absolute impossibility of our ever acting to- 


646 APPENDIX. 


gether, under any critical state of things, with the confidence and concord 

necessary to the success of our joint operations, or even with entire safety 

to ourselves, composed as his Highness’s principal military force virtually 

is, and swayed as his councils are, or may be, by the inveterate enemies of 
our nation. But however defensible, or reconcileable with the spirit of 
treaties, such a step might be, I very much doubt whether it would at any 
time, and especially in the present conjuncture, produce the desired effect. 
The proud spirit of this court (still proud under its recent humiliations), 
would revolt at such a capitulation ; and, most probably, hazard much ra- 
ther than subscribe to it. It would talk, as it has already done, more than. 
once, on occasion of some temperate and distant expostulations on the 
same head, of its independence ; of its right to employ and favour whom it. 
pleases ; of its reliance on the fidelity and attachment of its French ser- 
vants ; and of the unreasonableness of our entertaining any distrust of men 

entirely at the devotion, and the mere ereatures, of a friendly power, hav- 
ing no interests but what are inseparable from ours. But these arguments,, 
plausible as they are, do not constitute the sole, or perhaps principal diffi- 
eulty in the present case. One of the consé¢quences of Raymond’s corps 
(and besides Raymond’s corps there is another cunsisting of from twelve 
to fifteen hundred sepoys, commanded also by Frenchmen, attached to the 
Rissalah of Umjid ud Dowlah)*, has been a material reduction of every’ 
other description of military force ; insomuch that, excepting the regular 
infantry of the state, it has few other troops of any estimation. Were it 
then to comply with the proposed demand, it would be left without suffi- 
cient means not only of defending itself against foreign attack and domes- 
tic insurrection, but of collecting its revenues ; for it is not to be supposed 
that our small detachment would be adequate, even if there subsisted no. 
objections to its being applied, to all these purposes. ‘The experiment 
failing (as I am of opinion it almost necessarily must), and we following up 
our provisional resolution in that case, the consequence, it is natural to 
suppose, would very soon be a closer connexion than ever, if that should 
be practicable, between this court and the French; and at all events, such 
an understanding with Tippoo as would hardly fail to give him that ascen-, 
dancy in its councils which he has long been endeavouring (more sedu- 
lously than artfully, perhaps,) to acquire. 

It way be thought that the abominable tendency of French principles, 
(in whatever view considered,) and the evil consequences which have re- 
sulted to almost every power that that nation has drawn intoits alliance, if 
properly exposed and illustrated, ought to have the effect of exciting, at 
the different courts of India such a detestation of the one, and dread of the 
other, as to render any connexion between them next to impossible. But 
though these are topics which have not been neglected; and though they 
doubtlessly seem well calculated to produce the sort of impressions to be 
wished for, yet it would be wrong to place any great reliance in considera- 
tions which unfortunately have not always had the weight they were enti- 
tled to with European powers better qualified, in general, to appreciate 
their force (as being more conversant in systematic and prospective poli- 
ties,) more immediately liable to suffer from a coalition with the new re-~ 
public; and, finally, more interested to oppose its aggrandizement, than 
any of the princes or, states of Judia can be. It is true, that a French con- 
nexion would be dangerous ever? to Tippoo Sultaun; but remote and spe- 
culaive danger is often overlocked in favour of immediate, and, perhaps, 
only apparent, benefit: With regard to the court of Hyderabad in particu, 
Jar, J may venture to say, that its political views hardly ever embrace a very 
distant period, or any combinations having the permanent advautage of the 
state for their object. ; 
* The principal Pungah Chief. 


APPENDIX. 647 


I have dwelt the longer on the consideration of the expedient suggested 
in the present article (from the subject of which, however, the whole of the 
prevrne paragraph must be owned to be a digression,) because I appre- 
hend there may be seme persons capable of imagining our political posi- 
tion in India, as ascertained at the peace of Seringapatam, to be so com. 
manding as to enable us to carry a point of this kind with little or no diffi- 
culty. No doubt we were placed by that event, or rather by the political 
sagacity and military skill which conduced to it, on higher and more re- 
spectable grounds than we had ever before occupied in India ; but we shall, 
nevertheless, do well always to bear in mind, that it is. an envied eminence 
we stand on; and to beware how we forfeit or hazard, by a domineering 
spirit, what a spirit of moderation so much contributed to our gaining. 

Before we dismiss the consideration of the measure suggested in this 
article, it may be proper to notice a modification of which it may be thought 
susceptible, and which presents itself in a limitation of its operation ¢o ¢he 
European part of the corps, and an offer of replacing this immediately by 
British subjects. But though the main obstacle to the measure, namely, 
that of depriving the state of its principal military force, would by this 
means be got rid of ; yet it would, at the same time, become liable to much 
of the objection lving against the first expedient ; from which it would not 
then materially differ in the chief feature. 

3rd. I shall confine myself to observing with regard to the suggestion 
contained in this article, that although I have little doubt of the general 
efficacy of the measure, yet its adoption would not seem to be warrantable 
or prudent in.any other cases than those of an absolute rupture with the 
Nizam, or of some strong and open act of hostility on the part of Raymond 
himself. Such cases have, in some degree, been secretly provided for, but 
not to the extent that would, probably, be requisite. For though a simple 
pecuniary douceur might answer in some instances, yet in others it might 
be necessary to hold out something like a permanent provision, if not even 
employment. 

4th. It has long been a favourite object with the court of Hyderabad to 
make the defensive engagements, subsisting between it and the Company, 
general instead of particular ; or, in other words, that we should guarantee 
its possessions against the Makrattas, as well as Tippoo Sultaun. 1t has also 
long sought to prevail on us to relax from the strictness of that article of 
the agreement of 1789 with Lord Cornwallis, conformably to which we 
have always, not only restrained our detachment from acting against cer- 
tain polygars, tributary to the Mahrattas as well as to the Nizam, but also 
carefully prevented it from passing the Mahratta boundaries whenever this 
has appeared necessary (as owing to the mingled nature of their respective 
dominions, has sometimes happened,) in order to reaching the point where 
its services were required. Such, for instance, was its situation towards 
the close of the rebellion of Ali Jah, whoin it was obliged to decline pursu- 
ing to Aurungabad, because this could not be done without its occasionally 
entering the Mahratta territory; and because the court of Hyderabad 
either would not apply for, or could not obtain, the consent of the Poonah 
Government for that purpose. ; 

By complying with the wishes of the Nizam’s Ministers in these re- 
-‘spects, and agreeing to such an augmentation of the detachment at present 
employed with his Highness, as might be judged necessary, there is little 
doubt but we should obtain our object with regard to Raymond to whatever 
extent we pleased : to say nothing of other advantages that we might either 
expressly and previously stipulate for, or subsequently derive from the 
ascendancy which we should in this case, acquire at the court of Hyder- 
Abad. ; 

Perhaps even something short of these compliances might procure us 


- 


648 : APPENDIX. 


our main object. But as perfect confidence is not likely to subsist for any 
long time together between the courts of Hyderabad and Poonah, and as 
apprehensions of future encroachments by the latter will ever continue, 
most probably, to be entertained hy the former, who, on this account, will 
always deem it necessary to be prepared for such a contingency, it may be 
presumed that it will scarcely consent to part with Raymond’s corps, with- 
out our undertaking, in some shape or other, if not by express defensive 
engagements, to secure it against that danger. It would be to no purpose, 
as to this particular, that we replaced that corps hy an adequate body of 
our own troops, if those troops, in case of an invasion of his Highnes¢’s 
territories by the Mahrattas, should not be at liberty to assist in repelling 
it; which, however, is the predicament that our detachment stood in dur- 
ing the late contest between these two powers. 

There is, probably, one point at least that Azim ul Omra would consi- 
der as an indispensable condition in such an arrangement as we are now 
contemplating, though he were even to wave insisting on a generaldefensive 
alliance against the Mahrattas ; and that is a positive engagementto support 
the succession as it might be settled by the nomination of the Nizam (or, in 
other words, by himself,) against aJl opponents whatsoever. Now gnch an 
engagement might beppes to place us in opposition to the Mahrattas, 
who, upon the Nizam’s death, might be disposed to favour some other Pre- 
tender to the Musnud; and, persisting to maintain his cause, make it ex- 
tremely difficult, if not impossible, for us to avoid a war with them. Here 
is an impediment that deserves to be well considered, and weighed against 
the advantages of the measure immediately in question. , 

In regard to the restrictions under which our detachment has hitherto 
served, I am of dpe that without their being removed, no body of 
troops that we might supply to replace Raymond’s corps would compensate, 
to the Nizam for its loss, since while they continue, they must operate, as 
hitherto, to deprive hiw of its services in cases, perhaps, of the first im- 
portance in his estiination. Besides, though these restrictions were pro- 
perly enough established by us, yet they are considered, and sot entirely 
without reason, as great hardships by the court of Hyderabad, between 
which and the Government of Poonah there subsists a sort of tacit con- 
vention, whereby the forces of his Highness have not only occasionally 
passed through the other’s territories, but even acted against the Polygars 
tributary to hoth states (as those of Shorepoor and Gudwaul,) without any 
visible objection on the part of the Mahrattas. We certainly eould not 
now relax from the rigidness of our praetice in these particulars without 
giving offence, and furnishing a just ground of cumplaint, to the Govern- 
ment of Poonah; but, on the other hand the peculiar nature of the case 
would appear to warrent a hope that the difficulty might be surmounted 
by means of a suitable representation to the court of Poonah, made in con- 
cert with that of Hyderabad. 

But however practicable it should be to obtain the acquiescence of the 
Mabrattas in these points, or with whatever indifference they might view 
even our determination to interfere in the settlement of the succession to 
the Musnud of Hyderabad, it can scarcely be doubted that such an exten- 
sion of dutsdefensive engagements with the Nizam, and such an augmenta- 
tion of our detachment serving with him as above spoken of, would excite 
in them considerable jealousy and alarm. The consequences to which 
sentiments of this kind might lead are not difficult to conceive; and 
though they are not, perhaps, inevitable, yet in measuring the advantages 
against the disadvantages of the proceeding under discussion, it may be 
right (and will, at least, be the safest way,) to take these last in the ex- 
treme. And here it is proper I should acknowledge my own incompetency, 
and the superior means of the Residency at Puonah to appreciate, with 


APPENDIX. 649 


due exactness and greater certainty, the extent of the effects capable of be- 
ing, or likely to be, preduced on the Mahratta Governmeut by the different 
measures in question. That Residency also will be best able to ascertain 
how far, and to suggest in what manner, it may be possible to reconcile it 
to those measures. On this last head J shall, for my own part, only ven- 
ture to hint, that perhaps an offer to admit it to a participation of any 
vantages granted to the court of Hyderabad, might conduce to remove its 
objections to the arrangement; and that though the Mahrattas are not 
likely ever to stand in need either of our troops, or our guarantee against 
the Nizam, yet they might not be unwilling to accede to the projected 
Treaty with his Highness, on condition of our agreeing to a defensive alli- 
ance with them against Zemaun Shah and the Seiks, which it may sooner 
or later be advisable for us to do with other views besides that of propitiat- 
ing them in regard to the objects of the present enquiry. 

In conclusion, and on an attentive review of all that Lee been advanced, 
I have no hesitation in declaring it to be my opinion that of the four dif- 
ferent modes which have been suggested for arriving at our object with re~ 
gard to the corps of Raymond, the one calculated to accomplish it with the 
most promptitude and efficacy, and the least liable to failure, is the fourth 
or last. It must at the same time be- confessed, that owing partly to a 
certain unaccommodating and illiberal spirit in the Government, and partly 
to the generally disordered state of its finances, our present detachment 
suffers inconveniences on the score sometimes of pay and at others of pro- 
visions, that would, as well as the unpleasant expostulations and discus- 
sions to which they occasionally give rise, be but too likely to increase with 
any considerable augmentation of its numbers. The most effectual way 
of Bere iy these difficulties under a new arrangement would probably 
be by procuring the assignment of one or more districts known to be ade- 
quate in point of revenue to the discharge of the subsidy ; and, in their 
other resources, to supplying the remaining wants of the troops. Kurpah 
alone, if not entirely, would yet, in a great measure, particularly well an- 
swer these purposes; at the same time that our possession of it would, on 
account. of its local position with regard to the north-eastern parts of 
Tippoo Sultaun’s dominions, add considerably to the security of the Car- 
natic, and especially of the Sirears. Whether the jealousy and discontent 
which that Prince would no doubt conceive at our gaining even a footing 
of so limited a nature in Kurpah ought to make us wave so great an advan- 
tage, is a point for the consideration of others. 

It would likewise, in the event of such a connection between us and the 
Court of Hyderabad as the one-in contemplation, particularly behove us to 
_be on our guard against the arts which the latter might be but too apt to 
practise for the purpose of provoking an attack from the Mahrattas, and 
with the secret view of prosecuting in that case, by our means, some pro- 
ject of resentment or aggrandisement. . 

Tue only remaining precaution that occurs to me as particularly neces- 
sary to be taken in case ofa material augmentation of our troeps at Hyder- 
abad, respects the selection of not only their commander, but of all the 
principal officers ; in whom it would be desirable, for obvious reasons, that 
temperate and conciliatory manners, a just solicitude for the maintenance 
of the national character, together with a competent knowledge of the 
customs and language of the country, should be joined to the qualifications 
more properly professional. 


650 APPENDIX. 


Notes to the Answers. 


Page 639, Pungah, in its more restrained sense, signifies cavalry mounted on 
horses, the property of the Sircar; and is equivalent to what we call the siadle- 
horse ef Tippoo Sultaun. At the Court of Hyderabad, however, it has come to be 
applied more generally, being used there to denote what may otherwise be called 
the household or body guards, comprehending foot as wellas horse; and the com- 
manders of which have been commonly distinguished by the appellation of Pungah 
Salah Sirdars. By the Pungeh party is meant that political division among the 
Omras of this state, headed by the chiefs of the Paugah. It was established by the 
late Shums wi Orra, principal commander of these treops, and sometimes called 
commander ia chief of the Nizam’s army. He had a great jealousy of the influence 
of Azim ul Omra, whem he-was much in the habit of opposing during his life-time. 
He died at Paangul early in the late war with Tippoo Sultaun, leaving an infant son 
on whom the Nizam eonferred the title of his father (or Shums ul Omray, as well 
as the principal command of the Pungah. But though this yeuth is, in consequence, 
strictly speaking, the chief of the Pungah, yet his maternal uncle and guardian, Umjid 
ud Dowlah, has hitherto been more usually considered as such. Next in rank of this 
party to Umjid ud Dowlah is Ghasimeea, who is likewise a kinsman of Shums ul 
Omra. The most efficient member of it however, till lately, was supposed to be 
Mahommed Azeen Khan, who aspired, as it was thought, to the station-of mi- 
nister ; but who is at present a state prisoner inthe fort of Golconda. This party 
continued its opposition to Azim ul Omra, after the death of the elder Shums ul 
Omra, and in fact were, in conjunction with Govind Kishen, the Mahratta Vakeel 
at the Nizam’s Court, the framers of the treaty of Khurdlah, which led to, jf it did 
not actually stipulate by a secret article, the surrender of the minister’$person. 
But the victory of the Pungah party in this instance was of short duration § for the 
Nizam had scarcely got back to Hyderabad when he discovered, or was gmade to 
believe, that his honour and interests had been basely sacrificed on that occasion. In 
consequence, the active members of the party soon fell into disgrace; but as Umjid 
ud Dowlah either was not considered as falling under this description, or was 
thought to have atoned for his past errors by his early separation from his col- 
leagues, he escaped their punishment. The credit of the party has since been 
rapidly on the decline, insomuch that it may be doubted whether it is any longer 
an object of solicitude te Azim ul Omra, though heretofore very much his dread. 


Page 639. That we must depend principally if not solely on our own arrange- 
ments for intercepting deserters, &c. from the Carnatic, will appear from’the an- 
swer once given to the resideft upon his complaining to the Nizam’s ayinisters, 

‘that his Highness’s Aumils and other officers did not duly exert themselves to pre- 
vent such persons from entering into or proceeding through their respective dis- 
tricts. *‘ If the more watchful and active officers of your Government (said they), 
cannot prevent deserters from passing through and escaping beyond theCompany’s 

‘country, it cannot be a matter of surprise that they should be able to elude the 
vigilance of our’s.” fa 


APPENDIX, 651 


APPENDIX B. 


Extract of a Letter from Jacob Bosanquet, Esq., Chairman of the. Court of 
Directors, to the Honourable Jonathan Duncan, Governor of Bombay, 
dated East India House, \st June, 1798. 


France is now fitting out a considerable fleet in the Mediterranean, the 
destination of which is unknown; amongst other objects, the conquest of 
Egypt has been mentioned, and though I do not think it very probable, 
either that the attempt will be made, or that it could succeed if it was, I 
think it is impossible for us to be too much upon our guard, as we know 
India to be one of the great objects to which the French at present are 
directing their attention. By every thing that I can collect, it appears 
that both the conquest of Egypt, and the conveyance of a force down the 
Red Sea, might be carried into execution by France under certain cir- 
cumstances, and therefore what is not impossible, ought always to be 
looked to with a certain degree of caution by prudent men. All I pro- 
pose by this letter is to call your attention to the subject, and to recom- 
mend you to neglect none of those precautions that you may think may 
reasonably be employed to frustrate any attempt of the French, either to 
pass a body of men to India surreptitiously, or by the more open mode 
of really taking possession of any part of Egypt. 


A true Extract. Jonaraan Duncan. 


APPENDIX C. 


An Abstract of the present State of Tippoo Sultaun. By Captain <subse- 
quently Sir John) Malcolm. 


In drawing up the Abstract I have neither time nor information to take 
a wide range, I shall therefore confine myself to a few principal points. 

The nature of the intelligence on which the knowledge of the Sultaun’s 
designs and actions is founded must create diffidence in any person who re- 
Jates them. J have made it a rule to assume no fact that is not minutely 
corroborated by two or more persons who were employed for the same pur- 
pose of obtaining intelligence, but who, frem circumstances must have 
been’wholly unacquainted both with the persons and occupation of each 
other. : 

I mean to arrange this abstract under three yeneral heads. 

Ist. The military force, which will include the fixed establishment. Their 
present strength, mode of payment, state of discipline, principal military 
officers, their characters, their estimation with Tippoo, garrisons, and their 
present state. 

2nd. The revenue department. State of his treasury, alterations of his 
mode of management, princicipal revenue officers, their characters and 
estimation. 

3rd. Late occurrences, present stations of troops, policy of the Sultaun, 
and reflections. 

Ist. Military Force. The fixed establishment of the Sultaun’s standing 
army is as follows :—Three Kutcherries of regular cavalry called Askars, 
each to consist of four Mokums, of 1000 horsemen each, amounting to 


652 APPENDIX. 


12,000. Three Kutcherries of irregular cavalry, called Suars, Sillabdars; 
indifferently each Kutcherrie to consist of four Aissalles, of 1,000 men each, 
12,000. Three Kutcherries of regular infantry, called Jiesh ; each Kut- 
cherrie consists of four Cushoons, of 4,000 firelocks and eight field pieces, 
two battering guns, and two came) lead of Rockets attached ; men 48,000, 
field pieces 128, and battering guns 32. One Kutcherrie of Slaves, to con- 
sist of two Cushoons, called Assudullah and Ahmedu, who are considered as 
the guards of the Sultaun, and generallv do fort duty ; 8,000 men, sixteen 
field pieces, and four battering guns. One Kutcherrie of pikemen, called 
Jelloo, that attend always the Sultaun’s person, 2,000. One Kutcherrie of 
pioneers, 8,000. A Kutcherrie of Carnatic peons, called Sooder, who are 
employed in collecting the revenues, and as garrisons to small forts, 8,000. 


Abstract of Established Force. 


ne ee re 

° ° . he : a oo 

it Dy Sp ~ ow S s 4 oo eS. 
dgles| 2 {sel 2 2 | 2/22) 34 
Falee| 4 | 3 é § [a2 | 86 
G3 

eO|1eOo| € |25}] A F< 


ee 


8,000| 8,000; 144 


| 
| 


8,000} 2,000 36 


Total 2,009 1,200 east 


About 500 have been lately entertained and though ddmitted on the 
strength, have not yet joined this corps, as both men and horses are yet 
training ; 300 of the horses were brought from Poonah, and 200 by ships 
to Mangalore. 

N. B. There are besides these many local corps of peons that are not 
included. 

N. B. Though no corps of Golendanzes, or. gunners, are stated in the 
above, they are supposed attached as well as gun lascars. 

N.B. Independent of the horse abovementioned, there are about 800 
Beyd or Looties, who follow the army, and whose occupation is plunder. 

he establishment has never been completed ; its present strength, from 
the best information I have may be reckoned as follows :—Regular horse, 
6,000; Irregular horse, 7,000; Regular infantry, 30,000. 

Guards, viz. Ahmasy and Assadulah, 4,000; pikemen, 1,500; pioneers, 

6,000; Carnatic peons, 8,000. 


Abstract of real Strength. 


oS . 

te 6 & me of M ) 
83 | 35 | BE | 2% G |eel & 
Bf | &2 se 2 gs 1 se} 8 
om tec] 3 a5 a £3 8 
= : ea, | 8 
Pi pm fe 5 & xz |o a 


Total ls 8,000,-| 7,060 |' $8,000 | 4,000}15,000) 8,000) 6,000 


N. B. I have not yet included battering guns, field pieces, or rockets, 
imagining he has at all times as many of these as he can transport, and also 
as many elephants, camels, and draught and carriage cattle as he ever can 
require ; he has with his army 100 mules, which are reported to be for his 
guns. 


APPENDIX. 653° 


Tippoo's European or French Force, as it is called, consists as follows :-— 
‘pp ap 


t 


| 28 

ra os Q°h 

3 36 os 

g | ZF | 3° 

a 

cd raat me 

Lally’s Party . : : 4 40 350 
Lately arrived from the Mauritius 6 50 100 
Total. 10 | 90 450 


Pay and the Mode of Payment. 


The mode of payment of the army differs as much as the troops do of 
which it is composed. 

The Askars or stable horse receive a monthly net* pay of twelve rupees. 
The horses are the property of the Circar, at whose expense the men 
are clothed and armed. 

The horses of the irregular cavalry belong either to the Commander or 
the horsemen, and the Circar pay a regular soctnly sum for each; 40 rps. 
a Hindoo horseman, and 45 toa Mahomedan. If a horse pelonsing to 
the irregular cavalry is killed on service, the Circarto pay a stated price, 
and half of all plunder is considered as the Circar right. : 

The Sultaun has lately ordered that the Jimmidars of the irregular 
horse should have lands (Jaidads) assigned them for payment in lieu of 
receiving cash from the Treasury. 

The regular infantry are divided into three classes, which receive a net 
pay as follows:—l1st+ class, 10 rupees per month; 2nd ditto 84 ditto ; 3rd 
ditto, 7 ditto. 

The Assoudullha and Ahmedu or guards, as | received 5 rupees 
per month; and were victualled by the Circar, but I am informed they 
now provide themselves and receive monthly 15 rupees. 

The pikemen per month, 10 rupees ; the Carnatic peons, 5 ditto ; the 
pioneers, 8 ditto; golandanzes,, 10 ditto; gun lascars, 7 ditto. 


4 

* I stile it net pay, because all the troops have a nominal pay, exceeding consi- 
derably what they actually receive, a circumstance which arises from the difference 
of exchange in the Circar payments, and in the Bazaar. 

t All these three classes meet in one kutcherrie, of which they compose. different 
bessallahs.—Between the two first, the difference of pay is made on account of the 
difference of size and appearance; they do similar duties. The third class are 
subordinates, put on all duties of fatigue, and into garrison, but never hardly 
brought into action. 


654 APPENDIX. 


Lally’s party are paid by contract. The Sultaun allows the Commandant, 
for each European horseman, 90 rupees per month; for each European 
foot soldier, 30 ditto ; for Caffries and half-cast, 20 ditto; for native Se- 
poys, 16 ditto; for a gun, 500 ditto; for anelephant, 12 pagodas ; for his 
own pay as Commandant, 2000 rupees. 

From this allowance, the Commandant is obliged to pay whatever officers 
he may have in his party, as also to purchase and feed horses for his ca- 
valry, and to find bullocks for his gun and to cloth and arm his party. 

N.B.—The troops do not receive their pay regularly, but are seldom 
more than four months in arrears. 

The Government benefits considerably by keeping the troops in arrears 
from an institution of the Sultaun’s, of a bank called Malek Towjar,* which 
is kept in camp by the servants of the Circar ; here cash is lent at high in- 
terest to the troups for orders on their arrears, by which interest and a 
double management of the exchange, a soldier is generally defrauded near 
one-sixth of his pay. 

The pay of the regular army is the same in the field and garrison, but 
their constitution supposes them always encamped. 


Discipline.—With regard to discipline, the chief attention of the Sultaun 
seems still directed to his \infantry. The regular cavalry exercise in bedy. 
They march regularly in file—form inline and charge. The irregular 
horse have no discipline whatever. The infantry are said to be much im- 
proved since last war. The golandanzes or artillery, are also kept in con- 

_ Stant practice. * 

The whole of his army is kept ina state of activity—movements are 
perpetual—and no kutcherrie or cushoon is ever allowed to remain more 
than two years and seldom so long in any station. 

The regular army are almost always in the field, except during the mon- 
soon, when it is cantoned, but seldom any part of it is putin garrison, ex- 
cept the guards, who do duty in Seringapatam. 


Principal Officers and Estimation.—The Sultaun employs his officers in a 
civiland military fine, as the occasion demands, but I shall in this place only 
mention those who may be deemed his chief military Commanders. 

The first is Meer Cummut u Deen, an officer of acknowledged bravery 
and ability—he is idolized by the army, and, therefore, an object of jea- 
lousy to the Sultaun, who is, however, sensible of his superior merit, and 
always employs him in cases of emergency. 

_ Reza Saheb, commonly called the Banky Nabob, a relation of the Sul- 
taun’s, and in high estimation. He has the character of being a brave officer, 
Oe is acknowledged impetuous and headstrong. He is about thirty years 
of age. # 

Mahomet Reza, son of Waken Khan, Nabob of Savenore—an officer 
of merit, and in favour with the Sultaun. 

Syd Ghotferyformerly Commandant in the Nabob’s service at Tanjore~ 
about 54 years of age—a man of great experience and bravery, in favour 
with the Sultaun. 

Meer Mohin u Deen, better known by the name of Syd Saheb—a miser 
and a coward, but an able manager, in which line he has been lately em- 
ployed, though he still holds high military command. He possesses the con- 
fidence of the Sultaun who is married to his daughter.t 

Foker u Deen and Meer Nazur Ali, are also Chiefs of estimation. 


_ * There is one of those Circar shops or Malek Toujar’s with every detachment. 
: + Who died about twelve days ago. 


* 


APPENDIX. 655 


Garrisons-—their State—The Sultaun has expended great sums in im- 
provements, or rather additions to the works of Seringapatam, on which 
he has been employed ever since the conclusion of the peace in 1792. 1 
cannot form any distinct idea of the nature of the works he is constructing 
—from what I have hitherto heard, one account says, he is carrying 
two walls round the fort, each of which is of much more strength and so- 
lidity than the old one, which is destroyed as the new work advances, but 
of which not one half is yet finished. 

Another states he is also occupied in cutting a broad deep ditch across 
the island, from the Deriah Daulet Bagh to the south branch of the river. 
There is to be a drawbridge over the ditch opposite to the east gate of the 
fort, and the only high-road to the fort to be over it. : 

It is highly probable that he will weaken instead of strengthen his 
capital, by multiplying unnecessary works, particularly as no account 
mentions their being under the direction of an European engineer. 

Bangalore and Ossore have both been destroyed. The former has not been 
so completety demolished as the latter. Many parts yet remaining entire, 
particularly the east gate and the lower parts of most of the rampatt, a 
circumstance which would seem to have originated more in the unskilful- 
ness of the miners than any design. 

Both Savendroog and Nemdydroog have been repaired and stored with 
provisions. The other garrisons remain much in their former state ; he has 
built a small fort and pettah close to Old Mysore. 

2nd. Revenue Department, state of Treasury.— Although it is generally 
reported among the nations that Tippoo has, by assessments on the inha- 
bitants of his remaining territories, repaired the breach that was made in 
his treasury at the peace of 1792. A moment’s reflection will shew the 
fallaciousness of this idea. Tippoo paid to the allies three crores and 
thirty lack, which is considerably more than two year’s revenue of the 
country left in his possession. He has had not only the current expences 
of his Government to defray, but to repair the ravages of war which may 
surely be calculated to have deprived him of at least six months nett reve- 
nue. Independent of this, he had to remount great part of his cavalry, 
and to purchase or make up both arms and stores to replace those that 
were destroyed or lost during the war. When to this we add the vast sums 
expended on the fortifications of Seringapatam, on which 6000 men have 
been at work for near six years, we cannot suppose his revenues, which 
do not amount to one and a half crore, have more than met his annual 
expenditure. 

If this is the case, his treasury cannot contain more than two crores at 
the utmost, as between five and six crore was the greatest supposed amount 
at the conclusion of the peace, out of which he paid three crores-and thirty’ 
lack, and in all probability, that amount was exaggerated. 

Alterations in manugement.—Tippoo has varied in many points at differ- 
ent periods from that mode of management which was prescribed in a code 
of revenue regulations which wa§ translated into English, and published in 
Calcutta in 1792.* 

It isan ascertained fact that he has not collected so much from his coun- 
try as his father, a circumstance which may be ascribed to his chiefly em- 
ploying Mussulmen, Assofs, and Aumildars, which Hyder seldom did—. 
The Hindoos still do the business, but are more venal from having less 
responsibility. 

Among the greatest changes that have taken place lately in his revenue 


* Indeed I believe those never were observed. 


656 APPENDIX. 


system, may be reckoned that of his granting assigned lands to some of his 
military commanders for the maintenance of themselves and party, and 
his having diminished much the number of revenue officers, by allotting 
larger managements. No assof is now appointed to a country that does 
produce a lack,and no Aumildar to one under thirty thousand. 

Chief Revenue Officer Characters.~At the‘ head of the revenue officers 
may be placed Meer Mahomed Saduk (Duan,) to which high station be was 
promoted by Hyder, from being cutwal to the army. He is an able man, 
devoted to the will of the Sultaun, with whom he is esteemed a favourite ; 
he is accounted a prudent statesman, and a strong adviser of peace. 

Meer Hussan, brother-in-law to Cummer u Deen, an officer high in trust. 
Sied Mahomed Khan, an officer of high repute in the revenue line. 

Purneya, treasurer.—He was in the same employment with Hyder ; he 
is reputed an able financier. 

There are besides many revenue officers of reputation, whom I have not 
mentioned from want of sufficient information to speak of them with 
exactness. 

Detail of occurrences since January, 1798.—I mean not in this part of 
the account to take a long retrospect. I shall confine myself to this year, 
and briefly state those occurrences which appear most worthy of note. 

In January the Sultaun joined his camp near Seringapatam, and pub- 
lished that he was going towards Mangalore, where it was rumoured seve- 
ral French ships were expected with troops on board; to this was added a 
report, that the Sultaun meant on their arrival to attack the English, 
which gained force from the circumstance of all applications for leave be- 
ing denied, and a mutchelka (or obligatory note) taken from each sepoy, 
that his family was above the Ghauts.* 

February.—Tippoo was reported next to have changed his intention of 
roing towards Mangalore, and to have turned his thoughts towards visit- 
ing his northern frontier, in order to intimidate the Mahrattas who had 
demanded seven years’ arrears of Chout, and also with a view to visit the 
celebrated Peerzadah at Keysermoorus, whose murud or disciple he had 
been long anxious to become. He received and despatched again in this 
month a vakeel from Poonah 

He encamped with some part of his army at a village called Arakera, 
two marches from the capital, for several days, and from it detached the 
Banky Nabob, Rezah Saheb, in one directioh, and Meer Saduk in another, 
in otder to. distribute the lands to the Jemmidars of Sillabdahr horse, 
agreeably to the new system of supporting them that he had resolved 
upon. 

P March.—The Sultaun went with his escort to a place on the banks of the 
Caveri (Tilcar,) 25 miles from Seringapatam, to superintend the repair of 
a dam across the river ; he returned to the city to be present at the Ramzan 
feast, but ordered his tents and escort to pass on to encamp near Motta 
Talow, where he. joined theurafter the feast was over. * 

He despatched a vakeel with letters to Scindiah, and report said he was 
much inclined to join the Mahrattas in an attack on the Sultann,t but that 
both Meer Saduk and Purneah g¢xerted all their influence to prevent such 
an event occurring 

About this peried news reached the capital that the Annagoondy Rajah 
had been successful against the Sultaun’s troops, in consequence of 

See 

* An alarm was also spread at this period about the Coorga Rajah, who, it after- 
wards appeared had taken unnecessary alarm at the approach of some irregular 
horse, who were foraging, and had in consequence assembled his troops near Peria- 
patam. ‘This matter was settled on explanation. 

: + So in copy, but most probably the Nizam. 


‘ 


APPENDIX. 667 


which a strong detachment was ordered to hold itself in readiness to pro- 
ceed against the insurgents, 

April.—The Sultaun remained at his camp near Moota Falou. The 
principal event of this month was cutting the bank of this famous tank, 
which he did contrary to the opinion of several of his Omrahs. Two mo- 
tives were conjectured to induce him to this extraordinary action. 

The one supposed it the effect of avarice, the other of policy. If the 
former, he was disappointed, for two old guns were all that its drained-bed 
produced ; but itis more reasonable to ascribe it to policy, as he destroyed 
several other small tanks in its vicinity, aprereey with a view of distress- 
ing any numerous army that might hereafter encamp near his capital. 

t is not unworthy of observation, that immediately previous to the 
breaking out of last war, he destroyed the large tank near Bangalore, and 
similar conjectures were then made. 

Letters were despatched to the courts of Hyderabad and Poonah; from 
the former letters had been received by Camel Kerkerrah, and from the 
latter a vakeel., 

The stable horse were kept at the capital, and every division of the 
country tas ordered to store grain and ghec, and to send « proportion of 
draught cattle to the capital. 

May.—Not only all the Aumildars, Assoffs, &c. were required to swear 
allegiance to the Sultaun, a custom which with them has been annual for 
five years past ; but every soldier of the army was directed to swear (in the 
Sl prescribed by the religion he professed,) to be fuithful to his stan- 

urd, * 

The Sultaun went for a short time into the city, but returned to camp on 
the 2nd of June with part of his zannana, and alt the Sillahdar horse were 
ordered to join from their foraging stations. Accounts were received of a 
French party landing at Mangalore, and preparation was directed to be 
made for their march to, and reception at, Seringapatam. 

June.—On the 3rd of June the river came down, and all communication 
with the capital was obliged to be carried on by means of basket boats. 

On the 18th Shire Khan returned with three cushoons to the capital 
from the Malabar coast, where he had been to settle some differences be- 
tween the Sultaun and Coorjah Rajah, relating to the disputed territories. 
It is not stated what has been done, but there appears to have been an ami- 
cable adjustment. . 

On the 20th, in the evening, the long expected French party reached 
camp, they consisted of about 50 Europeans and about 100 half-cast ; one 
of the Europeans was in a palenquin, five on horseback, and the rest, with 
the coffrees and half-cast, marched on foot. They had only one tent on 
their march: the Sultaun, however, directed an ample supply of camp 
equipage, and fixed their encampment at about a mile from his own quar- 

- ters ; next day six of the party who were said, to be officers, paid him a 
visit ; the Major of Lally’s party interpreted; what passed is unknown, as 
all others were excluded. It appeared by the countenances of the French 
gentlemen when they came out that they were pleased with their reception. 

Two of the French gentlemen have since ‘had frequent intercourse, but 
no arrangement of consequence has yet been made. It is believed the 
Sultaun means they should discipline a. considerable body of sepoys. 

The Mohurrum feast was celebrated with splendour, but no part of the 
army was after it was over ordered to forage. \ 

The Sultaun gave out that he meant to remain in camp for some months, 
and various reports were at the same time spread as to his design of march- 


* A few months previous to the breaking out of last war, he took a similar pre- 
caution of swearing his men. 
voL. I. 2u 


668 APPENDIX. 


ing, which it is now thought he is resolved upon, as tents had been sent 
from the fort to his camp. 

July.—At Seringapatam it was reported he meant to take the route of 
Gootty towards his eastern frontier. It was believed he meant to invade 
the Carnatic ; and this report had made such an impression that fifty families 
had left the Baramahl on the 30th of June for Mysore, and gave as a reason 
when interrogated as to their emigration, that they had relations in the Sul- 
taun’s army, and were afraid of being punished if found below the Ghauts 
when Tippoo descended. ‘This belief and alarm would appear the natural 
effect of the oath he had required of his troops, and the mutchelka he had 
one month before exacted. 

Present position of troops.—Having now finished the detail of his trans- 
actions for these few months past, I shall state what I believe to be the 
present position of his troops. 

He has immediately with him encamped near the French rocks his son, 
Futtee Hyder, Cummur u Deen, and al! the principal officers, both civil 
and military, of his country. . 

As his army are for convenience encamped in parties at the distance of 
afew miles, I shall state for the sake of perspicuity, under one head. 

His whole army on the island and in the environs of Seringapatam, that 
could be assembled in two days— 


Regular horse - - - - 6,000 
Arregulars - - - - 3,500 
Regular infantry ? - - 14,000 
Pikemen - - - - 1,500 


Gunner's and Lascars - - - 2,000 
10 battering guns, and 40 field pieces on this side the river, 30 elephants, 
100 mules, 100 camels, and 1,500 draught bullocks ; in camp, as many 
more as are wanted, within two days march, at forage. 
Garrison of Seringapatam— 
The Guards or Ahmedy, and Assoudullah - 3,000 
Infantry, 2nd Kutcherry ~ - - 1,000 
Total - 4,000 
Troops in the Harponelly district, acting against 
the Annagoondy Rajah, under the command 
of Mahomed Khan and Mahomed Ali Zettuh 


Selladars, or irregular cavalry - 1,000 
Regular infantry - - - - 3,000 
At Gootty, under Kistnapah and Bauker Bez— 

infantry - - - rs 4,000 


Some infantry are still on the Malabar coast, and some Sillahdar horse 
and a large party of infantry at Sadashavagur ; and also some of the Sillah- 
dar’s horse and Byeds at forage in different parts of the country. 

Policy of the Sultaun and reflections on it, 

Tippoo is generally described as a Prince equally destitute of humanity 
and reason, as one whose passions ever triumph over his judgment. 

Whatever arguments may be brought against the first part of this accu- 
sation from tft treatment of his subjects, the tyrannical cruelty he ex- 
ercised ‘on~his English prisoners, will ever warrant their countrymen in 
affixing it on his name. 

As to the latter points, Iam not disposed to allow them just, as general 
positions. His conduct since the peace of 1792, has shewn that though he 
possesses those feelings which are allowed not only to be natural, but ho- 
nourable in a humbled Monarch (viz. a spirit of ambition to regain lost 
power and fame, and a spirit of revenge against the State that has humbled 
him). Yet, that he pursues these objects, not with that heedless and im- 
patient rage that characterizes a man guided wholly by his passions ; but 


* 


APPENDIX. . 669 


with that unremitting activity and zealous warmth which we would look 
for in a Prince, who had come to a serious determination to endeavour by 
every reasonable means in his ide to regain what he had lost. 

To prove what I have said, I shall take a short retrospect of the leading 
features of his conduct since 1792. 

This was first marked by an honourable and unusually punctual discharge 
of the large sum which remained due at the conclusion of the peace to the 
allies. Instead of sinking under his misfortunes, he exerted all his activity 
to repair the ravages of war. He began to add to the fortifications of his 
capital—to remount his cavalry—to recruit and discipline his infantry—to 
punish his refractory tributaries—and to encourage the cultivation of his. 
country, which was soon restored to its former prosperity. 

He next (near two years after the war) took the wise resolution of de- 
stroying Ossoor and Bangalore, as he had seen they were easy conquests to 
the English, and served them both as useful posts to cover their convoys 
and secure their depots for their grain and military stores ; this was surely: 
the action of a man who had benefitted by experience. 

During the first two or three years he seemed wholly devoted to domestic 
arrangements—when all was settled he found himself at liberty to engage. 
again in politics. : 

He appears first to have intrigued at Hyderabad, with a design to separ 
rate that Court from the English interests, but without success. 

An important scene soon opened, the imprisonment of Azim-ul-Omrah 
and the contemptible interregnum (if I may term it so) at the Court of Hy- 
derabad. This added to the divisions at Poonah and the declining health of 
the Nizam offered a fair prospect. The Sultaun took every step that pru- 
dence could suggest to make the most of the opportunity without involv- 
ing himself in any risk till success was highly probable, if not certain. He 
sent a larre and well appointed detachment to Ghootty under one of his 
ablest officers (Syd Ghoffer) on the pretext of enforcing payment of some 
of his unsettled claims on Karnoul. 

At this period, Nana Furnaveze, who was expelled from Poonah by the 
dread of Scindiah’s power, solicited the Sultaun’s aid, who, aware of the 
ex-Minister’s influence and wealth, flattered him with the promise of support. 

The improvement of the Nizam’s health—the return of Nana to 
Poonah. The emancipation and restoration to power of Azim-ul-Omrah, 
—events as extraordinary as they were unexpected, disappointed the suc- 
cess, but did not impeach the wisdom of the Sultaun’s schemes. 

His French visitors, of whom he had several, flattered him with hopes of 
future success against the English, the power with whom he was naturally 
the most exasperated ; but he does not appear to have entered into serious 
negotiations with any of them before September, 1797, when two gentle- 
men from the Mauritius made him large offers of aid, and induced him to 
send a vakeel to the islands authorized, (as would appear from Governor 
Malartic’s proclamation) to enlist whatever number of Frenchmen could be 
induced to enter the Sultaun’s service. 

He has had of late some correspondence, both with the Courts of Poonah.- 
and Hyderabad, of what nature I know not—but he is well versed in Mah- 
ratta politics, and knows that they solicit foreign interference, more with a 
view of intimidating domestic foes into some arrangement, than with any 
serious intention of using it—and he also knows that whatever appear- 
ances Azim-ul-Omrah may from political design assume, that he is his fixed 
enemy on principle. 

From what I have stated, I infer that the policy of the Sultaun is obvi- 
ously to regain his former power, and that all his intrigues and prepara- 
tions,whatever may appear their immediate object, are ultimately directed 
against the English, on the principle that it is their declared and invariable 
policy to check his aggrandizement. 

But at the same time, I do not think he will deviate from that line which 


670 APPENDIX. 


he has obviously hitherto  sapegaes of not engaging in hostilities till suc- 
cess is highly probable if not certain. I consider him at this moment 
ausing for events. The French buoyed him up with hopes of England 
eing ruined, and of their sharing with him—the territories of that king- 
dom in India—and have probably, at all events, promised him the imme- 
diate co-operation of a large force. ; 

On the other hand, he views with anxiety the tedious troubles of Poonah, 
which certainly now appear approaching to acrisis, and that he conjectures 
may afford him a favourable opportunity of action. 

These are reasons, more than sufficient for his keeping so large a force 
in readiness near Seringapatam, and there is no doubt, had the French 
been able to have landed a respectable force at Mangalore, at the same pe- 
riod which they did that contemptible party which have reached Seringa- 

atam, he would before this have engaged in hostilities with the English— 
ut I cannot conceive for a moment, that the aid he has received will tempt 
him to so bold a measure. 

My object in this hasty abstract, has been solely to throw suck light as 
toy information enabled me on the Sultaun’s situation and views. Onthe 
eonduct, we should at this period observe towards him, I shall not presume 
to offer an opinion. The consideration of this important point is fortunately 
entrusted to those whose high reputation leaves not a doubt, but the line of 
conduct they pursue, on this and every occasion, will be that which is best 
calculated to promote the prosperity of the British nation. 


JOHN MALCOLM, Persian Interpreter. 
Madras, \6th July, 1798. 


APPENDIX D. 


From Zemaun Shah to Sir John Shore.* 
Received 3d June, 1798. 

At this time the trusty Ghoolaum Ahmed Khan, the news-writer in Hin- 
dostan, after having the honour of paying his respects at the resplendent 
presence, described to us the excess of your attachment and fidelity which 
afforded us much satisfaction, and prompted further marks of our favour to- 
wards you. It is our intention to visit Hindostan, and at 3 proper season shall 
accordingly set out where we shall encourage friends and chastise enemies. 
We have, therefore, now deputed Ghoolaum Ahmed Khan thither to ascer- 
tain who are our friends and who are our enemies, which we will commu- 
nicate accordingly ; let your mind he perfectly at ease, and continue to 
walk in the path of allegiance and fidelity. Dated in the month of Zehidja, 
1211 Hedegiree, answering to June, 1797. 


From Zemaun Shah to Mr. Lumsden. 
é Received 27th May, 1798. 

Ghogllum Ahmed Khan, our news writer for Hindostan, being ad- 
mitted into our presence, made us happy by representing your attach- 
ment and regard, and caused an increase of our favour and good will 
towards you, we have resulved to visit Hindostan, and by God’s help, the 
time wi}l come, when we shall raise our royal standard in those countries ; 
our victorious armies shall bring honour to the well affected, and punish- 
ment to the refractory. For this reason, we have sent before us Ghoollum 
Ahmed Khan, to ascertain who are our friends and who are our , 
enemies, you will in every respect be confident, and firm in your attach- 
ment and regard, considering that you are covered with the royal favour. 

Zehize, 1211. 


ne 


* Referred to at page 188. 


APPENDIX. 671 


APPENDIX E. 


Memoir, with Observations on the probable invasion of Zemaun Shah, by 
Major-General Sir James Craig.* 


, The prominent feature in the politics of this part of the country, at the 
present moment, seems to be the threatened hostility on the part of Ze- 
maun Shah. 

It cannot be denied that, if the invasion with which he menaces these 
and the neighbouring provinces takes place, it willbe an event produc- 
tive of much mischief at any rate, and pregnant with no small degree of 
eventual danger, for it may be held as certain, that if he succeeds in his 
attempt so far as to penetrate to Delhi, he will become exceedingly for- 
midable. The glare of victory, the influence of religion, and the allure- 
ments of plunder, will draw to his standard numbers probably greater 
than have appeared united in one cause since the days of Aurengzebe. 
On the one hand the Rohillas, and on the other every disaffected Rajah 
bordering on the Mahratta dominions, will look up to him as a deliverer 
and protector, and will hasten to unite their efforts to those which the 
will consider as operating to their benefit. While every unemployed chiet, 
capable of collecting a few followers, and impatient of a state of inacti- 
vity, will eagerly embrace a new adventure, and will have the less hesi- 
tation in joining the invader, that his success seems to be already esta- 
blished as certain in the public mind; but great as this resource appears 
to be for the increase of his numbers beyond what his original army will 
consist of, it is still looked on as less than that which he will derive from 
the Seiks, whose country he must traverse ere he can reach the capital of 
the Mogul empire. 

These people he cannot leave behind him as enemies; if he reaches 
Delhi, it can only be after having conquered and reduced them to sub- 
jection, or, however improbable such an event may at present appear, 
after having concluded a treaty of friendship with them. In the latter 
case they will voluntarily join him ; in the former he will force them to 
do so; in neither can a regard to his own safety permit him to dispense 
with their attendance, the only pledge he can have of their fidelity to 
their engagements ; on these grounds it is that I have made the assertion, 
that if the Shah ever reaches Delhi, he will command a force, which in 
point of numbers, at least, will be truly formidable. 

But the probability of his ever making the attempt is doubted by many, 
and the chief foundation on which these doubts are built is, first, that he 
is not possessed of the necessary resources to enable him to undertake an 
enterprize of such magnitude, and next, that the same threats of inva- 
sion have been invariably held up these several years past, without their 
having ever produced any effect. 

With respect to the first of these arguments, I confess the information 
I have been able to collect as to the state of the Shah’s country, his reve- 
nues or his resources, is by much too limited to enable me to ground any 
solid argument upon, and I much doubt whether any account, that can 
be depended upon, relative to these points, has ever reached us yet ; that 
his army is not deficient in numbers we have good reason to believe, and 
though it be admitted that he has not a treasure sufficient to maintain 
them long, the hope of plunder, and attachment to a Prince, who, by 


* Referred to at page 270. 


672 APPENDIX. 


every account, stands high in their opinion, may nevertheless lead them 

on under a bare subsistence, in the confidence of experiencing his future 

head in a liberal share of the spoils they will expect to procure for 
im. 

The other argument has always appeared most futile in my eyes,— 
though repeated obstacles may have hitherto prevented the accomplish- 
ment of his project, can that circumstance be brought as a proof, that he 
will never be able to attain it. The existence of his intention is ascer- 
tained by his having the year before last actually reached Lahore in the 
. attempt to carry it into effect, and are these any good grounds for ima- 
gining that the difficulties which he has hitherto met, and that the reasons 
which on that occasion forced him to quit his enterprize and return to 
his own dominions, are always to exist! In truth we know, or at least, all 
our accounts say, that they have, in a great measure, actually ceased by 
the subjection of his domestic enemies. I think it is pretty certain, that 
he enjoys, at this moment, a degree of internal tranquillity, to which his 
reign has hitherto been a stranger. 

But on this point let us ever bear in mind, that there is danger in being 
misled by the idea of the impracticability of the attempt; there is none 
in embracing the contrary opinion. 

The line of conduct to be adopted towards the Shah, supposing him 
really to carry his threatened plan into effect, and whether we shall con- 
sider him as an enemy in the first instance, that is, the moment his inten- 
tion is avowed by the advance of his forces, or whether we shall remain 
unconcerned spectators so long as he abstains from molesting us or our 
allies, are subjects of political, and not military, consideration ; and in- 
tending to confine these observations entirely to the latter view of the 
subject, I shall enter into the former no further than may be necessary in 
order to consider the military arrangements to be adopted in either case. 
I the more readily decline entering into this question, because I confess 
myself too little informed upon the subject, not to be extremely diffident 
of any opinion I might adopt upon it. 

Exclusive of ourselves and our immediate ally or dependent, the Nabob 
Vizier, the three great powers that will appear in this contest, are the 
Shah, the Seiks, and the Mahrattas; and it is a very singular circum- 
stance attending the relative situation of these powers, that they appear to 
be all three guided by such a rooted and determined animosity to each 
other, that it seems at this moment scarcely possible to expect that any 
two should unite in opposition to the third. Could a view of the common 
danger be held up to the Seiks and Mahrattas in so strong a light as to 
induce them to lay aside their hatred to each other, and to act with cor- 
diality to avert it, there is no doubt but that they might offer a formidable 
opposition to the Shah’s advance. I confess this is little to be expected, 
but the attempt is well worth the trial; an able resident with the Mah- 
rattas might possibly succeed in persuading them to enter into the nego- 
tiation; I fear our relation with the Seiks is too feeble to admit of any 
communication with them upon the subject, if it is not, encouragement 
from us imight at least have the effect of uniting them among themselves; 
disunited and distracted by jealousies and animosities, as they are at pre- 
sent, it seems little probable that any considerable effort can be expected 
from them, unless a point of union is offered, to which all may look, and 
which, may serve as a common channel of conciliation between them. 

After all, the probability of reducing these people to any sort of co- 
operating system, especially where the Mahrattas, who are considered by 
them as their natural and inveterate enemies, are to be parties, must be 
very small. A sense of their danger however, and the inveterate hatred 


APPENDIX. 673 


that they bear to the Afghans, may possibly bring it about, and it may be 
worth while to consider what may be the line of conduct to be pursued 
in such an event, improbable as it is. 

Exclusive of the Douab, the Vizier’s dominions, including Rohileund, 
are bounded by the Ganges, which forms to them a natural, and what 
would be a formidable, barrier, were it not fordable in so many parts 
during the dry season, these fords, however, from all the information I 
have been able to procure, are confined to the space between Anopshire 
and Hurdwar, though I believe that in a dry season there is also one at 
Ramgaut.* A Memoir, which I have now before me, mentions by name 
fourteen of them, including those at the above mentioned places. 

It is of the first consequence, that the whole of this space be examined 
by able, active, and intelligent officers, of rank and experience, capable 
of determining the positions to be taken, and the works to be erected, 
for the defence of all the fords that may be found included in it, what- 
ever their number may be. Against an army, consisting almost exclu- 
sively of cavalry, and totally unprovided with artillery, nothing seems so 
easy, aS with well disposed works, and well served guns, to render fords 
and narrow passes of every. sort almost impracticable; the nature of the 
works to be erected, and the number of men and guns which their de- 
fence will require cannot be ascertained till this examination has been 
made. On the former subject, however, it may not be improper to ob- 
serve, that these works should all be enclosed, not only on account of the 
facility with which cavalry can turn them, but to prevent any bad conse- 
quence from any possible attempts of the Rohillas. 

The composition of the corps to be formed for the defence of this line, 
which, in every possible light in which the subject can be viewed, and in 
every event ought to be prepared and occupied, seems naturally to fall to 
the Nabob’s troops, and appears, indeed, to be as well adapted to them 
as any service that can be allotted for them ; each post should be occu- 
pied by a proportion of cavalry as well as infantry, and his artillery ap- 
pear to be competent to every thing that could be required of them. 

The detail on this subject, would be a matter of deliberation, to be 
founded upon the knowledge of the different spots to be occupied, and at 
any rate would be misplaced here. ~ 

The upper part of the Ganges being thus secured, end if I am not 
mistaken, a very little, but well directed labour would render it effectu- 
ally so,—the remainder of the barrier may at any time be equally formed, 
by seizing and securing all the boats upon the river ; to effect this point be- 
yond the possibility uf doubt, it would be proper not to depend upon the 
execution of the Nabob’s orders by his aumils and collectors—but upon 
the more certain effect of one or two good gun-boats, fitted up as gallies, 
which manned by strong parties of our Sepoys, might follow the promul- 
gation of the Nabob’s directions down the river, and secure the certain 
execution of them, the boats should be lodged at Allahabad, or any inter- 
mediate posts which it may be found expedient to occupy, except such as 
may be wanted for purposes hereafter specified. 

Thave already observed, that these preparatory measures, are totally 
independent of every consideration with respect to the conduct to be pur- 
sued by us, and ought to be adopted, whether it be found expedient to 
act in concert with other powers, or to depend solely on our own arms, 
and those of our ally, the Vizier. 

Of the same nature, is that of putting the fortress of Allahabad into 
an immediate state of defence—by this I do not mean, the proceeding on 


* Forded by the English army in March, 1773. 


674 : APPENDIX. 


the proposed altetations, by which it will be rendered an effectual and 
important barrier to our territories, and a key to other countries— but I 
allude to the providing it with the necessary artillery, ammunition, and 
provisions, It is obvious, that the works which will be required in the 
former case, cannot be finished in time, fer any purpose which can be 
the object of the present memoir; but, exclusive of the steps already 
mentioned, such measures should be immediately adopted with respect to 
the works as may probably bé completed in time, and hich may give 
them. every additional strength they are capable of admitting. I am not 
at present prepared te give.a decisive opinion on the subject, not having 
sufficiently examined the ground with a view to it—but it may be well 
worth censidering, whether it would not be advantageous to cover the 
front, from river to river, by a chain of detached redoubts, which would 
be ereeted in a short space of time, and at little expense, would be easily 
epee and render the protections afforded them by the walls of the 
ort of great defence, even against an enemy, more skilled in attacks of 
that nature, than the one at present in view—at the same time, that they 
would form an exceHent entrenched camp, toreceivearetreating or inferior. 
army, in case of necessity. I mean this, however, only as a temporary 
expeiient for this occasion, because in a general view, I consider Allar 
habad as a point of such importance to us, that I would not miss.a mo- 
ment, in which it could be done with propriety, in proceeding on the 
works proposed, to render it a complete fortress according to our system, 
and perhaps the detached redoubts, if practicable in other respects, would 
be found to facilitate the doing so, by affording security, while the bod 
of the place itself must necessarily be open, during the carrying on o 
the svorks. 

Defensive war must ever be ruinous to us in this country, and recourse 
must, therefore, be had to it, only where uncontroulable cireumstances 
render operations of another complexion impracticable. In the present 
case, we eannot inyade the Shah’s dominions—the most sanguine disposi- 
tien could hardly propose the attempt. In a general view, therefore,. a 
war with him must be defensive—it. must be eur business, however, if 

essible, to carry tt on with that vigour, which may demonstrate that its 

eing so, proce solely from the situation of the respective parties, and. 
not from any deficiency of resources or spirit on our side; unfortunately 
from the cemposition of the two armies, the choice of action must ever 
remain with the enemy, who may at any time elude our pursuit, with 
the same facility that he can advance to the attack, whenever he judges 
proper to de so, and stili more unfortunately from. the same cause, though 
we may refuse his attack, we can never reap the full profit of victory, and 
though we may defeat we cannot destroy. ’ 

The Shah’s army is understood to be composed almost entirely ef ca- 
valry, while ours.is nearly as much so-of infantry —but on the other hand, 
he has little or no artillery, of the use of which his peeple are entirely 
ignorant, while ours is well served; and we should be careful to have as 
much in the field as can be got together, regard being had to the number 
of which our army will consist, to which it should always be in a-certain 
proportion, to enable the column of march to cover and protect it; 
nothing, howevex, is-more advantageous and decisive against cavalry than 
heavy attillery. We have here in the field at present four 18-pounders 
and nine 12spounders, with four small howitzers; we have also about 
twenty-four 6-pounders. 

The army which will be collected in the event of the Shah’s approach, 
must depend upon circumstances, particularly upen the issue of the im- 
pending hostilities ea the coast, at present we have one battalion of Euro- 
peans, about 700 men, and ten of Sepoys complete, exclusive of the gar- 


APPENDIX: 675 


rison of Allahabad, from whence another battalion of Europeans may be 
drawn, amounting to about 900 men. Our cavalry consists of a European 
regiment, which cannot be depended on for above 350 men—two regi- 
ments of native cavalry complete, and Major Bruce’s independent regi- 
ment, likewise complete—three last composing about 1,460 men; we have 
also four companies of artillery with their lascars. It is not likely that 
the sitnation of affairs will, during this season at least, admit of any in- 
crease of this force beyond perhaps a couple of battalions more of native 
infantry,and supplying the deficiency of the garrison of Allahabad, which: 
should indeed be augmented with at least another battalion, while in strict 
prudence, it ought never to be without a proportion of Europeans. The’ 
aggregate force thus supposed in the field, will amount to something 
better than 16,000 men. To this number of men, and to the exigency 
of the circumstances, I do not deem our artillery sufficient, I would aug- 
ment it, (provided it be possible to send a proportionable number 
of artillerymen) to sixteen 12-pounders, and four howitzers, of a larger 
calibre than those we have, which are only four and a half inch—J would 
also have six or eight 6-pounders, exclusive of two to each battalion in- 
cluding those to be formed of the grenadier companies. I know that 
this will be looked upon as a very high proportion of artillery, and it is 
probably more than has yet been seen, in our service, in this part of India. 
I have, however, well reflected on the subject, and though aware of the 
embarrassment that arises from a numerous train, I am under the.con- 
viction, that it will be found prudent to submit to it on the present oc- | 
casion. 

It may not be improper here, to offer an observation on the state of our 
cavalry. Of the European regiment I shall say nothing, it is already in 
very good order, and I have no reason to doubt, that it will be found 
equal to every thing that can be expected from itssnumbers. I havea 
good opinion of Major Bruce’s regiment, and think them capable of much 
service: as to their fidelity, I see no reason to doubt it—they serve for pay 
and are well paid, and as they will, spite of every effort that can be made 
to prevent it, find plunder in whatever country they may be, I can see no 
inducement for them to betray the service they are in. It might be well 
to increase this corps to 700 or 800 men. 

The two native regiments are complete in men and horses. I have not 
seen the first regiment lately, but Colonel Welsh’s has improved much ; 
they have acquired rapidity, and a considerable degree of solidity in all 
their movements, their horses are not bad, and their men are young and 
able,—with all this, I find that a general want of confidence in them pre- 
vails every where. I do not mean to confine this to the 2nd regiment, our 
cavalry is in general considered as not to be depended upon, and as little 
better than useless; the idea is, that they are of a cast much inferior to 
the usual horsemen of the country, and that consequently they are defi- 
cient in that high spirit and sense of honor, on which is founded the sup- 
posed superiority of personal valour in the latter. Allowing the fact, 
it would be of much weight, were it intended, that our cavalry should 

charge in. the disorderly and irregular manner, which is the practice of 
the native troops, by which the action soon becomes an aggregate of per- 
sonal conflicts between man and man, where courage and superiority of 
numbers must prevail, but the real force of cavalry consists in its weight 
and solidity, and if the former is secured to ours by the style of horses 
on which they are mounted, and the latter by their discipline, I can see 
no reason why our cavalry should not experience every benefit arising 
from these important qualities, and why these should not in that arm, as 
well as in the infantry, compensate for superiority of numbers and cast, 
with all its supposed attendant virtues; for in our infantry it is admitted 


676 APPENDIX. 


that our men are in general also of a cast inferior to that of their eppo- 
nents. On these grounds it is always with concern that I hear the very 
general and public opinion which prevails on this point, and which ap- 
pears to me to have in some degree infected the officers of those corps 
themselves ; if were much to be wished that some measure were fallen 
upon that would be likely to do away an impression of so pernicious a 
tendency, and which I firmly believe myself to be without foundation. 

Perhaps the best plan that could be adopted, with this view, would be 
to put the whole in the charge of a general officer, who would take a lead 
among them, would give them weight and confidence, and who would 
carefully watch the opportunities of pointing out to them their advantages, 
and in what their strength consists. It is true that it would require an 
officer well conversant in the cavalry service, and I believe there is but 
one in this part of the country who has any knowledge of it; among the 
officers at present attached to the cavalry regiments, there is much com- 
mendable zeal and good will, but it would be vain to seek for any real 
professional knowledge of that service amongst them. 

Lord Cornwallis found benefit from his cavalry in the Mysore, though 
it did not exceed 1,100 men; ours actually in the field amounts to 1,300 
oe cavalry, exclusive of Major Bruce’s regiment; and it might pro- 
bably be augmented by the third regiment from below. 

In this examination of the state of our force in the field, it is impossi- 
ble to avoid adverting to an object of important consideration in it, I 
mean the Nabob’s troops; though in the preceding observations I have 
assigned a portion of them to the defence of a part of the frontier, of 
much consequence to the general defence, yet I did so, merely as being 
that species of service for which alone I thought it probable that a few 
might be selected as competent to it, and even in that situation I should 
be extremely diffident of them, unless means could be found to support 
them by some of our troops. 

In the field it is obvious that no sort of reliance can be placed on, or 
any species of service expected from them; totally indisciplined, equally 
inefficient in numbers, insolent, licentious, and disaffected, they would 
embarrass their friends infinitely more than they would injure their ene- 
mies ; the only possible use to which I think they could be put would be 
by quartering them in large bodies in the Rohilla and Patan countries, 
with the view of overawing and keeping quiet, if it be possible, those tur- 
bulent and restless people, with respect to whom, some measures must be 
adopted ; there can be no doubt of their inclination to join the Shah, to 
whom they are supposed to be warmly attached; some few might be en- 
gaged to follow our standard by paying them well, but the inclination of 
the majority would certainly lead them to the opposite side; perhaps the 
sudden appearance of bodies of the Nabob’s troops in different parts, 
ready to seize the families of such as should attempt to stir to join the 
Shah, together with the difficulty of doing so in their own persons, and 
the impracticability of their families escaping, while the passes on the 
river are occupied, might force them, however unwillingly, to remain 
quiet ; at any rate, every effort should be used in the attempt, and means 
shoukd be adopted to take the best security that can be obtained for their 
fidelity the instant the Shah’s movements are ascertained. 

As it is undoubted, that no real use can ever be made of the Nabob’s 
army in the field, it becomes a matter of serious consideration, whether 
the force that we shall be able to collect is such as to give us well grounded 
hopes of opposing so formidable an enemy, as I believe the Shah will be 
found to be. . 

The extent to which we shal] be able to carry that force, in the present 
state of the establishment, I have already stated to be, as I imagine, be- 


APPENDIX. 677 


tween 16,000 and 17,000 men, ‘of which the proportion of Europeans will 
not be above an eighth; this will, it is true, be a larger army than has 
ever appeared in our service on this side of India, but it will also be for a 
more arduous contest than any that has yet occurred ; and I have no hesi- 
tation in saying that every possible means should be used to increase it. 
The want of officers presents, however, a very great difficulty to any ge- 
neral augmentation ; the number would be* found to be very inadequate 
to any efficient increase of the army, by new levies; the mode of afford- 
ing a greater force in the field, which presents itself to my mind as the 
readiest, the most certain, and in all the least objectionable, is that of 
detaching the rene companies of all the other regiments completed 
in officers, and then to be formed, together with those of the regiments 
now in the field, into battalions; the battalions not in the field to be aug- 
mented by new levies to 125 men a company, they would then remain of 
the same force in point of numbers as at present, and the additional 25 
men per company by being incorporated with. already formed soldiers, 
would sooner become fit for service than new corps probably would. 

If there are 12 native battalions in the field, there will remain 14, ex- 
clusive of the regiment at Hyderabad, the grenadier companies of which 
would form the augmentation; it would amount to 2,800 men, com- 
pleting the army to near 20,000 men. 

Little can be expected from any augmentation that can now take place 
in the cavalry, as it is impossible that either men or horses could be suf- 
ficiently trained to be uf use; but surely some means might be fallen upon 
to supply the regiments we actually have with horses in some more expe- 
ditious manner than is now followed. . 

With respect to artillery men and lascars, the number with the army 
must be increased to the greatest extent that the exigency of other set- 
vices will admit of; at present it is very inadequate, to the service that 
would be required. 

To these preparatory steps I have only to add, that exclusive of the 
ammunition, &c. necessary for the defence of Allahabad, large supplies 
of every species of stores should be lodged in that fortress, as the depét 
of the army. 

These preparatory, and as they appear to me indispensable steps, being 
adopted, and I confess in my mind no time should be lost before they are 
commenced, the determination of Government with respect to the line 
to be pursued towards the Shah, must regulate our first motions, should 
it be thought proper to remain in a state of neutrality so long as he ab. 
stains from molesting us or our allies; and should we not be bound by 
any treaty with the Mahrattas, upon which point I am entirely ignorant, 
it would still appear advisable that we should adopt measures of security 
and precaution against a new and powerful neighbour, whose real views 
cannot be ascertained, who cannot approach our frontier but in the full 
career of victory, and who being master at Delhi, can scarcely avoid, 
sooner or later, entering into discussion with our ally the Nabob, who 
holds the office of Vizier of the Empire, which, however nominal it may 
be, must furnish whoever rules at Delhi with claims and objects of ad- 
justment to stimulate his ambition or his avarice. It is possible, also, 
that even viewing the Shah as an enemy, circumstances of policy may 

nevertheless render it expedient that we should act by ourselves, and avoid 
any junction with the Mahratta forces in either case; the measure to be 
pursued appears to me to be the same. A strong position should be taken 
about Anopshire, where a well fortified camp would, I think, prove the 
surest, and indeed, seems to me to be the only means by which we can 
expect to stop the career of the enemy, and preserve the best part of the 


678 APPENDIX. 


Nabob’s dominions from ravage and devastation. The precise position to 
be taken must depend upon a thorough and deliberate examination of the 
country ; but as near to Anopshire, as local circumstances will permit, 
appears to be the most eligible. Here we should be on the direct road 
from Delhi, from which it is distant only 50 miles; our supplies would 
be secured from the Vizier’s country, and the Rohillas would be kept in 
awe; the camp. should be wéll fortified, and should command a spot 
where at least two bridges could be constructed on the Ganges. 

' While we are in this position, the Shah will scarcely venture to pass the 
river, even if he should be able to force the fords, to which we should be 
at hand to give assistance; for in that case, our communication by the 
Douab would remain equally open, while his with Delhi would be cut off; 
his supplies from thence would be at our mercy, while such troops as the 
Nabob should have it in his power to collect, would prevent him from 
procuring any from the country in which he would be, which he would 
also find carefully exhausted, by our having already formed our maga- 
zines from it; and though the Naboh’s army might not perhaps be able 
to oppose him effectually, yet by taking up a new line on the river that 
runs near Bareilly, it might impede his progress, till unable any longer 
to subsist; he would find that his only safety would be in an immediate 
return. 

As little is it to be apprehended that he would pass us on the other 
route, and enter the Douab to attack Allahabad, as he would here find 
himself subject to the same inconveniences in either case, three marches 
would put us in possession of Delhi; it is true that the district of the 
Douab would be open to the ravages of the Shah’s horse, but it does not 
in any event appear to be edna to prevent it with so very inferior a 
body of cavalry as we shall have. The only means of covering the coun- 
try would be by a chain of well connected posts from the Ganges to the 
Jumna ; but it does not appear by the map that any feature exists in the 
country by which the extent necessary to be occupied in this manner 
could be lessened, while the whole of the space, from river to river, is 
much too considerable for any force that we could apply to the purpose, 
and even if it were not, this line could only be formed below Calpee, as 
the shallowness of the Jumna would leave open the flank of gny other 
that might be taken above that place. 

It thus appears, I think, that the Shah could continue his conquests, or 
molest us or the Nabob Vizier, only by attacking us in our position; but 
ten or twelve thousand infantry, or even a lesser number, in a camp pre- 
vo secured by works skilfully constructed, and defended by a well 
served artillery, might surely bid defiance to any army, constituted as his 
is, nor does it seem likely that such a post could be forced by any opera- 
tions that could be devised by their skill, or executed by their courage, 
though it should be found on trial to merit all that is said of it. 

Though a lesser number might suffice for their defence, yet the main 
body posted here ought certainly not to consist of fewer than 10,000 in- 
fantry at the least; because it is necessary that it be of that strength that 
cannot with safety be left behind ; a weaker corps might be masked, or. 
would be unable to act in the manner pointed out for it in the rear of the 
enemy, should his presumption lead him to offer the opportunity for doing 
so. The remainder of the infantry might be employed in supporting the 
Nabob’s troops in guarding the fords of the river to Hurdwar. 

Iam well aware that this system of operations may be construed into 
an exhibition of timidity, and that it may be said to militate against the 
ptinciple which I have myself pointed out, that defensive war must be 
ruinous to us, and that where such, from uncontrollable circumstances, 


APPENDIX. 679 


becomes unavoidable, it should be conducted with the utmost vigour and 
spirit. I consider this to be an unavoidable defensive war on our part. 
We can have no object of attack to which we could direct offensive ope- 
rations, and the experiment which has been already made in this country 
offers no encouragement to the system of a continued succession of unin- 
terrupted marches, in pursuit of an army constituted and equipped as is 
that of the enemy we are considering. If he wishes to avoid us, our ob- 
ject of bringing him to action will be found to be unattainable, while 
fatigue, and its consequent effect among our Europeans, will every day 
lessen the equality of terms, upon which we could view it as desirable. 
If on the other hand action is his choice (and I own I think Zemaun Shah 
is not at present sufficiently aware of our advantage over his indisciplined 
noultitude, to enable him to subdue the pride and arrogance which will 
lead him to regard our numbers with contempt) he will not fail to find us 
out, indeed it is our object to reduce him to the necessity of attacking 
us ; to deprive him of the power of choosing, but I would wish it to be 
with every possible advantage on our side, that skill can add to discipline. 
It must be remembered, that we are considering the case of our acting 
alone, without the cooperation or assistance of any other power; and it 
must also be remembered, that we can never enter into the contest till 
both the Seiks and Mahrattas are subdued; till the Shah is master of 
Delhi, and of a tract of country almost equal in extent to the whole of 
his natural dominions, till he shall have been able to augment his army, 
by every disaffected or unemployed Rajah or Chief in the country; in 
short, till his numbers, as I said before, will probably exceed what have 
2 ah in one cause since the days of Aurengzebe. 
hould it, indeed, be judged expedient to oppose the Shah in the first 
instance—should policy dictate the measure of preventing the establishment 
of a new, and probably, not a feeble power in Hindostan, and in a part of 
it too, where no counter-balance can be found but in ourselves. In that 
case, there seems to be little doubt, but that we might appear with that 
forward activity, which when practicable, is certainly more becoming our 
station in India, than the line of conduct which I have recommended in 
the other case, would at first view seem to be. It is imagined that the 
Mahrattas would with readiness accept the proposal of a junction of in- 
terests and of forces; this, however, should be ascertained beyond the pos- 
sibility of doubt. It will then remain to be determined by what route the 
Shah proposes to advance. 
For the general report is, that avoiding the Seik’s country altogether, it 
is his intention to enter Hindostan, by the route of Moultan, across the 
desert of Bikaneer to Jyepoor, and various accounts have already appeared 
of his having directed the necessary measures to be taken for providing his 
army with water, which is not to be had in many parts of that route; this does 
not, I confess, appear to me to be probable, the subjugation of the Seiks, and 
the possession of their country must be a part, or rather the ground work, 
of his plan, for he could never hope to remain master of Delhi and the sur- 
rounding provinces, while the intermediate country between him and his 
own dominions, remained in the hands of his inveterate enemies, to whose 
incursions he would leave the latter entirely open. 

It is not, however, impossible, that advancing himself through the coun- 
try of the Seiks, he may detach at the same time a large part of his army to 
advance by the other route. 

They would find upon the frontiers a number of considerable Rajahs, 
extremely disaffected to the Mahratta Government, who would probably 
follow his standard, and in conjunction with his detachment, create a very 
powerful diversion in that quarter. To this the Mahrattas must eee a 
part of their force, while the remainder, joined with us, should, | think, 


680 APPENDIX. 


advance beyond Delhi, and take up the most favourable position that may 
present itself on the Shah’s route. 

1 fear the Mahratta cavalry will be found to be very unequal to that of 
the enemy, and that it will be difficult to bring on an action with any pros- 
pect of rendering it decisive in our favour by any other means than by re- 
ducing the Shah to the necessity of attacking us in our position ; fortunately 
the pride and native arrogance of these people will ensure us this advan- 
tage, in whatever strength we may be, and when repulsed and disheartened 
by their loss from a well-disposed artillery, it is not improbable that the 
Mahratta horse may be encouraged to complete their defeat. 

It would require a more complete knowledge of the country than I, or 
indeed, I might say we, possess, to enter into any detail as to the exact po- 
sition it may be proper for us to take ; but in general terms it may be said, 
that it should be a position of defence, and upon the route by which the 
enemy is coming; previous examination should determine several, to be 
ae according to the different circumstances under which the Shah may 

vance. 

The disposition of the Seiks, and of what are called the Hill Rajahs, in- 
habiting the hilly country to the northward of the great road, may also 
enter very much in the consideration to be given to the measures to be pur- 
sued ; every encouragement should be held out to the former in particular, 
to protract their defence as long as may be practicable, and when no longer 
able to offer a direct opposition to the Shah’s advance, they should, if pos- 
sible, be induced to retire to the difficult parts of the country, and from 
thence act by continual incursions upon the flanks and in the rear of his 
army. 

in the same manner, if any of the Hill Rajahs can be induced to enter 
into the opposition against the Shah, their acting in the way proposed for 
the Seiks, would be found more advantageous to us than any junction of 
their forces with ours, would probably be ; to them the most decisive lan- 
guage should be held, they should be assured of favour and protection if 
they concurred in the general defence, and the most rigorous measures 
should be held out to them, if they suffered a man from their dominions to 
act against us. 

If the face of the country presented any natural barrier, if the Jumna, 
for example, were not fordable in almost every part above Calpee, a posi- 
tion along its banks would effectually cover the only frontier by which it is 
possible to enter the Donab, and by our well disciplined infantry, and su- 
perior artillery, I have no doubt but that it might be done with the utmost 
certainty against all the force of India put together; but that not being the 
case, and as a junction of interests with the Mahrattas could not be reason- 
ably pursued, if we were not to co-operate in the defence of their frontier, 
as well as of our own, the advance beyond Delhi, seems to be an indispen- 
sable step ; the very boldness of the measure would give confidence to our 
allies, and assure them of our good faith ; it is likewise the only means by 
which we can hope to influence the operations of the Seiks, and obtain a 
chance of directing them to the general benefit. 

T have not a doubt that the Shah would attack us, and as little of the issue 
of the action, but our object should be to endeavour to bring it on, in such a 
manner as would give hopes of rendering it decisive ; should, however, misfor- 
tune, orany other circumstancesrendera retreat necessary, it should be made 
to the Ganges somewhere near Anopshire, here a bridge previously con- 
structed, with its head on the western bank well secured by good redoubts, 
should ensure the passage of the Ganges, and where, having the fords on 
the river properly secured, and the fortress of Allahabad in a state of de- 
fence, abandoning the Douab only to the ravages of the enemy, we should, 
it is to be hoped, be able effectually to secure our own and the remainder 


APPENDIX. 681 


of the Nabob’s dominions, till an accession of additional strength, or other 
circumstances enable us again to advance, and in conjunction with our 
allies, act with the vigour becoming our station in this part of the world. 

Among the preparatory steps to be adopted, I would recommend the em- 
bodying a corps of pioneers, properly provided with the means of working, 
to be always carried with them. Action and attack should indeed be ever 
our object in this country, but circumstances may frequently render defen- 
sive measures indispensable, and under none are they more likely to be- 
come so than in the probable operations under consideration ; the supe- 
tiority of numbers, on the part of the enemy, will undoubtedly be great, 
and although it may in some measure be compensated by our discipline 
and artillery, it will nevertheless require every additional aid. A single 
redoubt may in many instances turn the fortune of a day, and to the 
enemy with whom we shall have to deal, a very slight work, well defended, 
must be almost impregnable. 

Ina country in which the movements of cavalry are so unrestrained, as 
they are in the extensive plains that are every where found in these parts, 
it behoves us to give every additional aid to ours, which must ever be so 
greatly inferior in number. With this view, the establishment of a small 
corps of Horse Artillery to be attached to the brigade, seems a very desira- 
ble object. Lieutenant-Colonel Montague has some good ideas on this 
head, such as probably would be found better adapted to this country than 
any which could be taken up from the plan pursued in Europe. 

Intending this memoir merely as tracing the outline of the measures which 
have appeared to me to be proper on the present occasion, I have avoided 
entering into detail, or extending it to several collateral circumstances, 
which, though demanding attention, would be obvious the moment a deter- 
mination is taken upon the general system; amongst others, however, it 
may not be amiss to notice, that in either of the cases which we have consi- 
dered, the possession of twoor three intermediate posts on the southern bank 
of the river, between Anopshire and Allahabad, might prove extremely be- 
neficial. Nothing can ever render Cawnpoor tenable; neither can the fort 
at Futty Ghur, in my opinion, be made such as it would be safe to occupy. 
The cantonment itself might be made into a good post, but it would re- 
quire a considerable corps to defend it. Mehindy Gaut is surrounded by a 
mud wall, and if the Shah is so unprovided of the means necessary for the 
attack of fortified posts, as we are told he is, it might, perhaps, be rendered 
respectable in his eyes, with the assistance of a few detached works; the 
great point is to find spots that are not commanded and previous examina- 
tion can alone determine where such are to be met with. It is to be ob- 
served, that in the whole course of the river in the space mentioned, the 
southern bank is the highest and commands the other. 

I recollect when Iwas at Bombay last year, conversing with Sir Charles 
Mallett on this subject, he suggested the idea of creating a diversion by en- 
couraging the inhabitants about the lower parts of the Sind or Indus, who 
are supposed to be much disaffected to the Afghan Government. This 
matt perhaps be worth the trial; the communication is not difficult from 

oinbay. 


682 APPENDIX. 


APPENDIX F.* 
Hyderabad Treaty, \st September, 1798. 


._ An enlarged perpetual subsidiary treaty between the Honourable United 
English East India Company and his Highness the Nawaub, Nizam ul Mulk 
Asoph Jah Behadur, Subadar of the Deccan, his children, heirs, and 
successors, settled by Captain James Achilles Kirkpatrick, by virtue of the 
powers delegated to him by the Right Honourable Richard Earl of Morn- 
ington, knight of the most illustrious order of St. Patrick, one of his 
Britannic Majesty’s most Honourable Privy Council, Governor.General in 
Council, appointed by the Honourable the Court of Directors of the said 
plonouranle Company, to direct and contro) all their affairs in the East 
ndies, : 

Whereas his Highness Nizam ul Mulk Asoph Jah Behadur, has from 
the greatness of existing friendship, expressed a desire for an increase 
of the detachment of the Honourable Company’s troops at present serving 
his. Highness, the Right Honourable the Earl of Mornington, Governor 
General, has taken the proposals to that effect into his most serious consi- 
deration, and the present juncture of affairs, and the recent hostile conduct 
and evil designs of Tippoo Sultaun (as fully evinced by his sending am~' 
bassadors to the Isle of France; by his proposing to enter into a treat 
offensive aud defensive with the French Republic against the Englis 
nation ; and by actually receiving a body of French troops into his domi- 
nions and immediate pay), rendering it indispensably necessary that effectual 
measures for the mutual defence of their respective possessions, should be 
immediately taken by the three allied powers, united in a defensive league 
against the aforesaid ‘Tippoo Sultaun, the aforesaid Governor General has, in 
consequence, empowered Captain James Achilles Kirkpatrick, Acting 
Resident at the court of his Highness the Nizam, to enter in behalf of the © 
Honourable United English East India Company, into certain engagements 
with his Highness Nizam ul Mulk Asoph Jab Behadur, for a permanent 
increase of the Honourable Company’s troops in his Highness’s pay, in the 
proportion and on the conditions specified in the following articles, which 
must be understood to be of full validity, when this treaty shall be 
returned, signed and sealed by the Governor General :— 

Article \st.—Such parts of the letter from Earl Cornwallis to his High- ° 
ness the Nizam, dated 7th July, 1789 (and which has always been consi- 
dered in the light of a treaty), as relate to the stationing of troops with his 
Highness, are to be considered as in full force, that the services of the 
new permanent subsidiary force are to be regulated precisely by the same 
restrictive clauses that operate on the present detachment, unless the Peishwa 
shall hereafter consent to any alterations in those conditions, and his High- 
ness likewise approve of the same. ; 

, Article 2d.—Agreeably to the practice in the Company’s service, the 
new subsidiary force shall be subject to reliefs, either partial or entire, as 
‘often and in such manner as-the Company’s Government may require, 
rovided withal, that no diminution takes place by such means in the stipu- 
Tated number to be stationed with his Highness. 
{ Article 3d.—The proposed reinforcement of subsidiary. troops shall be 
“in the pay of this state from the day of their crossing the boundaries. 
Satisfactory and effectual provision shall be made for the regular payment 
of this force, which, including the present detachment, is to amount to 


* Referred to at pages 272, 290, and 609. 


. 


-APPENDIX. : 683 


6000 sepoys, with firelocks, with a due proportion of field pieces, manned . 
by Europeans, and as at the monthly rate of two lacs, one thousand four 
hundred and twenty-five rupees, the yearly amount of subsidy for the 
aforesaid force of 6000 men, with guns, artillery-men, and other necessary 
appurtenances, is twenty-four lacs, seventeen thousand one hundred rupees. 
The said sum shall be completely discharged in the course of the year by 
four equal instalments, that is, at the expiration of every three English 
months, the sum of six laces, four thonsand two hundred and seventy-five 
rupees, in silver of full currency, shall be issued without hesitation or 
demur froin his Highness’s treasury. And should the aforesaid instalments 
happen to fall at any time the least in arrears, such arrears shall be deducted, 
notwithstanding any objections thereto, from the current kist of Peishcush, 
payable to his Highness on account of the Northern Sirkars. Should it, 
at any time, so happen, moreover, that delay were to occur in the issue of 
the instalments aforesaid, at the stated periods, in such case, assignments 
shall be granted on the coHections of certain districts in this state, the real 
and actual revenue of which shall be adequate to the discharge of the 
yearly subsidy of the aforesaid force. 

Article 4th.—The duties on grain and on all articles of consumption, as 
well as on all necessaries whatever, for the use of the new subsidiary force, 
shall be commuted agreeably to the practice that obtained with the former 
detachment. A place likewise shall be fixed on as the head quarters of the 
said force, where it shall always remain, except when services of import- 
ance are required to be performed; and whenever either the whole, or part 
of the said force, is to be employed in the business of the state, a person 
of respectability, and who is a servant of this Sirkar, shall be appointed to. 
attend it. The commanding officer and officers of the said subsidiary force 
shall be treated in all respects in @ manner suitable to the greatness and 
dignity of both states. 

Article 5th.—The said subsidiary force will at all times be ready to 
exectite services of importance, such as the protection of the person of his 
Highness, his heirs and successors, from race to race, and the overawing 
and chastizing all rebels or exciters of disturbance in the dominions of this 
state; but it is not to be employed on trifling occasions, nor like Sebendy, 
tu he stationed in the country to collect the revenues thereof. 

4rticle 6th.—Immediately upon the arrival of the faforesaid subsidiary 
force at Hyderabad, the whole of the officers and serjeants of the French 
party are to be dismissed, and the troops composing it, so dispersed and 
disorganised, that no trace of the former establishment shall remain. And 
his Highness hereby engages for himself, his heirs and successors, that no 
Frenchman whatever shall ever hereafter be entertained in his own service, 
or in that of any of his chiefs or dependants, nor be sutfered to remain in 
any part of his Highness’s dominions. Nor shall any Europeans whatever 
be admitted into the service of this state, nor be permitted to remain 
within its territories, without the knowledge and consent of the Company’s 
government, 

Article 7th—The whole of the European and sepoy deserters from the 
Company’s service, that may be in the French or any other party of troops 
belonging to this state, are to be seized and delivered up to the British 
resident ; and no persons of the above description are to be allowed refuge 
in future in his Highness’s territories, but are (on the contrary) to be 
seized without delay, and delivered up to the British resident. Neither 
shall any refuge be allowed in the Company’s territories to sepoy deserters 
from the service of his Highness, who shall, in like manner, be seized and 
delivered up without delay. 

Article 8th.— Whereas his Highness the Nizam, from considerations of 
prudence and foresight, and with a view of avoiding manifold evils, has 


VOL, II. 2x 


684: APPENDIX. 


determined on dismissing the French from his service, and in dispersing and 
disorganising the troops commanded by them, as specified in the 6th 
Article, and on entertaining a perpetual standing force, of the Honourable 
Company’s, in their room, subject to the limitations and restrictions 
prescribed by Ear] Cornwallis’s letter to the Nizam, mentioned in the Ist 
Article ; itis therefore hereby agreed, with a view to the mutual benefit of 
his Highness and the Peishwa, and the happiness of their respective subjects, 
that the Company’s government will use their best endeavours to have 
inserted with the consent and approbation of both, in the new treaty in 
contemplation between the three allied powers, such a clause as shall set 
at ease with regard to the other. Should the Peishwa, however, not accede 
to a proposal so highly advantageous and profitable to both governments, 
and differences hereafter arise between the two states, namely, that of the 
Nawaub Asof Jah Behadur, and of the Rao Pundit Perdhaun, in such case, 
the Company’s government hereby engage, that interposing their mediation, 
in a way suitable to rectitude, friendship and union, they will apply them- 
selves to the adjustment thereof, conformably to propriety, truth and 
justice. The Nawaub Asof Jah Behadur accordingly hereby engages, 
never to commit on his part any excess or aggression against the Sirkar of 
Rao Pundit Perdhaun ; and in the event of such differences arising, what- 
ever adjustment of them the Company’s government, weighing things in 
the scales of truth and justice, may determine upon, shall without hesitation 
or objection, meet with full approbation and acquiescence. 

Article 9th.-All former treaties between the Honourable East India 
Company and the governments of the Nawaub Asof Jah and the Peishwa, 
remain in full force. Should hereafter the Rao Pundit Perdhaun express 
a desire to enter into subsidiary engagements, similar to the present, with 
the Honourable Company, the Nawaub Asof Jah will most readily give his 
concurrence. 

Artivle 10th.-This enlarged subsidiary treaty, consisting of Ten Articles, 
being this day settled by Captain James Achilles Kirkpatrick, with the 
Nawaub Asof Jah Behadur, Captain Kirkpatrick has delivered one copy 
hereof in English and Persian, signed and sealed by himself, to the Nawaub, 
who, on his part, has also delivered to Captain Kirkpatrick one copy of the 
same, duly executed by himself; and Captain Kirkpatrick hereby engages 
to procure and deliver to his Highness, in the space of fifty days, a ratified 
copy from the Governor General, in every respect the counterpart of the 
one executed by himself; and on the delivery of such copy, which will 
then have become a full and complete instrument, the treaty executed by 
Captain Kirkpatrick shall be returned. In the mean while, no time shall 
be Tost in writing for the advance of the proposed reinforcement. 


Signed, sealed, and exchanged at Hyderabad, 
1st September, A.D. 1798, or 19th Rubby 
ul-awul, A.H. 1213. 
J. A. Kinkparrick. 


Separate article appertaining to the perpetual subsidiary treaty concluded 
between the Honourable English East India Company andshis Highness 
the Nawaub Asof Jah Behadur,on the Ist of September, A.D. 1798, 
or 19th of Rubby-ul-awul, A.H. 1213. 

Whereas in conformity to a wish expressed by his Highness the Nizam, 
the stipulation in the 6th-Article of the Subsidiary Treaty respecting the 
delivering up of the French is agreed to be made a separate one, his High- 
ness hereby engages, that after the arrival of the Company’s troops at 
Hyderabad, the whole of the French officers and soldiers in his service 
shall be apprehended in such way as Captain Kirkpatrick may point out, 


APPENDIX. 685 
and be delivered up to him, or for a time be kept in confinement in an 
habitation belonging to this Sirkar, but in the custody of the Company’s 
troops, and upon the reorganisation of the party lately under the command 
of the aforesaid French officers, they, the said French officers and soldiers 
shall, within the space of two months, be delivered up to the British resident. 
Strict orders shall, moreover, be issued to all talookdars on the frontiers, 
and to those in charge of all fords and passes, to seize any Europeans 
whatever, attempting to pass their respective stations, and send them imme- 
diately with all due precaution, prisoners to Hyderabad, where they shall 
instantly be delivered up to the British resident. On the above condition: 
it is hereby agreed that the Frenchmen thus delivered up, shall not ‘be 
common prisoners of war, nor be in any respect maltreated. They shall 
be conveyed at the Company’s expense, and with as little restraint as 
possible to England, and from thence be sent by the first favourable 
opportunity to France, without being detained for a cartel or exchange of 
prisoners. 


Signed, sealed, and exchanged, at Hyderabad, 
Ist September, A.D. 1798, or 19th Rubby- 
ul-awul, A.H, 1213. 


Separate article appertaining to the perpetual Subsidiary Treaty con- 
eluded between the Honourable English East India Company and. his 
Highness the Nawaub Asof Jah Behadur, on the Ist Seatember, A.D. 1798, 
or 19th Rubby-ul-awul, A. H. 1213. 

No correspondence on affairs of importance, shall, in future, on any 
account, be carried on with the Sirkar of Rao Pundit Perdhaun, or with any 
of his dependants, either by the Nawaub Asof Jah Behadur, or by the Ho- 
nourable Company’s government, without the mutual privity and consent 
of both contracting parties. And whatever transactions, whether of great 
or small import, may in future take place with the aforesaid Rao Pundit 
Perdhaun,or his dependants, a reciprocal.communication of the same shall 
be made to the other contracting party, without delay and without reserve. 


Signed, sealed, and exchanged, at Hyderabad, 
Ist September, A. D. 1798, or 19th Rubby- 
ul-awul, A. H. 1213. 


Ratified by the Right Honourable Richard Earl of Mornington, Knight 
of the most illustrious order of St. Patrick, &c. &e. &e. Governor General 
in council. 

Fort William, 
18¢h day of September, 1798. 


APPENDIX F. 


Memorandum relative to the late French corps in the Deccan, by Capt. 
Malcolm. 


The French corps in the Deccan, have for several years past hoisted the 
national flag, and most of the lapells and epaulets of their new clothing, 
had the words liberté and constitution embroidered on them. 

The general conversation of the French officers after they were dismis- 
sed, proved that they had entertained ambitious designs, and considered 
themselves as forwarding the interests of their mother country. Captain 
Christof, an officer of the party who had been formerly a serjeant of sepoys 


686 APPENDIX. 


* 
in the English service, affirmed that the late Monsieur Raymond had 
formed the most ambitious projects, and that the same were adopted by 
his successor—and that the landing of any French in India, would pro- 
bably have been the signal to commence their intrigues.* 

It was generally reported and believed that Raymond had a General’s 
comiission from the Directory, but it has not been discovered. 

In a letter which passed through the resident at Hyderabad, recom- 
mending a person to Monsieur Piron—it was stated that the person recom- 
mended would, from having respectable connexions at Paris, be useful in 
transacting Monsieur Piron’s affairs with the Directory. 

In a letter from Monsieur Baptiste, the second officerin the corps, to 
Captain Kirkpatrick, relative to his claims on the party and property at 
Hyderabad—Monsieur Baptiste expresses an apprehension that he will be 
unable to return to France, as Monsieur Piron will represent his conduct (to 
the Directory) in odious colours. 

There was found in store when our troops took possession of the French 
lines, small arms and clothing for 12,000 men beyond the force then serv- 
ing under Mons. Piron, besides a number of pistols for cavalry. 

te French corps had three arsenals and two founderies. I only saw 
these at their lines, near Hyderabad. The arsenal there was full of military 
stores, and in the foundery, there were a number of brass cannon newly 
east, which our artillery officers judged as good and as wel] finished as any 
they had ever seen. They also made swords, muskets, and pistols. The 
specimens I sent to Lord Mornington, will shew the great progress they 
had made in these manufactures, 

The French party were always well paid—their clothing was neat and 
their discipline superior to any troops I ever saw in a native service. The 
men were the best of the country—and from the regularity of their pay, 
they could recruit at pleasure. 


APPENDIX G. 
Buonaparte’s Letter to Tippoo Sultaun.t 


FRENCH REPUBLIC. 
Liberty Equality. 


Buonaparte, Member of the National Convention, General-in-Chief, to the 
most Magnificent Sultaun, our greatest Friend, Tippoo Saib. 


Head-Quarters at Cairo, 7th Pluviose, 7th Year 
of the Republic, One and Indivisible. 


You have already been informed of my arrival on the horders of the 
Red Sea, with an innumerable and invincible army, full of the desire of 
delivering you from the iron yoke of England. 

I eagerly embrace this opportunity of testifying to you the desire I have 


* This information 1 had from a gentleman to whom Christoff had communi- 
cated it, 


t+ Referred to at page 295. 


APPENDIX. 687 


of being informed by you, by the way of Muscat and Mocha, as to your 
political situation. 

I would even wish you could send some intelligent person to Suez or 
Cairo, possessing your confidence, with whom I may confer. 

May the Almighty increase your power and destroy your enemies. 


BUONAPARTE. 


True Translation from the French, 


Francis Warrens, Translator. 
* 


ee ee 
APPENDIX H. 


Proclamation du General Buonaparte aux Habitans au Caire le ler Nivose, 
Pan 7me dela Republique Francoise. 


Des hommes pervers avoient egaré une partie d’entre nous ; ils ont peri. 
Dieu in’a ordonné pour étre misericordieux pour le peuple ; J’ai été cle- 
ment et misericordieux pour vous. . 


Jai été faché contre vous de votre revolte, je vous ai privé pendant deux 
mois de votre Divan mais aujourdhui je vous le restitue, votre bonne con- 
duite a effacé la tache de votre revolte. 


Scherifs, Ulemas, Orateurs des mosquées faites bien connaitre au peuple, 
ue ceux qui de gaieté de ceeur se declareront nos ennemis n’auront de re- 
uge ni dans ce monde ni I’ autre. ‘ 


Y aura-t-il ua homme assez aveugle pour ne pas voir que le Destin 
dirige toutes nos operations; y auroit il quelqu’un assez incrédule, pour 
revoquer en doute que tout dans ce vaste univers, est soumi a l’empire du 
Destin. 


Faites connaitre au_ peuple que depuis que ce monde est monde il etoit 
ecrit qu’aprés avoir détruit les Ennemis de PIslamisme fait ahattre la 
Croix. Je viendrois du fond de V’occident remplir la tache qui m’a été im- 
posée. Faites voir au peuple que dans le saint livre du Coran, dans plus 
de vingt passages, ce qui arrive a été prévu, et ce qui arrivera est egalement 
expliqué. 


Que ceux done que la crainte seule de nos armes empéche de nous nuire 
changent: car en faisant au Ciel des veux contre nous, ils soliciteroient 
leur condamnation, que ces vrais croyants fassent des voeux pour la pros- 
périté de nos armes. 


Je pourrois demander compte a chacun de vous, des sentiments les plus 
secrets de ton cceur, car je sais tout, méme ce que vous n’avez dit a 
personne. 


Mais un jour viendra que tout le monde verra avec evidence, que je suis 
conduit par des Ordres Superieurs ; et que tous les efforts humains ne peu- 
vent rien contre moi, Heureux ceux qui de bonne foi sont les premiers 4 
se inettre avec moi. 


688 APPENDIX. 


Extract of 4 Letter from Mr. Udney to Lord Grenville, duted Leghorn, 16¢h 
April, 1798. 


A gentleman of extensive correspondence, has given me every assistance, 
and taken much pains to discover the destination of the armament carrying 
on in Genoa and the rest of Italy and France. The result of which has 
been as follows, and well-founded—‘ That the rendezvous is to be at 
Ajaccio, in Corsica, from Genoa and ‘Toulon ; that from the 25th of this 
month to the. 10th of May, the whole are to be assembled there, or at 
Malta, which is to be given up on their appearance ; that twenty sail of 
the line and frigates, French, Venetian, &c., are to be employed with 600 
sail of transports, and 50,000 men. Alexandria isthe principal destina- 
tion, and even the Black Sea, with the consent of the Ottoman Porte, and 
that however executed, the blow is meant against the East India Comyany’s 
power in India. Should not this be put a stop to, the consequences may be 
fatal; for whether by the Gulph of Persia—by land from Egypt—or the 
Red Sea, éroops may be got out either now or at a future time, and by 
keeping possession of Alexandria, Cairo, and Suez, they might even on a 
peace, make alliances and oceasion great disturbances in India. 


Copy ofa letter Srom Mr. Secretary Dundas to Lord Grenville.* 


My pear Lorp, Wimbledon, 13th June, 1798. 


In consequence of the intelligence from Mr. Udney, lately transmitted 
to me by your Lordship, and the still more recent intelligence from Frank- 
fort, and the communication made to me last night, relative to the proposed 
disposal.of the Portuguese troops, I have thought it right to put my ideas 
on paper upon the subject of the supposed: expedition of Buonaparte to 

gypt, in order that this important subject, with all its bearings, may re~ 
ceive a mature consideration. In executing this intention, however, I 
must content myself with throwing my ideas loosely together, for although 
T have ever since my connection with the administration of India, been at 
great pains to colleet information by every means, and have long made up 
my mind to a conviction that the possession of Egypt by any great Eu- 
ropean power would be a fatal circumstance to the interests of this coun- 
try, Icannot collect together my memorandums upon the subject 30 imme- 
diately as to answer my purpose in the present moment; but having 
weighed the opinion I now give very maturely at the time of the threat- 
ened war with Russia, I am pretty certain I will not be very erroneous in 
the statement I mean to give you. 

Tam sanguine in my hopes that our fleet now in the Mediterranean will 
supersede the necessity of deciding upon any practical conclusions, which 
may flow from our speculations upon this subject, but.as the prospect is 
liable to disappointment, I must presume and proceed upon the supposi- 
tion that the French armament has successfully reached Alexandria; and 
if they have done so, it is needless to trouble you with a detail of the inte- 
rior weakness of Egypt in every respect whatever, in order to prove the 
facility of its subjugation, whether done without the concurrence of the 
Ottoman Porte or with their concurrence, as stated in your information 
from Frankfort. Even if they were to rest contented with that conquest, 
without extending their views further at present, I should think they had 
performed the most masterly stroke they have ever yet done for their fu- 
ture aggrandizement in power and in wealth. This is too large a field to 
enter upon at present; but L eannot refrain from putting into your hands 


a A 


* Referred to at p. 350. 


APPENDIX. 689 


a paper upon that subject recently put into my hands by Lord Spencer. It 
succinctly states the outlines of what is to be expected from such a pos- 
session in the hands of France, and I certainly concur in every idea he 
states, with many additional ones which my official situation has led me 
often to revolve upon. 

But to return to the purpose of this letter, which is directed to the fur- 
ther views of the French, as stated in your intelligence, namely, the over- 
throw of our Indian power by an attack upon the British territories there, 
I believe it is not a new idea, and I have reason to suppose that the Em- 
press of Russia had it in contemplation, at the time that hostilities between 
that Court and Great Britain were likely to take place. 

The transporting an army to India from the Mediterranean must be at- 
tempted in one of four ways—either by Constantinople and the Black Sea, 
or secondly, by vessels from the Red Sea, or thirdly, by land from Jidda 
through the Upper Yemen to Muscat, or rather to that part of the Ara- 
bian coast where the sea is most narrow (which is about opposite the 
island of Kishmish,) and there by the help of vessels to be procured at 
Muscat to cross the gulph, and thence proceed through the remainder of 
Persia, entering Hindostan by crossing the Indus; or if sufficiency of ves- 
sels could be had at Muscat they might avoid the necessity of crossing the 
gulph of Persia, and pass over directly by sea to the western side of India ; 
or dastly, the army must march to Aleppo, and at Bir cross the Euphrates, 
and following that river and the Tigris, descend to the Persian gulph, and 
thence proceed along the coast to the Indus. 

As to the first of those routes, if it be true that the Ottoman Porte has 
been so perfectly insane as to form the connexion mentioned in your Frank- 
fort information, this routemight certainly be pursued by the Dardanelles 
into the Black Sea; but it is impossible to suppose, that if they were to 
reach the Black Sea, Russia which has made such struggles to obtain the 
command of that Sea, would permit the transit of a French force, which it 
must see would ultimately establish the power and influence of the French 
Republic in the centre of the Ottoman dominion. Holding it impossible 
that the Emperor of Russia would suffer such a circumstance to take place, 
it is unnecessary to trouble you with the further detail of this route; it 
would be towards the Caspian, and thence to penetrate into India, which 
would be very difficult, and barely possible through that part of Persia. 

The second and third routes are certainly practicable, upon supposition 
that the Frankfort intelligence is true, of this expedition having been con- 
certed with Tippoo Sultaun, because in that case vessels may have been 
sent either from the Mauritius or from the ports of Tippoo Sultaun, or 
from both, and in that case there could be no difficulty in transporting a 
body of troops either from the Red Sea or from the Persian gulph, in the 

manner J have already supposed, in detailing the different routes from 
Egypt to India; but 1 am not of opinion that the French Government can 
have formed a sufficient concert, or would run the risk of all the difticul- 
ties which stand in the way of their enterprize in either of the two ways 
now supposed. 

The folowing reasons Jead me to this conelusion—in the first place, al- 
though the possession of Egypt has been long a favourite object both with 
the old and new French Government, and was always considered by them 
as the most obvious means of undermining the British power in India; 1 
do not think till recently they ever entertained an idea to accomplish it 
in the gigantic manner now proposed, and consequently cannot have con- 
certed or prepared early encugh to meet them in the Red Sea or in the 
gulph of Persia such an extent of shipping as would be requisite for the 
transportation of such an army to the coasts of India, and unless they had 
made such a preparation, they are too well informed not to know that with- 
out previous preparation they had no chance of finding the requisite ton- 


690 APPENDIX. 


¥ 

nage either in the Arabian, or the Persian, zulph; secondly, if they had 
thought of this enterprize sufficiently early for such preparation, their own 
judgment must have suggested to them the risk of their whole plan being 
frustrated by storms, or by the vigilance of dur eruizers in the Indian seas ; 
thirdly, they were not certain but their plans would be discomfited by a 
very small naval-force being stationed either at the mouth of the Red Sea, 
or at the mouth of the Persian gulph ; and, in fact, I conceive it even now 
not to be too late to use that precaution. 

These various reasons satisfy me, that if this enterprize is really to be 
undertaken, Buonaparte will, as much as possible, avoid the dangers of 
the sea, which is not his element, but trusting to his own exertions and 
the enthusiasm of his followers, endeavour to accomplish his object by 
marching to Aleppo, cross the Euphrates, and following the example of 
Alexander, by following the river Euphrates and the Tigris, and descend- 
ing to the Persian gulph, and thence proceeding along the coast to the 
Indus, This route requires no vessels to transport troops. The roads are 
much more practicable, and the resources of provisions and forage much 
greater ; if, indeed, the Turks were hostile to their views, they could in a 
variety of ways annoy them, both in their first project and in their after 
plans of recruiting their army, by the means of landing them at Alexan- 
dretta or Scandroon, the nearest port to Aleppo. Bat if, as stated in the 
Frankfort intelligence, the Turks are really friendly to the views of France, 
I do not see any reason to suppose that the object of reaching‘ India may 
not be accomplished. It will be done, no doubt, with great fatigue and 
loss of men ; it must be a tedious operation, and many hardships must be 
undergone ; but these are considerations which will not operate either upon 
the leader or upon the followers of this entekprize, and therefore it ap- 
pears to me we will act most unwisely if we omit arfy one exertion to pro- 
tect our Indian interests against the most formidable danger to which, in 
my opinion, it was ever-exposed. , 

The first and most obvious measure that can be pursued from this 
country is a direct representation, both to the Emperor of Russia and at 
Constantinople. If the Turks have formed any such connexion, and en- 
tered into any such alliance, as stated in the Frankfort intelligence, their 
conduct is so directly hostile to us as to relieve us from every ceremony 
with regard to them. The interest of Russia itself is so nearly concerned 
hy the admission of the French into Egypt, and the means thereby afforded 
them of gaining a pre-eminence in, and ultimately the conquest of, Tur- 
key, that 1 cannot conceive the Emperor, with all his pacific dispositions, 
will choose to be a tame spectator of such transactions. Nothing should 
be left undone on our part to excite him to a sense of his danger; and if 
the Turks, notwithstanding the representations of Russia, persist in such 
an alliance as is supposed, we ought to connect ourselves as closely with 
Russia as possible, and aid her in every project she may undertake for the 
chastisement of the Turks, * 

Information will be immediately and by the speediest modes conveyed to 
our governments in India, stating the intelligence we have received, and 
guarding them against the danger with which they are threatened; anda 
naval force, either from the Cape or from India, must be directed to eruize 
at the mouth of the Red Sea, and at the mouth of the Persian. Gulph, in 
order to prevent any naval communication between the French and the 
continent of India. ; 

For.these two years past there has been, from time to time, appearances 
of French emissaries, both in Persia and in Egypt, and it is not probable 
that the French would have formed such a project as this without having 
endeavoured to secure a co-operation with some of the powers, through 
whose countries they are to pass; and, in the last despatches from India, 
there seems tU $e a floating idea as if Tippoo had been holding out the 


APPENDIX..- 691 


hopes of a Freneh co-operation to one.of our refractory rajahs, on the 
coast of Malabar. 1t must be the object ef our government in India, b 
every means in their power, to counteract the intrignes which. the Frenc 
may have used for facilitating’ their present enterprise. I hope much may 
be done in this way; and considering the desultory politics of Indian 
powers, the French may very speedily find themselves disappointed in the 
co-operation they have counted upon. Any material disappointment in this 
respect must be fatal to their project—their army must be much fatigued 
and exhausted after so longa march ; and if in that situation we can induce 
the Abdalli, the Afghans, and other tribes bordering upon the Indus, and 
also the other powers in the north of India, tr annoy the French army in 
their progress to our territories, they would): , cut up before we were 
called to encounter them, as would render our; uccess tolerably certain. 
At the same time, it must not be forgot, that in all systems of intrigue 
with the native powers in India, we labour under a great disadvantage in a 
competition with France. However much we may endeavour to use our 
power in India with fairness and with moderation, still we are an upstart 
power, and our dominion there is established on the foundation of the 
conquests or cessions, made to tis by a variety of the native powers. It is 
impossible to suppose that they do uot feel uneasy under such circum- 
stances, and therefore a more easy prey to the representation, seduction, 
and intrigue of another power, who comes in the plausible furm of offering 
to deliver them from English bondage, without desiring any recompence in 
return; in short, it is a rivalship, where our enemy has every thing to 
gain and nothing to lose, and where we have nothing to gain and every 
thing to lose. _ 

Under these circumstarices we have no certain security, exeept what 
rests upon our ows independent and solid power ; it is for this reason I 
urge the absolute necessity of reinforcing our governments in India, by 
every means in our power. The great demand for troops upon the Conti- 
nent at the beginning of the war, together with the iy eats and Joss of 
men in the West Indies, aid the conquest of the Cape, joined to the 
apparent security of India, has induced us to keep back from the Jadian 
establishments those recruits necessary even for keeping up their peace 
arrangement. The 10th and Lith regiments were destined many months 
ago for the East India service, but you know that both the one and the 
other have been since appropriated te other services, and are, of course, 
withdrawn from their former destination; and it dees not occur to me that 
we havea possible resource for sending the requisite force to India, except 
in two ways. The one is, to send the regiments, being two in number, 
lately recruited from the supplemental militia, to Gibraltar, and to send an 
equal number from thence to the East Indies. The other resource is the 
troops in Portugal, and even after bath of these are applied to that service, 
our Indian security will net be adequate to our wishes. 

Do not conceive that I am undervaluing*the service to which you wish to 
apply the troops in Portugal. I know and feel its importance, but I have 
uniformly and invariably maintained that it is our duty, in the distribution 
of our force, both naval nad military, never to abandon the security of our 
distant possessions. ‘Their distance places them out of the reach of all 
extraordinary resources. No militia regiment will volunteer its service for 
the security of India—many will for the security of Ireland. Every man in 
the kingdom will arm himself for the security of England, but the East and 
West Indies can look to no such resource. When attacked they must 
stand or fall by the force appropriated to them, but they are placed beyond 
the reach of those innumerable resources which present themselves when 
an urgent danger presses at home. 

: I remain, 
My dear Lord, yours very sincerely, 
H. Duwpas, 


692 ’ APPENDIX. 


Secret intelligence from Frankfort. 
_ {Enclosed in the foregoing letter.] 


A Monsieur Faujas de St. Fond (known as a man of letters before the 
revohition) arrived at Frankfort. few days ago. He is employed by the 
French Government to make enquiries into subjects of Natural History. 
The Abbé de Lisle is here likewise on his way to-Brunswick ; he was vi-. 
sited by Faujas, with whom he was formerly acquainted, and who in con- 
versation informed him that the expedition from Toulon was certainly: 
destined to Egypt; that it had been long in agitation; that Buonaparte 
had foymed the plan, and prevailed on the Directory to-adopt it; that the 
Porte had agreed that they might take possession of Egypt, in return for 
which they had stipulated the future payment of a large sum of money, 
the cession of some islands taken from the-Venetians, and the free expor- 
tation of grain from Egypt to Constantinople, which condition they had 
persuaded the Porte would always be observed, being in effect mutually 
advantageous ; that the army under Buonaparte consisted of 40,000 men, 
the élite of the French troops, which would be gradually reinforeed, and 
that all the principal officers in every corps and department of the army, 
were chosen by Buonaparte; that the project was, after having secured 
possession of certain parts of Egypt to take the nearest route by Arabia, 
through Persia, gross the Indus nearly where Alexarder did, ‘and from 
thence advance into the British territories. He said that the Directory for 
aiong time past had employed Agents in Persia and India, that those who 
at present had the chief power in Persia had agreed to assist in and facili- 
tate the enterprize; that the Prince on the borders of, the Indus (meaning, 
TI suppose, Zemaun Shah) had done the same, and that measures had been 
Sully concerted with Tippoo Sultaun, to whom the Government would env 
deavour (ar were endeaneerins to convey the ;number of troops hehad res 
quired. He observed that this enterprize embraced. a number of great 
public objects, as well as many private views ; that Buonaparte saw in it 
an ample field for gratifying his ambition, and perhaps a prospect-of esta- 
blishing ‘himself itt some great and independent situation, which he could 
scarcely have done in Italy. Mr. Faujas pretended also that the projected 
invasion of England was intended merely to create expense, excite appre- 
hension, and cover this expedition, so as to prevent the British Ministry 
from takitig measures for the security of their Asiatic dominions.’ 


~ 4 


Importance of Egypt to the French. 
{Enclosed in Mr. Dundae’s letter to Lord Grenville.) 


The probability of the Frenth taking possession of Egypt, naturally 
leads us, as a great commercial nation, to consider the question of the pro- 
bability, as well as the consequences that may arise from the accomplish- 
ment of such an undertaking. 

T beheve it. will be very generally admitted, that the possession of Egypt 
has been a long time an object of French politics ; the sending of Monsieur 
de Tott to survey the levels and. roads practicable across the Isthmus of 
Suez remains as full proof of such a design, which perhaps was retarded 
at that moment by ideas of justice, now no longer prevailing. 

M. Volney, one of the latest, writers on the affairs of Egypt, and a man 
of some influence with the, existing Government of France, speaks but 
sligttlt of the niilitary prowess of the present Mamaluke Government, 
and considers 10,000 effective men as the greatest number they can bring 
inte the fila 3 80 ‘that it appears, if in this hour of arrogance, the French 


% 


APPENDIX. 693 


intend the invasion of Egypt, they will not be prevented by the opposition 
that can be given to them by the Mamaluke Government. 1 

The immediate advantages that may lead the French to this measure 
are, that after the various revolutions of parties that have taken place, an 
establishment in Egypt may, perhaps, be deemed necessary to transplant 
such subjects as might otherwise be troublesome at home. The idea of 
settling and parcelling out a country whose riches and fertility have been 
the theme of all ages, cannot fail to catch the minds of these men, who, 
from habits of licentiousness and dissipation, are no longer fitted to return 
to the restraints of industry, or the sobriety of regular government. 

Another very material argument arises in favour of such an establish- 
ment. It is well known that the, southern provinces of France are not 
equal to the supply of their own wants for corn, which they have been 
always used to purchase of the Barbary States. Egypt will afford them 
abundance in return for the common manufactures of France, and by this 
means, form a basis for that commerce by barter, which will easily extend 
itself whenever their Government shall attain a sufficient degree of consis- 
tency ; so much, therefore, may be said on the question of probability. 

As to the advuntages that may in future arise from such a possession, 
they are great and manifold; I know that it has been an opinion long pre« 
vailing in France, that Egypt would afford most of the articles of the East 
and West India growth, and I have reason to think such an opinion well 
founded. The productions of this country as it now stands are wheat, rice, 
Indian corn, millet, jesamum, cotton, flax, senna cassia, sugar, nitre, 
natron, sal ammonia, one > and wax. 

But if we extend our idea, and consider the situation of Grand Cairo, 
we shall find it calculated for a great mart, extending its commerce to all 
around it, It is the céntre of the Carravan trade, and unites Europe with 
Africa and Asia by its circuitous commerce. Carravans from Morocco, 
Nubia, Abyssinia, Armenia, Persia, Syria, Damascus, Aleppo, Algiers, 
Tunis, Tripoli, and various others, arrive annually at Cairo, and bring the 
produce of their several countries, and a large sum in specie for the pur- 
chase of such commodities as they want. 

When the trade of Cairo was flourishing, it consisted of spices of all 
kinds, gums of various sorts, drugs of most kinds, silk, cotton, and all 
sorts of china and India produce, which were exchanged with the Carravans 
for gold dust, ivory, and slaves, and with Europe for gold, silver, copper, 
tin, lead, coral, and most articles of European manufacture. The Vene- 
tians, who carried on the greatest part of this trade to Europe in the l5th 
century, employed 43,000 seamen in it, nor has this commerce entirely 

ielded to the destructive Government of the Turks; for, according to 

Jonsieur Volney, the worth of the commerce of Cairo amounts annually 
to 150 millions of livres. 

Should the French restore the commerce to India by the Red Sea, 
which is, undoubtedly, their object, they will do it to more advantage 
than ever it has yet been done. For our commerce to India has intro- 
duced into these countries more of the European manufactures than were 
formerly in demand, as well as familiarized the use of China and India 
produce to every part of the world. 

Coffee and tea, two articles little known in former times, are now be- 
come generally and extensively in common use, and form a very consi- 
derable branch of commerce. The growth of sugar and indigo in India 
are likewise new articles, and of great consideration, so that the com- 
merce of the Red Sea is materially changed in its favour. 

The navigation of the Red Sea is by no means so dangerous as igno- 
rance has represented it. The winds are periodical, making the passage 
very short both to and from India, and the passage from Suez to Cairo 


694 APPENDIX. 


is twenty days by the Carravans, and from Cairo the passage down the 
Nile is through a channel of about two hundred miles to the sea. 

We were formerly in the practice of trading to Suez with assorted 
cargoes known in India by the name of Gulph goods, but the late trou- 
bles in Egypt have greatly disturbed this commercial intercourse. 

When I was in India I procured several statements of the nature of 
this trade from a free merchant who had himself been there, and he calcu- 
lates that on the sale of two cargoes of the amount of £300,000, the 
profits would arise from 75 to 100 per cent., deducting 14 per cent. for 
the charges of land carriage from Bees to Cairo, the duties, presents to 
the Beys and all contingencies. The returns to be made in Mocha coffee, 
on which there is a great profit both in Europe and Asia, and in bills as 
a remittance of their money to Europe. 

Should this trade, therefore, be once established in the hands of the 
French, it is easy to foresee the attendant consequences. It would give 
them the preference, if not the monopoly, in the supply of the whule 
Mediterranean in corn, rice, tea, coffee, sugar, indigo, spices, and all 
sorts of India and China goods, in return for all the articles of their own 
manufacture, most of which are well calculated for the demand of the 
Carravans; and by means of remittances from India, this commerce would 
be carried on for a time with the capitals of other countries, which is an 
advantage peculiarly necessary to France at this moment. 

To follow all the circuitous branches of such a commerce would lead 
to lengths I cannot permit myself to follow; I fear they are too obvious 
not to shew themselves on the slightest examination, but there is one 
advantage left to a maritime nationthere are no ports of shelter on the 
whole coasts of Syria and Egypt, of course the intention may be defeated 
by a naval force in its infancy, or its progress may be always impeded by 
our superior activity and naval skill. 


20th April, 1798. 
an SRA SRC RE EROS SERRE 


rom the Earl of Mornington to Dowlut Row Scindiah. 


Fort William, July 8th, 1798.* 


I have already had the pleasure to address a letter to you, notifying my 
arrival in this country, and expressive of the kind and friendly sentiments 
I entertain towards you, which I trust you will have received. 

It is always my wish to maintain the relations of amity and good-will 
with you, and being constantly anxious for the maintenance of your pros- 
perity and welfare, I inform you that I have received a communication 
from Zemaun Shah, announcing his intention of visiting Hindostan, and 
demanding my assistance and that of the Nabob Vizier, for the purpose of 
restoring the throne of Delhi to Shah Allum, and of expelling the Mah- 
rattas from Hindostan. Colonel Palmer, in whose wisdom and experience 
I repose the greatest confidence, will have the honour to communicate to 
you the papers which were received by the Resident of Lucknow, from 
Zemaun Shah. 

If Zemaun Shah should invade Hindostan, it will be necessary fur all” 
the established powers upon the north-western frontier to be vigilant, and 
to attend carefully to the defence of their respective territories. For this 


sy > 


* This Jettér, was procured for the Editor by the kindness of Mr. Edmonstone, 
after the'text had gone to press; but as it is of importance, it is here given. 


APPENDIX. . 695 


purpose whenever you shall return into your own dominions, you shall 
find the British Resident at your Durbar, instructed by me to enter into a 
defensive Treaty with you for the reciprocal protection of your dominions, 
of those of the Nabob Vizier, and of those of the Company, against the 
threatened invasion of Zemaun Shah. 

With these friendly intentions towards you, it would give me great sa- 
tisfaction to learn that your own prudence, and your regard for the safety 
of your invaluable possessions on the north-western frontier of India, had 
suggested to you the propriety of returning to Hindostan for the purpose 
of taking the requisite precautions against the impending danger. Your 
friendship for the Company, which I believe always to be sincere, furs 
nishes another motive tu induce you not to protract your stay in the do- 
minions of the Peishwa. 

The conduct of Tippoo Sultaun_ having lately been of a very offensive 
and hostile nature towards the British Government and its allies, it is 
therefore necessary for me, in conjunction with the Nizam and with the 
Peishwa, (being all united by Treaty,) to demand satisfaction of Tippoo. 
I earnestly hope that Tippoo may satisfy the just expectations of the 
allies without compelling them to resort to arms; my uniform disposition 
being to preserve peace with him and with every power in India. But 
under the circumstances of Tippoo’s prep for war, prudence re- 
quires that the allies should be prepared on their part to meet any exigency 
that may arise. The present position of your army prevents both the 
Peishwa and the Nizam from fulfilling their defensive engagements with 
the British Government against the menaced attacks of Tippoo. As you 
are the friend of the Company, you will be sensible of the propriety and 
justice of my amicable request, and you will not continue to occupy a po- 
sition which disables the allies of the Company from acting, where their 
assistance is due under the solemn obligation of existing Treaties. 

When you arrive in your own dominions, you will there find Colonel Col- 
lins, whom Sir John Shore appointed Resident at your Durbar, and whom - 
I have confirmed in that appointment; placing equal reliance on his abili- 
ties. He will have the honour to present my particular respects to you, 
and in addition to a defensive Treaty against Zemaun Shah, he will offer 
my mediation for the adjustment of all differences between you and the 
Nizam and the Peishwa. 

Nothing would make me so happy as to become the instrument of peace 
and reconciliation between you ot the courts of Hyderabad and Poonah ; 
for I consider you all as the friends of the Company, and it has given me 
great concern to witness your Jate unfortunate dissensions. 

T entreat you to understand that. this letter is dictated by a spirit of 
friendship, and of anxiety for your real interests. I refer you to Colonel 
Palmer for the particulars of all my sentiments towards you, and I hope 
through him to hear a satisfactory account of your welfare, and to obtain 
an additional pledge of your amicable disposition. 


Mornineron. 
N. B. EpMonstTone, (A true copy.) 
Persian translator to Govt. 


696 APPENDIX. 


MILITIA ORDERS. 


By the Right Honourable the Governor General. 
Fort William, Dec. 21st, 1798. 


The Governor-Genera] has observed, with the utmost satisfaction, the 
zeal and alacrity with which all ranks of the European, Armenian, and 
Portuguese inhabitants of the town of Calcutta, have applied themselves to 
learn the use of arms, since the re-establishment of the corps of European 
militia. : : 

The regular and assiduons attention of the infantry and cavalry, com- 
prising this respectable corps, will soon render it an important addition to 
the military force of this Presidency, and will contribute essentially to the 
ay of the seat of the supreme Government of the British possessions 
in India. 

The Governor-General being on the eve of his departure for Fort St. 

' George, takes this opportunity of declaring his public approbation of ex- 
ertions so honourable to the character of this settlement, and so conforma- 
ble to that spirit which now secures the British empire in Europe ayainst 
the combined efforts of all its enemies. 

All the officers bearing commissions in the militia having, without ex- 
ception, manifested every possible degree of activity and diligence in the 
formation and discipline of their respeetive companies and troups, the Go- 
vernor-General will not attempt to discriminate the merits of individuals 
belonging to the corps. But it is his duty to express a particular sense of 
the service rendered by Lieut.-Colonel Welsh, of the 2nd regiment of 
native cavalry, in forming the corps of militia cavalry, which has derived 
great advantage from the valuable instructions of that respectable ofticer. 

The Governor-General is persuaded, that no incitement is necessary to 
sustain the zeal which now animates the whole settlement ; but he cannot 
withhold from the gentlemen who have exerted themselves on this occa- 
sion, the accompanying testimony of the value of their services, contained 
in a letter from the Right Hon. Henry Dundas, which did not reach Fort 
William until somé weeks after the re-establishment of the Calcutta Eu- 
ropean militia had taken place. ‘ 


——— 


Extract of a letter from the Right Hon. Henry Dundas to the Right Hon. 
the Governor-General, dated the \6th June, 1798. 


In consequence of the menaces and arrogant language of our enemy, 
threatening, by an invasion of our own island, at once to strike at the whole 
vitals of our strength and power, a spirit of zeal, ardent loyalty, and na- 
tional pride, has been*excited to a degree unequalled at any period of our 
history; and the consequence of it is, that all ranks and degrees of men 
are coming forward to be trained in arms—ietermined to repel every at- 
tempt to insult our coasts, or to disturb the internal peace and prosperity 
of the country. We are, in truth, become an armed nation; and, in addi- 
tion to all our other advantages, have formed a bulwark of internal secu- 
rity, founded upon the yoluntary zeal, loyalty, and valour of the country. 
I wish, earnestly, to urge your Lordship to take this statement under your 
consjderation, as applicable to the situation of India. If it be true that a 
successfyl invasion of this country would prove fatal to us, in every one 
interest werthy to bestow a thought upon, it is still more peculiarly true, 
with regard to his Majesty’s subjects settled in India. A successful attack 
upon our possessions in India, and the overthrow of the British interests 
there, would be a death’s wound to every prospect which any civil ser- 


APPENDIX. 697 


vant of the company can entertain. Why then are not they, so far as is 
consistent with their other avocations and duties, to devote some leisure 
hours in each week, in order to learn the use of arms, and to form them- 
selves into corps, under the authority of the Government, for the purpose 
of adding to your European strength in India, and preparing themselves, in 
case of the last extremity, to sacrifice their lives in defence of those inte- 
rests, upon which every thing essential in life must depend. This is an 
advantage which, in the day of difficulty, no other European nation but 
ourselves, have the means of resorting to. 


APPENDIX I. 


To Lieut.-General Harris, Commander-in-Chief, &¢.* 


Sir, 

Having in obedience to your orders taken the command of the troops 
ordered for the assault of the Fort of Seringapatam, consisting of a corps 
of six companies of European flankers from the Bombay army, under 
Lieut.-Colonel Dunlop ; a corps of four companies of European flankers 
from the Scotch Brigade, and the Regiment de Meurone, under Colonel 
Sherbrooke; his Majesty's 12th, 33rd, 73rd, and 74th regiments; ten 
companies of Bengal sepoy flankers, under Lieut.-Colonel Gardener; 
eight companies of coast sepoy flankers, under Lieut.-Colonel Dalrymple; 
six companies of Bombay sepoy flankers, under Lieut.-Colonel Mignan ; 
one hundred artillerymen, with a proportion of gun lascars, under Major 
Bell. The European and Native pioneers under Captain Dowse, amount- 
ing as per enclosed return of men actually under arms at the assault, to— 

Firelocks { Nurgbeans mer | Oe ace } Total - 4,376 

I have now the honour to report to you the measures I took to secure 
the success of the important object entrusted to me, and the result, and 
to enclose a return of the killed and wounded on the assault. 

Having received your instructions to make the capture of the ramparts 
my first object, as the force under my command was not deemed sufti- 
cient to assault the ramparts and town at the same time, when defended 
by Tippoo’s whole army, I directed Lieut.-Colonel Dunlop, with six com- 
panies of Bombay European flankers, supported by his Majesty’s 12th and 
33rd regiments, and ten companies of Bengal sepey flankers, with fifty 
artillerymen, to assault the North ramparts, and to push on with the 
European flank companies until he met the South attack, under Colonel 
Sherbrooke, consisting of the flank companies of the Scotch Brigade 
and Regiment de Meurone, reinforced by the Grenadier companies of 
his Majesty’s 73rd and 74th regiments, in consequence of the vigorous 
resistance, there was reason to apprehend at the several heavy batteries 
on the South face of the fort, and supported by his Majesty’s 73rd and 
74th regiments, eight companies of coast native, and six companies of' 
Bombay native flankers, with fifty artillerymen, when the whole were di- 
rected to form on the East face, until arrangements were made for the 
attack of such of the Cavaliers as might not already have been seized on, 
or for proceeding to the attack of the body of the place, if with the force 
remaining such a measure should be deemed advisable. 

The assault commenced, in obedience to your orders, at one Pp. a. 
Colonels Sherbrooke and Dunlop were directed on no account to quit the 
inner rampart previous to their junction, for any other object but that of 


s 


* Referred to at page 570. 


698 - APPENDIX. 


seizing on the cavaliers in the neighbourhood of their respective attacks, 
and to lose no time in regaining their situation on the ramparts, as soon 
as that object should be attained, and every cavalier or post on the ram- 
part, which it might be deemed essential to secure, were immediately to 
be occupied by a battalion company or companies from the supporting 
European regiments, so that the whole of the ground once captured 
might be secured, and the flankers on their junction be in full force to 
follow up their success, by an attack on any of the cavaliers which had 
not fallen in their way, or by an assault on the body of the town and the 
palace of the Sultaun. 

In the success of every part of this plan my warmest wishes were grati- 
fied; the whole of the ramparts, and every cavalier in the fort, were in a 
vigorous assault of a few hours, in the possession of our troops, who 
were too well acquainted with the value of their conquest to render the 
retaining it against the whole of Tippoo’s.army at all doubtiul. The 

lace, therefore, being so securely our own, I was not anxious, by an 
‘immediate attack on the palace, to bring on a fresh and unnecessary 
slaughter; and indeed the exhausted state of the gallant flankers rendered 
it expedient for me to halt a short time before I proceeded to the attack 
of the palace, which, if Tippoo was in it, there was every reason to sup- 
pose would be, if possible, as gallantly defended as attacked. 

During this halt, two fresh battalions of sepoys arrived, and trusting 
that by this time the Sultaun would see how fruitless any further resist- 
ance must prove, I requested Major Allen, Deputy Quarter-Master-Ge- 
neral, who had just arrived from camp, aud who, from his knowledge of 
the language, was well qualified to execute the duty, to proceed with a 
flag of truce to the palace, and offer Cowle to Tippoo Sultaun, and every 

erson in his palace, on his immediate and unconditional surrender of 
himself and family to me; at the same time informing him, if there was 
the smallest hesitation in acceding to this offer, that an immediate assault 
on the palace would take place, and every man in it be put to the sword. 
The Grenadiers, and part of the 12th regiment under Major Craigie, with 
the 2nd battalion of the 9th regiment of sepoys, accompanied Major Allen 
to put this threat into immediate execution, if necessary; and I prepared 
the flankers, now a little recovered from their fatigues, to follow to the 
attack of the palace on the first signal of hostilities having recommenced 
(for the firing had ceased on all sides for upwards of an hour). In the 
mean time I received intelligence from one of the prisoners, of whom I 
caused enquiry to be made «as to the place where the English soldiers, 
who had been taken in the different assaults on the enemy’s out posts 
during the siege were confined, that they had all been put to death about 
ten days before in the most barbarous manner, by having nails driven 
through their skulls. On this I immediately advanced with the flankers 
of the 74th regiment and the light infantry, and remaining part of the 
‘12th regiment, resolved, if Cowle had not already been granted, and the 
dreadtul accounts of the fate of our fellow soldiers were confirmed, to 
sacrifice the tyrant to their manes. 

On reaching the palace, Major Allen came out to me, and informed me 
he had been with Tippoo’s two youngest sons, who were ignorant where 
their father was, but were disposed to surrender themselves and the palace 
on a promise of protection. Anxious, if possible, to discover Tippoo, 
who I had been informed was certainly in the palace, I hesitated to agree 
to these conditions unless they would inform me where their father was, 
and threatened to search the most secret recesses of the palace if he was 
not instantly produced ; but not being able to learn from them where the 
Sultaun was, and wishing to get them out of the fort before it was dark, 
after giving them every assurance of protection and kind treatment, I sent 


APPENDIX. 699 


then off to you, under charge of Lieutenant-Colonel Agnew, your public 
Secretary, and Captain Merrivtt, your Aid-de-Camp, escorted by the 
light infantry company of his Majesty’s 33rd regiment. The palace was 
then taken possession of without opposition. I now a to the 
search of the palace, accompanied by Lieutenant-Colonel Close and Major 
Allen, taking care, however, to avoid the Leuana, round which I had 
posted a sufficient force to make his escape from it impracticable. In 
the palace we found a man who, on being severely threatened, said that 
the Sultaun was killed in attempting to escape through the Northern 
Sally Port, and offered to conduct us to the body. We accordingly pro- 
ceeded thither, and under a slaughtered heap of several hundreds, many 
of whom were men of consequence in his service, had the. pleasure to 
discover the body of the Sultaun, he had been shot through the head and 
body, and was quite dead, I caused him immediately to be put into.a 
palanquin, and conveyed to the palace, where the body was identified by 
some of the principal men who had fallen into our hands, and by two of 
the eunuchs belonging to his Haram. ; ; 

I now proceeded to give such protection to the inhabitants as was in 
my power, and although it was by this time dark, as 1 have heard no 
complaints of outrage or insult being offered to any after the conflict 
ceased, I may ¥enture to say the natives of India will be satisfied that the 
British soldiers are not more brave than humane. = 

Early the next morning Abdual Cawtic, the second son of Tippoo, and 
the elder son of the two who were delivered to Lord Cornwallis as hos- 

«tages at the conclusion of the last war, was met by Lieutenant-Colonel 
Dalrymple coming from the island to deliver himself up, he was imme- 
diately assured of protection and the most liberal treatment, and I went 
to meet him to shew how much satisfied I was with the confidence he 
placed in us by thus delivering himself into our hands when the means of 
scape were perfectly in his power. 

Having been Jed to expect you in the fort yesterday morning, I waited 
with Abdual Cawlic to deliver him into your own hands. But on being 
relieved by Colonel Wellesley, I proceeded with him to camp, and deli- 
vered him over to you. I perceive, in the general orders of yesterday, 
hat no mention is made of Colonel Sherbrooke. This, I perceive, is 
owing to that order being published before 1 had time to make my report 
to you of the conduct of the troops under my command on the assault, 
which was highly exemplary throughout, and if, where all behaved nobly, 
it is proper to mention individual merit, I know no man so justly entitled 
to praise as Colonel Sherbrooke, to whose exertions I feel myself much 
indebted for the success of the attack. 

I make no doubt but Lieutenant-Colonel Dunlop, who commanded a 
party of equal force with that of Colonel Sherbrooke, would have merited 
equal praise for his exertions had he not most unfortunately been disabled 
by a wound very early in the assault, a circumstance I most sincerely re- 
gretted, as from the well known character of that officer, and the clear 
manner in which he understood the instructions I gave him relative to 
the attack he was to lead, I put the greatest confidence in the suceess of 
the attack. 

I have the honour to be, Sir, 
Your most obedient, humble Servant, 
: Davip Barrp, Major-General. 

Camp at Seringapatam, ; 

6th May, 1799. 


VOL. 1. 2y 


700 


APPENDIX K. 


Statement of the Force composing the Grand Army 
under the Command of Lieutenant General Harris, February, 1799. 


Non Commissioned 
Corps. Drums Rank and File. Total 
19th Regiment — i cage 447 
25th Do. . 465 
: —_———— e912 
lst Do. Native Cavalry F . ant 443. 
2nd Do. Do. : ea oe . ‘ 443 
3d Do. Do. j 5 2 a E 443 
4th Do. Do. 3 : : 437 1766 


2 Companies Bengal Artillery 
ist Battalion Artillery s F 
2nd—s«*Do. Do. : 


12th Regiment Foat . 


33rd_—s~Do. Do. . F 
73rd Do. De. . . 
74th Do. Do. 


Scotch Brigade . ; : 
Swiss Regiment 


Total European Infantry 


Ist Battalion Ist Regiment 


2nd Do. 3rd “Do. : ‘ : 
2nd Do. 5th Do. 2 : 
Ist Do, 6th Do. . F 
Ist Do. 8th Do. : 
2nd De. 9th Do. 
1st Do. 12th Do. ‘ : 
2nd Do. 12th Bo. . ‘ 
Three Battalions Bengal Volunteers 4 7 
Total Native Infantry 
* 
Gun Lascars ‘te Fi i 
Pioneers . . ; A : ‘ é 
Total Gun Lascars and Pioneers 
Abstract. 
Cavalry . . . . 5 ‘ 
Artillery. : . . 7 
European Infantry . - : 
Native Infantry . : . ; * 
Total Fighting Men 


Lascars and Pioneers 
Grand Total 


Cox. RoBerts. 


APPENDIX. 701 


Detachment under the Command of Colonel Roberts. 


Non Commissioned 
Corps. Drums Rank and | Total. 
File. q 
1 Company Bengal Artillery . Z ‘ 7 ¢ 57 
1 Do. Coast . : i is & ; 8&5 
[eet ene) 142 
1 Battalion 10th Regiment B. N. I. A ‘ . 993 | 
2nd Do. 10th Do. Do. . ‘ F ‘ 1008 
2nd Do. 2nd Do. C.N.I. : : ; 3065 | 
2nd Do. th Do. Do . . ‘ ‘ 1068 i 
Ist Do. llth Do. Do. . . , : 1092 
2nd Do. IJilth Do. Do. . - ‘ : 1099 
| 63.25 
Cgmpanies of Gun Lascars oe . : ; 338 
Total ‘ , . 6785 


Detachment in the Southern Division under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel 


Brown. 
Detachment of the Ist Battalion Artillery : ‘i 58 y 
—_—_—_—— . 58 
[st Division Ist European Regiment F : : 300 
2nd Do. 2nd Do. Do. . : : 7 346 
———— | 646 
2nd Battalion Ist Regiment (3 omens) . . 349 
ist Do. 2nd Do. ‘ . : 1040 
Ist Do. 3rd Do. < 900 
Ist Do. 13th Do. 2 Flank Companies) 7 224 
2nd Do. 3th Do. (2 Do. Do ). 224 
| 2737 
New Troop of Cavalry : , 2 108 108 
—O 
Gun Lascars. . . . : 168 168 
Pioneers . : ‘ é : ‘ 100 100 
Total : 3 é 3817 


Northern Division Commanded by Colonel Vigors. 


European Infantry : 129 
Native Infantry including Revenue Corps and Invalids 6712 


Total . ; A 6841 


N.B. A Detachment of Recruits from Hydrabad, consisting of 7 Havildars, 
6 Naiques, 7 Puckallies and 743 Sepoys, at Masulipatam, not included above. 
Five Companies of His Majesty’s 19th Regiment of Foot, and one Company of 
Bengal Artillery, ordered from Columbo to join the Troops in the Field in the 
Southern Division, not included in the above. Also a Detachment of 1500 Men 
under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel Read in the Barahmahaul. 


_ APPENDIX. 


GENERAL ORDER OF ENCAMPMENT OF THE GRAND ARMY. 


Ist Batt. Ist Reg. 
ist Do. 12th De. 
Ist Do. 6th Do. 


3rd 


Scotch Brigade. 
H. M. 74th Foot. 


Ist 


RIGHT WING. 
Brigade. Brigade. Brigade. 


Ist Batt. 8th Reg. 
Qnd Do. 12th Do. 
2nd Do. 3rd Do. 


5th 


ist Bengal Volunt. 
3rd Do. Do. 
2nd Do. Do. 


4th 


3 H. M. 33rd Foot. 
Reg. de Meuron. 
H. M. 73rd Foot. 


LEFT WING. 


2nd Batt. 9th Reg. 


6th 2nd 
Brigade. Brigade. Brigade. 


2nd Do. 5th Do. 


a @ Ist Reg. Nat. Cav. 
> 3 & 9th Do. Dragoons. 
& & 4th Do. Native Cav. 
<q 
2% 2nd Do. Do. 
6 zg 3 25th Do. Dragoons 

& 3rd Do. Nat. Cav. 


Major of Brigade Lt. Lauder. 
Colonel Gowdie Commanding. 
Qr. Mast. Brig. Lieut. Brice. 


Maj. Gen. Baird Commanding. 
Major of Brigade Lt. Lambton. 
Maj. of Brigade Lt. Colebrooke. 


Col. Sherbrooke Commanding. 


Qr. Mast. Brigade Lieut. Kelly. 


Maj. of Brigade Capt. Cuppage. 
Lt. Col. Gardiner Commanding. 
Qr. Mst. Brig. Lt. R. Marriott. 


The Hon. Col. Wellesley Comg. 


Maj. of Brigade Capt. Hughes. 


Maj. Brig. Capt. Lt. M‘Pherson. 
Lieut. Col. Scott Commanding. 
Qr. Mast, Brig. Lt. Armstrong. -2 


Col. Stevenson Commanding. 
Maj. of Brigade Lt. Strachan. 


Colonel Pater Commanding. 


Major Brigade Major Patterson. 


‘osby. 
y. 


Battering Train with the Arm 
Do. 


Do. 


4 Iron 24 Pounders, 


30 Do. 18 


8 Do. 12 
2 Brass 8 Inch Mortars. 


Maj.Gen. Bridges Commanding. 
Staff Maj. of Brig. Capt. Ogg 
6 Do. 54 Do, 


Do. Aidde Camp Lieut, € 


Field Train. 
2 Brass 18 Pounders. 
Do. 


8 Do. 12 


Do. 
1 Do. 8 Inch Howitzer. 
4 Do. 54 Da. 


Do.Aid.deCp.Lt.G.M.Popham. 
32 Do. 6 


Maj. Gen. Popham Commandg. 
Staff Maj. of Brig. Capt. Grant. 


Horse 
Arty. 


Captain Monteath. 
Attached to Cavalry. 


Captain Walson. 
4 Brass 6 Prs. 


Commanding. 
Staff Maj. of Brigade, 
Staff Aid de Camp, 


Major General Floyd, 
8 Do. 3 Do. 


108 


APPENDIX. 


‘Tetou 2 H-yuen(py ‘NoauopH Lusa0y 


ozr9 | S08’ | ZI9‘T 918‘F 


9IF 9IF S 068 
gl9 gL9 ue L68 
- £99 £99 i 66S 
“iL Ail ms 69 
£69 7 £6 i 
869 see 829 
EBS ee £2S 7 
£99 £99 - 669 
6L9 9: . 009 
a9 | 9 | ee 
Omg bE. | 99T cats 
Sh th sh aw 
= we aS .| 28 
So seo seo] ek 
[=] ay [=] S ° fe 
oe ss see | ae Ss a & 
BE |fe|Ea-| Sy 
oO * © Re a) 
5 S ve £ 


rn 


"66L1 ‘Atenaqeg WITT ‘atoueury ‘sieytenty peayy ‘JatyO-ul-ra 
‘DOIMIS PP OF porquasse Away oy} Suisodmoo ‘Lequiog jo Aouapis 


Bar‘T 


*surodoing 
‘ofa 99 Wey 


"TROL 


puonoyy “g adeo} * 


“TRYSIe AY “99-91 
“uosi93eq soley 
“OUIOET “[09- v1{ 
“Aidg soley 
ah y soley 
*saqi0,y rofesy 
“weUsTY “JOD-7"] 
sfousiqg 10feyy 
‘QOUIINET LOle PY 
“snLOqNg “09 
“URUIA] “[09-"7] 


"I 'N (894 pg 38q PZ 
‘I°N “Sor wag “yeq 48] 
"34 WIG JO 48] Jo “yop 
IM “TN “Baar pe “3eq pZ 
3005 “831 W/W 'H 
003 “Sal ‘OCH 
‘s003 “Sor WIG) “I “HJ 
“B91 pE eq IST 
“SOL Up “FeQ.IST 


£1089.1410 
°S°N ‘Bor pg ‘9eq 38} 


Aq papueuuiog 


* sduog svau01g 


"SD “aeurast a *fo9-"97y Aq 
“mod ‘opesiig oanen yoy 


quaunsor 437) 


‘doyung *joo-arq Aq ‘wi09 
‘epesiig uvedoing 10 aaquag 


quouligat 4327 
TW “lop~anery Aq 
COUT VEN WS 
S9IULSU JO OYIGE 


sivosey] pur ArolTpry Jo juamyoujaqT 


tr rere, 
pueuwoy qaenyg sourer [P1ou9y)-jULUOyNOV] 
Iq 9) 0} Sursuojaq sdoory, 943 Jo NUOLaY IVUINaY 


"TI XIGNUddV 


4yIouay sauialpy ‘Noauoy Iuadoy 


eaxeyg ‘nol ‘kydog “yey “wurer ‘aduion Jepyeqng. 


quowsoy pug “Ag 


Squamisoy pug coywueg 48] 


asp Gog “sdug ‘Susser —ywoundoy “pag ‘uoyeneg 38] 


“481 ‘uosdwoy,y, ‘S“} 


‘aspupyy usisug ‘osu “Moy 


dvyy ‘poy ——sarddyOQ JO soweyy 


‘aduoy “FT 30°F fAsOY suo sry “NalT ‘papunoy{— "Bay pug “IeEL 


704 


APPENDIX. 


I ele 


K 


ot 
a 6 
6 9 
8¢ a 
Las 
OF. £ 
¢. é 
Sacer 
& a} }> 
a 3 SS Eg, 
31 8 bale [a | S38 
=} Bs /Z)el|Sis 
= * Le g/e/3) 
St ra = real EN 
g Fz | + 
*popunogyr.- 


“661% ‘S Ypavpy ‘orodepag qwou duivg , a 


; ae 
y EEA es «of s 
p s 
elol jet 2 | 3: ) 8 
aha BS (pi B! 
SSiS2} 2) 8 Eye: 
Siete 61 Bea! 
ols le * Ls lela 
eisys #43) 8) 
‘BLE | a : aien 
oe ae od ‘ ae 8 


' 


“EGLE “UOTE JO YI9-OUE uot 


I0LT | - 


. . . . 


* . : : sdi0g sd9N0LT 
‘Soy wig “IG IS] | apEsuag oawn Yo 
+ Bay mn f opestig uvodowny jo adquacy 
+ + Boyer F 
‘op pag “OP BL). 
Op Wp ‘Op-3aH Fé” 


Bore pug “wg as] J 
ae oe : +. ganasery pun Aaqnay 


+ opedug one 3y3ny 


‘of 


aosupog 


quan purse sdoory, spuneyng ooddty, ia pasesua Auta 


iy ayy Jo jaud ys Ur ‘Surssify pue popunds “partty Jo wangoyf [wraoy 


‘We XIGNUdd¥ 


APPENDIX N. 


Return of Killed, Wounded and Missing, of the Corps which were engaged 
under the command of Lieutenant-General Harris in the acticn with 
Tippoo Sultaun’s Army near Mallavilly, on the 27th of March, 1799. 


Europeans. Natives. {Horses. 


Corps. Siz Fle (2| ele 
elei2le|2|2 EE 
S/B(M) o/s Beis 
Bs ela] 5 
| Seen Rae RS, (es Ue We A 
His Majesty’s 19th Dragoons ....j.... weselecesleceslesee| Saal 3 
inst LOR OO wreswase seve! olecas vive loess [osu |enies | OM o2les 
Hon. Com. \st. Reg. of N. Cav... }.... vecefeseet 2 focee| 3} 4. 
beesee bee DNs eece Mn ceed poses sastesoe) DL joveo) 2) dhs 
aitse. Sieseiateinle 3rd. 00... dO. 0... dee cveolecee} L ]....4 YH 4. 
His Majesty’s 33rd Regiment ....|.... coonlecccleceelaccntee|es he 
wesieeasiwiea’s 74th do. ......] 5 weve [a see esses fowiccfed fe fe 
seseseseeees Scotch Brigade....} 1 Sawelleisres le'ese.a:dardiers 
Hon. Com. 10th Reg. Bengal N.1},... weilesce|  Odeadefects 
Heihieide aac Ast Bat. Ist Reg. Coast)... eeee] LY 1] 4 ae 
tied & acces Ast do. Gth doves dee eee feesefeeee| LD peeeepee de] 
Sheets teats 2d do. 3rd dow... .jee elec feeeefeeee| SY Uf 
bree cokers 2d do. lth do..../.... ooh 1 
Perrier [st do. 12th do....fe. ccf eedueeefeees 2; 1 
43 Saye Secs 2d do. 12th do.....|....[....h eee deee aq 


Officers included in the Return.— Wounded, Captain Kennedy, }9th Light 
Dragoons ; Lieutenant Strachan, 2nd Regiment of Native Cavalry; Lieu- 


tenant Moore, 74th Regiment. 
B. Cuose, Adjutant General. 


APPENDIX 0. 


06 


i 


SACI Papntous 3ou “pusy PyL UMoIE sJoHOTOD—3nay{ JopuN HuUOMRYSTIOG Ou PUL “AWAY AUQUOR O49 UIA s9I09g Pu SOUBEPIO PIA ol, “HON 


e963 | S7tr j 
e tr | SOL | 999 4 ¥IZI | aces foster | oztt | > 8 8 ss is | 8 | oe | os is a ona aw durvwg ott on 30 toys 
os e ae ;. —QPOUOD OU WV Bugurvarosa 0p 71 

Reid boa oot 008% eg 6688 s6eg6 0086 ee nef q . i pia Away out aya po koauGs sarone qedyouted 
: * Fi ie a oe! Wee ¥. Ps 8. 8 $4 8 os es Ss * : op ov ppd 

—|— 2 = | 8 ee. t Awry 003 (ais pasoauos upely, Sapo Wvea_é 

3% Syl oe | a a =| = i= 2 z.. e o S sions - xs : 

rlteieeiay|aeligiieize! 2 igesi gi) 2) Eigei £1 E | gs . 

a es a} z = S = 7] & & be &| 2 & 3 . 

ge | SF 18h | gs | s8|s8| 88 12%! § bee) | eb eae! eg | F | es 

S : | BS 2 | g BS a = | + 28 


“SEUOLS IVIIONIVd GNY FONVNGUO IO LOVUISAV 
spoparous you *apeang 00'9 MROgE PUT ‘ANUBOT s,WUZEN Ol} SOUS sIty Jo 169's ‘s109u;Su_ ss “A °N 
saprrofny Jo Uanzos. 94) UO AUTIY dy) Jo 1330049 


tae 968t |9 26+ Bt|s [286 jose ae G2 Zrep\98L [982 
. : + duny £equio: uoyQuel par psopy 

sigzjsries focos|gs 620 ols £9 jo9|Z6gt\Goees jorctltezzt |seasizezilo \r9z loos \s3\ee)6e8 rs torgiosz {906 | {145 roteye fo unset outa ei Ga oat 
e : : ° . . . « . . . AUB pue 
ge lotlgoy jecrex (16s iasvor lo6srjesr |» |sop j6cs lozisclovy jo6es\vose)tzs -|p0¥ (fee cee os cars 
: : 7 aoye ‘weyedesurog sr0j0q KWAY Oty JO TIHZUEHS 
é : Peas et eas ANuBat pus ATVAC 8,WIVZN 
$9 1og|Z6or62Zer |ssot Zzers |Z6gr eZalg 119% brats ZOPF|SSH 1256 | + OY SSOUYTITE site Jo OAPSHYOXD ‘OPQVUIED OUg Wo 

: “| Suzyoreuk vo ppp oy uy Away 043 Jo wW3u0ng 


{eSsitasgs |PoZs|r4eegt|oz Sthr| St le 12h, 


¢ + pudgy pte umorg spuojog~"snayy Jo RUaUE 
“YSVjo yy agar ‘wiviodpoauy woay pAoyy peso 


O68 |SLOPT [ZEgr|¥81 OPS 09) 


| 
bs} 
cw | 8 8 


|eome| =| ae amarante oti _—— ee ors ee a ete ee ee 
. wks *SUIN{DY Jo spopleg 
“SLOIYO Tuy _ *8IOTTBO. “S199 YO Surpnjo *S109H0 . 
~pupouT QuIHI1g. 491S Surpoyour ‘44g Jog “OE QUdsdId HUST Saypopouy-‘Kyng 104 


“TOE pup 


“SMAILVN - *SN¥aAd OUWNT 


suvyadeSays0§ Jo afoys 043 Jo Wotenp~UOS ays ye Suyuyswos poe ‘kuary ous WIA podoAuod $9J03g TUdyouyld pus 
oousupay Jo ,OUTSEY Us WTA ‘USivdwuD oz 30 sporsod snOMEA FU 1YIUENS Spt JUEMOYS ‘SLULUTT [esOUDH~“snory Aq popueulwUEs LUT JY} JO suIN;OY oy Jo eovadsay 


707 
APPENDIX P. 


General Return of Killed, Wounded and Missing, of Corps composing the 
Army before Seringapatam, from the 4th of April to the 4th May, 1799, 


both days inclusive. 


Europeans. 
Corps. 3 3 2 
m/s |23 
sizi2 
= |e 
F | pe | tee 
Madras Engineers oss VI... 
Bombay. do. $4. pat poe 
Bengal Artillery 4} 12).. 
Ist Battalion Coast do. 6] 6]... 
2nd do. do. 8] 15; 1 
Bombay Artillery ; : 4 4] 6]... 
His Baeny: s 19th Regiment . 117 | 49] 1 
33rd do. | 6 | 2] lz 
‘ . 7rd do. | 21 | 99 i 
. . . T4th do. 145 |ULT.. 
; . . 75th do. ‘ 16 | 64} 38 
‘ i . 7th do. ‘ F 110 | 51 1 
7 . Scotch Brigade . 114) 86) 2 
Regiment de Meuron | 16 | 60; 1 
Bombay Regiment of European Infantry | 9 | 23] 1 
Ist Bat. 10th Bengal Reg. Native Infantry)... | .. | .. 
2nd do. do. do . mn 
1st Battalion Bengal Volunteers a 
2nd do. “do. ‘ a 
3rd do. do... gakal ds 
Ist Bat. Ist Reg. Madras Native Infantry Beil ss 
2nd do. 2nd do. do. : el are 
2nd do. 3rd do. do. Ps {1 2 
2nd do. 5th do. do. : a) sscde W) caer 
Ist do. 6th do. do. wal Tie 
2nd do. 7th do. do. renal cao 
Ist do. 8th do. do. ee pias 
2nd do. 9th do. do. ora tae 
Ist do. ]ith do. do. as bers 
2nd do. I}th do. do. Set dh Gi 
Ist do. 12th do. do. see Pad 
2ad do. 12th do. do. . 1 3 
Pioneer Corps | 1d .. 
Ist Bat. 2nd Reg. Bombay Nat. Infantry 1 I 
2nd do. 2nd do. do. jee 2 
Ist do. 3rd do. do. : stats 1 
2nd do. 3rd do. do. A als a 
Ist do. 4th do. do. 7 A eae 
Ist do: 5th do. do. . ele a 1 
Pioneer Corps - ; ; . 1 
Total . . .| LOI} 622! 22 


Seringapatam, 5th May, 1799. 


Natives. 


Killed. 


Orw* bb 
. tO om 
° Sos: 


mb Bobo Mt Gros" * °° 
wo 


SA cell coed 


HOP WN HNO LOT KH COh oP’ 
_ 
oS 


| Missing. 


eee 


119) 420) 


100 


N.B. Two Conductors of Ordnance wounded on the 2nd and 4th 


instant, not ineluded in the above. 


708 APPENDIX. 


OFFICERS KILLED AND WOUNDED, INCLUDED IN THE 
GENERAL RETURN. 


Major C. Campbell, Ist bat. lst Madras reg. N. I. killed 5th April, 1799. 
Lieut, G. Nixon, H. M.12th reg. do. 5th do. Lieut. T. Falla, do. do. 6th 
do. Lieut. Fitzgerald, 33rd, do. 5th do. Lieut. Fireworker A, Brooke, Ben-- 
gal artillery, wounded 5th do. Lieut, R: Nixon, H. M. 12th reg. do. 5th 
do, Lieut. King, do. do. 6th do. Ensign Neville, do. do. 17th do. Capt. 
1. Munro, 2nd bat. 12th Madras N. I. do. 18th do. Lieut. I. Vernon, do. 
do, do. do. Lieut. Moore, do do. do. do. Lieut. Mackintosh, 2nd bat. 3rd 
Madras reg. N. I. do. 17th do. Capt. Alexander Torriano, Bombay artil- 
lery, killed 18th do. Lieut. Wm. M‘Reddie, do. do, 18th do. Lieut. Wm. 
Taylor, staff, wounded, do. do. Lieut. Jeremiah, Lock, 2nd bat. 2nd reg. 
Bombay N.1. do. do. do. Lieut. John Barnard, do. do. do. do. Assist.- 
surgeon Glasser, Reg. de Meuron, killed 19th do. Lieut. I. Fish, 2nd bat. 
3rd Madras reg. N. I. do. 20th do. Lieut. S. Smith, do. wounded do, do. 
Lieut. Fletcher, H. M. 74th reg. do. do. do. Capt. C. I. Mears, Ist bat. 
2nd Bombay reg. N. I. killed 2ist do. Capt. John Gerdon, H. M. 75th 
reg. wounded do. do. Capt. Marshall, Ist bat. 5th Bombay reg N. I. do 
do, do. Capt. Wm. Brown, Ist bat. 3rd do. do. do. do. do. Lieut. Todd, 
H. M. 73rdreg. do. 26th do. Capt. Hay, H. M. Scoteh brigade, killed do. 
do. Tieut. M‘Beath, do. wounded do. do. Lieut. Innes, do. do. do. do. 
Lt. M‘Lean, do. do. do. do. Lt. Blair, Ist bat. Madras artil. do. 25th do. Lt. 
Tnvine, H. M. 74th reg. killed 26thdo. Capt. Aytone, do. wounded do, do. 
Lieut. Maxwell, do, do.do.do. Lieut. Carrington, do. do. do. do. Lieut. 
M‘Lean, jun. H. M. 73rd reg. do. 27th do. Capt. Molle, H. Me Scotch 
brigade, ds. do.do. Capt. Piauchaud, Reg. de Meuron, do. do. do. Lieut. 
Fagen, 3rd bat. Bengal volunteers. do. do. do. Lieut.-Col. Montagu, Ben- 
gal artillery, wounded 2nd May (since dead.) Lieut. Cookesley, Ist bat. 
Madras artillery, killed do. do. Capt. Cosby, staff, do. 3rd do. Capt, Lt. 
Caldwell, Madras engineers, wounded 4thdo. Major Mandeville, 2nd bat. 
Madras artillery, do. do. do. Capt. Jourdan, 2nd bat. do. killed do. do. 
Capt. Lieut. Prescott, Ist bat. do. wounded do do. Lieut. Shawe, H. M. 
12th reg. do.do. do. Capt. Macleod, 73rd, do. do.do. Lieut. Lalor, 73rd, 
killed, do. do. Lieut. Thomas, 73rd, wounded, do. do. Ensign Antil, 
73rd, do. do. do. Ensign Guthrie, 73rd, do. do. do: Lieut. Farquhar, 
74th, killed, do, do. Lieut Prendergast, 74th, do. do. do, Lieut. Hill, 
74th, do. do. do. Lieut. Shaw, 74th, do. do. do. Lieut. Mather, H. M. 
75th reg: killed 4th May. Lieut. Turner, 75th, wounded, do. do. Lieut. 
Broughton, 75th, do. do. do. Lieut. Skelton, 75th, do. do. do. Lieut.- 
Col. Dunlop, 77th, do. do. do. Capt. Owen, 77th, killed, do. do. Lieut. 
Lawrence, 77th, wounded, do. do. Capt. Lardy, Reg. de Meuron, do. do. 
do. Lieut. Mathey, do. do. do.do. Lieut. R. Webb, Bombay European 
reg. do. do. do. Lieut. Cormick, Madras pioneers, killed do. do. 


——— 


ABSTRACT OF OFFICERS KILLED AND WOUNDED. 


Madras engineers, 1 wounded. Bombay do., 0. Bengal artillery, 2 
wounded. Madras do. 2 killed, 3 wounded. Bombay do. 2 killed. Ben- 
gal infantry, | wounded. Madras do. 14 killed, 26 wounded. Bombay 
do. 3 killed, 12 wounded. Madras pioneers, 1 killed. Bombay do. 0.— 
Total killed and wounded 67. 


Barry Crosz, Adj.-Gen. 


709 


APPENDIX. 


‘og ‘spjoow Ioy sZuIpring WIM ‘sayrapanoy 


“MANDY °V ‘d 


a : . . . . - : in Pt *Areyoioag ALEUMWL 

+ 6 + + song ‘guLey Treg Sapystayg pue Sunpeut 403 sormouLy *JUIUIDZLIS 499.1109 cd 
BL . . . . . . . . . soulzedey vouddxg TEU -o1d 0} OF10YITY oTQIsSod ussq Suraey jo ‘ eo Beas 

: \ 7 . 7 ; 7 . caper aor coe or oaaet UY STG Gq SUTABY JOU Ff *Q0BLQSQY YInod B St aAOqe siLT, 

[ nae ae *a2g ‘sIOOL, Zuyyousnug ‘adery 40us ‘op *od £83 * See ® * * — $¥20a O43 UO pajanoW sUND * . 

t : : cs . Sig. 8 ® OR ‘AoysnW “op "og 000‘2& be * STQVddTAIOS 918 000°ST pein ai a eTea ORE ‘oni “oa 
& . = - * . * +o fsodelseD ‘suny Joy s[euasiy o3reT 00066 . : 5 : . “arg ‘samiqreg ‘syooraaty Jo op og 

Tt = * + sautqount oyeredas anos Suruyezuoo ‘sjoysuN, op ‘od | oo0toss = * «= *° — SOUIZBSEH OLOMIP ayy wt asoo] Aapmoduny jo ‘op “otf 
rd ° ° . ° . sung Surysyod pue Suyoiog 10} SBuIpyng 331eT 00FFSb 3 : . * SdZ{S JUELaBIP JO ‘4oUS UOAE PUNY JO [8303 purty 

"sqrt 
0% ‘sSupyng Raging fo gunoooy “894039 oMOUM 
| tod a P ! | 

626 | tie {Zit foun lz 69. 29 1 A t ‘i i > je | jsrlo lsojpt|sriséleg|Zejssiz jotjZe|Stirelisis jeZlorjotjesia iratensy is jt ft **29UBUPIQ JO [BIOL puwry 
nn a ee a On a ees Pe ‘some tama (Hum wad Wet lauae (aoe Meet banat Kure Seed Sine ieee ‘aeend Gem’ Saeed Semel Geant Somes Reseet Seoul sl Coot ley Snen fant foe fou (ented (eee bene 

ry ry as By 
ede | ce ce fededfectesfedeocdeefet ot it dh it dE |e |& |p |o les] *“|2ejoujraj ide] *"orlgsior/saiedis {1916 jotidaie [6uttlt js |r |e} testes seoueupi9g oly 
z A ere ee Se = eel oe] oo] os. + ob eed caf oct oe] cof oof oof oof oe] oof cof eefor she sab oal coh eel oof ool ooh eel eol eel wal eal eet ool oe Arpunog ey} uy paystayan ‘oa 
perl ele lz tr lorie le lens is 9 (71% [yt ys fe [716 | --|stlptlozjes|ée|Zelorja je [1316 jo Jo }r-jeait [9 fo fois focfes|t fooft | cree ete eee souenpsg sszag 

J fn OO Cn ee eT oeet feel uated Coe tet teen tent : 
vw | EIS) = eleleisiesy eye) 

Q <7 i 

# || s lele/e/31318/8/3/8 818/815 

g : 

“SAD ZITMOFT “suIOYOD s1e}0N 


surejedesutieg ut ‘og ‘soueupsg jo youNsqy 


‘OS XIGNAddV 


710 APPENDIX. 


APPENDIX R. 


MEMORANDUM 
Respecting the Prize Property captured at Seringapatam. 


Although it is not possible to ascertain with any degree of accuracy 
what the prize property in Seringapatam will amount to, yet from the va- 
rious information obtained through the Mutseddies and others, employed 
in different départments under the late Sultaun, I am enabled to form the 
fellowing estimation :— ; 

\st—especie, 16,74,350 star pagodas ; 2nd—jewels, gold and silver bul- 
lion, 98,00,000 ; 3rd—paddy, pepper, salt, and other articles, in the differ- 
ent granaries, 1,10,000; 4th—-copper and brass pots, glasses, carpets, &c., 
26,000 ; 5th—elephants, camels, horses, buliocks, would amount to 54,000 ; 
6th—cloths of various sorts, &c. in the Tosha Khana, 2,00,000. ‘Total, 
45,58,350 star pagodas. Military stores not included. 

No remark is necessary on the Ist article. The estimation on the 
jewels is very uncertain ; there are still twenty and more boxes, the con- 
tents of which bave not: heen valued; very Kittle is known upon the subject 
of jewels, for no one among Tippoo’s people has any idea of the contents 
of his treasury ; so that information is very little to be depended upon re- 
lative to this 2nd article. With regard to the third, I have every reason 
to think that the estimation is correct. The 4th article consists of a va- 
riety of things, which, most probably, will produce the estimated sum. 
The 5th is composed of property of which I cannot procure an exact ac- 
‘count. ‘The 6th includes all the gold and silver cloths, and every article of 
that description, as well as sundry other commodities too particular to 
enumerate ; the estimation is within bounds. 

As the greater part of the captured property is composed of jewels, &c., 
articles which either Tippeo or his. father Hyder had plundered, the Mut- 
seddies and other persons, of whom I have enquired, declare that they 
cannot give any exact statement of the late Sultaun’s riches. 


W. M. Gorpon. 
Seringapatam, June 9, 1799. 


APPENDIX S. 


The Sircar Coudadad to the Executive Directory, representing the French 
Republic, One and Indivisible, at Paris.* 


In the name of that friendship which the Sircar Coudadad, and the 
subjects of the Sircar, vow to the French mepublie, which friendship and 
alliance shall endure as long as the sun and moon shine in the heavens, 
and which shall be so solid that the most extraordinary events shall 
neither break nor disunite them. 

The English, jealous ‘of the connection and friendship which, for so 
long a time, has subsis.ed between my Sircar and France, some years ago 
united against me with the Marhattas, the Nizam Ally Khan, and my 
other enemies; and declared a war as odious as unjust, which lasted 
several years, and of which the result was so fatal, that it cost me 
three crores and thirty lacks of rupees in money, and my finest pro- 
vinces. 

* Referred to at page 591. 


APPENDIX, 711 


The republic is certainly not ignorant of any of these unfortunate cir- 
cumstances, nor of the many efforts I made to dispute, inch by inch, the 
possession of that country, which at last [ was obliged to relinquish to 
our common enemy. I should not have been driven to such cruel sacri- 
fices had I been aided by my ancient allies the French, who were deceived 
by the perfidious machinations of Conway, the Governor-General of Pon- 
dicherry, who was then plotting with Campbell, the Governor of Madras, 
for the evacuation of the place commanded by the former. No doubt the 
republic will now repair the fault ef their former Government, by driv- 
ing the English from their rich possessions in India. 

‘These sentiments, with which I have long been animated, I have made 
known to the Government of the Isle of France, through the organ of 
two Ambassadors, from whom I have had the great satisfaction of receiv- 
ing such an answer as I desired, together with the republican flag, by the 
hands of Chapuis, Chief of a brigade, and Dubuc, a Captain of a ship, who 
also brought with them the inconsiderable succour of officers and imen, 
with which circumstances permitted General Malartic and Rear-Admial 
Sercey to supply me. 

I retain with me the first of these officers, and send the second to you 
as my Ambassador, who, in requesting your alliance, offensive and deten- 
sive, will, I trust, obtain such a reinforcement of troops as,joined to mine, 
may enable me to attack, and annihilate for ever, our common enemies 
in Asia. 

I send you my standard (which, united with that of the republic, will 
serve as a basisfor the alliance into which our respective nations are about, 
to contract), and with it the particular articles which J have charged 
Captain Dubuc to communicate to you. ; 

join with him my subjects Sheik Abdoulraim and Mahomet Bismilla, 
who are equally authorized to represent me with your Government. 

Whatever may be the future state of our two nations, whether blended 
or separate, into whatever engagements they may respectively enter, may 
the prosperity, the glory, and the success of both, be still the common 
object of each; may the sentiments which they feel for each other, be 
guaranteed by mutual assurances of fidelity, and by oaths of reciprocal 
obligation; and may the heavens and the earth meet and unite, ere the 
alliance of the two nations shall suffer the smallest alteration, 


In my Palace at Seringapatam, 20th July, 1798. 


A true Translation, 


G. G. Kesue, French Translator. 


A Note of the Proposals to be made by my Ambassadors to the Executive 
Directory at Paris.* 


Article 1.—For ten or fifteen thousand troops, of every description, 
infantry, cavalry, and artillery. 


Article 2A naval force to act on the coast where our armies may be, 
to favour, andto reinforee them, in case of necessity. 


Article 3—The Sirear will furnish all military stores and provisions for 
the army of the republic, as well as horses, bullocks, carts, and tents, 
together with every other necessary ; excepting European liquors, which 
his country does not afford. 


* Referred to at page 592. 


712 APPENDIX. 


Ayticle 4.—On all marchesand military operations, the King’s orders are 
to be observed. 


Article 5.—The expedition shall he directed to some pointof the Ccro- 

* mandel coast, and in preference, to Porto Novo, where the disembarka- 

tion of the troops shall take place, and where the King, with his. whole 

army, will appear, either before the arrival of the French army or at any 

time appointed, it being his intention to commence operations in the heart 
of the enemy’s country. 


Article 6.—The King desires that the republic will incorm him, by des- 
patching to Mangalore two corvettes from Europe, within 20 days of each 
other, of the number of ships and troops which are to be sent from France, 
in order that he may take the field immediately, and be master of the 
Coromandel coast, before the arrival of the republican forces, and thus 
be enabled to provide for all their wants. 


Article 7.—All the conquests which may be made from the enemy, ex- 
cepting those provinces which the King has been obliged, to cede to the 
English, to the Mathattas, and to the Nizam Ally Khan, shall be equally 
divided between the two nations, and according to their respective con- 
venience. The same division shall also be made of the enemies ships, 
and of the Portugueze colonies, in order to indemnify the King for the 
expences of the war. 


Article 8.—Should any difficulty arise between the allied armies, each 
shall observe justice, according to their own laws and customs; and 
every discussion relating to them shall be conducted in writing between 


OY 


the two nations. 


ar 


Article 9.—Whatever may be the desiré“of the republic, whether to give 
peace to England, or to continue war, the King trusts the republic will 
always have the kindness to consider him as a friend and faithful ally, 
accordingly comprehend hit in all its treaties, and apprise him of all its 
intentions. 


Article 10.—All French whatever, who now are or may hereafter come 
within the territories of the King, shall be treated as friends and allies ; 
they shall have the liberty of passing and repassing, and of trading, with- 
out any molestation or hindrance ; on the contrary, they shall receive 
every assistance and succour which they may want. 


4rticle 11.—To procure for my service four founders of brass and four 
founders of iron cannon, four paper makers, twelve manufacturers of 
glass, in different branches of the manufacture, two naval engineers, and 
two good ship-builders. 


Given in my Palace of Seringapatam, under my signature, and that of 
my Prime Minister, with the séal of state affived, the 20th July, 1798. 


A true Translation, 


G. G. Kesus, French Translator. 


END OF VOLUME I. 


CRITIQUES 
ON PHE 


“ HISTORY OF THE BRITISH COLONIES,” 


With numerous Maps and authorised Official Documents and hitherto (unpub 
lished) Statisticat Charts, from the Celenial Office, East India House, Board of 
Trade, Custom House, and Board of Control, &c. ‘ 


‘Mr, Martin possesses eminent qualifications for the task he has undertaken—he has not 
merely a taste but a possion for statistics ; a sheet of figercs is to him as delightfal as a 
landscape of Claude’. co a virtueso, and he frames tables with as mucit facility as if Babs 
bage’s calculating - agine formed a part of. his mental machinery. Connected for many -years 
with the coloni-c_, .\e has acquired a thorough knowledge of colonial and commercial pos 
Hey—an economist “{ no mean order, he has arranged and digested that knowledge so as 
to afford information and guidance for the future. Above all, imbued with the purest 
principles of philanthropy, his aim, in all his publications, hasbeen to point out the best 
means for increasing the amount of human happiness.’—Athencum, Murch, 1834. 


«Mr. Martin, not only surveys, but he explains; he not only gives you measurement, 
but ‘he is a meteorologist, a mineralogist, and’ a financier; he omits nothing that can pos- 
sibfy be brought to bear on the subject.of his work, whieb, in point of value, has perhaps 
never ‘Deen excectied. The vari of nations amorg 100,000,006 British subjects, on 
1,000,008 square miles of Engilsh dominion—the form of government in the several preai- 
dencies—the exact state of their several civif andumilitary éstablishments—thdr dcbt and 
expenditure—the value of meney in the different provinces—the general policy—the man- 
neys and customs, and climates of these swarms of nations, we mect with attention, and 
on each point, where it is practicable, we have a statistical table, defining, with precision, 
all matters that can be reduced to such certainty,’—New Monthly Magazine, April, 


“It is highly honourable to his Majesty as the ‘Sovereign of the greatest Colonial Em. 
pire inthe world,’ that he should have accorded to Mr. Martin his gracious permission to 
insoribe to him the first history of that empire; and we cordially congratulate the author 
ow this distinguishing mark of royatfavour. The fistory.of the British Colonics teems 
with information, the most diversi valuabie information.in every page, writton- with 
a noble, gencrous, patriotic, proad, and lofty spirit.’—Court Journal. 


‘ Mr. Montgomery Martin’s valuable History of the Byitish Colonies eontains a fund of 
useful information, weil ilustratea by eopious tables,’sAlorning Herald, 


* As & work of reference, Mr. Martin’s publieation will be necessary to all libraries, 
whose owners take an interest in Colonia! affairs, for it contains information which cannot 
be procured clsewhere.’-—Spectator, 


* Unquestionably Mr. Martin has claim to our highest praise for extraordinary perse 
verance and research, as well as for judicious selection and arrangement of materials, in 
this Historical and Statistical Work,’—Nacal and Military Gazette. 


* Aponderous work upon a gigantic subjcet :—it is a page of history that has long been 
required to be filled up, and we are giad that the work has boen undertaken by ‘one, who 
is in every way so competentio undertake it by his dong acquaintanee with the subject on 
whiclr he writes; if the succeeding volumes should be eqnal tothis, it will be one of the 
most valaable and compicte works ever published; as it sots before -us in alt its depart. 
monts, physical, statistical, political, and ecelesiastical, the history of those countrics, 
which, being the offspring of our own, are undoubtedly entitled to the highest plaee, The 
statements must have cost Mr, Martin immense labour and research.’-+-Liverpool Courier. 


‘An undertaking of immense grasp and great importance; every thing relating to our 
Eastern Possessions, collected from a varicty of sources, most of them official.’—siatic 
Journal. 


‘ftis gratifying to observe that this national work has been duly appreciated by the 
pudlic. A histary-ofiour immense Cotonial psessions, ‘of the great interests connected with 
them, of their bearing and influenee upon the mother country, with a clear view of the 
policy which had been operating apoe teem, was a desiteratum in our fanguage. With 
un external empire ramifying itself into every part of the globe, there was a compicte 
blank in our literature of works relating to its people, its iaws, its customs, its physical as- 
pects, industrial and economical chasacter, its productions, and its governments, previ« 
ous to Mr. Martin devoting his energies to the task of giving to the public his compre. 
hens{ve and most valuable work, a noble monument of perseverance and industry, and of 
a sagacious and powerful mind. The volume has our very hearty commendation. The 
statistical information it embraces is wide, and has been collected with great pains, and 
4s remarkable for its accuracy ; and the remarks upon men and manners are «distinguished 
dy a philanthropic spirit highly honourable to Mr. Martin. .No library, whether public ar 
private, can be considered complete without this work, both as a book of roference and 
for agreeable and instructive reading.’—-Constituttonal Magazine, 


©The fourth volume of the ‘ History of the British Colonies,’ as regards its plan, ful~ 
ness and exceution, holds on its mighty and splendid career without faltering or abatement, 
and if possible with a more masterly freedom, knowledge and philanthropy than ever :—this 
last feature seems to ‘expand as the pubdlication advances in magnitude and age ; nor do 
we exceed the simpic but prominent truth in saying that Mr. Martin’s enlightened, liberal 
and religious fervour of humanity sheds abroad such a lovely light as to render his purcly 
statistical details exceedingly interesting and attractive even to the general reader, and to 

> 


CRITICAL.NOTICES OF, PHE HISTORY. OF TNE COLONIES. 


excite kindred feelings in all. His acquaintance with every distinct Colony, nay, every 
patch of territery en which a few British subjects have settled seems more minute and 
complete than any that has ever been formed by individual historians or tourists of 
single settlements, while the case with which he disposes of his vast and multiform ma- 
terials points out a grasp of intellect of extraordinary power. That one manshould not only 
visit all or almost all of the British Colonies, tut write of each and ali, by far the most 
satisfactory aecount of their relations, interna} condition, capabilities and prospects that has 
ever appeared, can only be explained by declaring that the writer’s mental powers and ac- 
quirements are extraordinary, and that nothing short of a passion for the task could have 
carried him through with it. The work is essentially statistical, calling in the aid of 
politics, science and the arts, as scope may be granted to a mind of great compass, Vi- 
vacity and enquiry ; his pages of figures, with verv slight and few exceptions, are as plain 
and accurate as the simpiest lessons in arithmetic, whilst of his style it can seldom be 
said that it is other than pure, or where description is called for that it falls short of elo- 
quence of a fine order ; nor must we forget to mention the sustained tone of Christian 

feeling which pervades every sentiment and every argument in M ontgomery Martin’s 

great and invaluable work—a work worthy of the mighty and numetQ us Colonial depen- 
dencies of the Empire ef Britain.’— Monthly Review for June, 1835. 


‘Mr. Montgomery Martin has nobly redeemed his original pledge ty the public, and by 
placing before it in a clear and comprehensive light the state of our Colonial possessions in 
Europe, completed a wosk of rare industry, and of great national importance. We cannot 
help in casting a glance back upon his entire Jabours, which exhibit the arms of our dear 
native land stretched abroad hy every sea and quarter of the earth, east, west, north, aud 
south,—holding the strongest peints, and controlling powers every where—spread over mil. 
lions of miles of territory, and ruling millions of people of every shade of human colour 
and every religious faith—her language spoken, her protection sought, her institutions co- 
pied, her character venerated ;—we cannot, we repeat, look upon this picture, so vividly 
brought before us in Mg, Mastin’s work, without thinking of the wondertul progress and 
greatness of Britain : “ toto divisos orbe Britannos,’—what a jest is it now ! when she is scen 
in every part, encirchng, emoraecing, and pervading the whole mighty and universal 
giobe 1! As a library book—as a book of information—andjas a book of reference—it has 
ho superior, and we cordialiy recommmned it te the encouragement it so eminently merits.’ + 
—Literary Gazette. 

‘Mr, Martin has in this great work happity exemplified what may be accomplished by ho- 
nesty of purpose, persevering tabour, and independent talent. He has, by the present Vo- 
lune, concluded & work not more caHed for than it was new; and when we consider the 
immense variety of information requisite to its completion, and the want of guides by whom 
his path might have been pointed out, it is astonishing that he should have been able to 
approach anything like a satisfactery history of the unparalleled and unmeasured posses. 
sions of the British nation. Afr. Martin surveys, explains, and descends into every branch 
of information which a country and a community can offer, and every part 1s executed with 
a degree of carnest pains-taking, whether we regard his spirit of tidelity, his unwearied re- 
seareh, or. his tearless assertion of the whole truth as it appears to him, that may well 
become an example to all writers of constitutional and historical works. The same high- | 
toned sustainment of moral purity, the same reverence of sacred tsuths, characterize the 
present volume, that attracted our admiration and_praise in those that preceied. Nor, now 
that Mr, Martin has completed his history, a> i¢ too much to dectare that he has earned a 
nobdle and andying reputation as a scholar, a sound rcasoner, an ardent advocate of free. 
dom, a spotless moratist, and a consistently zealous Christian.—AMonthly Keview for Dec., 
1835, ‘ 


In anexceedingly modest address to his readers, prefixed to this volume, Mr. Martin 
atlades to some of the many formidadle and most discouraging circumstances he had to 
contend with in the execution of lis stupendous work, and we think this tittle narrative 

' wilt not be read without exciting she must kindly feelings towards its authoy, por without 
leaving the most lively impressions regarding his extraordinary assiduity and perseverance, 
Jn this address Mr. Martin claims the merit of industry only for his labours, but the public 
has discovered many Higher qualities than this in the work before us. It has discovered 
intelligence, talent, a sound and comprehensive judgment, discrimination and taste, and, 
last, though not least, literary attainments of no ordinary kind, and ithas awarded Mr, Mar- 
tin a reputation proportioned to these merits.’—Scotsman, Dec. 5, 1835. 


‘ In this votume, Mir. Martin concludes his great undertaking, which is distinguished by 
the same marveliaus spirit of industry—the same anweuried research, and masses of fact 
for which the former volumes were so remarkable. It is the very first work of its kind ;— 
the materiais of whieh it is composed, were scattered over atarge surface and in a muiti- 
tude of places; its tabular ilustrations are derived from such a variety of sources, that it 
would be ail but impossible to make them quite free from errors—and when it is remem. 
dered that one head and one hand has gathered these enormous stores of information, and 
in an incredibly short space-of time put them together, we will be disposed to wonder that 
the works so complete. If any circumstance in addition to its intrinsic merits were re- 
quired to increase the claims of the ‘‘ History of the British Colonies,” upon pubhe patro. 
nage, the fact that Mr. Martin persevered in it to the end, unaided by any assistance from 
Govétment or any other associating bodies, and resting solely from his own limited 
me&ns, ought to.be sufficient in itself to procure it a welcome wherever there are-readers 
whe.sympathize in the extended interests of mankind. It cannot be expected that men of 
ability should devote their energies to the publie service, unless some reward come to them 
in a gratifying shape, and the reward to which Mr, Martin looks, is of a kind, to confer as 
much bdhefit upon the patron as upon the auther. The success of the publication has, we 
believe, been considerable, but it cannet meet greater success than its importance so emi- 
minently deserves.’— Ailes, 


pL ie nn ee 


MTA 
a 00017403 : 


atwazies 7? © 


Digitized with financial assistance from the 
Government of Maharashtra 
on 02 January, 2016 


