UI UUUUUIT ANT LIT Tt 
00026100 


UTM MTYUUA TOTTI 
00026100 


Digitized with financial assistance from 


An Initiative by 


‘y 
1+ '/ Parekh, i HDFC 
FOUNDATION | WITH YOU, RIGHT THROUGI 


on 15 October, 2018 


THE WELLESLEY PAPERS 


WE MUST ENDEAVOUR TO DISCHARGE 
OUR DUTY TOWARDS OUR COUNTRY 
WITH FORTITUDE AND PERSEVERANCE 
Wellesley to Wilberforce, Fanuary 24th, 1806 


THE 
WELLESLEY PAPERS] 


THE LIFE AND CORRESPONDENCE OF RICHAB.D 

COLLEY WELLESLEY MARQUESS WELLESLEY 1760- 
1842 GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF INDIA 1797-1805 
SECRETARY OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 1809- 
1812 AND LORD-LIEUTENANT OF [RELAND 1821-1827 
1833-9834 INCLUDING HITHERTO UNPUBLISHED 
CORRESPONDENCE WITH GEORGE III AND GEORGE 
IV THE DUKES OF YORK AND CUMBERLAND 
THE DUKES OF PORTLAND AND WELLINGTON 
LORDS ABERDEEN AUCKLAND BATHURST BROUG- 
HAM CASTLEREAGH GREY HOLLAND LIVERPOOL 
MELBOURNE AND PALMERSTON LADY MHESTER 
STANHOPE AND LADY BLESSINGTON BURDETT 
CANNING CREEVEY CROKER PEEL SPENCER 

PERCEVAL PITT WILBERFORCE ETC ETC 


BY THE EDITOR OF 
“THE WINDHAM PAPERS” CABR 


26100,. 


IN TWO VOLUMES r 
aN VOLUME TWO Sean |*. 


YY-X- 70 


HERBERT JENKINS LIMITED 
ARUNDEL PLACE HAYMARKET 
LONDON S.W. 8&8 @& MCMXIV 


23100 


PRINTED BY THE ANCHOR PRESS, LTD., TIPTRAE, ESSLX. 


CONTENTS 


BOOK V 


SECRETARY OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 
1809-1812 


CHAPTER II 


The Ministerial position at home : Wellesley’s suggestions for 
strengthening the Government : Lord Holland on Wellesley : 
Overtures to Canning, Castlereagh, and Sidmouth: Wellesley 
on the Peninsula War : His anxiety to strengthen the 
Cabinet : His offer to make room for Canning : Negotiations : 

The offer to Castlereagh : Castlereagh declines : Canning’s 
refusal : The King’s illness : Wellesley on the general 
state of Europe : Buonaparte and Prussia : The Regency: 
Wellesley resigns : His memorandum on the reasons for his 
resignation 3 


PAGE 


BOOK VI 
WELLESLEY’S ATTEMPT TO FORM A MINISTRY. 1812 


Wellesley replaced by Castlereagh : Catholic Emancipation : 
Grattan’s motion : Assassination of Spencer Perceval : 
Liverpool’s overtures to Wellesley and Canning : They 
decline to join Liverpool : Defeat and resignation of the 
Government : Wellesley’s negotiations : Canning’s adherence : 
Liverpool and his colleagues decline to serve with Wellesley : 

Earl Grey and Lord Grenville decline : Lord Moira’s ad- 
herence : Wellesley’s failure : His explanation : Misunder- 
standings 81 


BOOK VII 
IN OPPOSITION, 1812-1820 


Liverpool’s ministry : Wellesley and Canning : Canning elected 
for Liverpool : Marriage of Wellesley’s daughter : The 
relations of Wellesley and Canning : Canning disposes of a 
rumour : His advice to Wellesley : Wellington in Spain: 
Vittoria : The invasion of France : Napoleon’s last efforts : 
His abdication ; The treaty of Fontainebleau : Wellesley’s 
change of view : Restrictions on the importation of corn: 
Wellesley and the Grenville party strongly protest : Poverty 
in the country : Agrarian disturbances : Coercive measures of 
the Government : The opposition of Wellesley and the 
Grenville party 11g 

v 


vi CONTENTS 


BOOK VIII 
LORD-LIEUTENANT OF IRELAND. 1821-1827 


PA 

A teconciliation is effected between Liverpool and Wellesley : 
Wellesley is offered, and accepts, the Lord-Lieutenancy of 
Ireland: Henry Goulburn: The unsettled state of Ireland: ¢ 
The ‘‘ Whiteboys ” : The Catholic question : Wellesley’s 
love of work : His energy : Wellesley marries again: 
Lord Liverpool resigns: Canning becomes Prime Minister : 
Canning suggests that Wellesley should again go to India: 
Lord Melbourne : Plunket : The rupture between Canfing 
and Wellington : Correspondence concerning it : Herries: 
Canning offers Wellesley the Embassy to Vienna: Projected 
changes in the Government of Ireland : Lord Anglesey to 
be Wellesley’s successor : The death of Canning : The 
result of Wellesley’s seven years’ administration of Ireland 141 


BOOK IX 
LAST YEARS OF OFFICIAL LIFE. 1828-1835 


Goderich resigns : Wellington becomes Prime Minister : He 
does not offer any post to Wellesley : They cross swords 
over the Catholic Emancipation Bill : Wellington resigns 
and is succeeded by Grey : Wellesley accepts the office of 
Lord Steward of the Household : The state of Ireland : 
The choice of a King for Belgium : Wellesley offers his 
services for a diplomatic mission to Spain : He is appointed 
Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland : Grenville on Wellesley: 
Irish affairs ; A breach in the ministry : Lord Brougham: 
Irish Coercion Bill : Irish Tithes Bill : Death of Lord 
Spencer : Melbourne resigns : Wellington proposes Peel 
to the King: Peel accepts office: Wellesley retires with the 
Melbourne ministry : Melbourne again Prime Minister: 
Wellesley Lord Chamberlain : He resigns soon after accept- 
ing the office: Reasons for his resignation : A paragraph in 
a leader in The Times causes much trouble 219 


BOOK X 
IN RETIREMENT. 1835-1842 


Wellesley’s breach with Melbourne : An unsatisfactory explana- 
tion : Occupations after retirement : The Indian despatches : 
Brougham’s review : The East India Company’s compli- 
ment : Queen Victoria’s accession : A further tribute from 
the East India Company: Wellesley’s appreciation of Pitt : 
Politics and pastimes : The Etonian muse : Niceties of 
criticism : His interest in Eton : A review of his services 
to the Empire : An unworthy reward : His views on the 
policy of France : The Company’s gratitude : I[ll-health: 
Death 295 


INDEX 401 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


TO FACE PAGE 


THE Marquess WELLESLEY Prontispicce 
From adrawing by Count D’Orsay 


Henry ROBERT STEWART, VISCOUNT CASTLEREAGH 22 
Engraved by H. Meyer, from a drawing by W. Evans, after a painting by Sir 
T. Lawrence 


Lapy HEster STANHOPE 56 
From a lithograph 


WILLIAM WynpHAM, LorD GRENVILLE 98 
Engraved by T, A, Dean, from a painting by J. Jackson 


CHARLES, 2ND EARL GREY 134 
Engraved by J. Cochran, from a painting by Sir T. Lawrence 


Mary ANNE, MARCHIONESS WELLESLEY 150 
From a miniature by Andrew Robertson at Apsley House, by permission of His 
Grace the Duke of Wellington, K.G. 


FREDERICK, DUKE OF YORK, AND GEORGE IV, SILHOUETTED AT 


BRIGHTON 188 

From the National Portrait Gallery 

GEORGE CANNING 206 
From a drawing dated 1824 

Witiiam ConyNGHAM, 1sT BARON PLUNKET 222 
Engraved by J. Heath, from a painting by Hamilton 

HEnry PETER, BARON BRoUGHAM 244 
From the National Portrait Gallery. Drawn by Charles H. Lear 

Sir Francis BurDETrT 270 
From a lithograph 

WILLIAM Lams, 2ND VISCOUNT MELBOURNE 296 
Engraved by S. Freeman, from a painting by Sir T. Lawrence 

Str RoBErT PEEL, Br. 322 
Engraved by J. Cochran, from a painting by Sir T. Lawrence 

Joun Witson CROKER 338 

_ From a painting by Sir T. Lawrence 

SAMUEL ROGERS 352 
Engraved by C, W. Sherborn, from a painting by J. Hoppner 

MARGUERITE, COUNTESS OF BLESSINGTON 362 
Engraved by C. Cousins, from a painting by Sir T. Lawrence 

ViIscouNT PALMERSTON 376 


BOOK V 


SECRETARY OF STATE FOR 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS. 1809-1812 


Commons. 


BOOK V 


SECRETARY OF STATE FOR 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS 
December 1809 to January 1812 


CHAPTER II 


The Ministerial position at home : Wellesley’s sugges- 
tions for strengthening the Government: Lord 
Holland on Wellesley : Overtures to Canning, 
Castlereagh, and Sidmouth : Wellesley on the 
Peninsula War: His anxiety to strengthen the 
Cabinet : His offer to make room for Canning: 
Negotiations: The offer to Castlereagh: Castlereagh 
declines : Canning’s refusal: The King’s illness: 
Wellesley on the general state of Europe: Buona- 
parte and Prussia : The Regency : Wellesley 
resigns : His memorandum on the reasons for his 
resignation. 


OT only was the Ministry weak, but 
Wellesley was well aware of the fact. 
The debate on the Walcheren Expedi- 


tion showed clearly the want of good speakers on 
the Treasury Benches alike in the Lords and 
The success of the vote of censure 
on the Ministers responsible for this would have 
had the serious effect of compelling their retire- 
ment from Government. Wellesley and Har- 


rowby alone would have been exempt. 


3 


4 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1800- 


Tur MARGUESS WELLESLEY fo AN UNKNOWN 
CoRRESPONDENT 


Private and confidential Apsley Houce 


March 13, 1810 


It is already admitted that the present Govern- 
ment must seek for additional strength in order to 
carry on the public business. It has, however, 
appeared inadvisable to attempt any alteration of 
the present frame of the Cabinet previously to the 
issue of the enquiry now depending in the House of 
Commons. 

This delay may be necessary as far as it relates 
to the conclusion of any actual appointments to 
offices, but I apprehend that, unless immediate 
steps be taken for negotiating with those persons 
whose assistance may be thought useful in 
strengthening the Government, the very means of 
forming any Cabinet upon the general basis of the 
present administration may be destroyed. The 
resolutions of the House of Commons upon the 
issue of the depending enquiry may be of such a 
nature as to disqualify many of the members of 
the present administration, and some of those 
whose assistance might be beneficial as an ac- 
cession to the Cabinet. If such should be the 
result of the enquiry, no materials will exist for 
the formation of a Government on the present 
basis, and the administration must fall into the 
hands of the opposite party. In order to obviate 
this mischief, it might be proper to establish 
without delay an understanding with those 
persons, whose aid is acknowledged to be requisite, 


1812] THE CABINET’S WEAKNESS 5 


under any circumstances which can now be 
expected to arise. 

Whatever distribution of offices may be thought 
necessary for the strength of the Government 
should be immediately settled, and those persons 
who are to be introduced into the Cabinet after 
the result of the enquiry should now be united for 
the purpose of rendering that result as favourable 
as possible to the formation of a stronger Govern- 
ment. 

These persons should particularly concert the 
means of mitigating the force of any resolutions 
which may be proposed in the House of Commons 
at the close of the enquiry, so as to prevent the 
possibility of such disqualifications as may be 
apprehended, unless it be rendered the interest of 
all parties (excepting the determined opposition) 
to unite in the formation of a Government on the 
present basis. 

My opinion has long been decided, that no strong 
or permanent Government can be founded on the 
present basis, unless it shall comprehend all, or at 
least a very large proportion, of the parties now 
denominated: Mr. Canning’s, Lord Castlereagh’s, 
and Lord Sidmouth’s. Iam aware of the difficulty 
of bringing these persons to act together, and also 
of the obstacles which might impede a cordial 
union between some of them and the leading 
members of the present Cabinet. 

But unless a sacrifice can be made of some 
portion of the personal animosities and prejudices 
of the hour by those who concur in general 
political principles, the administration must not 


6 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [r1809- 


only pass into the hands of the opposite party, but 
must remain there. 

The question, therefore, is, what sacrifices it 
may be deemed advisable to make for the purpose 
of averting so great a danger ; and what attempts 
can be made with any hope of collecting from the 
three parties already named a sufficient strength 
to carry on the public business. 

The inclination of my opinion is, that if a 
general resolution were adopted to make those 
personal sacrifices which the occasion requires, it 
would not be impracticable to unite a very 
considerable portion of those whom I have 
described. For my own part, Iam ready with the 
utmost cheerfulness to make any personal sacri- 
fice for so great and important an object, and to 
undertake any part which may be assigned to me 
in such a negotiation. 

The advice which I submit is, therefore, that a 
proper distribution of offices for the formation of a 
new Cabinet should be immediately settled, and 
that an attempt should be made to unite Mr. 
Canning, Lord Castlereagh, and Lord Sidmouth 
in the present cause. If any of them should 
decline any reasonable proposition which may be 
made to them for that purpose, such a conduct 
would justify the exclusion of the party which may 
thus have refused to co-operate in the proposed 
system, and the plan may then be limited, without 
injustice to the pretensions of that party. 

With a view to facilitate the execution of this 
plan, I am ready, under Mr. .Perceval, either to 
remain without office, and not in the Cabinet, or 


1812} AN ATTACK OF NERVES 7 


to accept the Presidency of the Council ; or I will 
readily concur in acting in the same manner under 
any other person whom Mr. Perceval (with *my 
consent and that of our colleagues) may select 
for the head of the Government ; or generally I 
am willing to take any post which may be deemed 
most advantageous for the success of the plan.' 


Wellesley himself was possessed of very consider- 
able oratorical power, and at times spoke admirably, 
but such was the nervousness that sometimes 
overwhelmed him that he was on these occasions 
physically unable to rise from his seat. 

“Lord Wellesley treated Mr. Perceval and 
other Ministers with magnificent scorn and con- 
tempt,” Lord Holland has written. “In a subse- 
quent altercation between him and Lord Harrowby 
in the House of Lords, respecting the differences in 
Cabinet while he remained among them, his 
superiority in wit, spirit, vigour, and eloquence was 
most decisive. Yet when, on Lord Boringdon’s 
motion for an efficient administration, he was 
expected to vindicate his own motives and 
conduct, and to explain at large his views of 
domestic and foreign policy, though he had come 
down with mighty ostentation, dressed and 
decorated, as his usage was, for the delivery of a 
great speech, his nerves failed him entirely, and 
he allowed the question to go to a division with- 
out uttering one word. So universal was the 

1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 244. 


8 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1800- 


pexsuasion that he was on that day to outdo him- 
self,and so positive was the expectation of his speak- 
ing, that someone, on the Chancellor’s return from 
the House, asked, without the ceremony of previous 
enquiry whether he had spoken or not: ‘ What 
was the style of Lord Wellesley’s speech?’ ‘I 
think in that of Tacitus,’ replied Lord Eldon. He 
was, indeed, a most uncertain speaker in every 
sense of the word. After studiously announcing 
his intentions of speaking, and repeating his views 
and arguments and illustrations in private to 
friend and foe, he not unfrequently sat silent. 
When he did rise, it was often doubtful which side 
he would espouse, what topics he would select, and 
whether he would treat them with ability and 
eloquence or lapse into frothy, trite, and unmean- 
ing declamation, or entangle himself in some 
metaphysical disquisition which he was quite 
unequal to unravel or expound. His allusions 
were more classical than apposite, and his language 
that of a polite scholar even to a fault. His wit 
was elaborate and far-fetched, but well and neatly 
executed. He was sometimes illogical, and I 
have known him pompous, empty, and unsatis- 
factory. Yet there was a smack, a fancy of 
greatness, in all he did ; and though in his speeches, 
his manners, and his actions he was very often 
open to ridicule, those who smiled and even 
laughed could not despise him.’’? 
1 Further Memoirs of the Whig Party, 115. 


1812] THE WALCHEREN FAILURE 9 


‘The policy of the Walcheren Expedition wasn 
the end approved by the House of Commons, but 
so strong was the feeling against Lord Chatham, 
who was mainly responsible for it, or at least was 
held to be so, that he resigned his office of Master 
of the Ordnance. He was succeeded in May by 
Lord Mulgrave, who was followed at the Admiralty 
by Yorke.? 


SPENCER PERCEVAL to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Downing Street: April 28, 1810 
I have heard from Dundas and have seen Lord 
Melville. Dundas would not go to the Admiralty 
unless there had been an arrangement of office in 
view for more strength. I have, therefore, felt that, 
with the impression with regard to Lord Gambier, 
I had no choice left but to press it upon Yorke, 
who has consented to take it. 
Dundas and his Scotch friends will not, I think, 
leave us immediately, but he will not be reconciled 
to stay long unless we can get more strength.’ 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo SPENCER PERCEVAL 
Apsley House: May 3, 1810 
I have had no opportunity since the late 
appointments * to state to you what I have been 
able to collect of their first impression. I under- 
stand that it is very unfavourable, and so far from 
1 Charles Philip Yorke (1764-1834), entered Parliament in 
1790. He was Secretary at War, 1801-1803, and Home 
Secretary, 1803-1804. 


2 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 272. 
* The appointments of Mulgrave and Yorke. 


50) THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1809- 


apy augmentation of strength, that the change is 
likely to occasion additional weakness. I need not 
répeat my entire good-will towards Mr. Yorke, my 
yeal respect for his character, and my sincere desire 
to act with him; but I fear that without further 
aid the Government will not be able to proceed. 

In this state of things I am disposed to think 
that it might be advisable to consider again the 
means of obtaining the assistance of Mr. Canning 
and his friends, and to make a direct proposition 
to them on such grounds as might be consistent 
with your honour, and with your continuance at 
the head of the Treasury. 

If such a proposition should be approved, I am 
ready to make the same sacrifices for its success 
which I have already offered to you, with a view 
to a more extended arrangement; and I wish 
distinctly to state that I shall be prepared to 
vacate my office for the purpose of contributing to 
the accession of strength which might be derived 
from the introduction of Mr. Canning and his 
friends into the frame of the Government. 

* If a just and reasonable proposition of this 
nature should be declined by Mr. Canning, em- 
barrassments will be removed which now obstruct 
other means of strengthening the Government. 

Iam not authorised to state any positive infor- 
mation on this point, but Ithink advantage might 
now be derived from urging it to a clear issue. 
(Pencil note to above)? 

{* This referred to the case (which I knew not 


1 It is clear that Wellesley sent this letter to Canning. 
The note is to him. 


1812] WELLESLEY’S PROPOSALS II 


tobe possible, but which it was right t@ suppose) 
that you might not choose to act with some 
particular persons, or might make other con- 
ditfons which could not be accepted. The general 
object of this paragraph was to urge the expediency 
of making a proposal to you, and at the same time 
to show that I was not authorised to answer for 
you in any way whatever before a direct pro- 
position should have been made to you. 

Mr. Perceval was aware that J could not form a 
part of any Government with Lord Castlereagh 
or Lord Sidmouth, unless you were one of the 
Cabinet; but he also knew that I would not 
oppose such a Government in Parliament after my 
resignation.—W.]? 


SPENCER PERCEVAL to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Downing Street: May 4, 1810 

I received your letter on my return from the 
House of Commons this morning, and I have been 
so engaged since I have been up, as not to be able 
to answer it earlier. 

As I never expected that the removal of Lord 
Mulgrave to the Ordnance and the introduction 
of Mr. Yorke to the Admiralty would have the 
effect of giving us any additional strength, I 
certainly am not disposed to controvert the 
opinion that we have acquired no new strength by 
that arrangement ; but I must say that I do not 
apprehend, nor do I perceive any symptom at 
present which should lead me to think that it is 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 282. 


12 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [x809- 


likely to occasion any additional weakness. The 
clamour attempted to be raised on this occasion 
by our adversaries, founded upon the impropriety 
of countenancing by the King a person who had 
made himself obnoxious to the newspapers by 
clearing the gallery of the House of Commons, is 
really nothing but the squib of the day. 

Our divisions last night were certainly in thin 
Houses, and the first was on a question on which, 
though Ponsonby? and Tierney * opposed us, some 
of the Opposition were with us, and, therefore, it 
cannot safely be argued upon. But the majorities 
of 138 to 59, and 83 to 26, which were the numbers 
on these divisions, exhibit a better proportion 
than almost any divisions which we have had this 
session. 

The prospect, however, of the Government being 
able to proceed or not, in my opinion is to be 
judged of by other circumstances, independent 
altogether of Yorke’s appointment. You know 
very well that I think we have not such strength 
as (if we could get any additional strength, con- 
sistently with what is due to our character) 
would justify us in forbearing to attempt to pro- 
cure it. 

1George Ponsonby (1755-1817), a member of the Irish 
Parliament from 1776 until its final dissolution, when he sat 
in the British House of Commons. He was Irish Chancellor of 
the Exchequer during the vice-royalty of the Duke of Portland, 
1782, and Lord Chancellor of Ireland, 1806, but held this 
high office less than a year. He wasa leader of the Commons 
from 1808. 

2 George Tierney (1761-1830), famous as having fought 


a duel with Pitt. He was Treasurer of the Navy under 
Addington, 1802, and President of the Board of Control, 1806. 


1812] PERCEVAL’S REPLY 13 


With respect to all that has passed, between 
Canning, Castlereagh, and ourselves, I enter into 
all your feelings which will not suffer you to apply 
to Lord Sidmouth or Castlereagh without at the 
same time applying to Canning. But I am sure 
it is the feeling of many of our colleagues, and I 
confess it is In a great degree my own, that we 
could not have taken Canning amongst us at 
present with advantage to our strength or without 
prejudice to our character, unless we could at the 
same time have prevailed upon some other of the 
remains of Pitt’s friends to join us. 

And, indeed, I understood you to be so far of 
the same opinion as to think that Canning alone, 
at the present time, at least, would not in effect 
give us any strength. If then, that is the real 
state of the case, I confess it appears to me that 
at this time, at least, we cannot usefully make an 
application to Canning. If he should accept our 
overture we shall get no strength, and I am sure 
we could not, in fairness either to ourselves or him, 
make the overture upon the mere expectation of 
his rejecting it, and by that means attempt to 
remove an obstacle to our overture elsewhere. I 
shall, however, very gladly talk over this subject 
with you when most convenient to you.’ 


Wellesley was a persistent supporter of the war 
in Spain, which was not popular in England, and 
in a debate in the House of Lords on June Io, 
1810, he defended his position in an eloquent 
speech. “The struggle in which Spain is now 

1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 282. 


14 ‘THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1809- 


engaged is not merely a Spanish struggle,” he said. 
* No, my Lords, in that struggle are committed the 
best, the very vital interests of England. With 
the fate of Spain the fate of England is inseparably 
blended. Should we not, therefore, stand by her 
to the last? For my part, my Lords, as an 
adviser to the Crown, I shall not cease to recom- 
mend to my Sovereign to continue to assist Spain 
to the latest moment of her existence. It should 
not dishearten us that Spain appears to be in the 
very crisis of her fate ; we should, on the contrary, 
extend a more anxious care over her at a moment 
so critical. For in nations, and above all in Spain, 
how often have the apparent symptoms of dis- 
solution been the presages of new life and of 
renovated vigour. Therefore I would cling to 
Spain in her last struggle; therefore I would 
watch her last agonies. I would wash and heal 
her wounds, I would receive her parting breath, I 
would catch and cherish the last vital spark of her 
expiring patriotism. Nor let this be deemed a 
mere office of pious charity, nor an exaggerated 
representation of my feelings, nor an overcharged 
picture of the circumstances that call them forth. 
In the cause of Spain the cause of honour and of 
interest is equally involved and inseparably in- 
volved and inseparably allied; it is a cause in 
favour of which the finest feelings of the heart 
unite with the soundest dictates of the under- 
standing.” 


1812] PERSISTENT RUMOURS 15 


GEORGE CANNING to THE MARQUESS WELLESLBY 


Private and confidential House of Commons 


June 13, 1810 


The rumours of other arrangements are so strong 
that I cannot help fearing that something is doing 
unknown to you, which will place you in an 
awkward situation.’ 


GEORGE CANNING to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 


Private and confidential Gloucester Lodge 


June 14, 1810 

You ought to know better, to be sure, but since 
I saw you in the House of Lords yesterday I have 
received what I should think such positive 
evidence that something zs or has been doing of 
the sort to which our conversation referred that I 
cannot refrain from warning you that such is the 
general belief; and that but for your disclaimer 
I should imagine that belief to be well founded. 

I only hope that you have not been kept in 
ignorance, as part of the system. At all events, 
however, this intimation can do no harm, and may 
put you on your guard. 

Destroy it when read. 

P.S. I wasin the House till near twelve last 
night, but saw no symptoms of your speaking, and 
the course of the debate did not seem to me likely 
to lead to it. If there is anything that you wish 
said about Spain which you had not an oppor- 
tunity of saying to your own satisfaction, let me 
know it, and I will endeavour to supply it to-day. 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 304. 


16 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1809- 


d shall ke at home all day till I go to the House, 
having a return of the inflammation in my eyes, 
which prevents my going out this morning to 
my Committee.’ 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo SPENCER PERCEVAL 


Private and confidential Apsley House 


June 14, 1810 

The events of the session of Parliament appear 
to me to have proved the necessity of augmenting 
the strength of the Government, especially in the 
House of Commons. Your information and mine 
lead to the certainty that it would not be practic- 
able to unite the friends of Lord Sidmouth, Lord 
Castlereagh, and of Mr. Canning, because it has 
been ascertained that Lord Sidmouth and his 
friends cannot consent to act with Mr. Canning. 

Although the grounds of this objection are 
entitled to great respect, I confess that I cannot 
admit the reason or justice of such an exclusion, 
particularly in the present crisis, when Lord Grey 
has opened such an attack upon all those leading 
principles which constituted the basis of Mr. Pitt’s 
Government. 

Under these circumstances, I wish to urge a 
serious consideration of the necessity of making an 
immediate effort for the purpose of obtaining the 
aid of Mr. Canning and his friends. For this 
purpose I am desirous of vacating the office which 
I now hold in order to admit Mr. Canning, and I 
am willing either to accept any other suitable 
office in the Cabinet, or to remain in the Cabinet 

1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 306. 


1812] WELLESLEY’S OFFER 17 


without office until a vacancy can be conwenienthy 
made forme. __ . 

You may be assured that I shall most cheerfully 
act under either arrangement, provided the great 
advantage of Mr. Canning’s assistance can be 
obtained by it. 

I have already repeatedly stated this idea to 
you, but it has not yet been regularly considered 
by the Cabinet. I wish you would have the good- 
ness to take their opinion upon it as soon as possible. 

Although I cannot positively answer for Mr. 
Canning’s acceptance of a proposal to act in the 
present Government, I would not suggest such a 
plan if I were not convinced that he could not 
decline an arrangement founded on the basis 
which I have stated.’ 


SPENCER PERCEVAL to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Downing Street: June 15, 1810 
I shall feel it to be my duty to bring the subject 
of your note under the earliest and most attentive 
consideration of our colleagues, and for this 
purpose will propose a Cabinet to meet on Sunday, 
if you have no objection, at three o’clock. If you 
should not be able to attend at that time I will 
appoint any other which will better suit you? 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo SPENCER PERCEVAL 


Private and confidential Dorking 


July 22, 1810 
Some time since I took the liberty of stating to 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 308. 
2 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 310. 


18 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [r809- 


you mys opinion that unless some steps were 
immediately taken to favour Mr. Canning’s 
admission into the Cabinet, that advantage would 
be entirely lost to the present Government. At 
the same time I renewed my former offer respecting 
my present office, and I stated a desire that the 
subject should again be considered by the Cabinet. 

The great pressure of indispensable matter of 
practical detail has prevented you and the 
Cabinet and myself from touching this very 
delicate (but in my judgment) indispensable 
discussion. I do not know whether you have had 
any means of consulting others on the point ; when 
I spoke to you you seemed still to consider the 
difficulties with regard to Lord Castlereagh to be 
insuperable. My information leads me to hope 
that Lord Castlereagh would be found reasonable 
and practicable on every branch of the question. 
At all events, it is very desirable to bring the 
matter to a final and positive termination, and if 
it is determined to be either useless or dangerous to 
accept my offer, to apprise Canning distinctly of 
his situation. 

I understand that he is likely to see you 
to-morrow, on some ordinary business, and I think 
great advantage might result from your con- 
versing with him freely on the whole subject, and 
stating your sense of the difficulties which exist, 
and hearing his ideas with regard to their removal. 
For my own part I desire you to consider me to be 
entirely at your disposal, with a most anxious 
wish, however, that you would employ me and 
my office for obtaining the benefit of Canning’s 


1812] MORE EXTENDED PLANS 19 


assistance* connected with the accession of Loyd 
Castlereagh. 

I enclose a note stating in writing the ideas 

which I have already conveyed to you verbally. 
(Pencil note to last) 
[* This is understood by Mr. Perceval to refer to 
the actual state of the question, in which it was 
necessary to connect any proposition to Mr. 
Canning with a similar proposition to Lord 
Castlereagh. 

In every discussion Lord Wellesley has distinctly 
stated that after reasonable proposals had been 
made and rejected by Lord Sidmouth and Lord 
Castlereagh for a more extended plan, he should 
think it necessary to make a separate proposition 
to Mr. Canning, and that in that last case 
he should be ready to resign his office for 
Mr. Canning.—W.]}? 


[ENCLOSURE] 

July 23, 1810 

Since Lord Wellesley made the proposal of 
opening the situation which he now holds in the 
Government for the purpose of obtaining the aid 
of Mr. Canning, he has learnt that Mr. Canning 
has received information, through various 
channels, of the objections which Lord Sidmouth 
has stated against acting with Mr. Canning. The 
result of this information on Mr. Canning’s mind 
has not been to determine him never to act with 
Lord Sidmouth, but Mr. Canning thinks that it 
would be injurious to his just pretensions to suffer 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 346. 


20 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [r800- 


Its admission to the Cabinet to be subjected again 
to the will of Lord Sidmouth and to await any 
contingent change which time might produce in 
Lord Sidmouth’s sentiments. In this state of 
circumstances, any long delay in the execution of 
the proposed plan of strengthening the Govern- 
ment would render it nearly impossible to obtain 
the services of Mr. Canning. 

It is further evident that neither Mr. Canning 
nor any other person would enter into the Cabinet 
with so much advantage at a more advanced 
period of the session, when the whole system of 
measures for the year must already have been 
decided, and when the opportunity of taking a 
part in the councils of the Government would have 
passed away, and nothing would remain but the 
necessity of defending in Parliament what had 
been done in the Cabinet. 

It has been proved that Lord Sidmouth’s 
assistance cannot be obtained without the adoption 
of an exclusive system, which would neither be just 
in principle nor useful in practice. 

It is now certain that any attempt to delay such 
partial accessions of strength as might now be 
obtained in the hope of ultimately effecting a 
more general union, instead of promoting that 
object, would probably render all such partial 
accessions of strength, as well as any more 
general union, utterly impracticable at any future 
time. 

It is not ascertained that Lord Castlereagh 
would refuse to act with Mr. Canning, and the 
accession of those two persons to the present 


1812] NOW OR NEVER 21 


Government would certainly furnish  gregt 
additional strength. 

Lord Wellesley therefore wishes most anxiously 
that the consideration of this most important 
subject should be renewed, in consequence of the 
circumstances which tend to prove that unless Mr. 
Canning be now received into the Cabinet his future 
admission may become hopeless, and with it all 
prospect of additional strength may be precluded. 

With this view Lord Wellesley repeats the offer 
made in his former note to Mr. Perceval, and he 
further proposes to be the channel of any com- 
munication which it may be thought advisable to 
make to Lord Castlereagh. At all events, he 
thinks the question should now be finally decided, 
as it is not reasonable to expect that either Mr. 
Canning or Lord Castlereagh can long remain open 
to any overture. ? 


SPENCER PERCEVAL to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 


Private and confidential Ealing 
August 17, 1810 


I send you at last the draft of a letter to Castle- 
reagh. After much consideration and _ recon- 
sideration, I do not see how consistently with that 
fair exposure of the real state of the case, which is 
unquestionably due to him, I can put the question 
in a more favourable manner. But, I confess, my 
hopes of his favourable reception of it are very far 
from sanguine. If any alterations occur to you 
which might give it a better chance, I beg you will 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 348. 


22 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1809- 


cammunieate them, and I will give them the fullest 
consideration. 

I request your particular attention to that part 
of it which relates to yourself. Of course I have 
endeavoured to state it as concisely as I can; if I 
have failed in any degree you will point out the 
particulars, and in general exercise your free 
criticism without the least reserve. 

When you have read it and made your obser- 
vations, I wish you to be so good as to forward it 
to Dundas, that he may also try his hand at 
removing anything which may seem to him likely 
to disappoint our object. He will be so good as to 
return it tome. I will thank you both not to lose 
time in forwarding it, as it is a sort of letter which 
I shall not trust to an amanuensis to copy, and 
therefore wish to ensure the having Sunday next 
for copying it over myself. * 


[ENCLOSURE] 
Draft Letter of SPENCER PERCEVAL to LorD 
CASTLEREAGH 
August 22, 18f0 
When you learn that the object of this letter is 
to ascertain what chance there may be of your 
being prevailed upon to accept an office in the 
present Government, you will easily conceive how 
much [I must regret that I did not find myself 
prepared to open this subject to you before you 
left the neighbourhood of London. The explana- 
tions which may be necessary and must be 
convenient upon such an occasion, and the facility 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 358. 


1812] CASTLEREAGH APPROACHED 23 


which conversation affords to such explanations, 
would have rendered a personal communication 
upon it infinitely preferable to any which can take 
place by letter. 

To make this mode of communication, however 
(which is the only one now open to me), as little 
defective and as satisfactory as possible, I shall 
think it necessary to explain to you fully what has 
been the course of my own thoughts and of those of 
my colleagues upon this subject, as well as to 
state to you what has been done by us in con- 
sequence. 

Upon one point we have been uniformly 
unanimous, namely, in the wish to regain your 
assistance in His Majesty’s service. On the best 
means, and on the greater or less probability of 
regaining it, as well as upon the circumstances 
which should accompany any attempt to regain 
it, we have thought differently ; and it is out of 
the endeavours to reconcile these differences, and 
to remove the difficulties which they have 
occasioned, that the delay has arisen in my 
explaining myself to you. 

That it was expedient for the public service that 
we should endeavour to procure additional strength 
to the Government, provided it could be procured 
consistently with our due honour and character, 
and with the honour and character of those to 
whom any overture might be made, has been, from 
the first moment our own Government was formed, 
the constant opinion of us all. 

But till its fate, or at least the probability of its 
continuing to exist for any time, was better 


24 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1800- 


ascertained than it could have been previous to the 
distussions on the Walcheren question, obvious 
redsons, which it is not at all necessary to detail, 
rendered any attempt at such a measure in the 
opinions of most of us inexpedient and objection- 
able. After that discussion was over, many 
difficulties still remained. 

Lord Sidmouth, yourself, and Canning were the 
three heads of parties to whom alone we could be 
looking, and if we had considered nothing but the 
relative strength of your respective connections, it 
would have been obvious that the application to 
any one of you with the probable effect of alienat- 
ing the other two would not promise us any advan- 
tage, whilst the most desirable thing upon every’ 
account appeared to be the prevailing upon you 
all, if possible, to join us. We were all agreed 
that no offer could be made with propriety to 
anyone which did not comprehend you and was not 
made to you also ; that not only the interests of the 
public service required that we should endeavour 
to procure your assistance, but that our feelings 
of what was due to you rendered this indis- 
pensably necessary. Lord Wellesley was amongst 
the first to urge the expediency of our union 
including yourself, Lord Sidmouth, and Canning. 

Lord Wellesley has uniformly been desirous of 
obtaining your assistance and of acting with you in 
the King’s service, and has always stated the 
justice and propriety of comprehending you in any 
plan which might be proposed for enlarging the 
basis of the Government. He has also declared 
his disapprobation of any plan which should 


1812] A DIFFICULT POSITION 25 


exclude any of the three parties already named and, 
on this ground, as well as for other reasons, he has 
signified that he could not be a party to ahy 
application in any quarter unless a_ similar 
application should be made at the same time to 
Canning. 

After all that had then so recently happened 
between you and Canning, and, especially, while you 
were both exposed, at any day, to the probability 
of fresh debates opening the discussions upon your 
differences, the overture to you and Canning, at 
such a time, unless it could be reconciled to your 
respective feelings by the circumstances under 
which it was made, and with which it might be 
accompanied, appeared to be hopeless ; at least it 
seemed evident that premature attempts of that 
nature would, in all probability, not only have 
failed, but might have had a very probable 
tendency to render the prospect of future reunion 
more difficult and distant. 

Besides these considerations affecting you and 
Canning, from what were supposed to be the feelings 
of Lord Sidmouth and Canning towards each other, 
difficulties likely to prove insurmountable were 
thought to exist in those quarters to any pro- 
position which should extend to both of them. 
Lord Wellesley’s opinions, indeed, were different 
on these points. It occurred to him, and he was 
strongly impressed with the opinion, that the state 
of the King’s Government and of the nation was 
such, that not only an attempt ought to be made 
to collect again together in one body all the 
remaining friends of Pitt’s connection, but that 


26 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1800- 


tere wasereason for thinking it might be made 
with a fair prospect of success ; that the principles 
of an overture upon such an extended basis might 
be forcibly urged upon the individuals to whom it 
was made, as affording a motive to forget all former 
feelings, in any degree of a personal nature, and to 
reconcile them, on public grounds, to unite for 
the purpose of upholding that system and those 
principles which the state of parties exposed to great 
danger, and called upon public men to make 
considerable sacrifices to preserve. 

It was obvious that, in order to make room for an 
arrangement on so extensive a scale, no incon- 
siderable sacrifices would be necessary for this 
purpose amongst ourselves and our friends; but 
the object seemed to be so great and paramount as 
to justify the expectation that such sacrifices 
would be cheerfully made, and that whatever 
awkwardnesses any individuals might have felt 
from their part in such arrangement, the liberality 
of the principles, the extent and natural import- 
ance of the object, would have afforded a complete 
and satisfactory answer to any objections which 
could have been felt by themselves or suggested 
by others to the part which such individuals might 
have in it. 

Lord Wellesley felt and pressed these con- 
siderations very strongly ; he thought that Lord 
Sidmouth and Canning might without difficulty 
be brought to admit the force of them, so as to 
forget their former feelings for each other. And 
although I confess I was not so sanguine on the 
subject as he was, yet I certainly did feel that if 


1812] | TENTATIVE PROPOSALS 27 


they could have been prevailed upon toe view the 
subject in the light above represented, it would 
have given me the most favourable means of open- 
ing a proposition of this kind to you. I therefore 
consented to the attempt being made with them, 
and so long ago as the Easter recess means were 
employed to ascertain from Lord Sidmouth and 
Canning whether, if upon the principle of re- 
assembling the separated members of Pitt’s party 
an offer should be made comprehending you, Lord 
Sidmouth, Canning, and your respective friends, 
they, Lord Sidmouth and Canning, would be 
disposed to a favourable consideration of it. No 
direct offer was made, but means were taken to 
ascertain their sentiments. Had the result been 
favourable you would have immediately heard 
from me. But it was not favourable. 

Canning declined giving any positive answer to a 
question of so hypothetical a nature; it was 
evident, however (although he would not pledge 
himself without receiving a more direct and 
distinct proposal), that his reply to any such 
specific offer would not have been founded on any 
exclusive principle or personal prejudice, and that 
he would not have objected to the mere pro- 
position of acting in a Government either with you 
or Lord Sidmouth. Lord Sidmouth declined being 
a party to a union with us upon so extensive a 
principle. The Easter recess had nearly worn 
away while we were obtaining and considering the 
result of these enquiries, and had we seen any new 
and satisfactory mode of proceeding upon this 
subject it would have been hardly possible to 


28 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1809- 


have found time for it during the pressure of 
Parliamentary business. 
owards the close of the session Lord Wellesley 
still retained the idea that Lord Sidmouth’s 
objections and difficulties might be removed. He 
thought (especially after Lord Grey’s last speech, 
which appeared to be a declaration of war against 
all the principles and the whole system of Pitt’s 
Government) that the policy and necessity of a 
union amongst the remains of Pitt’s friends might 
be made to appear still more plainly, and Lord 
Sidmouth be prevailed upon to act upon the view 
which might be given to him of that necessity. 
He was desirous of trying how far he could himself 
prevail upon him; and about that time Lord 
Wellesley saw Lord Sidmouth and one of his 
principal friends for that purpose, but he could 
make no alteration in Lord Sidmouth’s determin- 
ation. *Lord Sidmouth upon this occasion 
explained himself fully. His objection was 
to Canning—not, as he said, a personal 
*Perhaps OMe, Nor upon any grounds of private or 
onary ana Personal dislike, but upon the public 
betteriett ground, that he did not think that if 
gp.p. Canning were to make one in the Govern- 
Pishe ike ment formed of himself, of you, and of us, 
shouldstand. the public would believe there was that 
W- confidence and cordiality amongst our- 
Agreed! selves which could alone give us the con- 
*P-P fidence of the country ; and without that 
confidence the Government could not have 
that strength which rt was the professed 
object of the proposed arrangement to procure. 


1812] PERCEVAL’S HOPES 29 


We were thus flung back upon our original 
difficulties. We had looked to an arrangem@nt 
on an extended basis, as the best calculated to 
reconcile difficulties and awkwardnesses which 
might possibly be felt in a more contracted one ; 
yet as we must now forego all hopes of procuring 
any additional strength for the King’s service 
unless an attempt should be made upon the more 
contracted one, and as the opinion still remains 
amongst us very strong, after much and frequent 
deliberation upon these considerations, and in 
conformity to the clear opinion of myself and 
colleagues, I have determined to put plainly the 
question to you, whether if I should receive His 
Majesty’s commands to make a joint offer to you 
and Canning of two of the highest and most 
affluent and responsible offices of the State, you 
would be disposed to give a favourable reception 
to such an offer; and I cannot forbear from 
expressing my hopes that when you consider the 
state of the country and the great importance of 
such an expression of strength and ability as this 
arrangement would give to the King’s councils, 
you will now, after the interval which has elapsed, 
see no reason for refusing to give that reception to 
the proposition which at an earlier period perhaps 
you would have felt some reluctance in affording. 

In endeavouring to regain you and Canning to 
His Majesty’s service it certainly would not only 
be my wish, but must be an essential object with 
me, to endeavour to proceed in such a manner as 
was most likely to be acceptable to both your 
feelings, such necessarily being the most likely, of 


30 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1809- 


course, te obtain my purpose. The return of both 
of either of you to your old offices would not, I 
think, be likely to attain this object. If it would 
be so, in justice to Lord Wellesley and Lord 
Liverpool I ought to say that they would willingly 
part with them for the purpose. It is, however, as 
it appears to me, obvious that it would be incon- 
venient that you should both return into your 
former offices ; and if only ove did so return the 
impression might be unfavourable to the other who 
did not. There remain, therefore, only two other 
offices of an efficiency and station which allow of 
their being offered to you. I mean the Admiralty 
and the Home Secretary of State’s. I am em- 
powered to state to you that the present possessors 
of these offices will have no difficulty in making 
way for you, and that I shall not be embarrassed 
by the arrangement which their removal will 
render necessary. As to the choice between the 
two offices, I would rather not be put to make it for 
you, but would wish to leave it to yourselves, if 
possible, to arrange; and indeed upon this and 
every minor point of detail in the arrangement, if 
you can be once prevailed upon to see, in the great 
advantage which would be derived to the public 
by the return of you both to power, a sufficient 
motive for your giving a favourable reception to 
the proposition itself, I cannot think that any 
difficulty can occur which may not be easily 
surmounted. 

In putting this question to you, to learn what 
your reception of such an offer, if made, would be 
likely to be, instead of making the offer itself you 


1812] AN INFORMAL OFFER 31 


will see that I avoid putting it as an offer in His 
Majesty’s name, and thereby save you (in the 
event of your declining it) from any awkwardness 
which you might feel in declining a gracious offer 
from the King ; but at the same time I wish you 
distinctly to understand that I have no difficulty 
whatever in assuring you that you may rely upon 
it, if you feel no insurmountable objection, His 
Majesty will, without doubt, empower me to make 
the offer immediately in the most formal manner. 

I ought to state to you that, though Lord 
Camden has no objection to continue in office with 
us whilst hypothetical enquiries of this sort have 
been making as to the manner in which an offer if 
made would be received; and though he was 
anxious for the success of the arrangement if it 
could have been accomplished upon the more 
extended scale, comprehending Lord Sidmouth 
and his friends ; and though he is also desirous not 
to stand in the way of any arrangement which may 
be thought advisable for His Majesty’s service, yet 
he has declared that he could not be a party to the 
offer itself. He feels hurt at the style and manner 
in which Canning wrote and circulated the letters 
to him, and therefore, though he gives every 
reason to believe that he would support the Govern- 
ment should the alteration comprehending you 
only take place, yet he will not remain a member 
of it if Canning comes in. He states this deter- 
mination always in most perfect good humour to 
me ; and indeed I ought to add that he has always 
in the most liberal and friendly manner given me 
to understand that his office was at any time at 


32 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS | [x809- 


my disposal whenever I thought it could be useful 
td an arrangement advantageous to the King’s 
service. 

Long as this detail and statement are, yet I am 
fearful that there may be many points on which 
you might wish for further explanation. If I 
could foresee those points I would certainly 
endeavour to anticipate those enquiries. You 
will naturally feel that I shall be most anxious to 
recelve your answer. I am not, however, so 
unreasonable as to desire you to hasten it beyond 
your own convenience. One advantage of a 
communication upon such a subject at this season 
is that there is time enough to consider and 
arrange it. 

However much I wish that I may have put this 
subject in such a light as will induce you to receive 
it favourably, yet should the contrary unfortun- 
ately be the case, I beg you will understand that as 
I should have no right to ask for the reasons of 
your refusal, so I would really prefer that you 
should not state them. They possibly may be of 
a nature which, though you may feel them strongly 
at the moment, may be likely in time to wear out. 
I should fear that the mere fact of once having 
formally stated them may give them a strength 
and permanency which would not otherwise belong 
to them, and which it is very material to the public 
service should not exist. 

I am aware that the subject on which I have 
been writing is one of very considerable delicacy, 
yet I have purposely avoided anything like a 
formal and ceremonious opening of it. As the 


1812] | CASTLEREAGH DECLINES 33 


explanation of my thoughts and views* upon it 
have been most full and open, I was desirous tht 
the manner of making it should be equally frank, 
full, and without reserve, and I am persuaded this 
is the manner which you would most prefer. But, 
at all events, the letter is too long to admit of being 
lengthened with any unnecessary apology, and 
therefore I will conclude. 


SPENCER PERCEVAL to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Ealing: August 19, 1810 

I return you your paper of amendments to my 
letter. I have adopted them all verbatim, except 
in the two or three words which you will find 
altered in my handwriting in the copy which I 
return. 

The advantage of communicating with Canning 
again till we have heard from Castlereagh does not 
appeal to me, and the necessity of it, considering 
how long we have been communicating with him 
before we have communicated with Castlereagh 
at all, I certainly do not see ; and, upon the whole, 
unless you have some very strong reason for 
wishing it, I should rather think it was better to 
wait till you could tell him the result. 

I hope your cold is better.’ 


LorD CASTLEREAGH to SPENCER PERCEVAL 
Private and confidential Mount Stewart 
September 4, 1810 
Having protracted my journey longer than I 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 364. 
2 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 362. 
2 D 


34 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1800- 


had intefided, I did not receive your letter of the 
abnd ult. till yesterday on my landing. 

Desiring to express in suitable terms to you and 
your colleagues my sense of the sentiments you are 
pleased to express towards me personally, I am 
not less sensible of your attention in relieving 
me by the mode of your communication from the 
necessity of declining in any more formal manner 
a proposition which it is conceived might con- 
tribute to the advantage of His Majesty’s service. 

It is unnecessary for me to trouble you with the 
considerations in detail which suggest themselves 
to me, upon the reasoning which you have taken 
the trouble so fully and candidly to open. It is 
enough that I should express my own firm per- 
suasion that an arrangement of the nature you 
propose (even were all obstacles to the cordial 
consolidation of the arrangement itself successfully 
surmounted) could not command the public con- 
fidence, or inspire the nation at the present moment 
with an impression that the administration 
entrusted with the management of affairs was 
really united within itself. 

Under these impressions, I trust not incon- 
siderately formed, or resulting from any unbecom- 
ing feelings of a personal nature, I need hardly add 
that, were the offer in question made to me, it 
would be impossible for me to hesitate in soliciting 
His Majesty’s gracious permission dutifully to 
deciine it. 

2 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 382. 


1812] CANNING’S REPLY 35 


SPENCER PEeRcEVAL fo LoRD CASTLEREAGH 
Downing Street: September 8, 1810 
I this day received your letter of the 4th inst. 
However much I may regret the nature of your 
answer, I cannot decline giving myself the satis- 
faction of thanking you for the kind manner in 
which you have received and answered my letter 
to you.’ 


GEORGE CANNING to SPENCER PERCEVAL 
Private and confidential Hinckley 
September 26, 1810 


The communication made to me through Lord 
Wellesley at Easter, and others which I have 
subsequently received from him, and with which 
you are acquainted, have placed me in a situation 
in which I think it fair, both to myself and to you, 
to state to you directly, and without disguise, my 
sentiments on the subject of those communications. 

In the course of the Easter recess Lord Wellesley 
was commissioned by you and the rest of his 
colleagues to endeavour to ascertain from me: 

Ist. Whether I would consent to act with the 
existing Government on its present basis? (By 
which I understand to be meant, with your 
continuance at the head of the Treasury) ; 

and. Whether I would consent to act with a 
Government which should comprehend the several 
persons who had at any time been connected with 
Mr. Pitt? (By which description I understood 
Lord Sidmouth and Lord Castlereagh to be particu- 
larly intended). 
1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 383. 


36 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1800- 


It appeared to me that I could not reasonably 
ob called upon for a gratuitous declaration of my 
opinions upon questions involving matter of so 
much personal delicacy. I declared my readiness to 
give a distinct answer to any specified and practical 
proposition, but I declined giving any answer to 
the two questions thus abstractedly proposed to 
me. 

Some time in the month of May, or early in 
June, Lord Wellesley expressed to me an anxious 
wish to give up the Seals of the Foreign Depart- 
ment, for the purpose of their being offered to me ; 
but previously to his making the tender of this 
resignation he desired to learn from me whether, if 
such an offer should be made to me, I would 
entertain it. 

I took some days to consider this question, and 
then informed Lord Wellesley that if the proposal 
were to be accompanied with the assurance of his 
remaining in the Government in some situation 
satisfactory to himself, and with suitable arrange- 
ments for those persons with whom I was im- 
mediately connected, I would not refuse to enter- 
tain it. 

I had learnt in the interval, since Lord 
Wellesley’s first communication to me at Easter, 
that the same questions which he had then been 
employed to put to me had at the same time been 
propounded to Lord Sidmouth, and that, from the 
manner in which he had received them, all idea of 
his accession to the Government, on the principles 
proposed, was at an end. 

I understand from Lord Wellesley that no 


1812] A DECIDED NEGATIVE 37 


similar communication had yet been madé to Lord 
Castlereagh, but that it was determined by the 
Cabinet, with Lord Wellesley’s perfect acquies- 
cence, that it would be right to combine an 
overture to him with any other overture for obtain- 
ing an accession of strength to the Government. 
And when I saw Lord Wellesley last, towards the 
end of August, he informed me that, in pursuance 
of that determination, you had undertaken to write 
to Lord Castlereagh for the purpose of ascertaining 
whether he would be willing to listen to any 
overture that might be made to him. 

Lord Wellesley likewise described the nature of 
the offers which it was in the contemplation of the 
Government to make, jointly or simultaneously, 
to Lord Castlereagh and me, if it should appear 
probable that they might be made with success. 
But he stated distinctly that he was not then 
authorised to make any proposition to me, nor to 
receive any answer from me. 

To the proposition then stated by him to be in 
contemplation I should have had no hesitation, 
so far as related to myself, in giving a decided 
negative. But, complicated as that part which 
related to me was with the intended offer to Lord 
Castlereagh, I did not like to anticipate the state- 
ment of a refusal, the motives of which might have 
appeared equivocal. 

T have recently heard from Lord Wellesley that 
the answer received by you from Lord Castlereagh 
is such as to show that the Government has no 
prospect at present of obtaining his accession, but 
that there is nothing in that answer which appears 


38 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1800- 


to point at any personal objection to any 
individual. 

I can now, therefore, say, without any appre- 
hension of being misinterpreted, that I should 
have begged leave to decline the intended offer to 
me, independently of any consideration of its 
being coupled to one with Lord Castlereagh. 

Tsay this with the less scruple as I have already 
avowed to you that I should mot have declined 
the proposition suggested by Lord Wellesley, and 
as I am equally ready to declare that if that 
proposition were now made to me (with the 
qualifications which I have already described), and 
were it to be His Majesty’s gracious pleasure to 
command my services in the office in which I had 
before the honour to serve him, I should now be 
prepared to obey His Majesty’s commands. 

I cannot but be aware of the misconstructions 
to which the openness of this declaration might 
expose me, if I could imagine that any unfair 
advantage would be taken of it. But after the 
discussions which have taken place I have thought 
it better that the precise proposition, to which in 
the course of them my consent was given, should be 
distinctly defined and understood, than that I 
should risk the imputation, either on the one hand 
of having been determined to reject all overture, 
or on the other of having been willing to accept 
any thing that might be offered to me. 

The very basis of the proposition which I 
consented to accept (Lord Wellesley’s voluntary 
resignation of his present office) sufficiently shows 
that it did not originate with me. 


1812] A FINAL DECISION 39 


And by declaring my readiness to agyee to this 
proposition, at the expense of a sacrifice of personal 
feeling on my part (which I do not pretend to 
undervalue), I trust I shall at least have attained 
the object for which I determined to make that 
sacrifice, and for which J have now determined to 
make this declaration—that of proving that it is 
not by any personal pretensions of mine that the 
re-union of the friends of Mr. Pitt in the service of 
the country is rendered impracticable. 

On the other hand, I beg it may be understood 
that this declaration is on my part final ; that it is 
to the proposition to which I have referred alone 
that I have been, or am now, willing to assent ; and 
that while I have myself scrupulously abstained 
from anything like an exclusive principle, or 
individual objection, I am not to be considered as 
acquiescing in such a principle, if stated with 
respect to me, nor as being ready to wait the good 
pleasure of any individual. 

I do not communicate this letter to Lord 
Wellesley, though I have, of course, thought it 
right to tell him that I intended writing to you.' 


Draft of SPENCER PERCEVAL’S reply to GEORGE 
CANNING 

September 30, 1810 

I have received your letter of the 26th inst. from 
Hinckley, and have shown it to Lord Wellesley. 

As your object in writing seems to have been to 

prevent the possibility of misunderstanding with 

regard to the nature and extent of the consent 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 401- 


40 ‘THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1809- 


which you may have been prepared to give to any 
proposal which might have been made to you for 
joining the present Government, a very short 
answer on my part will, I trust, be sufficient and 
satisfactory. 

I never conceived myself authorised to infer from 
what had passed any consent of yours, beyond 
what you state in your letter. Indeed, I might 
have doubted whether I could justly have pre- 
sumed upon that consent even so far. I had 
understood from Lord Wellesley that if a pro- 
position for your return to your former office were 
made, connected with the assurance of asatisfactory 
arrangement for Lord Wellesley, and a suitable 
consideration of your friends, you would feel no 
such objection to my continuing to hold my present 
situation, and no such personal objection to any 
individual, whether a member of the present 
Government, or one to whom an offer might be 
made at the same time, as would preclude you 
from entertaining such a proposition, and from 
being prepared to discuss the details of it. This 
is the full extent which I had felt myself authorised 
to collect from anything which I understood to 
have passed between Lord Wellesley and you ; 
and the hope which I acknowledge I indulged, that 
you might have been prevailed upon to accede to 
an arrangement which might have placed you in 
another office, if such an arrangement had been 
found upon the whole more consistent with the 
general interests and strength of the Government, 
was certainly founded on my own reasoning rather 


1812] A PAINFUL VISIT 4I 


than upon anything which I had understood to 
have fallen from you." 


In 18x10 the King was again unwell. He had 
been much worried by the failure of the Walcheren 
Expedition, and greatly distressed by the “ Duke 

_and Darling ” scandal* that resulted in the retire- 
ment of his son, the Duke of York, from the office 
of Commander-in-Chief. The final blow to his 
reason was the death on November 2 of his 
youngest and favourite daughter, the Princess 
Amelia. He was then placed in the custody of 
his physicians. ‘‘ The Marquess Wellesley, as a 
member of the Privy Council,’”’ says Pearce, 
“ visited the King during the calamitous affliction 
under which he suffered, to ascertain and report 
upon the state of His Majesty’s health. When his 
Lordship entered the apartment in which the royal 
sufferer was confined he found the man whom he 
had been accustomed to see surrounded with the 
insignia of power, and all the heraldic pomp of 
state-ceremonial, sitting in a condition of complete 
nakedness on his bed, sunk apparently in hopeless 
oblivion. Lord Wellesley wasso deeply affected that 
he could not refrain from tears, and in after life 
never adverted to the subject without emotion.’’§ 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 405. 

2 This scandal arose out of the sale of commissions in the 
army by Mary Anne Clarke, the mistress of the Duke of York. 
It was brought to light by Colonel Wardle in 1809, and was 
the subject of debate in Parliament. 

3 Life of Wellesley, iii. 167. 


42 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [x800- 


Notes of the result of the Examination of the 
Physicians in attendance on His Majesty, by 
THE LorD PRESIDENT and THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 

Windsor: November 21, 1810 

His Majesty has had a relapse of his disorder 
within the last week, which has interrupted the 
progress of amendment described in the bulletin 
of the 13th inst. The disorder has not returned 
with the same degree of violence which marked its 
commencement. His Majesty’s present state of 
understanding and health is nearly similar to the 
second stage of nearly all his former complaints of 
a similar description. 

In His Majesty’s former complaints he has 
passed through a similar stage of imperfect use of 
judgment previously tothe entire recovery of reason. 

In ordinary cases the present state of his 
disorder would be deemed more likely to be 
permanent than its more violent state, but as His 
Majesty has usually passed through this state 
previous to recovery, it is probable that his 
present condition will not be permanent. 

His Majesty is not at present in possession 
of the power of exercising his judgment, although 
the excess of passion is not so great nor so 
frequent as at the commencement of the relapse, 
and his manner is on the whole more mild than at 
any period of time since the commencement of the 
relapse, although he is occasionally passionate and 
violent. 

This relapse does not affect the probability of 
His Majesty’s ultimate recovery. 


1812] THE KING’S HEALTH 43 


It is, however, probable that this relapse may 
retard the period of His Majesty’s ultimate 
recovery. It is not probable that His Majesty 
can be completely recovered in less than three 
months. 

This would be deemed by the physicians a 
speedy recovery. 

It is nearly impossible that His Majesty should 
be completely recovered before the 29th inst. 

It is probable that many intervals may occur 
before the expiration of three months, in which 
His Majesty may be competent to any single (but 
not to any complicated) act of Government. 

Such an interval may occur previous to the 29th 
inst. 

During any such interval it would be impossible 
to reckon upon the continuance of His Majesty’s 
competency of reason for any, even the most 
limited, period of time. Dr. Willis stated that 
during such intervals it would not be prudent to 
trust His Majesty without constant superinten- 
dence. It would probably retard the time of His 
Majesty’s ultimate recovery if he were soon to 
perform any act of Government. 

The cause of this relapse was His Majesty’s 
solicitude respecting the funeral of the Princess 
Amelia, and the pains which His Majesty employed 
in the settlement of remunerations to Her Royal 
Highness’ attendants. 

This cause being intimately connected with the 
original cause of His Majesty’s present illness, and 
having also ceased to exist, it is probable that its 
consequences may not be permanent. 


44 ‘THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [x809- 


The phiysicians stated that the most urgent and 
afflicting symptom in His Majesty’s actual situa- 
tion was the want of sleep. They expressed 
considerable expectations of the relief which might 
ensue from any long interval of sleep, and those 
who had attended His Majesty in former attacks 
stated that, in the course of this illness, short 
intervals of sleep had produced more decisively 
favourable consequences than they had remem- 
bered in His Majesty’s former illnesses. ? 


Notes on the General State of Europe, by THE 
MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
London: May 15, 1811 


The commencement of the Spanish Revolution 
afforded the only opportunity which this country 
has for some years possessed of directing the 
efforts of her army with effect against the over- 
grown power of France. It was therefore always 
Lord Wellesley’s opinion that as soon as it 
appeared evident that the people of the Peninsula 
were resolved to endure everything, rather than 
submit to the French power, it was our policy to 
found, in the Peninsula, a system of military 
operations which should demand the employment 
of such a portion of the military power of France 
as should give to the other powers of the Continent 
the means, not only of recruiting their strength, 
but of employing that strength for the purpose of 
relieving themselves from the dominion and 
influence of France. 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 435. 


1812] A MILITARY SYSTEM 45 


Our system was to be framed on primciples of 
slow operation, to produce remote results, but 
beneficial effects to the common cause in every 
successive stage. It was not to be expected that 
the system, however successfully pursued, was to 
destroy the power of France, or to overthrow its 
present form of government for the purpose of 
introducing another of our election; but the fair 
and rational object of the system was to enable us 
in the first instance (as far as respected our own 
security), and ultimately the powers of the 
Continent, to restrain the power of France within 
such limits as might be necessary to the safety, 
liberty, and tranquillity of Europe, and to check the 
design of universal dominion, which, of late years, 
has been so successfully pursued by the present 
tuler of France. 

This object could be accomplished only by 
creating so powerful a diversion in the Peninsula 
as might enable the powers on the Continent to 
oppose the views of France, according to their 
respective means, so that France might be reduced 
to the alternative, either of relinquishing her 
designs in the Peninsula or elsewhere, or of making 
an imperfect effort in two quarters. In one case, 
we might be certain of success in that quarter 
which France should abandon ; in the other case, 
we might hope for success in resisting the divided 
efforts of that great power, which, when con- 
centrated, has generally proved irresistible. The 
system, in its practical operation, would resemble 
a machine which could work at either or both 
extremities, as occasions might offer. For 


46 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [x809- 


instance, éf a large portion of the French army were 
employed in the Peninsula, then an opportunity 
was afforded to the powers of the Continent of 
acting against France. On the other hand, if a 
large portion of the French army were directed 
against the other continental powers, then an 
opportunity was afforded of rescuing the Peninsula 
from the dominion of France. 

It is true that this system has not been steadily 
pursued by England, nor has it been carried to the 
full extent of which the resources and means of 
England were capable. If the whole, or at all 
events a considerable portion, of the Force em- 
ployed against Walcheren had been applied (on 
the principles above described) to the Peninsula, 
there can be no doubt that the most complete 
success would have ensued; and it was on this 
ground that Lord Wellesley objected to the 
expedition against Walcheren, and has ever con- 
sidered it as the most absurd and ruinous project? 
ever attempted ; especially in the manner in which 
the attempt was made. He does not think that, 
even since he has been in the Cabinet, all has been 
done that could or ought to have been done, either 
in money or men in the Peninsula. 

The prosecution of this system is equally bene- 
ficial to England, both in all its intermediate stages 
and in its possible final result. Imperfect as the 
efforts of England have been, they have four times 
saved the Peninsula from the dominion of France, 
and by that means have prevented France from 


1 From here to the end of the parierape is marked in the 
original ‘ Most secret.” 


1812] THE SYSTEM’S SUCCESS 47 


directing her military power against this,country, 
either by an immediate invasion of England, or, 
more remotely, though scarcely less dangerously, 
by an effort against Ireland ; and from directing 

er power to the utter extinction of the continental 
powers of Europe. 

When Buonaparte in person, at the head of a 
numerous army, was employing every effort to 
subjugate Spain, the Emperor of Austria suddenly 
armed against France, and compelled Buonaparte 
to quit Spain, to withdraw a portion of the force 
employed in that country, to leave the designs 
against the Peninsula unexecuted, and to entrust 
the completion of them to his generals. It is true 
that Austria failed, because she rushed into a war 
too precipitately. But the event proved satis- 
factorily the operation of the system (which has 
been described), and showed that it was not 
necessary to excite Austria to exertion. In truth, 
Austria suffered from the excess of temerity and 
precipitation, and, instead of being excited, she 
required to be restrained. If Austria had waited 
patiently till the proper season for action, and had 
matured and digested her plan of operation, the 
result of the contest might have been very ditferent. 
But, even as it happened, it diminished the efforts 
of France on the Peninsula for a time, and enabled 
us to make more effectual preparations in Portugal 
during the interval. And perhaps this case of 
Austria proves in the clearest way the advantage 
of protracting the war in the Peninsula, which, even 
if not very favourable, must be advantageous to 
the grand object of wasting the resources of France 
by a double pressure. 


48 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1809- 


With wespect to the ultimate result of the 
proposed system, the advantages which it holds 
forth to England, if successful, are equally manifest 
and important. It willrescue the Peninsula and 
its colonies from the dominion of France; it will 
place the Peninsula and its colonies, from a natural 
union of interests, under the influence of Great 
Britain ; it will relieve an extensive country, full 
of resource, military, naval, and commercial, 
possessing the richest and most extensive colonies 
in the world, from an oppressive Government, and 
establish in its room a Government of well- 
tempered liberty, formed upon the model of our 
own constitution ; it will secure to us a great and 
efficient ally on the very border of France, and will 
enable us to impose a stronger restraint upon 
France than was ever before in our power. Such 
are the probable results of the system, if it be 
admitted that it be carried into effect. 

If it should be successful, the state of Europe, 
and of the world, will be more advantageous to 
England than it has ever been since the House of 
Bourbon was unfortunately placed on the throne 
of Spain. 

There is at present every encouragement to hope 
for a successful result, because it may with perfect 
truth be asserted that, at the present moment, 
nearly three years from the commencement of the 
struggle, Buonaparte has not advanced a single 
step towards the subjugation of Spain, and his 
armies for the third time have been driven with 
disgrace from Portugal. 

The continuance of this system has greatly 


1812] A GLORIOUS EXAMPLE 49 


embarrassed France, has compelled her, at an 
enormous expense of men, money, and military 
resources, as well as of military character, to 
employ a large portion of her army against Spain, 
and has again given time to the other continental 
powers to prepare means of resistance. Not only 
has the lustre of the French armies been tarn- 
ished by the long continuance of an unsuccessful 
struggle, and, in many instances, the positive 
defeats she has sustained (in addition to the 
acknowledged failure of their military skill and 
science opposed to ours), but Spain and Portugal 
have held forth to the nations of Europe a glorious 
and instructive example of resistance against a 
power which, by its repeated successes, had 
created an opinion that it was irresistible. 

RussiA.—It now appears that the Emperor of 
Russia, seeing the tendency of Buonaparte’s 
ambitious projects, is actively preparing the means 
of resistance. It appears that these preparations 
have been accelerated since the Court of Peters- 
burg has become acquainted with the incorporation 
of the Hanse towns with France, and of the Duchy 
of Oldenburg, the integrity of which was guar- 
anteed by the treaty of Tilsit. His Imperial 
Majesty has likewise taken great umbrage at what 
Buonaparte calls the Continental System, which, 
for the purpose of destroying the commerce of 
England, will in fact destroy the whole commerce 
of Europe. That system has not been carried into 
effect in any part of His Imperial Majesty’s 
dominions. 

The Court of Petersburg seems to be convinced 

2 E 


50 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1809- 


that sh¢ must be prepared to resist the further 
encroachments of France, as concessions will only 
produce fresh demands. A considerable body of 
troops has been assembled; the manufacture of 
every description of arms has been encouraged ; 
the organisation of the army has been altered and 
improved ; and it appears that Russia is now really 
convinced of the necessity of opposing France, not 
for any general purpose of coalition, or support of 
other powers, but for the independence and safety 
of Russia herself. 

The relative situations of Russia with Turkey 
and Persia are unfavourable to the prosecution of 
any great and vigorous effort against France.: At 
the very moment that Russia is compelled to 
adopt measures for her security from the oppression 
of France, she is carrying on a war of ambition 
and aggrandisement against Turkey and Persia. 
While she is taking up arms to defend her ancient 
possessions, she is struggling for the conquest of 
Wallachia and Moldavia. It is certainly her 
interest to come to terms both with Persia and 
Turkey, but Persia will probably reject peace, 
unless Russia shall withdraw from her projects of 
agetandisement, and shall retrocede possessions 
which she is evidently anxious to retain ; and it is 
not probable that the Turks will be moderate in 
their demands, if they should perceive that Russia 
is driven to peace with them in order that she may 
be better prepared against France. 

In this state of circumstances, Lord Wellesley 
has been pressed to make advances to Russia, and 
to encourage a spirit of resistance against France. 


1812] THE FATE OF AUSTRIA 51 


But Lord Wellesley has thought it advisable to be 
perfectly silent on the subject, for, in addition to 
other powerful arguments, the fate of Austria, in 
the East campaign, proved that the continental 
powers of Europe required a curb and not a spur. 
Russia would either suspect our advances, or be 
encouraged by them to make demands of money 
and armies which we could not satisfy; and in 
either case the final result would be to excite 
jealousy or dissatisfaction. In no case could we 
hope to increase her means of resistance against 
France until her own efforts shall have brought her 
into a state in which our aid might be useful. This 
cannot be expected before she shall have acted in 
such a way as to prove that she is resolved 
sincerely, and with energy, to apply all her 
resources to the object of rescuing her empire 
from the usurpation of France, and by the means 
within her power to open to England such com- 
mercial and naval advantages as shall facilitate 
our advances towards her assistance. 

In the event of a rupture between Russia and 
France, it is certain that we can give Russia no 
money, and it is probable that it will not be in our 
power to give her any military assistance. Aid 
perhaps may be afforded by maritime operations, 
and by supplies of arms and stores. 

It is, however, desirable to know Lord Welling- 
ton’s opinion, applicable to some contingencies 
which may arise. 

First.—If France should persevere in her pro- 
jects against the Peninsula and make a vigorous 
efiort in that quarter? In this case, it will 


52 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1809- 


naturally follow that all our exertions must be 
made in that quarter. 

Second.—If{ France should act on the defensive 
in Spain, and even retire to the Ebro, and should 
relinquish her active operations in the Peninsula 
until the termination of a contest with Russia, 
would it be advisable to withdraw any portion of 
our army in the Peninsula, in order to employ it in 
the north of Europe ? 

Third.—If France should attempt both objects, 
and should make an imperfect effort both in the 
Peninsula and in the north of Europe, would it be 
advisable to withdraw any portion of our army 
from the Peninsula for the purpose of employing 
it in the north of Europe ? 

In either of the two last cases, if it be judged 
expedient to employ, in the north of Europe, any 
part of the army which is now in the Peninsula, to 
what points, and in what manner, could such 
operations be directed with any prospect of 
advantage ? 

AusTRIA.—There can be little doubt that Austria 
is much dissatisfied with France, nor has the 
marriage established, or even promoted, confidence 
and cordiality between the two Courts. 

But the Government is miserably weak, and her 
finances are represented to be in the most deplor- 
able condition. She is endeavouring to improve 
her situation, but a certain period of time is 
absolutely necessary to enable her to recover 
herself from the efforts of the last struggle. She 
must remain at least neutral, and she may be 
apprehensive that Russia may be too precipitate. 


1812] THE STATE OF PRUSSIA 53 


But she cannot wish well to France, nor can she 
wish for the subjugation of Russia. 

The policy of Austria will certainly be to remain 
neutral, and although not well affected to France, 
nor at present disinclined towards Russia, she will 
probably look to the possible advantages of a 
neutrality (necessary from other causes) in the 
eventual plunder of the Russian Empire. 

This is the unfortunate result of her weak (if 
not corrupt) councils. But if Russia should resist 
France successfully or maintain the struggle for 
any long time, the same motives will lead Austria to 
counteract Francetothe utmost extent of her means. 

Prussia.—Prussia is in a most deplorable 
condition, and at present it is apprehended that 
she must take part with France. The Court may 
be absolutely subject to France, but the officers 
of the Prussian army are extremely adverse to 
France. This idea is confirmed by what has 
passed at Colberg, where it appears certain that 
some resistance has been opposed to the French 
troops. Prussia would rise against France in any 
favourable crisis. 

DENMARK.—It is probable that the people of 
Denmark are favourably disposed towards Eng- 
land and hostile to France; but the King is not 
only adverse to England, but outrageously mad in 
his hostility. Denmark will probably follow the 
success of Russia. 

SWEDEN.—The people of Sweden are very 
favourably inclined towards us, and Bernadotte 
affects to participate in that disposition. Berna- 
dotte says that as he is now a true Swede, he 


54 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [x809- 


naturally adopts all the feelings and interests of his 
country, and is therefore hostile to the ambitious 
projects of Buonaparte. But his affectation is so 
gross and absurd that Lord Wellesley cannot 
persuade himself to give credit to Bernadotte’s 
protestations. 

Sweden, however, is at the mercy of England, 
and much afraid of Russia, and if Russia should 
make head against France, Sweden must follow our 
orders. Upon the whole of this state of affairs, 
does Lord Wellington think that we should look 
to the Peninsula exclusively, or make any reserve 
for exertions in the north of Europe; and, if we 
should make attempts in that quarter, where and 
how ? 

Whether, in any of the cases supposed, any 
attempt could be made with advantage on any 
part of the coast of France, either northward of 
Spain, or in the Mediterranean ? 

Whether any attempt shall be made from Sicily, 
either on the coasts of Spain, or France, or in 
Italy, or in the island of Corfu, or other isles of the 
Adriatic, or any part of those seas ? 

A large part of the Austrian army will be dis- 
banded. If France should be able to terrify 
Austria, could any part of this force be advan- 
tageously used in Spain, or collected in the 
Adriatic isles for eventual war in Italy ? 

Minorca is seriously menaced by France. What 
steps can be taken for its defence ? which is an 
object of great importance. Lord Wellington 
should state his sentiments on this point to Mr. 
Henry Wellesley at Cadiz. 


1812] AMERICAN HOSTILITY 58 


AmERiIcA.—Lord Wellington will perceive from 
the instructions to Mr. Foster the nature of our 
relations with America. Since the date of these 
instructions, America has proceeded to various 
acts of violence against our ships, and it may be 
necessary to retaliate against these proceedings 
by distressing her commerce. She has also inter- 
fered in a very improper manner with the pro- 
ceedings of the Spanish-American colonies, and is 
evidently most hostilely disposed towards this 
country. 

In the event of her proceeding to extremities, 
what military, naval, and political measures 
should, in Lord Wellington’s opinion, be adopted 
towards America ?? 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to SPENCER PERCEVAL 
Private and secret Apsley House 
July 28, 1811 
I saw the Prince Regent? yesterday, when he 
expressed considerable anxiety that Parliament 
should not be prorogued during the present critical 
state of the King’s bodily health. He wished that 
an adjournment should take place for ten days or a 
fortnight in order to afford sufficient time for 
determining the probable issue of the present 
crisis. He desired me to mention his wishes 
on this subject to you, if I should happen to see you 
before he saw you. As I understand that the 
Regent is gone to Windsor this morning I trouble 
you with this note. 


1 Add. MSS. 37293 f. 5. 
2 The Regency Bill was passed on February 4, 1811. 


56 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS .{1809- 


My sef&timents coincide with those of His Royal 
Highness. I think it would not be advisable to 
close the door of Parliament until it shall be ascer- 
tained that this attack is not likely to lead to any 
immediately fatal issue. 

I am sorry that I happened to be out when you 
called this morning. I had just walked through 
my garden to the Park, and returned almost 
immediately after your departure.’ 


Lapy HESTER STANHOPE? to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 

Private  Nebech, upon the banks of the Bosphorus 

August 29, 1811 

Mr. Canning * having threatened to write to your 
Lordship, I take the liberty of addressing you upon 
a subject I am anxious should not be misrepre- 
sented. 

You are aware, my Lord, that I left England 
on account of my health, which, though mended, is 
by no means re-established, and I always suffer 
extremely from cold. During the course of last 
winter I had often expressed a wish that it were 
possible I could visit either Italy or the south of 
France, which, coming to the ears of M. La Tour 
Maubourg, the French Chargé d’Affaives at this 

1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 480. 

2 Lady Hester Lucy Stanhope (1776-1839), eldest daughter 
of Charles ,Stanhope, afterwards third Earl Stanhope, was 
the companion of her uncle, William Pitt, from 18c3 until 
his death. She travelled extensively in the East. 

8 Stratford Canning, afterwards Viscount Stratford de 


Redcliffe (1786-1880), at this time Minister Plenipotentiary 
at Constantinople. 


1812] LADY HESTER STANHOPE. 57 


place, he was so good as to hint through a third 
person he should be most happy to give me every 
assistance in his power to accomplish this object. 
Had Mr. Adair! been here, or any man of known 
character and liberal opinions, I should in the first 
instance have communicated this circumstance to 
him, and fairly told him it was my intention to 
take advantage of the opportunity which now 
presented jtself of making the acquaintance of 
M. Maubourg, and requesting him to forward my 
views in the manner he thought most respectable 
to both parties. But Mr. Canning was young and 
inexperienced, full of zeal, but full of prejudice. I 
guessed therefore what might be the line of 
conduct he would pursue on such an occasion. 
Respecting as I do his many virtues, I did not wish 
to quarrel with him, or appear openly to disregard 
his authority, or publicly to ridicule the very idea 
of any person presuming to doubt my patriotism ; 
because I despise the idea of war with individuals, 
and also cannot but lament a fault too common 
to most of our public men, that of seeing things in 
the light they wish them to be, and not as they are, 
and trying to impose this fallacy upon the public 
mind, which, when discovered, must sooner or later 
destroy the degree of confidence they ought to 
possess. 

The above reasons decided me to see M. Mau- 
bourg privately, who is also very young for his 
situation, but which his talents fully qualify him to 
fill. Nothing can have been more candid, more 


1 James (afterwards Sir James) Adair (1763-1855) was 
Canning’s predecessor at Constantinople. 


58 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1809- 


honourable, and more delicate than his conduct 
upon this occasion, and he lost no time in writing 
to Paris for passports, and his answer may be 
expected every day. Not long ago Mr. Canning’s 
spy, who I saw was pursuing me for some time, 
communicated to his employer that he had seen 
M. Maubourg and myself walking together upon 
the coast of Asia. This led Mr. Canning to 
enquire into the business, the whole of which I 
communicated to him, and my reasons for having 
kept it a secret. He has thought it his duty to 
take leave of me, and also to forbid any of those 
persons belonging to him to visit me, which, as 
far as it affects my comfort, is of no consequence, 
as they are all horribly dull (except Mr. Pisani, 
who is a man of merit and information) ; and as 
far as it relates to my politics, I flatter myself that 
it is not in the power of Mr. Canning or any other 
person to cast any reflection upon them that would 
be credited in this or any other country, much less 
in my own. 

Although it is very evident that Mr. Canning has 
not been educated in your Lordship’s school of 
gallantry, yet I give him full credit for acting from 
the most upright and most conscientious prin- 
ciples ; and if his zeal has carried him a little too 
far, there is no one so willing to forgive it as I am, 
or so little inclined to attempt to turn him from 
his duty. Affectation or fear have in no degree 
influenced my line of conduct towards him, and 
if I have acted with more moderation than is usual 
to me it proceeds from what may (though true) 
sound like conceit to confess—the persuasion that 


1812] PATRIOTISM DEFINED 59 


Mr. Canning and I do not stand upon equal 
grounds, and that he is by no means a match for 
me, were I determined to revenge what, to others, 
catries the appearance of insult. But as he is both 
a political and religious methodist, after having 
appeared to doubt my love for my country he will 
next presume to teach me my duty to my God. 
Before I conclude I must make one petition to 
your Lordship, not to receive Mr. Canning with 
dog bows, or wry faces, or allow the fine ladies to 
toss him in a blanket ; the best recompense for 
his services would be to appoint him Commander- 
in-Chief at home, and Ambassador-Extraordinary 
to the various societies for the suppression of vice 
and cultivation of patriotism. The latter consists 
in putting oneself into greater convulsions than the 
Dervishes at the mention of Buonaparte’s name.’ 


Europe was in a most unsettled state. The 
war had drained its resources, and almost every 
country would willingly have made peace, if 
satisfactory terms had been forthcoming from 
Napoleon. Sweden and Prussia actually went so 
far as to invite an alliance with France, which in 
both instances rejected the proposal. Austria 
was bankrupt, and its Government paper at a 
discount of ninety per cent. Russia was dis- 
inclined to do more than stand on the defensive. 
Alone Britain and the Bourbon party in Spain 
were eager to continue the war. 

1 Add. MSS. 37310 f. 77. 


60 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1809- 


CounT MUNSTER to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 


Most secret Clarges Street 
October 22, 1811 


The messenger who yesterday brought des- 
patches from Vienna to your Lordship’s office has 
been detained at Berlin by Baron Ompteda, for 
the purpose of conveying his report on the highly 
important occurrences which have taken place at 
Berlin from the 2oth to the 25th September. 

They are of such a nature that His Royal 
Highness the Prince Regent has commanded me to 
give, without loss of time, a summary abstract of 
their contents to your Excellency. 

Baron Ompteda first refers to the declaration 
which the Prussian Chancellor Hardenberg’ has 
made to the French Minister at Berlin, on the 
determination of the King of Prussia to resist any 
attack which might be made against him. He 
then proceeds to state that the evasive answer at 
first given by Buonaparte had been followed by 
a more decisive one, delivered by the French 
Minister to the King of Prussia in an audience on 
the 24th September. 

Baron Ompteda having requested an interview 
with Baron Hardenberg for the purpose of being 
informed of the real state of things, he obtained 
the following account from the Prime Minister. 

1 Charles Augustus, Baron (afterwards Prince) von Harden- 
berg (1750-1822), after holding minor posts at Hanover and 
Brunswick, became in 1791 Prussian Minister of State. On 
the accession of Frederich William II. he was displaced by 
Haugwitz, but was Foreign Minister in 1804-1805, when he 


retired. In 1810 he was appointed Chancellor, and took an 
active and brilliant part in the War of Liberation. 


1812] PRUSSIAN ACTIVITY 61 


That the Court of Prussia, in order to ascertain the 
real intention of France, had in the month of May 
offered to conclude an alliance with that power, 
which, however, had been of a nature to secure the 
perfect independence of Prussia, on which account 
he had foreseen that it would not be accepted. 

In order to prove that Prussia had not really 
intended to conclude this alliance, Baron Harden- 
berg mentioned that one of the conditions was: 
“that the Prussian army should always remain 
united, in a corps d’armée, and under the command 
of a Prussian general, and that this army should 
never be employed but for the sole purpose of 
defending the Prussian dominions.” 

Baron Hardenberg then proceeded to state that 
this proposition of Prussia had not been favoured 
with an answer from Buonaparte ; that, however, 
the French had continued their preparations for 
war on the Prussian frontier with more activity 
than heretofore, and that Prussia, on her part, had 
put herself in a state of defence ; that this had at 
last produced the declaration of which Baron 
Ompteda had given an account in his despatch 
of the roth September; that at last a French 
messenger had brought, on the 20th September, 
instructions to Count Marsan, in consequence of 
which he had requested an audience with the King ; 
that Buonaparte had declared in very flattering 
terms ‘“‘that he had been prevented from giving 
an answer to the proposition of an alliance with 
Prussia, by being engaged in negotiations with 
Russia which were not yet terminated; that, 
however, in order to give to the King of Prussia 


62 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [x809- 


a proof ot his friendship, he should soon send a 
messenger to carry instructions for the purpose of 
entering into a negotiation on the proposed 
alliance, and that the conditions he was going to 
offer would be a proof of his sentiments towards 
Prussia ; that, in the meanwhile, he must insist 
that all preparations for war be discontinued ; that 
he did not think himself offended by them, but 
that his honour and the preservation of public 
tranquillity made it absolutely necessary that they 
should; that in case this was not agreed to in- 
stantly his Minister had orders to quit Berlin and 
the Prince of Eckmihl} to march into the Prussian 
dominions.” 

Baron Hardenberg added to this statement 
that, considering the state of complete uncertainty 
in which the Court of Prussia was left in regard 
to the resolutions of the Court of St. Petersburg, 
and since they had not even been informed of the 
effect produced by the scene which had taken place 
at Paris on the 15th August, there had remained 
no other part to be taken than to accept the pro- 
position of France, to enter into a negotiation. 
That, however, Baron Ompteda might firmly rely 
upon this, that the proposed alliance would not be 
concluded ; that the armaments would be dis- 
continued, in appearance only, in order to gain 
time, but that under hand the preparations should 
be continued, for which purpose Baron Harden- 
berg had repeated his request for obtaining arms. 


1 Louis Nicolas Davoust, Prince of Eckmihl (1770-1823), 
Marshal of France. He was one of the greatest of the generals 
of Napoleon, to whom he remained faithful totheend. During 
the Hundred Days he acted as Minister of War. 


1812] GNEISENAU’S POLICY 63 


The French Minister having desired that the 
Court of Russia might be speedily informed of this 
negotiation, a Prussian messenger was to be 
despatched on the 26th September for that purpose. 
It is likewise at the desire of the French Minister 
that Baron Hardenberg has caused an article to be 
inserted in the Berlin Gazette, of which Baron 
Ompteda has sent a copy, which states, ‘‘ that the 
assurances which the King had received of the 
amicable disposition of the neighbouring powers 
had induced His Majesty to suspend the warlike 
preparations which the former circumstances 
seemed to have required.”’ This despatch of Baron 
Ompteda was accompanied by a letter from Colonel 
Gneisenau* dated 24th September. It agrees in 
general with the tenor of Ompteda’s report, but it 
contains some observations which appear to me to 
be very alarming. Mr. de Gneisenau informs me 
that his advice has been to refuse at once the 
discontinuing of the preparations for war, and to 
forward them with redoubled vigour. He states 
that, contrary to his opinion, measures had been 
adopted for gaining time, by which in reality time 
would be lost ; that the adoption of his plan would 
have obliged the King to leave Berlin immediately ; 
that His Majesty had considered this as an act 
which would cause the instantaneous breaking out 
of the war, the responsibility of which he wished to 
avoid. 

1 Count Neidhard Gneisenau (1760-1829), Prussian Field- 
Marshal. He defended the fortress of Colberg against 
Napoleon, and in 1813 commanded the retreat of the Russian 


and Prussian forces after Liitzen and Breslau. He served 
under Bliicher in the later campaigns against the French. 


64 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1809- 


Mr. de Gneisenau then proceeds to say: “ It ts 
certain that we can never become the allies of France, 
and that we shall resist any attack made against us ; 
but much depends on the more or less powerful means 
of resistance.” He then states that his plan for 
fortifying a position in front of Spandau could not 
be put into execution, since it had been decided to 
leave to the enemy the choice of the time for 
beginning the war; that this circumstance pro- 
duced a still more serious consequence, that of 
making it very difficult to save “ the King’s person, 
and that, if the movements of the enemy’s troops 
should render his departure impossible, a Treaty of 
Submission to France would be easily foreseen. This 
as the only case,” he adds, ‘‘ in which we may foresee 
the possibility of Prussia appertaining to France. 
It is for this reason that the protracted presence 
of the King at Berlin is so dangerous to the good 
cause.” 

In regard to the works having been suspended, 
Mr. de Gneisenau informs me that the people 
employed about those which were nearly com- 
pleted were secretly at work for similar purposes, 
in other quarters. 

I have further to inform your Lordship that I 
have received letters from General Nugent, by 
which it appears that he expected to reach 
Vienna about the 29th September. I must, how- 
ever, defer the communication of this letter till I 
shall be able to read to your Excellency the 
despatches from Vienna, which are not yet 
deciphered. They will probably be of great 
importance, since I find that Baron Jacobi, who 


1812] THE PRUSSIAN CRISIS 65 


has been sent from Berlin to Vienna, has made 
his report to his Court by means of Count 
Hardenberg ciphers. 

The present crisis in which Prussia is placed 
is certainly alarming, yet it appears that the 
Prussian Cabinet has found means to gain time,’ 
since no tidings of the commencement of hostilities 
have been received in England. The circumstance 
of a messenger having been despatched from Berlin 
to St. Petersburg may lead us to hope that Prussia 
and Russia will remain united, and that peace will 
either be preserved or a common war be declared. 

Considering these circumstances, His Royal 
Highness the Prince Regent has been pleased to 
mention to me that it might be a proper moment 
for His Royal Highness to write to the King of 
Prussia, and requests your Lordship to take this - 
idea into your serious consideration, since if it is 
to take place His Royal Highness thinks that it 
should be done without loss of time. 

The Vienna despatches will be ready in the course 
of to-morrow.’ 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to SPENCER PERCEVAL 
Private Apsley House 
November 27, 1811 

Just as I reached Oatlands* this morning at 
half-past twelve, the Princess arrived from Wind- 
sor, which event prevented me from seeing the 
Prince until a very late hour. I am but this 
moment arrived in town, and have had no dinner, 


1 Add. MSS. 37293 f. 161. 
* The residence of the Duke and Duchess of York. 
2 F 


66 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1809- 


and am so much tired (partly from the extreme 
heat of the rooms at Oatlands), that I should have 
no power of rendering justice to any subject of 
public business to-night, even if I could reach 
you in any reasonable time. 

The subject of my audience to-day was Sweden ; 
but the Prince generally stated to me the same 
ideas which I have already mentioned to you, with 
much increased earnestness, and, indeed, in some 
points, with considerable force. He informed me 
that he had seen the Queen yesterday, and that 
Her Majesty entirely approved of all his views 
respecting the King, the Household, and the 
settlement for the Queen and Princess. 

He continues to think that the dignity of the 
King and the comfort of his situation will be best 
provided for by a separate establishment, under a 
new Office of the highest rank ; 

That the Regent should have the whole Civil 
List, and the full state as well as power of the 
Crown, and should resign his allowance as Prince 
of Wales ; 

That the Queen should have an independent 
allowance and the Princesses the same. He 
considers this part of the arrangement to be 
inseparable from the settlement of the Regency on 
a permanent basis. He will state many strong 
considerations in favour of his plan, and appears 
intent on carrying it into execution. 

He said to-day that after the discussion with 
you shall have taken place (unless you agreed) he 
should wish to receive your propositions in writing, 
in order that he might answer them. I rather 


1812] THE REGENCY 67 


understood this to be a proof of his determination 
to abide by his own ideas, than a symptom of any 
intention to depart from them in consequence of 
what he might receive in writing from you. 

As I suppose you will pass the greater part of 
to-morrow at Oatlands, I would fix Friday at two 
for the Cabinet on the other points in my depart- 
ment, if that day should be convenient. 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to SPENCER PERCEVAL 
Private Dorking : December 2, 1811 


The Prince Regent sent an order to me, which 
reached me at this place last night, directing me 
to attend His Royal Highness at Oatlands at 
twelve to-day. When I saw His Royal Highness 
this day he began by asking me whether I had seen 
the paper which he had received from you, respect- 
ing the new settlement of the Regency. I said 
(as you know I must have said) that I had not seen 
the paper, but that I was acquainted with the 
substance of its contents. He then communi- 
cated your paper to me, and said that he intended 
te state his ideas in writing on the whole subject ; 
that he was aware of the impropriety of desiring 
me to offer any advice in the present state of the 
question, but that he wished to declare his 
sentiments freely to me. I thought it was my 
duty to inform His Royal Highness that I could 
not, in this stage of the discussion, offer any 
opinion on the subject either of your paper or of 
his intended answer, and as this sentiment agreed 
with his own feeling, he did not ask my opinion 

1 Add. MSS. 37296 f. 41. 


68 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1809- 


from me, but he proceeded to express nearly the 
same view of the subject which he had stated to 
you and to me on former occasions. 

I collected from His Royal Highness’s con- 
versation that your paper had produced no change 
in his opinion, and that he entertained a strong 
persuasion that his statement would have great 
weight and would satisfy you that you had taken 
an erroneous view of the question. 

I understood from His Royal Highness that his 
statement in writing was not likely to reach you 
sooner than to-morrow (Tuesday) night or Wednes- 
day morning. He informed me that he would send 
a copy to the Lord Chancellor, and that he would 
send me another copy. I should be glad to know 
when you propose to assemble a Cabinet for the 
consideration of your paper, and His Royal 
Highness’ statement. I conclude that it cannot 
be sooner than Wednesday. I shall not be in town 
to-morrow." 


SPENCER PERCEVAL to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Downing Street : December 3, 1811 


I thank you for your letter, and regret extremely 
that His Royal Highness continues so attached to 
his first opinion respecting the new settlement of 
the Regency. 

I had called a Cabinet for this day at two 
o’clock, but I did so under the impression that I 
should personally have received the Prince’s 
observations upon my paper. Having, however, 


1 Add. MSS, 37296 f. 50. 


1812] WELLESLEY RESIGNS 69 


heard from Mr. Adam’ last night that I was not to 
expect them until to-morrow morning, I had, 
therefore, determined to postpone the Cabinet 
until two to-morrow. I trust you will be able to 
attend it, and also to take a Cabinet dinner with 
me on the same day.” 


From the general tenor of Wellesley’s letters 
during the period he was at the Foreign Office, it 
is clear that he was not contented with the policy 
of the Government, while for the Prime Minister 
he had a contempt that he did not trouble to 
disguise. Never, owing to his autocratic attitude, 
on very intimate terms with his colleagues, as time 
passed his relations with them became more and 
more strained, until in 1811 he rarely attended the 
Cabinet councils, and managed his own depart- 
ment without consulting anyone. He was angry 
at the way in which the war was conducted, and 
indignant that no move was made in the direction 
of Catholic Emancipation’ Finally, on January 
12, he tendered his resignation to the Prince 
Regent, who, however, was anxious to retain his 
services, and pressed him to remain. 


SPENCER PERCEVAL to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Downing Street: January 17, 1812 
It is with great regret that I have just received 
1 William Adam (1751-1839), Attorney-General to the 
Prince of Wales. 
2 Add. MSS. 37296 f. 51. 
3 See Wellesley’s Memorandum on the causes of his retire- 
ment from the Ministry, infra Pp. 74. 


70 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ {[1809- 


from Lord Bathurst the communication which you 
desired him to make to me. It would have taken 
me completely by surprise, had sit not been for 
what His Royal Highness the Prince Regent told 
me this morning, which had prepared me to expect 
such a communication. I understand that your 
determination is too completely fixed to give me 
any hopes of a change in it, and consequently I 
have nothing to do, except, in expressing my 
thanks for your desire to arrange the time both 
for acting upon this determination and for making 
it known in the way least likely to embarrass His 
Royal Highness’ Government, to express my deep 
regret that you should have found it necessary to 
adopt such a determination at all. 

Your disposition, which Bathurst also informed 
me of, to leave your son to act entirely as he may 
choose upon this occasion, I receive most gladly 
as a mark of kindness to myself, for which I am 
very grateful. I shall, therefore, unless I should 
hear from you to the contrary, feel myself at 
liberty, in due time, to endeavour to prevail upon 
Mr. Wellesley to continue to hold his present 
situation at the Treasury, in which I am persuaded 
he may at once be very usefully occupied in 
introducing himself into a general knowledge of 
the course of public business, and also be affording 
me the most essential assistance.’ 


SPENCER PERCEVAL to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Downing Street : February 7, 1812 
I have great satisfaction in acquainting you that 

1 Add. MSS. 37296 f. 175. 


1812] | WELLINGTON’S HONOUR 71 


at an audience with the Prince this day I sug- 
gested to him that he could not begin his un- 
restricted Regency with a more gracious act than 
that of raising your brother, Lord Wellington, to 
the dignity of an earl, and that at the same time 
he should send a message to Parliament acquaint- 
ing them with his intention, and expressing the 
hope that Parliament would [allow] His Royal 
Highness to grant to Lord Wellington the means 
of better supporting his additional honours. 

The Prince highly approved of the idea, and has 
authorised me to acquaint Lord Wellington with 
his intention immediately, though he thinks the 
message to Parliament ought to be withheld till 
the restrictions are at an end. 

I have lost no time in communicating this to 
you, which I am sure you will, on public grounds 
as well as private, entirely approve. 

You will, of course, perceive that the intention 
should not transpire here till the Prince’s notifica- 
tion of it to Parliament. 


Lorp ELpon fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
February 18, 1812 
The Prince Regent having been pleased to make 
the communication to your Lordship, together 
with which this is sent to you, I am anxious to 
state that it is in obedience to his commands that 
the paper, signed by His Royal Highness, is in the 
handwriting of the Chancellor, the Prince having 
1 Asa reward for the capture of Ciudad Rodrigo, Wellington 


was created an Earl on February ro. 
4 Add. MSS. 37296 f. 183. 


72 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1800- 


thought it more consistent with his regard for you 
that the pen of the Chancellor rather than that of 
any other person should be employed on_ this 
occasion. I beg to assure you that every personal 
feeling, which I have long had, makes it impossible 
for me not to regret the circumstance which has 
now taken place. 

I communicated to Mr. Perceval with all 
possible fidelity what your Lordship stated to me 
yesterday, and I find that you and I have agreed 
in noticing to the Prince the only circumstance in 
which there was any material difference of under- 
standing between us.? 


THE PRINCE REGENT to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
February 18, 1812 

The Prince Regent, having commanded the 
Chancellor’s attendance upon him this morning, 
has learnt that the communication made by 
Marquess Wellesley to the Chancellor yesterday 
has, in obedience to his former commands, been 
stated to Mr. Perceval. 

In the circumstances of difficulty and embarrass- 
ment in which the Prince is now placed, it is with 
great and sincere regret that, whilst he assures 
Marquess Wellesley of his high personal regard, he 
feels it unavoidable to communicate to him that 
he cannot withhold his acceptance of his Lord- 
ship’s resignation of the office of Secretary of 
State for Foreign Affairs, and that he is therefore 
now ready to receive the seals of that office.* 


1 Add. MSS. 37296 f. 197. 
2 Add. MSS. 37296 f. 195. 


1812] | A PAINFUL SITUATION 73 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo LorD ELDON 
Apsley House: February 18, 1812 

I should have received your Lordship’s kind 
letter of this date with additional pleasure, if it 
had contained no expression of regret. The Prince 
Regent could not confer so acceptable a testimony 
of his regard upon me as that announced by your 
Lordship, and I request your Lordship to be 
assured that your esteem for me could not be 
manifested in any manner so satisfactory to my 
sentiments as by your communication of the 
gracious determination of His Royal Highness to 
withdraw the rigour of his recent commands, and 
to release me from a situation already painful, and 
which must soon have become ignominious. 

The circumstance of difference to which your 
Lordship refers, respecting the Prince Regent’s 
communications to you and me on the subject of 
Mr. Perceval’s appointment on Saturday last, is 
certainly extraordinary. 

I have no doubt of the fidelity of your Lord- 
ship’s statement, and, upon the most mature 
deliberation and reflection, I continue in the 
positive certainty that His Royal Highness did 
assure me, in the most distinct terms, that no 
such appointment had taken place. 

I enclose a copy of my answer to the Prince 
Regent’s note.’ 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY ¢o THE PRINCE REGENT 
February 18, 1812 
Lord Wellesley returns his humble acknowledg- 

1 Add. MSS. 37296 f. 193. 


74 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [x809- 


ment to Your Royal Highness for your gracious 
acceptance of his resignation of the office of 
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, which he 
has continued to hold merely in obedience to Your 
Royal Highness’ special and repeated commands. 

Lord Wellesley is persuaded that Your Royal 
Highness has hitherto withholden your assent to 
his earnest request of being permitted to lay the 
seals of that office at your feet, from motives of 
the most condescending indulgence towards his 
humble services. He now receives this signal act 
of grace as the strongest testimony of Your Royal 
Highness’ benevolence and favour, and as a most 
timely and happy relief from a state of the most 
painful difficulty and embarrassment. 

He will wait on Your Royal Highness with the 
seals at any time that you may be pleased to 
command.? 


Memorandum 

[February 1812] 
Lord Wellesley expressed his intention to resign 
because his general opinions for a long time past on 
various important questions had not sufficient 
weight to justify him towards the public, or 
towards his own character in continuing in office, 
and because he had no hope of obtaining from the 
Cabinet (as then constituted) a greater portion of 

attention than he had already experienced. 
Lord Wellesley’s objections to remaining in the 
Cabinet arose, in a great degree, from the narrow 
and imperfect scale on which the efforts in the 


1 Add. MSS. 37296 f. 199. 


1812] GROUNDS OF COMPLAINT 75 


Peninsula were conducted. It was always stated 
to him by Mr. Perceval that it was impracticable 
to enlarge that system. The Cabinet followed Mr. 
Perceval implicitly. Lord Wellesley thought it 
was perfectly practicable to extend the plan in the 
Peninsula, and that it was neither safe nor honest 
towards this country or the allies to continue the 
present contracted scheme. No hope existed of 
converting Mr. Perceval, or any of his colleagues. 
No alternative, therefore, remained for Lord 
Wellesley but to resign, or to submit to be the 
instrument of a system which he never advised, 
and which he could not approve. 

Lord Wellesley had repeatedly, with great 
reluctance, yielded his opinions to the Cabinet on 
many other important points. He was sincerely 
convinced by experience that in every such 
instance he’had submitted to opinions more 
incorrect than his own, and had sacrificed to the 
object of accommodation and temporary harmony 
more than he could justify in point of strict public 
duty. In fact, he was convinced by experience 
that the Cabinet neither possessed ability nor 
knowledge to devise a good plan, nor temper and 
discernment to adopt what he now thought 
necessary, unless Mr. Perceval should concur 
with Lord Wellesley. To Mr. Perceval’s judg- 
ment or attainments Lord Wellesley (under the 
same experience) could not pay any deference, 
without injury to the public service. 

With these views and sentiments, on the 12th 
of January Lord Wellesley merely desired per- 
mission to withdraw from the Cabinet, not 


76 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1809- 


requiring any change in his own situation, and 
imploring no other favour than the facility of 
resignation. His plain request was notified to 
the Prince Regent and to Mr. Perceval, as nearly 
as possible at the same moment of time, with the 
expression of Lord Wellesley’s wish, that the 
precise time of his resignation might be accom- 
modated to the pleasure of His Royal Highness, 
and to the convenience of Mr. Perceval, as soon 
as the restrictions should expire. 

The Prince Regent received this notification 
with many gracious expressions of regret; and 
Mr. Perceval, in writing, used expressions of 
regret, and also of thanks, for the manner in which 
Lord Wellesley had signified his wish to resign. 

Mr. Perceval, without any communication to 
Lord Wellesley, instantly attempted to induce 
the Prince Regent to remove him before the 
expiration of the restrictions, and repeatedly urged 
the attempt with great earnestness, severally 
proposing Lord Moira, Sidmouth, or some of his 
party to supersede Lord Wellesley without an hour 
of delay. Mr. Perceval never gave any intimation 
to Lord Wellesley of these proceedings, nor even 
of his wish for Lord Wellesley’s immediate retire- 
ment. The Prince Regent still pressing Lord 
Wellesley to retain the seals, he submitted to His 
Royal Highness’ commands, declaring at the 
same time his anxious desire to be liberated as 
soon as His Royal Highness should establish his 
Government. 

When it appeared, at the expiration of the 
restrictions, that the Prince Regent intended to 


1812] WELLESLEY’S PRINCIPLES 77 


continue Mr. Perceval’s Government, Lord 
Wellesley again tendered the seals to His Royal 
Highness with increased earnestness. On that 
occasion, being informed that His Royal Highness 
was still at liberty, and was resolved to form his 
Cabinet according to His Royal Highness’ own 
views, and being commanded to state his opinions 
on the subject, Lord Wellesley declared that, in 
his judgment, the Cabinet ought to be formed, first 
on an intermediary principle respecting the Roman 
Catholic claims, equally exempt from the extremes 
of instant, unqualified concession, and of per- 
emptory eternal exclusion ; and, secondly, on an 
understanding that the war should be conducted 
with adequate vigour. Lord Wellesley said that 
he personally was ready to serve with Mr. Perceval 
on such a basis, that he never again would serve 
under Mr. Perceval in any circumstances. He 
said that he would serve under Lord Moira, or 
Lord Holland, on the proposed principles, but that 
he desired no office, and entertained no other wish 
than’ to be instrumental in forming such an 
administration for the Prince Regent as should 
be consistent with His Royal Highness’ honour, 
conciliatory towards Ireland, and equal to the 
conduct of the war, on a scale of sufficient extent. 
He made no exception to any Prime Minister but 
Mr. Perceval, whom he considered to be incom- 
petent to fill that office, although sufficiently qual- 
ified for inferior stations. He offered to act under 
any other person approved by His Royal High- 
ness, but he stated that his own views rendered 
him much more anxious to resign instantly. 


78 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS 


The Prince Regent commanded Lord Wellesley ' 
to continue until His Royal Highness should have 
communicated with Mr. Perceval through the 
Lord Chancellor. Lord Wellesley stated that such 
a communication must prove useless, but sub- 
mitted to His Royal Highness’ earnest desire. 
Two days afterwards Lord Wellesley received 
through the Lord Chancellor the Prince Regent’s 
acceptance of his resignation, and accordingly 
delivered the seals to His Royal Highness on the 
19th of February, 1812. 


1 Add. MSS. 37296 f. 2or. 


BOOK VI 


WELLESLEY’S ATTEMPT TO 
FORM A MINISTRY. 1812 


BOOK VI 


WELLESLEY’S ATTEMPT TO 
FORM A MINISTRY. 1812 
Wellesley replaced by Castlereagh : Catholic Eman- 
cipation : Grattan’s motion : Assassination of 
Spencer Perceval : Liverpool’s overtures to Wellesley 
and Canning: They decline to join Liverpool: 
Defeat and resignation of the Government: 
Wellesley’s negotiations: Canning’s adherence: 
Liverpool and his colleagues decline to serve with 
Wellesley : Earl Grey and Lord Grenville decline : 
Lord Moira’s adherence: Wellesley’s failure: His 

explanation : Misunderstandings. 


ERY soon after Wellesley had retired from 
the Ministry, where, in spite of his previous 
refusal, he was succeeded by Castlereagh, 

the Catholic question, in which he was so interested, 
came to the fore, and he and Canning again fought 
side by side, supporting valiantly the cause of 
Emancipation. 

A debate on the Catholic question took place in 
the House of Lords on April 21, 1812, and Wellesley 
seized the opportunity to express himself strongly. 
“I do not wish to speak with disrespect of that 
Protestant establishment in Ireland whose security 
is so readily believed in this country, nor to cast 
any reflection upon those who preside over that 
establishment,” he said, in the course of one of 


his speeches; “ yet I know that the true state 
2 or G 


82 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [18* 


of the Church of Ireland in a very great degr 
consists of bishops without clergy, churches wit! 
out clergymen, and clergymen without church: 
parishes of considerable extent without clerg, 
men, church, or glebe ; many parishes frequently 
consolidated into one, with a common church too 
remote for the parishioners to resort to. Can a 
Church so circumstanced possess internal strength 
for its own defence against the mass of opposition 
excited against it ? and is not that strength less 
likely to be increased by arming itself with violence 
against the mass of discontent set in array by the 
intolerance of the laws enacted for its support ? ” 


GEORGE CANNING to MR. SHARP 
Sunning Hill: April 5, 1812 

By a letter which I have just received from 
Lord Boringdon? I learn that you had expressed 
to him Mr. Grattan’s desire to have some com- 
munication with me on the subject of his intended 
motion; and that he (Lord Boringdon) had told 
you that he believed that I was to be in town 
to-morrow. 

I had said, when last I saw Lord Boringdon, 
that I should be in town the beginning of the week, 
but you will not be surprised to hear that the fine 
weather which began to show itself yesterday 
after a week of rain and consequent confinement 
to the house had determined me, before I received 

1 John Parker, second Baron Boringdon (1772-1840), a 


supporter of Pitt and Canning. He was created Earl of 
Morley, 1815. 


1812] CATHOLIC EMANCIPATION 83 


Lord Boringdon’s letter, to prolong my stay in the 
country till Thursday. 

I shall be at Gloucester Lodge that evening. 
In the meantime, if Mr. Grattan should do me the 
honour to wish to make any communication to me, 
perhaps you would kindly undertake to be the 
channel of it. 

I am at G. Ellis’s, and the address is Sunning 
Hill, Staines. 

P.S. Possibly it may save time and trouble 
if I state to you shortly my view of the policy 
on which a motion respecting the Catholics should 
be formed, begging you to consider such state- 
ment is made to you in confidence, but with perfect 
liberty to mention to Mr. Grattan any part of it 
that it may appear to you worth while that he 
should know, and that he may be desirous of 
knowing. 

The obvious division of opinions upon the 
Catholic subject is into: 

1. Those who would give all, and immediately ; 

2. Those who would withhold all, and for ever ; 
and 

3. Those who would give, but with qualifica- 
tions either of time or mode. 

It is equally obvious that it is out of this third 
class that recruits are to be sought to the one or 
the other of the two former opinions. And the 
chance which either of these extreme opinions 
has of obtaining recruits out of this middle class 
will be in proportion to the degree in which they 
can bring themselves to approximate to the 
middle opinion. 


84 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1812 


In this view the initiative upon such a question 
is necessarily a great disadvantage. If Perceval 
were to bring forward a motion founded upon his 
opinions and fairly expressing it, he must be 
left in a minority. But having only to meet a 
motion founded on the opposite opinion, he will 
have the benefit of the votes, not of all those 
only who agree with him (which are a very small 
number indeed), but of all who see, or can find, 
a ground of difference from the motion proposed. 

This, I say, is a great disadvantage, but it is 
an unavoidable one. All that can be done is to 
lessen it as much as possible by shaping the 
motion (so far as principle and pledges will allow) 
in the manner best estimated to avoid some of the 
plainest and most notorious grounds of objection. 

The objection which I feel to the accustomed 
motion—for referring the petition to a com- 
mittee of the whole House—is this: that if you 
carried it you would not be advanced a step— 
except into difficulties. If you carried it, I mean, 
without a struggle—to carry it or any thing else 
against the whole strength of Government, would, 
of course, be to carry every thing, to change the 
Government, and so to forward the Catholic Cause; 
but that is out of the question. And speaking 
of it as a mere parliamentary measure, I so little 
think that carrying a committee would be a good 
thing for the cause, that if I were in Perceval’s 
situation, with Perceval’s opinion, I would give 
you the committee, professing to reserve my 
opposition till I saw what sort of plan you had to 
propose in it. I cannot conceive a situation of 


1812] CANNING’S VIEWS 85 


more embarrassment than that of an opposition 
called upon to frame and bring forward in public 
discussion a plan for conciliating opposite interests 
and jarring prejudices, with a body like the Catholics 
whom they must try to satisfy on the one hand, 
one like the Church of England whom they must 
take care not to alarm on the other, and with the 
whole weight of Government and its majorities 
watching, and having to choose a favourable 
moment to interfere and overwhelm them. 

What would not be good to carry, is (in my 
judgment) not good to propose. For though 
the objections which I have suggested may not 
be objections capable of being stated in debate, 
though Perceval may not adopt the policy which 
I have described, yet that which would be the 
main ground of such a policy, the certainty that a 
committee of the whole House on the Catholic 
question cannot be carried (except by Government, 
or except as overthrowing the Government) to 
any useful purpose, is perfectly plain and intelligible 
and will influence many votes, even if it is not 
put forward in many speeches. 

The result seems to be that any motion would 
have the best chance of success (or at least the 
best chance of defeating very many of the topics 
of opposition to it), which should go rather to im- 
pose upon the executive Government the task of 
bringing forward the Catholic claims, than to take 
them out of the hands of the Government into those 
of the House of Commons ; to express the sense of 
Parliament that they ought to be considered in the 
way most likely to give them a fair hearing, rather 


86 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1812 


than to point out a committee of the House of 
Commons as the fit mode of considering them. 

My motion (which I communicated with you 
some weeks ago) was a resolution something like 
that which Fox moved on the Slave Trade, which 
was followed the next session by a Bill brought in 
by Government for the abolition. But I mention 
this only as an explanation of my meaning, not 
as the only form into which such a motion might 
be embodied. 

The great point, I think, is to steer clear of the 
difficulties of mode and time, which is to be done 
by not only admitting, but contending, that the 
question is one for executive Government, that 
they only can prepare the details, that Parliament 
can do no more in the first instance than approve 
the principle and enjoin the duty. 

And this change from the form of the motions 
of former years seems naturally prescribed by the 
new Circumstance of a petition to the House—as 
well as to Parliament. . 

I must here end this most disproportioned 
postscript.’ 


Spencer Perceval was assassinated in the lobby 
of the House of Commons on May 11. The 
Ministry, disorganised by the suddenness of the 
blow it had experienced, was anxious to remain 
in office, under the leadership of Lord Liverpool, 
and the Prince Regent was in favour of that course. 
As it stood, however, the Government was not 


1 Add. MSS. 37296 f. 316. 


1812] DEATH OF PERCEVAL 87 


strong enough, and Liverpool made overtures to 
Wellesley and Canning, in the hope of retaining 
their active support and co-operation. 


GEORGE CANNING fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 


Private and confidential Gloucester Lodge 
Se ee, May 16, 1812 

I entirely approve of your determination to meet 
any proposal by the demand of an audience of the 
Prince Regent. 

But I ought not to omit to say that I should not 
wish to be comprehended in a Positive refusal of 
any proposal, solely on the ground of any specific 
distribuiton of offices. 

You know my wishes as to what relates to 
yourself too well to make it necessary to repeat 
them. But I do not think that ground of an 
absolute refusal, in the present state of the 
country, tenable. 

I write in great haste, in a moment stolen from 
company at dinner. But as something may 
pass to-night, I thought it not right to let your 
messenger return without this short statement of 
my opinion on this point. 

I will expect you here to-morrow morning, 
according to your appointment.’ 


GEORGE CANNING to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Gloucester Lodge: May 16, 1812 

There is nothing that can give me so much 
satisfaction, ‘‘ under all the circumstances,” as to 


1 Add. MSS. 37296 f. 324. 


88 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1812 


find either that your intelligence had been un- 
founded, or that (as you apprehend) some altera- 
tion had taken place in the intention of applying 
to us. 

What I feared (and that fear dictated my note 
to you), was an attempt on the part of the Govern- 
ment to make a case, an attempt which, having 
succeeded so fully against the Opposition in 
February, I thought they might be induced to try 
against us in May. Situated as the Government 
is, it can stand only either upon an accession of 
strength or upon showing that it has tried to gain 
such accession, and has been unreasonably refused. 
They would unquestionably prefer the latter 
ground, and I should wish that we could avoid 
furnishing it. 

I never imagined that you would otherwise 
implicate me by anything that you might say, 
than as an answer to a joint overture might be 
construed by those whose interest it was so to 
construe it, to implicate both the parties to whom 
that overture was made.’ 


GEORGE CANNING to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 

Gloucester Lodge: May 17, 1812 

Lord Liverpool goes from me to call on you. 

I have made a Minute of his communication to 

me, which I have read over and corrected in his 

presence, and a copy of which I will send you as 
soon as I can transcribe it. In it I say: 

“T thought it better to receive Lord Liverpool’s 

communication just as he gave it to me, and to 

1 Add. MSS. 37296 f. 326. 


1812] LIVERPOOL’S PROPOSALS 89 


defer making any remarks, or giving any answer to tt, 
until I should have communicated upon it with 
my friends.” 

I earnestly advise you to do the same. 

Liverpool carries this note, and I therefore can 
add no more. 

When shall I see you ?? 


Minute by GEORGE CANNING 
Gloucester Lodge: May 17, 1812 

Lord Liverpool stated to me that he was com- 
manded by His Royal Highness the Prince Regent 
to make to me the following communication : 

That upon the melancholy event of Mr. 
Perceval’s death, His Royal Highness being 
desirous of continuing his administration upon its 
present basis, was desirous also of strengthening 
it as much as possible by associating to it such 
persons in public life as agreed most nearly and 
generally in the principles upon which public affairs 
had been conducted. 

That with this view His Royal Highness natur- 
ally looked to Lord Wellesley and to me. 

That he (Lord Liverpool) was authorised to 
express the disposition of all his colleagues to act 
with Lord Wellesley and me, under an arrange- 
ment which might be at once consistent with their 
own honour and duty, and honourable and satis- 
factory to us. 

That with respect to Lord Castlereagh it was fair 
that it should be distinctly understood that the 
situation in which he stands, both in this 


1 Add. MSS. 37296 f. 334. 


go THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1812 


Government and in the House of Commons, was 
to be preserved to him. 

That with respect to official arrangements, he 
(Lord Liverpool) would not have been the bearer 
of any proposition to me but one which was under- 
stood as comprising my friends. 

In answer to a question put by me, Lord Liver- 
pool stated that his colleagues were desirous that 
he should be appointed to the office of First Lord 
of the Treasury, and that this desire was known 
to the Prince Regent when His Royal Highness 
commanded Lord Liverpool to undertake this 
communication. 

Lord Liverpool added that he was ready to 
answer any other enquiry that I might wish to 
make, or to clear up anything that he might have 
imperfectly explained. 

I said that I thought it better to receive his 
communication just as he gave it to me, and to 
defer making any remark or giving any answer 
whatever until I should have communicated it to 
my friends, Lord Liverpool himself undertaking 
to see Lord Wellesley. 

I would only therefore ask whether I was to 
consider the opinion and policy of the Govern- 
ment as remaining altogether unchanged upon 
the question relating to the laws affecting the 
Roman Catholics ? 

Lord Liverpool answered that his own opinions 
upon this subject remained unchanged, and that 
he was not aware that those of his colleagues had 
undergone any change. 

I then wrote this Minute in Lord Liverpool’s 


1812] NEGOTIATIONS gi 


presence, which he read over, and suggested such 
corrections as appeared to him necessary for 
making it perfectly accurate. 

GEORGE CANNING.’ 


Minute by THE Marquess WELLESLEY 
Apsley House: May 17, 1812 

Lord Liverpool came to me immediately after 
his visit to Mr. Canning, and remained with me 
for about half an hour, Soon after Lord Liver- 
pool’s departure I received the annexed paper from 
Mr. Canning.’ 

Lord Liverpool’s conversation with me was 
substantially the same as that which is described 
to have passed with Mr. Canning. Any difference 
which appeared arose necessarily from my ques- 
tions and observations, which were made without 
knowledge of what had passed between Lord 
Liverpool and Mr. Canning. After receiving Lord 
Liverpool’s verbal communication nearly in the 
terms stated by Mr. Canning, I enquired 

ist. What was to be the policy of the Govern- 
ment with relation to the Roman Catholics ? 

To this question Lord Liverpool returned the 
same answer stated in Mr. Canning’s paper to have 
been returned to a similar question. 

andly. I observed to Lord Liverpool that he 
was apprised of my opinion, that our efforts in the 
Peninsula had been conducted on an inadequate 
and imperfect scale, which could not be expected 
to accomplish the ultimate objects of the war in 


1 Add MSS. 37296 f. 340. 
2 George Canning’s Minute. 


92 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1812 


that quarter; that I had for a long time con- 
sidered an extension of our system in the Peninsula 
to be indispensably necessary, and easily practic- 
able; that I was aware of the impropriety (in 
my present situation) of urging any detailed 
questions to Lord Liverpool on this point ; but 
that I mentioned it now because it must form a 
principal consideration in my answer to the pro- 
position which he had brought to me. 

Lord Liverpool said that he did not agree in 
my opinion respecting the scale of the efforts 
which we had hitherto made in the Peninsula; 
that there never had been any limit to our exer- 
tions in that quarter, but what arose out of the 
question of practicability (that is, the means of 
increasing and supplying our armies), and that he 
had never heard any specific plan by which those 
means might have been carried farther, though 
the subject had been often most anxiously con- 
sidered in my presence ; that circumstances had 
occurred since my resignation which did not then 
exist, and into the particulars of which it would 
not be proper for him to enter at that time, which 
might enable Government to extend, to a certain 
degree, the military operations in the Peninsula, 
and the system of himself and his colleagues would 
be, as he contended they had always been, to 
make the greatest efforts in the cause of the 
Peninsula which the resources of the country 
rendered possible. 

3rdly. I enquired whether all the general con- 
stituent parts of the present Cabinet were to 
remain ? 


1812} LEADER IN THE COMMONS 93 


He believed it was known to me that some of the 
members of the Cabinet had been long desirous 
of retiring, and would be ready therefore now 
to afford facilities to any new arrangement. 

In answer to a question put by me respecting 
Lord Sidmouth and his friends, he said they would 
remain. 

4thly. I stated to Lord Liverpool that I made 
no enquiry respecting the proposed distribution 
and allocation of offices, because that circumstance 
would not constitute the basis of my decision upon 
the proposition which he had brought to me. 

Lord Liverpool observed that the distribution 
of offices was a matter open to future adjustment, 
to be regulated for the honour of all parties. 

5thly. When Lord Liverpool informed me that 
the leading in the House of Commons was to be 
preserved to Lord Castlereagh, I remarked that 
in any situation which I might ever hold in any 
administration, I should feel great obligation to 
any member of the Government who would under- 
take that charge, which was called the leading in 
the House of Parliament in which I sat, although 
I was fully aware of the great importance which 
that charge necessarily conveyed to the person 
who exercised it, and of the great influence which 
it must give to him in the general administration 
and patronage of the Government. 

6thly. I desired to know whether all those 
persons now designated by the name of “ The 
Opposition ’’ were to be excluded from the pro- 
posed scheme of administration ? 

Lord Liverpool answered that no principle of 


94 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1812 


exclusion was intended, but that he was not 
authorised to make any proposal to any persons 
of the description which I had mentioned. 

7thly. Considering the course which Lord Liver- 
pool had observed in making the communication, 
I asked him whether he applied to me by command 
of the Prince Regent, as a part of Mr. Canning’s 
suite ? I reminded Lord Liverpool of the con- 
stant and unabated exertions which J had made to 
open every avenue for the return of Mr. Canning 
to the public service, remarking at the same 
time that I never had attempted to press that 
point beyond the honour and feelings of Mr. 
Perceval’s administration. I stated that I could 
not consider any administration to be constituted 
on a foundation of justice towards individual 
talents and services, or towards the interests 
of the country, in which Mr. Canning should not 
hold a high, efficient station. But I added that 
Mr. Canning was under no engagement to me which 
could preclude his acceptance of any office which 
might be offered to him ; -that, on the other hand, 
Mr. Canning would certainly make the same 
declaration with regard to my perfect freedom. 

Lord Liverpool said that he had pursued this 
course of communication, being convinced that, 
under the present circumstances, I would not 
accept office unless a fair proposal was made to 
Mr. Canning. I declared to Lord Liverpool that 
he was correct in this view of my sentiments 
towards Mr. Canning, repeating, however, that 
Mr. Canning and I were perfectly free to act as 
each might think fit, and that our agreement in 


1812] WELLESLEY’S ANSWER 95 


many great public principles could not affect 
questions of mere official arrangement. 

8thly. I expressed my wish to receive this 
communication in writing, to answer it in writing, 
and also to submit my sentiments upon the whole 
transaction in an audience of the Prince Regent. 

Lord Liverpool informed me that Mr. Canning 
would transmit to me a copy of the Minute? of Lord 
Liverpool’s conversation taken in his presence, 
and Lord Liverpool desired me to consider that 
paper as the written communication which I 
wished to receive. I agreed to Lord Liverpool’s 
proposal on this point. I then informed Lord 
Liverpool that I would return my answer in writing 
to that paper; whatever might be the tenor of 
my answer, with regard to the great public con- 
siderations on which it must be founded, I expressed 
my hope that Lord Liverpool would be assured 
of my sincere personal respect and esteem. 

I now transmit this Minute to Lord Liverpool, 
requesting him to insert any correction which he 
may think requisite. 

(Signed) WELLESLEY. 

May 18, 1812. 

Corrected by Lord Liverpool, and returned to 
him.—WELLESLEY.* 


Neither Wellesley nor Canning joined the 
Ministry. Wellesley would not come in unless 
the war was carried on more vigorously, and 
unless a measure of Catholic Emancipation was 


1 See Canning’s Minute. 
2 Add. MSS. 37296 f. 344. 


96 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1812 


introduced. Behind these reasons was his idea 
that he ought to be Prime Minister. Canning like- 
wise insisted upon the claims of the Catholics, but, 
although he asserted that he was not actuated 
by personal feelings, there is no doubt that he 
was far from desirous of being a colleague of 
Castlereagh. Lord Liverpool approached Wel- 
lesley’s brother, William Wellesley-Pole, then 
Chief Secretary for Ireland. He was strongly 
opposed to Catholic Emancipation. 


THE Hon. WILLIAM WELLESLEY-POLE to THE 
EARL OF LIVERPOOL 
May, 1812 

Before I spoke to you this morning I had unalter- 
ably formed my decision respecting my resignation, 
but as you seemed so anxious that I should not 
announce it till to-morrow, I determined not to 
press the point. I am, however, very desirous 
that you should know, before the House meets 
to-day, that no circumstance can alter my deter- 
mination, lest it should be supposed that the 
result of the division could have any influence 
upon me. 

The very flattering manner in which you were 
$0 kind as to propose to me to accept of the seals 
for the War Department has, 1 can assure you, 
made a very deep impression upon my mind; 
and I have felt the greatest regret that the circum- 
stances under which I so very peculiarly stand 
rendered it impossible for me to accept the office, 
without subjecting myself to difficulties and incon- 


1812] POLE’S SCRUPLES 97 


veniences which I am bound by every principle 
of affection to my brother to avoid. Under the 
circumstances in which he now stands with the 
present Cabinet, I felt that I could not undertake 
a prominent part in your administration without 
appearing to enter into positive hostility to him, 
which would probably end in an open and eternal 
breach between us, and possibly to one between 
me and other members of my family; and this 
without, in my own judgment, being able, by 
accepting the seals, to render you such assistance 
as to make the arrangement of any very great 
and essential importance to you. 

It being thus, as I conceive, impossible for me to 
accede to your wishes and become Secretary of 
State for the War Department, I feel that, declin- 
ing to step forward into the front of the battle 
in this time of danger, I cannot, with any degree 
of regard for my own honour, consent to remain 
in my present situation, and thus retain a subordin- 
ate office under an administration in which I had 
refused one of the highest rank and importance. 
This would be meanly clinging to office with loss 
of character. 

I have already explained to you that I think 
the Catholic question practically so changed by 
the unfortunate death of Mr. Perceval, that no 
administration should do less than give it con- 
sideration, and endeavour to frame some proposal 
to be made to the Catholics. Excepting in this 
instance, lam not aware of any difference between 
us upon the great outline of politics. Upon the 
proposals made to Lotd Wellesley and Mr. 

2 H 


98 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1812 


Canning, I need not say more than I have already 
expressed to you. .It would have given me the 
mast sincere pleasure fo have seen an administra- 
tion. formed to which they had been parties. I 
have only now ‘to add that I have not had any 
eommunication either directly or indirectly with 
Lord Wellesley since Mr. Perceval’s death, and 
I shall not, inform him pf thé decision to which 
I have come till to-morrow. 

I shall be obliged to you if you will appoint 
a time for me to wait upon you respecting the 
arrangements consequent upon my resignation. 
There are some points respecting Irish affairs 
which I shall have to lay before you. 

I beg you, my dear Lord, to believe that I shall 
ever retain a just sense of your great kimdness 
towards me, and that I shall reflect with pride 
upon your good opinion. 


Liverpool was willing to carry on the Govern- 
ment without outside aid, but Stuart-Wortley* 
moved in the House of Commons an address to 
the Prince Regent, “praying him, under the 
present circumstances of the country, to form a 
strong and efficient administration.” This was 
carried by a majority of four, and the Ministry 
tendered their resignation. 

The Prince Regent, on May 22, asked Wellesley 
to discover if it would be possible to organise an 
administration in which the Liverpool party and 


1 Add. MSS. 37296 f. 398. 
2 James Archibald Stuart-Wortley (1776-1845), created 
Baron Whanrncliffe, 1821. 


1812] BRISK INTRIGUES 99 


the Grey and Grenville section would coalesce, 
“ The intriguing is going on briskly,” Brougham 
wrote to Creevey. “ Wellesley has seen [the] 
P[rince Regent], and then Wellesley saw Grey. 
Grey says all is afloat and nothing settled, but 
that all will be settled before Monday. .This 
shows a nibble at least, and I lament it much. 
To be in the same boat with Wellesley and Canning 
is pretty severe, I see no chance of their making 
such a ‘thing as one caw support ; indeed I feel 
in opposition to thern already, should they agree 
about it.”* ‘Canning was willing to join, but 
Grey and Grenville, though in favour of Catholic 
Emancipation, were not in accord with Wellesley 
as ‘to the necessity for conducting the war in more 
vigorous fashion, and would not come in. Can- 
ning undertook the negotiation with Liverpool 
and Melville. 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to THE PRINCE REGENT 
Abpsley House: May 23, 1812 

Lord Wellesley presents his humble duty to your 
Royal Highness, and has the honour to state that 
he has employed every practicable degree of 
diligence in preparing the means of executing 
your Royal Highness’ gracious commands, rela- 
tive to the formation of a Plan of Administration 
for your Royal Highness’ consideration; and 
that he hopes to be enabled to attend your Royal 
Highness for the purpose of submitting his 


1 Creevey Papers, i. 154. 


100 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1812 


respectful report on that important subject to- 
morrow in the afternoon.’ 


GEORGE CANNING to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
May 23, 1812 

I have written to Lord Liverpool and to Lord 
Melville, to propose to call upon them, and I 
will come to you as soon as I have seen them. 

In the meantime, I think it desirable to state 
in writing, for our mutual satisfaction, my under- 
standing of the principles on which you undertake 
the execution of the Prince Regent’s commands 
for the formation of an administration, and on 
which I am cordially disposed to act with you. 

I understood these principles to be: 

Ist. That the whole question relating to the 
Roman Catholics shall be taken into early and 
serious consideration, with a sincere and earnest 
desire to bring it to a final and satisfactory settle- 
ment ; 

andly. That the war in the Peninsula shall be 
prosecuted with the best means of the country. 

And I understand you to be ready and desirous 
to comprehend in your arrangements all persons, 
of whatever party-connection, who are disposed 
to act on both these principles, the latter of them 
subject, of course, to such modification as the 
varying circumstances of this country, of the war, 
and of the state of Europe may require. Upon 
these principles I am ready to co-operate, in your 
administration, with any persons who may be 
induced to accept your proposals; agreeing to 


1 Add. MSS. 37296 £. 437. 


1812] WELLESLEY’S POLICY I0L 


lay aside such minor points of difference as may 
admit of postponement ; endeavouring to come 
to a common understanding upon such of them 
as may be susceptible to adjustment. The state 
of the country appears to me to make it the duty 
of every man to soften, and reduce as much as 
possible, all grounds of unessential disagreement. 

In acting upon these principles I have myself 
no personal objections. I hope none will be made 
in any quarter. But I think it right to apprise 
you that while I protest against any such excep- 
tions, if unfortunately the arrangement should 
be in the hazard of being defeated by the pressing 
of any personal pretensions against objections 
which, after any fair efforts to surmount them, 
shall appear for the present moment absolutely 
unsurmountable, much as I shall regret that 
circumstance, I shall not think it consistent with 
my public duty, after having once embarked in the 
undertaking, to make the admission of pretensions 
merely personal (however natural I might think 
them), a sine quad non condition of my persever- 
ance in it. 

On the other hand, should any personal objec- 
tion be taken to voting with me (as I know has 
been done on former occasions), I earnestly beg 
and insist that no pretensions of mine may be 
suffered to stand in the way of an arrangement 
otherwise agreeable to His Royal Highness the 
Prince Regent, and calculated to afford to the 
country the advantage of an efficient and com- 
prehensive administration.’ 


1 Add. MSS. 37296 f. 427. 


26100 


102 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1812 


GEORGE CANNING fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Gloucester Lodge: May 24, 1812 

I enclose the answers from Lord Liverpool and 
Lord Melville, which have only just reached me. 
I understood indeed that the meeting was not to 
take place till ten last night. 

I need hardly assure you that this is not the 
sort of objection which I had in my contempla- 
tion, as likely or possible, when I wrote to you 
yesterday.’ 


[ENCLOSURE No. 1] 
THE EArt OF LIVERPOOL to GEORGE CANNING 
Fife House: May 23, 1812 

I have communicated to my colleagues the 
memorandum which I received from you this 
afternoon. 

They do not think it necessary to enter into 
any discussion of the principles stated in that 
memorandum, because they all feel themselves 
bound, particularly after what has recently passed, 
to decline the proposal of becoming members 
of an administration to be formed by Lord 
Wellesley.” 


[ENCLOSURE No. 2] 
VISCOUNT MELVILLE fo GEORGE CANNING 
Park Lane: May 23, 1812 
You will probably have received to-night from 
Lord Liverpool the answer to the proposal which 
you left with him and communicated to me this 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 7. 
2 Add. MSS. 37396 f. 431. 


1812] REFUSALS 103 


afternoon. Having stated to you my strong 
repugnance, or rather my decided objection under 
present circumstances, to join an administration 
of which Lord Wellesley was to be the head, it 
might be sufficient for me to refer to Lord Liver- 
pool’s reply, more especially as I do not wish 
to enter into any detailed reasoning on a question 
relating to a matter of personal feeling. I think 
it due, however, to you as well as to myself, to 
state distinctly that I have no objection to act 
with an administration formed on the two princi- 
ples mentioned in your memorandum, though I 
think it improbable that any consideration which 
the Government can give to the subject of the 
restrictions on the Roman Catholics will enable 
it to propose such a system as will wholly satisfy 
their claims, and at the same time afford that 
degree of security to the Protestant Establishment 
which is generally felt to be necessary.’ 


Liverpool and other friends of Perceval held 
aloof for a personal reason. ‘‘ Lord Wellesley 
had scarcely rejected Lord Liverpool’s offer, and 
Mr. Wortley’s motion was still pending,’ Yonge, 
the biographer of Liverpool, has written, ““ when 
a document appeared in the public newspapers 
purporting to be the authorised statement of the 
grounds of Lord Wellesley’s resignation in the 
previous February, and bearing also the appear- 
ance of a public attack on Mr. Perceval’s memory, 
while the sorrow of his friends for his loss was still 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 9. 


104 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1812 


fresh and unalloyed.” It was on this account that 
Liverpool wrote in reply to Canning that he and his 
colleagues “‘ all felt themselves bound, particularly 
after what had recently passed, to decline the 
proposal of an administration to be formed by 
Lord Wellesley,” and even Canning’s utmost 
effort only obtained this reply: ‘‘I can answer 
for myself (and I am confident equally for my 
colleagues) that I am not actuated in declining the 
proposal made to me by any objection of a nature 
purely personal ; but when I advert to the opinions 
and statements recently sent forth to the world 
respecting public men with whom I have been 
connected and public measures in which I have 
been engaged, I do not feel I should have acted 
consistently with my own honour and character, 
or the respect which I must ever, and shall ever, 
feel to my departed friend, if, under such cir- 
cumstances, I could have consented to have 
entertained the proposal which you were authorised 
to submit to me.’’? It only transpired later that 
Wellesley’s document had been sent to the Press 
by an injudicious friend. 


GEORGE CANNING fo VISCOUNT MELVILLE 
Gloucester Lodge: May 24, 1812 
I received your letter of last night at the 
same time with Lord Liverpool’s. Although 
neither of them perhaps strictly required an 
answer from me, I have not been able to refrain 
1 Life of the Earl of Liverpool, i. 390-r. 


1812] PERSONAL OBJECTIONS 105 


from offering some suggestions to Lord Liverpool, 
which I leave to his discretion to communicate 
to his colleagues or not; and I cannot forbear 
adding to what I have already stated to him 
some further considerations which arise peculiarly 
out of your letter. 

To Lord Liverpool I have suggested doubts 
whether any objection merely personal would 
constitute, at the present moment, a sufficient 
justification for refusing to act in an administra- 
tion, the public principles of which were allowed 
not to form any insuperable obstacle to union ; 
and whether, when the refusal is rested on an objec- 
tion merely personal, that objection ought not, 
in justice both to the parties making it and to the 
individual concerned, to be clearly defined. 

But your objection is so much more limited 
in its nature than that of your colleagues in general, 
while your agreement in the principles of the 
proposed administration is entire (or is at most 
qualified by a doubt as to the practical benefit 
which may ultimately result from one of them, 
not as to the expediency of trying it) that, having 
thus no public ground on. which to rest your refusal, 
I cannot help hoping that you will reconsider it. 

Your colleagues object to any administration 
which Lord Wellesley may form; you only to 
one of which he shall be the head. Now, as you 
have seen that paragraph in Lord Wellesley’s 
Minute, in which he disclaims for himself all 
pretension to any station in the administration 
which he considers himself merely as the instru- 
ment of the Prince Regent’s pleasure in forming, 


106 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1812 


it is unnecessary to remark to you that if he is 
placed at the head of it he will be placed there 
either by the special designation of His Royal 
Highness or by the acknowledged advantage of 
such arrangement. No presumption or exclusive 
claim of pre-eminence can be justly attributable 
to him. 

Surely, in such a case, having no objection to 
act with him as Secretary of State, it will be 
difficult to explain and justify the distinction 
which would prevent your acting with him as 
First Lord of the Treasury, if such should be his 
destination. I hope you will forgive an appeal 
to your better judgment, the motives of which 
on my part I trust you cannot misapprehend, 
and which I owe it to Lord Wellesley to assure 
you, in the most solemn manner, is made without 
his consent or knowledge.’ 


Memorandum by Eart Grey and Lorb 
GRENVILLE ? 
May 24, 1812 
In such a moment as the present we feel it to 
be the duty of all public men, both by frank and 
conciliatory explanations of principle, and by the 
total abandonment of every personal object, to 
facilitate, as far as may be in their power, the 
means of giving effect to the late vote of the House 
of Commons, and of averting the imminent and 
unparalleled dangers of the country. 
1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 11. 


2 This is the reply to Wellesley’s first tentative overture to 
Earl Grey and Lord Grenville. 


1812} GREY AND GRENVILLE 107 


Lord Wellesley has selected two among the 
many important subjects which must engage 
the attention of any man who could, in such 
circumstances, be called upon to consider the 
acceptance of stations of public trust. On those 
two points our explanation shall be as distinct 
as it is in our power to make it. 

On the first indeed our opinion is too well 
known, and has been too recently expressed to 
need repetition. We have derived a very high 
gratification from Lord Wellesley’s powerful exer- 
tions in support of the claims of the Roman 
Catholics, as well as from the manner in which 
that subject is adverted to in his Minute. And 
we do not hesitate to assure him that we will 
warmly support any proposal made by any 
ministers for the immediate consideration of 
those claims with a view to their conciliatory 
adjustment—a measure without which we have 
already declared that we can entertain no hope 
in any case of rendering our own service useful. 

As to the second point, no person feels more 
strongly than we do the advantage which would 
result from a successful termination of the present 
contest in Spain. But we are of opinion that the 
direction of military operations in an extensive 
war, and the more or less vigorous prosecution 
of those operations, are questions not of principle 
but of policy, to be regulated by circumstances 
in their nature temporary and fluctuating, and in 
many cases known only to persons in official 
stations: by the engagements of the country, 
the prospects of ultimate success, the extent of 


108 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1812 


the exertions necessary for its attainment, and 
the means of supporting those efforts without 
too great a pressure on the finances, and internal 
prosperity of the country. On such questions 
therefore no public men, whether in or out of 
office, can undertake more than a deliberate 
and dispassionate consideration according to the 
circumstances of the case as it may appear, and 
to such means of information as may then be 
within their reach. 

But we cannot in sincerity conceal from Lord 
Wellesley that in the present state of the finances 
we entertain the strongest doubts of the practic- 
ability of an increase in any branch of the public 
expenditure.’ 


THE EARL OF MorrA to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
May 29, 1812 

The Prince wishes to see your Lordship at nine 
this evening. I trust he will then empower you 
to address yourself to the Opposition. But, as 
I have had a sharp skirmish with His Royal 
Highness about Lord Grey, it will be quite 
necessary that I should see you previously. I 
will, therefore, come to Apsley House from the 
Levée, probably about four o’clock. It would 
have been my wish to attend you directly, only 
that it was privately hinted to me the Prince was 
anxious I should be at Carlton House before the 
Levée began, in order that by going into the room 
with the Ministers I might contradict a report 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. x. 


1812] MOIRA’S ADHERENCE 109 


current of his having struck me and Lord Erskine 
out of the list for the entrées.* 


THE EARL OF Morr to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Confidential June 1, 1812 


I return to you the two papers which you have 
had the kindness to send for my perusal.? 

It gives me sincere regret to infer from Lord 
Grey’s observation (coupling it with the tenor 
of publications in the newspapers by that party) 
that there has been a pre-determined resolution 
to resist the overture which they expected. 
This cannot have resulted from any difference 
with respect to principles, for they have stated 
none. The motive must be a calculation that an 
administration fashioned on a plan which shall 
receive that party only as sharers in power and 
station would not afford sufficient scope for the 
gratification of adherents. God forbid that I 
should in this impute to any of the truly dignified 
characters who take a lead in the Opposition a 
view consciously unworthy. My apprehension is, 
that the fear of appearing to sacrifice the interests 
of the friends who have been supporting them 
misleads their judgment as to the claim of their 
sovereign and their country on their duties. A 
party with a disposition which manifests itself 
so decidedly at the outset of negotiation is hopeless. 
You should, therefore, prepare yourself without 
delay to form an administration free from recourse 
to that party further than the profession that any 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 57. 
2 Wellesley’s Minute and the reply of Grey and Grenville. 


IIO THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1812 


individual who may not subscribe to the unmeasured 
pretensions of their leaders will meet the fairest 
consideration. When I say this I mean, of course, 
that as to any public step you should wait for 
the formal answer of Lords Grey and Grenville 
jointly. To the last we should acknowledge, 
however feeble the claim may be, that they may 
adopt a more temperate determination than is 
now held forth. I only take the liberty of advising 
that you should lose no time in fashioning in your 
mind the outline of an arrangement squared to 
this expected refusal. 


So far Wellesley had been asked merely to see 
if it was possible to bring about a combination 
of the two great parties, but now that this was 
shown to be impossible the Prince Regent, on 
June 1, authorised Wellesley to form an administra- 
tion. He did not regard the reply of Grey and 
Grenville as final, or as closing the door to further 
negotiation, and accordingly made a more formal 
proposal to them. He informed them that the 
projected administration included himself, as first 
Lord of the Treasury, Lord Moira, Lord Erskine, 
and Canning. He proceeded to make them a 
definite offer of either four or five places in the 
Cabinet, according as the Cabinet should consist 
of twelve or of thirteen members ; the filling of 
these places was to be left entirely to them. 

This offer they were unable to accept. 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 81. 


1812} AN OFFER REFUSED II 


EARL GREY AND LorD GRENVILLE fo THE 
MARQUESS WELLESLEY 


Camelford House: June 3, 1812 


We have considered with the most serious 
attention the Minute which we have had the honour 
to receive from your Lordship, and we have 
communicated it to such of our friends as we have 
had the opportunity of consulting. 

On the occasion of a proposal made to us under 
the authority of His Royal Highness the Prince 
Regent, we wish to renew in the most solemn 
manner the declaration of our unfeigned desire 
to have facilitated, as far as was in our power, 
the means of giving effect to the late vote of the 
House of Commons, and of averting the imminent 
and unparalleled dangers of the country. No 
sense of the public distress and difficulty, no 
personal feelings of whatever description, would 
have prevented us under such circumstances from 
accepting with dutiful submission any situation 
in which we could have hoped to serve His Royal 
Highness usefully and honourably. 

But it appears to us, on the most dispassionate 
reflection, that the proposal stated to us by your 
Lordship cannot justify any such expectation. 

We are invited, not to discuss with your Lord- 
ship, or with any other public men according to 
the usual practice in such cases, the various and 
important considerations both of measures and 
of arrangements which belong to the formation 
of a new Government in all its branches; but to 
recommend to His Royal Highness a number, 


112 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1812 


limited by previous stipulation, of persons willing 
to be included in a Cabinet of which the outlines 
are already definitely arranged. 

To this proposal we could not accede without 
the sacrifice of the very object which the House 
of Commons has recommended, the formation of 
a strong and efficient Government. We enter 
not into the examination of the relative propor- 
tions, or of the particular arrangements which it 
has been judged necessary thus previously to 
establish. It is to the principle of disunion and 
jealousy that we object, to the supposed balance 
of contending interests in a Cabinet so measured 
out by preliminary stipulation. The times imperi- 
ously require an administration united in principle 
and strong in mutual reliance, possessing also the 
confidence of the Crown, and assured of its support 
in those healing measures which the public safety 
requires, and which are necessary to secure to the 
Government the opinion and affections of the 
people. 

No such hope is presented to us by this project, 
which appears to us equally new in practice and 
objectionable in principle. It tends, as we think, 
to establish within the Cabinet itself a system 
of counteraction inconsistent with the prosecu- 
tion of any uniform and beneficial course of 
policy. 

We must, therefore, request permission to 
decline all participation in a Government consti- 
tuted upon such principles, satisfied as we are 
that the certain loss of character which must 
arise from it to ourselves could be productive 


1812] WELLESLEY’S FAILURE 113 


only of disunion and weakness in the administra- 
tion of the public interests.’ 


After the receipt of this letter, Wellesley in- 
formed His Royal Highness that it was impossible 
for him to form a Ministry, and he asked per- 
mission to announce to Parliament the result of 
his efforts. 


THE EARL OF MotIRA to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
June 3, 1812 

The Prince commands me to say that he has 
no objection to your stating in the House of Lords 
the circumstances attending the late negotiations 
in their fullest extent. I must, however, still hope 
that there may be no necessity for your taking 
this step to-day.” 

The Regent once more turned to the Whigs, 
and an attempt was now made by Lord Moira to 
form a Ministry, of which Lord Wellesley was 
invited to become a member. Moira, however, 
was no whit more successful than Wellesley, 
largely because of obstacles raised by Grenville 
and Grey. From the first there was little hope 
that he would succeed where others had so 
signally failed. 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to THE EARL OF MoIRA 
Apsley House: June 4, 1812 
I was unwilling this morning to state as strongly 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. go. 
2 Add. MSS. 37297 £. 96. 


I14 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1812 


as I feel it the impossibility of my having any 
participation in the plan of an administration 
which now appears to be in contemplation. But 
it is due to your Lordship’s high character, and’ 
to your powerful claims on my respect and 
gratitude, not to delay a direct and final state- 
ment of my determination on a point of such 
pressing exigency. I have therefore requested 
Mr. Pole to deliver this note to you, and to 
explain the reasons which induce me to hope that 
your Lordship will receive with your habitual 
kindness and indulgence a resolution which is 
indispensably necessary to my honour and happi- 
ness. 


Lorp BoRINGDON fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Portman Square: June 5, 1812 


I heard yesterday from two or three different 
quarters that when your Lordship used the words, 
“dreadful animosities’”’ in the House of Lords 
on Wednesday * you intended to apply them to the 
Prince Regent’s sentiments towards Lord Grey. 

In the House of Lords this day Lord Moira 
referred to this interpretation. Lord Douglas 
hoped the day would come when your Lordship 
should give to the House an account of the 
transactions in which you have been recently 
engaged, and expressed the opinion that your 
Lordship and Mr. Canning could never have enter- 
tained a hope of any success in the proposition 

1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 113. 


2 The expression in Wellesley’s speech on the causes of his 
failure to form a Ministry. 


1812] ‘DREADFUL ANIMOSITIES” = 115 


to Lords Grey and Grenville, asa difference of 
opinion upon every subject was known to be enter- 
tained between you. The Duke of Athol stated 
in strong terms his regret and astonishment at 
statements of “dreadful animosities” in the 
present situation of the country. 

Under the circumstances, I stated to the House 
that though I had not had the slightest authority 
from, or indeed communication with, your Lord- 
ship upon the matter of this expression, yet from 
my general knowledge of your character and 
sentiments I could take upon myself positively 
to assert that the idea of applying the expression 
to the Prince Regent had never entered into your 
contemplation, and that I considered your Lord- 
ship as utterly incapable of holding, even by 
inference, such language in Parliament; that 
I was persuaded that the exact words had been 
uttered in the hurry of the pending discussion, 
and without any intention of applying them in 
their strongest sense to any individual whatever— 
though it certainly might have come within the 
hearing of some persons that strong personal 
sentiments had been expressed in certain quarters 
(referring to Lord Liverpool, etc.) against your 
Lordship ; that I was confident you would hail 
the day on which the discussion prayed for by 
Lord Douglas might with propriety take place ; 
that so far from a disunion between your Lordship 
and Mr. Canning, and Lords Grey and Grenville 
upon all subjects, it was known that upon the 
great domestic question now pressing upon the 
general consideration there was an_ entire 


116 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1812 


conformity of sentiment; and that my own opinion 
was that your Lordship’s negotiation with Lords 
Grey and Grenville, so far from having been felt 
to be hopeless, might rather date its failure to 
your Lordship’s mind having been too free from 
doubt as to the probability of failure. 

Having in the outset of what I addressed to the 
House disclaimed any authority from your Lord- 
ship, what I said might be considered as immaterial. 
I have, nevertheless, thought it right to com- 
municate it to your Lordship, requesting you to 
give me credit as well for the motives by which 
I was actuated, as for the respect and regard with 
which I remain .. ? 


Wellesley subsequently explained that he had 
deliberately used the phrase “ dreadful personal 
animosities,” and that he had used it with refer- 
ence to the attitude assumed towards him through- 
out the negotiations of Liverpool and his colleagues. 
Ultimately Wellesley published the Correspondence 
and Documents explaining the Proceedings on the 
Recent Negotiations for the Foundation of an 
Administration. 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 {. 119. 


BOOK VII 
IN OPPOSITION. 1812-1820 


BOOK VII 
IN OPPOSITION. 1812-1820 


Liverpool’s ministry : Wellesley and Canning: 
Canning elected for Liverpool : Marriage of 
Wellesley’s daughter: The relations of Wellesley 
and Canning : Canning disposes of a rumour: His 
advice to Wellesley: Wellington in Spain : Vittoria: 
The invasion of France: Napoleon’s last efforts : 
His abdication : The treaty of Fontainebleau: 
Wellesley’s change of view: Restrictions on the 
importation of corn: Wellesley and the Grenville 
party strongly protest : Poverty in the country : 
Agrarian disturbances : Coercive measures of the 
Government : The opposition of Wellesley and the 
Grenville party. 

HE Prince Regent now sent for Liverpool, 
and he formed a Government which was 
generally looked upon as a stop-gap 

Ministry, but which in fact endured for fifteen 
years. Sidmouth went to the Home Office, 
Castlereagh to the Foreign Office, and Bathurst 
to the War Office. Vansittart became Chancellor 
of the Exchequer, and Eldon Lord Chancellor. 
Wellesley was terribly upset by his failure to form 
a Ministry, for it was the ambition of his life to 
be Prime Minister. He did not, however, skulk 
in his tent, but continued to interest himself in the 
political affairs of the day during the following 
eight years. He and Canning acted in concert 
while out of office, and were recognised allies, 


and, when apart, regular correspondents. 
TIg 


120 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1812- 


GEORGE CANNING to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 


Private and confidential Eastham 
August 25, 1812 

I see the truth is transpiring—as to Lord 
Wellington’s situation in Spain.’ 

I hear, in various ways, what is, I hope, not 
the truth about him—viz., that he is (or is required 
or believed by the Government to be) indifferent, 
if not adverse, to your politics and Pole’s. 

It would be of great importance, I should think, 
to clear this up: to the public if the Government 
are deceiving them; to the Government them- 
selves and the Regent if they are deceived. 

Could Pole employ his summer better than in a 
little trip to headquarters? It would not take 
above two months. He would be back, therefore, 
before the dissolution, which (if it takes place at 
all, and I doubt it) cannot take place before the 
middle or end of October.” 

I am wandering about till that time, into 
Hampshire, Dorsetshire, and Devonshire. 

My ultimate point is Talham, where I shall be 
from about the middle of September till the first 
or second week in October. By the end of October 
T shall be returned to Gloucester Lodge, and settled 
there for the session, which (whether then by 
dissolution or not) may possibly, I think, take 
place before Christmas. 

1 On August 12 Wellington entered Madrid asa result of 
his victory over Marmont at Salamanca (July 22nd), but he 
was forced to retire with some precipitation into Portugal 
on account of the approach of two French armies from the 


south-east and north under Soult and Souham. 
2 Parliament was dissolved on September 29. 


1820] CANNING’S ELECTION 121 


In this locomotive state I cannot give you any 
very accurate address by which to write to me 
on the road, but a letter sent to Gloucester Lodge 
will always be carefully forwarded to me on the 
day of its arrival there.’ 


GEORGE CANNING to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Liverpool: October 17, 1812 


My contest ended yesterday,? leaving me at 
the head of the poll with a majority of 500 over 
my competitor Brougham, and of almost 100 (99, 
I believe) over my colleague, the old member, 
General Gascoigne. The numbers are: 

Canning 1,631 
Gascoigne 1,532 
Brougham 1,131 
Creevey 1,068 


There has not been such a struggle here for 
fifty years, and the loyal party, having gained 
this decisive victory, assure me that I may reckon 
upon being member for Liverpool as long as I 
please to represent them. 

It has not cost me a farthing, and my reception 
has been such as to be really intoxicating. I am 
this moment returned from a triumphal chairing 
round the town, and have not steadiness of hands 
or head to do more than send you this general 
report of myself. 

I received yesterday your letter of the 14th. 

1 Add. MSS. 57297 f. 174. 

2 The general election took place in October, and the new 


House of Commons assembled on November 24. It was not 
dissolved until June ro, 1818. 


122 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [r812- 


I rejoice in your success. 

I shall probably want the seat for one of my 
own. immediate friends, as these are thrown out. 
Do you know of another marketable? I stay 
here ten days for a public dinner which they 
wish to give me before I go. The interval is to 
be filled up with a round of private dinners with 
my principal supporters—not one of whom I knew 
before I came here.’ 


At this time Wellesley’s attention was engaged 
by a family matter, no less important than the 
engagement of his natural daughter, Hyacinthe 
Mary, to Edward Littleton. In her letter 
Hyacinthe shows undoubted shrewdness, and 
conveys the impression that to her marriage was 
as much a matter of settlements as sentiment. 


EpwArD JOHN LITTLETON to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
Brighton: November 1, 1812 
Not having the honour of a personal acquaint- 
ance with your Lordship, I am under the necessity 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 179. 

2 Edward John Littleton (1791-1863), member of Parlia- 
ment for Staffordshire from 1812 to 1832, and then for South 
Staffordshire. He was a stalwart supporter of Catholic 
Emancipation. In 1832 he was proposed by Hume and 
O'Connell for the Speakership, but Manners-Sutton was 
re-elected by a large majority. In the following year, when 
Wellesley became Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, he accepted 
the office of Chief Secretary. Two years later he was created 
Baron Hatherton of Hatherton. He married Mary Hyacinthe, 
Wellesley’s natural daughter, on December 12, 1812, and by her 
had one son, who succeeded as second Baron Hatherton, and 
three daughters. His wife died on January 4, 1849. 


1820] A SATISFACTORY SUITOR 123 


of addressing myself to you by letter, the object 
of which is to request the honour of an alliance 
with your family by a union with Miss Wellesley. 
I am happy to say I have been fortunate enough 
to receive her acceptance and the good wishes of 
Lady Wellesley and her son, subject, however, 
to your Lordship’s approbation. 

It is perhaps necessary to inform your Lord- 
ship that I have lately inherited the fortune of 
my uncle, Sir Edward Littleton, and together 
with it have succeeded to the _ representa- 
tion of the-county in which he resided. The 
annual income of the estate, which is entailed 
upon my children, will be, when raised, at least 
£18,000. 

IT attained the age of legal maturity in last March, 
but, by an instruction conveyed in my uncle’s will, 
am prevented from entering on the property till 
I reach the age of twenty-four years, till which 
period I am allowed a rent charge of £1,500 a year. 
But as the estate is perfectly unencumbered I 
should not hesitate to borrow any additional 
sum which may be requisite during my minority. 
As Miss Wellesley and her brother have kindly 
promised to write on the subject to your Lord- 
ship, I trust their letters will render it superfluous 
to say anything more of myself. I shall be in 
town at the latter end of the week or the beginning 
of the next, when I hope your Lordship will 
allow me the honour of paying my respects to you 
in person.’ 

1 Add. MSS. 37325 £. 147- 


124 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1812- 


Mary HYACINTHE WELLESLEY fo THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 


Brighton: November 4 [1812] 


My DEAREST Papa, 

I cannot express to you the pleasure and satis- 
faction I derived from the perusal of your affec- 
tionate and flattering letters, both to me and to 
Mr. Littleton, and I hope I shall be able in person 
to return you my warmest thanks the beginning 
of next week, when we shall return to town and 
immediately begin the necessary preparations 
and arrangements for the marriage, which Mr. 
Littleton is desirous should take place as soon as 
possible. I am very anxious that your lawyers 
should be employed in arranging the business of 
my marriage settlements, as those of my sister? 
were so well managed by them; and I trust you 
will have the kindness to take the trouble to direct 
them in everything, as you did on that occasion. 
You will probably remember that her jointure 
was £2,000 a year, and her pin money £500, which 
was thought well proportioned to Sir William’s 
income of £4,000 or £5,000 a year; but do not 
you think the same jointure would be much too 
small in proportion to Mr. Littleton’s large 
fortune ? However, I have no doubt but you will 
be the best judge of what is necessary to be done, 
and I am fully persuaded you will lose no oppor- 
tunity of settling everything in the most advan- 
tageous manner. I have every reason to be pleased 
with Mr. Littleton’s kind and generous disposi- 


1 Anne Wellesley. See vol. i. p. 41. 


1820] SETTLEMENTS 125 


tion, and he seems well disposed to meet all my 
wishes with the utmost liberality. With regard 
to his own habits and inclinations, they are such 
as will secure us against the effects of any extrava- 
gance. You will find his principles and character 
most correct, without the least taint of pedantry 
or affectation; indeed, every day adds to the 
conviction I feel that my choice cannot fail of 
meeting your approbation. 

Mr. Littleton will return to town about the same 
time as ourselves, and tells me he will seize the 
first opportunity of paying his respects to you. 

I am very much concerned to hear your eyes 
are bad, though I hope by this time they are 
perfectly recovered. 

Believe me, dearest Papa, 
Your sincerely affectionate daughter, 
M. HYACINTHE WELLESLEY.’ 


GEORGE CANNING to MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Sunning Hill: November 19, 1812 
You have a long-tailed partizan in The Times 
called “ Vetus,” who, amidst a great deal of 
reasoning and eloquence of the very highest sort, 
introduces a strain of flattery to you and dis- 
paragement to every other human being, such as 
makes the friends of every other human being 
look about them and exclaim: ‘‘ What can all this 
mean?” JI do not attribute to you being party 
or privy to these letters, but the world does. 
And, coupling that disclaimer of your following 
me, which you thought it necessary to publish 


1 Add. MSS. 37315 f. 151. 


126 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1812- 


in your correspondence with Lord Liverpool 
last spring, with the exhortations to all mankind, 
and to me particularly, to follow you and you 
only, with which “ Vetus’ has more than once 
indoctrinated the world, a presumption was fast 
growing up (as I was informed) in the minds of 
many persons in and out of Parliament, which 
neither you could wish to encourage, nor I for a 
moment endure, that I had recently taken some 
new oath of allegiance and fidelity—a presump- 
tion which I thought it necessary at once and 
absolutely to destroy. 

I thought this the more necessary because I 
received, while at Liverpool, inquiries from some 
of my friends whether there had not recently 
passed between us (you and me) something of a 
more binding and solemn compact than had 
subsisted before, identifying our interests, and 
arranging our pretensions. To these enquiries 
I have answered, and continue to answer, that 
nothing of the sort has passed; that we stand 
towards each other exactly as we did last spring ; 
and I refer to your clear statement in your letter 
to Lord Liverpool as exactly defining our rela- 
tive situation. This is the whole meaning and 
the whole extent of what I have said, written, 
or spoken upon this subject. I should have been 
much better pleased that it had not been necessary 
to say anything upon it of any kind, but that 
necessity was not of my causing, nor, I dare say, 
of yours. 

To come now to a more important matter. 

The state of things in Spain does indeed afford 


1820] CAUTION AND CANDOUR 127 


you matter of just but melancholy triumph ; and 
I think it can hardly be expected of you that you 
should refrain from explaining yourself fully on 
this subject on the first day of the session. I 
think it will be highly advantageous for you to 
do so—but (I still think) to do so, not as a deter- 
mined opponent, but as a retired statesman taking 
a distrait, commanding, and unimpaired view 
of the state of the country. 

I know that the stand on the Isthmus between 
the two parties is very difficult to maintain. I 
have kept my balance there for near three years, 
and can therefore speak to it with some experi- 
ence; but I am equally convinced that it ought 
to be maintained at whatever cost or exertion, 
and that in retreating from the Ministry to fall 
over into the Opposition would be to lose entirely 
the vantage ground which we occupy in public 
opinion, and to identify ourselves with a lost 
cause. 

To change my metaphor: our object, I appre- 
hend (an object, I mean, of course, subordinate 
and only legitimate as being instrumental to our 
view of what is best for the country) is to force the 
present Ministry to a capitulation—zxot to put 
the whole garrison to the sword. Not that I 
much care how many wounds or contusions they 
all, and each of them, receive in the course of the 
siege. I only wish that a few of them may be 
left alive to man the lower part of the works, 
if the fort should ever be put into our hands ; and 
I think it desirable that the terms on which their 
lives are spared should not be so absolutely 


128 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1812- 


disgraceful as to make them utterly uwnuseable 
hereafter. 

One advantage of a more mitigated line on your 
part will be that it will enable me to march more 
nearly in a parallel with you in the House of 
Commons on the same occasion. The tone which 
I recommend to you I must adopt. I can speak 
in no other, yet, than as regretting and admonish- 
ing. The difference between us in one respect, 
viz., that I have not any prophecies to boast of, 
and, you have, is in your favour, and will justify 
your going higher, and speaking louder and with 
less management than I can. But if you were 
betrayed into direct and unqualified hostility, 
that would be a difference in kind, not in degree ; 
that, I think, for our joint interest and credit, 
would be much better avoided. 

One thing only would change my whole view of 
this subject : can you speak in Lord Wellington’s 
name, and on his direct and avowed authority ? 
If you can, away with caution! If not, I think— 
as above explained. 

I shall be in town on Saturday, and, as the best 
opportunity of talking things over fully, would 
gladly dine with you (I cannot offer to dine you) 
on that day or Sunday. Can you receive me either 
day—and which ?? 


GEORGE CANNING to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 


Private and confidential Gloucester Lodge 


December 12, 1812 
I remember your caution about lists, and I 
1 Add. MSS. 37297 £. 185. 


1820] TIMID FRIENDS 129 


have myself never made nor authorised any list 
of friends of my own, much less of yours, whom 
indeed I could not enumerate if I would. 

But there ave such abroad—and they do 
prodigious mischief. 

A person, a member of Parliament, came the 
other day to a friend of mine, and said : “ I under- 
stand my name is in a list which is made out of 
Mr. Canning’s and Lord Wellesley’s friends. I 
beg to say that I have no pretensions to be enrolled 
among them,” or words to that effect. Of this 
person I should have been pretty confident, but 
the list frightened him away. 

This morning I have received a letter from the 
country with the following paragraph : 

“____(T will mention the name when we meet, 
but do not like to write it) has just been here. 
He saw a list on Wednesday in the hands of. 
who had just got it at Apsley House. He repeated 
it to me. It was, as far as I could judge, per- 
fectly accurate, but he added that he could lay 
his finger on five who would be frightened 
away. For God’s sake try if this cannot be 
stopped.” 

I thought it right that you should know 
this. 

I have instructed the strictest enquiry on my 
part. Pray do the same among your friends at 
Apsley House, and if you can detect a list, cause 
it to be burned. 

Not only are unconfirmed friends likely to be 
frightened away, but there are some who profess 
good inclinations ovly to raise their price with the 

2 K 


130 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1812- 


Government, and it would be a pity to play their 
game for them.? 


Since his precipitate retirement into Portugal: 
Wellington had been preparing for his final 
advance across the frontier into Spain, which took 
place on May 22,1813. He concentrated his forces 
at Toro on the Dourg and routed Joseph Buona- 
parte at the decisive battle of Vittoria, June 2r1, 
driving the French across the Pyrenees. San 
Sebastian and Pampeluna speedily fell, and he 
eventually crossed the Bidassoa into France. 


THE MakQuess WELLESLEY ¢o EARL BATHURST 
Private Canterbury: July 3, 1813 

return you many thanks for your kind and 
most acceptable communication. The victory is 
glorious in every view, and according to the best 
of my judgment, solid and substantial, and full 
of the most important and decisive consequences. 
Lord Wellington’s letter to me is most satisfactory. 
I congratulate you most cordially on this great 
event. I hope to be able to attend the House of 
Lords, and to express my opinion on the state 
of affairs in Spain whenever that question shall 
be presented for discussion. I conclude that you 
will soon introduce it. 

Colonel Cadogan’s loss is irreparable to his 
family and great to his country. The total loss 
of our army, however, bears a small proportion 
to the advantage of our success, which must 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 £. 189. 


1820] THE VAUXHALL FETE 131 


operate most powerfully on every hand on our 
interests in the war. I would send you Lord 
Wellington’s letter if it contained any information 
“of which you might not be in possession ; it is in 
every point a strong confirmation in my mind of 
the great importance of the victory which he has 
achieved." 


THE Hon. WILLIAM WELLESLEY-PoLE to THE 
MaARQUESS WELLESLEY 

Savile Row: July 12, 1813 

The Regent has set about a grand féte in honour 
of Lord Wellington and the army, and he sent 
for me and desired I would undertake the arrange- 
ment of it with Lord Robert Seymour and others. 
I was, therefore, forced to set to work, though I 
felt it was not delicate for Lord Wellington’s 
brother to act as a steward, and so I ventured 
to hint to the Duke of York, who is to preside 
at the féte. However, His Royal Highness over- 
ruled my scruples, and to-day at a meeting of 
some persons who have agreed to be stewards I 
was unanimously called upon to act. We have 
determined upon Vauxhall, and I think we shall 
have the most splendid entertainment ever given 
in this country. Tuesday to-morrow sennight 
is fixed for the celebration, and I hope you will 
be able to come tq town and attend. We shall 
have all the rank, both civil and military, of the 
country, and it would be incomplete if you were 
not in your place. We meet to-morrow to settle 
a small subscription among the stewards, which 


1 Add. MSS. 37374 f. 8. 


132 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1812- 


is necessary to defray expenses, but will not be 
more than twenty guineas each. I will send you 
an account of our proceedings when they are a 
little more matured. We shall not be able to’ 
advertise till to-morrow evening. The Prince 
asked me after you. I told him that you were 
gone out of town, which you thought necessary 
on account of your health. He said he hoped you 
would come up for the féte. 

I stated to Lord Liverpool, as nearly as I could 
recollect, what was agreed upon by you and 
Canning. He heard me with great civility, and 
said: ‘‘ All I can say at present is that what you 
have communicated has given me the greatest 
satisfaction.” I have not heard from him since. 


By the following year the Napoleonic régime was 
apparently over. Moscow had dealt it a blow, and 
Leipzig had almost utterly laid it in ruins. In 
vain Napoleon made a last desperate effort. France 
had done its utmost, and was exhausted, and its 
Emperor had to give way before the armed hosts 
of half Europe, flushed with success. On March 31 
the victors entered Paris. On April 6 Napoleon 
signed his abdication, and a treaty was signed at 
Fontainebleau on April 11 between Napoleon and 
Austria, Prussia, and Russia, wherein he renounced 
all claim to the sovereignty of France and Italy. 
He was assigned the island of Elba as an in- 
dependent principality, and thither on April 28 


he departed. 
1 Add. MSS. 37310 f. 134. 


1820] A CHANGE OF VIEW 133 


EARL GREY to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Portman Square: May 18, 1814 
_Lord Liverpool, in answer to a question put 
by me, gave notice to-night in the House of Lords 
that he will on Monday communicate the treaty 
by a message from the Prince Regent and have 
an address upon it the following day. It becomes 
therefore necessary to consider what should be 
done upon this proceeding. I think an amendment 
to express our dissent from the avowed principle 
of the war indispensable, but upon this I am very 
desirous of receiving your Lordship’s opinion. 
Lord Lansdowne is desirous, as I am also, to 
have some conversation with you on this subject, 
and we will wait on you together at any time you 
will appoint for that purpose. I suggested Sunday 
as a day on which we probably should be dis- 
engaged, and three as a convenient hour, if it 
should suit your Lordship. 
I hope to hear that you are returned to town, 
quite recovered from the effects of your late 
indisposition.? 


Wellesley’s views concerning the war had gradu- 
ally changed, and he, who had been an advocate 
of its being prosecuted with ever-increasing vigour, 
was now all in favour of peace and retrenchment. 
Indeed, when Napoleon returned from Elba, he was 
opposed to England again going to war, and was 
eager that the Government should accept Napoleon 
as the Emperor of France. His attitude on this 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 £. 240. 


134 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1812- 


matter was the beginning of the estrangement 
between Wellington and himself. 

During the years that, followed, Wellesley, though 
he was still interested in politics, took little active 
partinaffairs. Though he might have made himself 
formidable in opposition, or invaluable as a sup- 
porter of the Government, he would do neither, 
and held himself aloof from the Parliamentary 
discussions of the day, although he had on occasion 
acted with the Grenville party, and had come to 
share their views on other subjects than the war. 

There was, however, one notable exception. He 
took a prominent part among the opponents of 
restrictions on the importations of food. 

Naturally enough the war with Napoleon had 
" tended to monopolise the attention of the nation 
and of the Government, but its cessation made 
it impossible for the internal condition of the 
country to be ignored longer. 

In 1815 a Bill had been carried by which the 
importation of foreign corn was prohibited so 
long as the price of wheat did not rise above 
eighty shillings per quarter; if it rose above that 
price it might be imported free. The object of this 
was to obviate the violent fluctuations in price 
that were caused by the sudden opening or 
closing of markets, according to the varying 
fortunes of the war. 

The cessation of the war brought to an end 
the inflated war prices, and with the fall in price 


1820] A SPIRITED PROTEST 135 


came a shortage of work for the agricultural 
labourer and a reduction in wages for those who 
were still employed. The ranks of the unemployed 
were further swelled by the addition of numbers 
of disbanded soldiers and the introduction of 
machinery in place of hand labour in many 
manufactures. The result was the outburst of 
agrarian discontent and outrage. 

Wellesley and the Grenville party strongly 
opposed the restrictions imposed on the importa- 
tion of food, and when the measure was carried 
in spite of their opposition, drew up a memorandum 
on the subject, in the course of which they stated 
that the immediate practical effect of the law 
was to compel the consumer to purchase corn 
dearer at home than it might be imported from 
abroad, and to give a bounty to the grower of 
corn by a tax levied on the consumer. 

Not only did they oppose this measure, which 
was very largely the cause of the discontent and 
disaffection in the country, but they also strongly 
opposed the coercive measures which the Govern- 
ment took for the suppression of the disturbances, 
especially the suspension of the Habeas Corpus 
Act, although later they were reconciled to their 
necessity. 


EARL GREY fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Portman Square: June to, 1817 
Availing myself of the permission you have 


136 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [x8z2- 


so kindly given me, I hasten to communicate to 
your Lordship the first certain intelligence I have 
received of the day when the question of the 
renewed suspension of the Habeas Corpus is 
likely to be discussed.’ Lord Liverpool told me 
yesterday, in the House of Lords, that the report 
would probably be made to-morrow, and that, 
allowing the necessary time for printing and 
delivering it, the second reading of the Bill 
would be appointed for Monday next. I think 
there is little doubt that the debate will be on 
that day, but should any delay take place you 
shall have timely notice of it. 

I anxiously hope that your health will be in a 
state to permit your attending on this very 
important question, which seems to me to be now 
reduced to this: whether a law forming the chief 
protection of our liberties is to be suspended as a 
mere matter of course, whenever it is found con- 
venient, in a time of distress or uneasiness, as a 
measure of police; and whether we shall allow 
a practice to be established of suspending the 
rights of the people of England, like the cash 
payments of the bank. 

The pretence for this outrageous proceeding 
I understand to be the representations of the 
magistrates as to the necessity of continuing these 
powers for the preservation of the public peace, 
and anew plot, which has just been, most conveni- 
ently, discovered. The object of this was a 
general rising in London, Manchester, Derby, 


1 This measure was introduced as the result of many dis- 
turbances in various parts of England. 


1820] WELLINGTON ECLIPSED 137 


Nottingham, Sheffield, Birmingham, and Glasgow, 
to take place as last night, to seize arms, surprise 
the barracks, etc., etc. 

The first communication of this tremendous 
plan came from Nottingham, and the proof of 
its existence has been obtained by the aid of a 
common informer, in seizing the leaders and 
contrivers of that part of it which was to be 
executed at Sheffield, in midnight council at 
an ale-house near that place. They consisted 
of about twenty-five, six of whom have been 
taken. They called themselves leaders of tens ; 
their whole force, therefore, amounted to 250, 
and with this they were to have executed at once 
a measure which would have eclipsed all the 
achievements of the Duke of Wellington, by 
seizing at the same time the depét of arms at 
Doncaster, surprising the barracks at Sheffield, 
and taking possession of Wentworth House. 
Two of the heroes who were to have conducted 
this great simultaneous operation, to be effected 
with arms, were parish paupers—of course the 
fittest persons in the world, and possessing the 
complete means for conducting a secret corres- 
pondence with all parts of England and Scotland. 

My Lord, my Lord! 

He made the giants first, and then he killed 
them... TomThumb.. 

1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 255. 


BOOK VIII 


LORD-LIEUTENANT OF IRELAND 
1821-1827 


BOOK VIII 


LORD-LIEUTENANT OF IRELAND 
1821-1827 


A reconciliation is effected between Liverpool and 
Wellesley : Wellesley is offered, and accepts, the 
Lord-Lieutenancy of Ireland : Henry Goulburn : 
The unsettled state of Ireland : The ‘‘ Whiteboys”’: 
The Catholic question : Wellesley’s love of work : 
His energy : Wellesley marries again : Lord Liver- 
pool resigns : Canning becomes Prime Minister : 
Canning suggests that Wellesley should again go 
to India : Lord Melbourne : Plunket : The rupture 
between Canning and Wellington : Correspondence 
concerning it : Herries: Canning offers Wellesley the 
Embassy to Vienna : Projected changes in the 
Government of Ireland : Lord Anglesey to be 
Wellesley’s successor : The death of Canning : The 
result of Wellesley’s seven years’ administration of 
Treland. 


RADUALLY the enmity and bad feeling 
(s that had existed between the Govern- 
ment and Wellesley had died out with 
the passing of the years. A rapprochement seemed 
likely when Wellesley supported the Ministry 
in the legislation designed to deal with the home 
troubles of 1819, and in December 1821, on the 
retirement of Earl Talbot, Liverpool offered him 
the office of Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland. This 
position, though without a seat in the Cabinet, 
Wellesley .accepted. 


14 


142 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [r821- 


THE MARQUESS OF BUCKINGHAM to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 


Confidential and secret London 
December 3, 1821 


On Friday night Lord Liverpool in strict con- 
fidence rejoiced me exceedingly by informing me 
of your appointment. [I did not write to you, 
because Lord Liverpool told me I was to appear 
to be ignorant of it. You are aware that Ministers 
have made overtures to me and to my friends 
which are now in discussion. I speak to you 
upon this subject with the greatest frankness. 
As far as personal feelings are concerned nothing 
can be more satisfactory to us than the offers 
which have been made. Our only doubt is how 
far the changes which are to be made will con- 
stitute a Government sufficiently strong to join 
consistently with our known and pledged feelings 
on the Catholic question. I find Lord Grenville 
strongly impressed, as.I need not say that I am, 
with the advantage which your appointment 
holds out to Ireland, and the facilities which it 
gives us to act with the Government of which 
you there forma part. This feeling is very much 
strengthened by the circumstance of Mr. Plunket’ 
taking office, and giving Parliamentary assistance 
to the Government. I will fairly tell you, how- 
ever, that in Lord Grenville’s mind I find this 
impression considerably neutralised by the appoint- 

1 William Conyngham Plunket (1764-1854), a strong 


supporter of Catholic Emancipation, was appointed Attorney- 
General of Ireland, January 1822, 


1827] FETTERS 143 


ment of Mr. Goulburn? to be your secretary. He 
feels that Mr. Goulburn’s known and eager 
opposition to the Catholic question will, added 
to Mr. Peel’s holding the Home seals, have the 
effect in Ireland of undoing the good resulting 
from the impression produced by your appoint- 
ment; and he fears that your administration 
will be fettered by a hostile secretary and an 
equally hostile Secretary of State. I am free to 
confess to you, in strict confidence, that my 
feelings are not so much alive to this danger as 
are Lord Grenville’s. I lament Mr. Goulburn’s 
appointment as one calculated certainly to excite 
those feelings in other minds besides Lord Gren- 
ville’s, and it would be decisive upon my dis- 
position to join the Government did I not place 
entire reliance [upon your] firmness and decision, 
and upon [your] being the most unlikely man to 
allow yourself to be fettered .. . 

You have it in your contemplation to go to 
Dropmore ... It would be very material if 
your arrangements would permit of your going 
to Dropmore to-morrow early, in order that Lord 
Grenville may not come to his decision before he 
sees your Lordship. I know the respect which 
he bears to you and the sincere regard he 

1 Henry Goulbum (1784-1856), had entered Parliament 
in 1808, and had held the Under-Secretaryships of the Home 
Office and the War Office. He was in 182r appointed Chief 
Secretary to the Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, which post he 
held until 1827. Subsequently he was Home Secretary 


under Peel, 1834-1835, and Chancellor of the Exchequer, 
1841-1846, 


144 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1821- 


entertains towards you. Much, I think, will 
depend upon your interview." 


THE MARQUESS OF LONDONDERRY? fo THE 
MARQUESS WELLESLEY 


Private December 4, 1821 


I hope you will excuse the liberty I presume 
to take in offering to your Lordship my cordial 
congratulations on your nomination to the govern- 
ment of Ireland. The administration of the affairs 
of this most important branch of the Empire must 
be regarded, especially at the present moment, 
as an undertaking well worthy of your Lordship’s 
talents and great experience; and I cannot but 
feel equally sanguine and anxious that the result 
may entirely correspond with the zeal and ability 
with which this great work on your Lordship’s 
hands will undoubtedly be undertaken. 

As there are many circumstances connected 
with the present state and condition of Ireland 
on which, at a leisure moment, I shall be anxious 
to confer with your Lordship, and especially with 
respect to the course best calculated to reconcile 
the embarrassments which a difference of senti- 
ment on the great question (upon which your 
Lordship’s sentiments and mine, I believe, are 
nearly coincident) necessarily introduces into the 
administration of affairs on both sides of the water, 
with the efficient and tranquil march of your 
Lordship’s immediate government: with this 

1 Add. MSS. 37310 f. 189. 


2 Robert Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh (1769-1822), suc 
ceeded in 1821 as (second) Marquess of Londonderry, 


1827] THE WHITEBOYS 145 


view, I take the liberty to propose, should either 
Saturday in the present or Tuesday in the next 
week be acceptable to your Lordship, to meet you 
in London. Subject to any change of time or 
place more convenient to your Lordship, I venture 
to name one o’clock at the Foreign Office for an 
interview.’ 


If Wellesley had gone to the Foreign Office when 
the state of affairs was difficult, he accepted the 
office of Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland when that 
country was in a most unsettled condition. 
Wellesley’s first duty was to suppress the ruffians 
who called themselves “ Whiteboys,” but that, 
though not easy, was simplicity itself as compared 
with the task of endeavouring to reconcile the 
different parties. The feeling in Ireland towards 
Wellesley was kindly. He was a distinguished 
man, who had occupied great positions, and this 
placated the anti-Catholics; while the Roman 
Catholics were naturally delighted to have so 
staunch a supporter of their claims. At his first 
levée on January 8, 1822, there was, says Pearce, 
“‘a scene that was entirely new in Ireland. Men of 
all parties were present ; the aristocracy and the 
merchants ; the bishops and clergy of the Estab- 
lished Church, and the Roman Catholic hierarchy ; 
Mr. O’Connell as well as the heads of the Orange 
party.” A few days later, “As far as appear- 
ances testify,” the Examiner remarked, “ the 


1 Add. MSS. 37310 f. 195. 
2 L 


146 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1821- 


Marquess Wellesley has commenced his Vice- 
royalty both auspiciously and characteristically ; 
that is to say, with benignant countenance to 
all parties, and with the assumption of splendid 
vigour.” This was an admirable beginning, but 
Wellesley’s difficulty was to hold the balance 
between the Catholics and anti-Catholics. The 
Cabinet, however, was so made up as to secure 
neutrality on the principal question that at the 
moment agitated the country. The Lord Chan- 
cellor, Lord Manners, the Commander of the 
Forces, Sir David Baird, and the Chief Secretary, 
Goulburn, were anti-Catholics; the Vice-Treas- 
urer, Sir G. Fitzgerald Hill, the Attorney-General, 
Plunket, and the Solicitor-General, Charles Kendal 
Bushe, were in favour of Catholic Emancipation. 
But Wellesley’s troubles soon began. The Orange 
party in Dublin announced its intention to decorate 
the statue of William III. on July 12, the anni- 
versary of the battle of Aughrim. This, in the in- 
terests of the people, the Lord Mayor forbade, and 
Wellesley supported him. This was remembered 
against the Lord-Lieutenant, and when in the 
following September he went in state to the 
Theatre Royal, he was received with mingled 
cheers, groans, and hisses, while, when ‘‘ God save 
the King ” was played, bottles and other missiles 
were hurled at the royal box. 

Wellesley was happy at finding himself again 
in harness. He loved the trappings of office, it 


1827] A ROYAL JOKE I47 


is true, but he loved the work also. As Lord- 
Lieutenant of Ireland he was as indefatigable 
as he had been as Governor-General of India and 
as Foreign Minister. Whatever task was assigned 
him, he did it with all his might and main. He was 
considerate of his subordinates, but he demanded 
from them at least an outside show of respect. 
“The public functionaries in Ireland are coming 
to close quarters,” Creevey wrote to Miss Ord, 
February 14, 1823. ‘“‘ Wellesley has dismissed 
at a moment’s warning Sir Charles Vernon, the 
Chamberlain, and two others—men who had held 
their situation about the court for years. Their 
offence was dining at a Beefsteak Club last week, 
where Lord Chancellor Manners was likewise, 
and drinking as a toast, ‘Success to the export 
trade of Ireland, and may Lord Wellesley be the 
first article exported.’”? Wellesley’s energy ex- 
torted admiration from all. “‘ The King expressed 
great satisfaction at Lord Wellesley’s conduct in 
Ireland,”’ Croker noted. ‘‘ He told us that Lord 
Wellesley on accepting the office had made a kind 
of apology for his former secession and expressed 
his gratitude to the King for admitting him into 
favour and his devotion to his service ; ‘ in short,’ 
said the King, ‘ I could not help exclaiming to him, 
“ Richard’s himself again.” ’’’* 


1 Creevey Papers, ii. 63. . 
2 Croker: Diary, January 11, 1822. 


148 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [x821- 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to THE EARL OF 
LIVERPOOL 
Private_and confidential Phoenix Park 
November 22, 1824 

I was most happy to hear so good an account 
of your recovery and confirmed health from 
Canning. Most sincerely do I hope that you may 
continue in strength and spirits to meet the fatigues 
of your arduous duty. In this hope I am cor- 
dially joined by all that is respectable of every 
party in this country, and by none more Zealously 
and faithfully than by Mr. Plunket. I know no 
evil of such portentous aspect to the Empire, 
and especially to this country, as any event which 
should deprive us of your public services. For 
myself, my unfeigned anxiety on this point is 
greatly increased by my personal confidence in 
your invariable kindness towards me, and by a 
warm sense of gratitude for the honourable sup- 
port which I have received from you since my 
arrival in Ireland. 

You will perceive by my official communications, 
which will reach you in a few days, that the con- 
dition of Ireland is greatly improved within the last 
year. Tranquillity is generally, if not universally, 
restored. The causes of its restoration are such 
as promise permanently beneficial consequences. 
Every measure, Insurrection Act, Police, Tithe 
Bill, Revision of Magistracy, Petty Sessions, 
Better Administration of Law, has succeeded 
beyond my most sanguine hopes. The general 
prosperity of the Empire begins to reach Ireland. 
Prices have improved, rents and even tithes are 


1827] | CONFLICTING ZEALOTS 149 


better paid, and in the districts which had been 
most disturbed the people are turning their 
attention to pursuits of industry and honest 
labour, instead of plotting and executing schemes 
of outrage and violence. The Insurrection Act 
has been very generally removed, and it is a very 
satisfactory circumstance that not one district 
from which it has been removed has since been 
disturbed. In some districts the farmers patrol 
with the police and military when occasion requires. 
In short, I should have been able, at the opening 
of Parliament, to present the gratifying tribute of 
“Treland tranquillised”” to His Majesty, were not 
the general prosperity and happiness disturbed 
by the noisy fury of the Catholic Association, 
by its contentions with the Orange Associa- 
tion, and by the polemical clamour of conflicting 
religious zealots. These new descriptions of out- 
rages “‘thunder in the index,’ but have not 
revived positive violence, nor do I entertain any 
alarm of immediate acts of force. But it is very 
painful to endure such an interruption of the 
harvest of all our labours at a moment when 
prosperity is advancing with so rapid and yet 
steady a course. The causes, however, of good 
are now so securely and generally established 
that I look without fear to the ultimate results 
of the system which I have pursued under the 
direction of your administration. 

I shall submit to you and the Cabinet my view 
of the condition of Ireland with relation to the 
Catholic Association, as well as to other political 
associations, the existence of which is alleged as 


150 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1821- 


the proximate cause and justification of the 
institution of the Catholic Association. The state 
of the laws affecting this matter is now under 
consideration here; and you will be enabled, 
before the meeting of Parliament, to exercise 
your judgment on the expediency of providing 
any further regulations of law applicable to the 
peculiar circumstances and more extended opera- 
tion of these associations.’ 


THE EARL oF LIVERPOOL to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 


Private Walmer Castle 
October 15, 1825 
I have received your letter, in which you are so 
kind as to communicate to me the intelligence 
of your intended marriage, and I beg you will 
be assured that I most anxiously hope it will con- 
tribute to the happiness and comfort of your life. 
I have the pleasure of being personally acquainted 
with the lady, and I may even add of some sort 
of connection with her, her sister having married 
my lamented and excellent relation and friend, 
Sir Felton Hervey. May I request of you there- 
fore to offer her my kindest regards ? 


Wellesley, who had been a widower for nine 
years,’ married on October 29, 1825, Mary Anne, 


1Yonge: Lord Liverpool, iii. 312. 

2 In November 1816 his first wife died. They had separated 
soon after his return from India. She went to live with 
her son-in-law, Edward Littleton, and was buried at 
Penbridge, in Staffordshire. 


1827}, WELLESLEY’S MARRIAGE I5I 


the widow of Robert Patterson,! a Baltimore 
merchant, and a daughter of Richard Caton, also of 
Baltimore. She was a grand-daughter of Charles 
Carroll, of Carollstown, Maryland, who, when he 
died in 1832, was the last surviving signatory of 
the Declaration of American Independence. The 
ceremony was performed at Dublin, first by the 
Lord Primate of Ireland, and afterwards, because 
the bride was a Roman Catholic, by the Most Rev. 
Dr. Murray, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of 
Dublin. The marriage was childless, but according 
to all accounts happy. The Marchioness was a 
Lady of the Bedchamber to Queen Adelaide. She 
outlived her husband by many years, dying at 
Hampton Court Palace on December 17, 1853. 
Her sisters married the Duke of Leeds and Lord 
Stafford. 

Owing to ill-health, Lord Liverpool resigned in 
March 1827, and the King sent for Canning, who 
advised ‘him, unless he were prepared to make 
concessions on the question of Catholic Emanci- 
pation, to summon an exclusively Protestant 
Ministry, which he would support, but would not 
join. The Duke of Wellington and Peel advised 
that there should not be an exclusively Protestant 
Ministry. The three Ministers were willing to join 
a neutral administration, but, as it happened, there 
was no one under whom they would all serve. 


1 Patterson’s sister, Elizabeth, married Jéré6me Buona- 
parte, Napoleon’s youngest brother. 


152 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS §[1821- 


‘“‘ The matter stood as follows,’ Mr. Kebbel has 
summed it up admirably: “If an anti-Catholic 
premier was appointed over Canning’s head, solely 
on religious grounds, there was a clear violation of 
neutrality ; if a pro-Catholic was appointed, then 
it could be nobody but Canning. He himself 
would not accept the first alternative, nor Peel 
and Wellington the second. The choice, there- 
fore, lay between Canning without these, and these 
without Canning.” On April 10 the King ap- 
pointed Canning Prime Minister, and Wellington, 
Peel, Bathurst, Eldon, and others declined to serve 
under him, whereupon he coalesced with the 
Whigs, and formed his Cabinet. Wellesley, of 
course, retained the Lord-Lieutenancy of Ireland. 


GEORGE CANNING to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 


Most private and confidential Foreign Office 
April 24, 1827 
J Jearn from Mr. (or, as he will be before the end 
of the week, Lord) Plunket, that you complain 
of not having heard from me. If I could find time 
to describe to you my daily occupation for any one 
of the last ten days, you would be surprised, not 
that I have not written before, but that I write 
now. Except for a few hours of scanty and 
interrupted sleep, I have not been free from the 
necessity of listening or talking—occupations 
most unpropitious to correspondence with absent 
friends. 
In truth, I had nothing specific to say to you, 


1827] CANNING PREMIER 153 


nor have even now, for the arrangements go on 
but slowly, owing to causes—which you, who 
remember our Whig and Tory negotiations in 1812, 
can well conceive. 

As to what relates to yourself, I purposely 
deferred writing to you, because I wished first 
to ascertain the opinions of the chairman and 
deputy-chairman as to the Indian Government, 
which I had been led to believe, by authority on 
which I thought I could rely, would be agreeable 
to you after your relinquishment of the Govern- 
ment of Ireland—if it came to you properly offered. 

To this condition it was absolutely necessary 
that the first opening with the Chairs should be 
made without your knowledge, and that I should 
be able so to state it. I accordingly saw them 
the very day after I kissed hands. 

I was to receive their answer inaweek. Inthe 
interval I have received your letter, which, of 
course,madeany answer from the Chairs superfluous, 

I am sorry that I was misinformed as to your 
wishes. 

P.S. You have been entirely misinformed if 
you have been led to believe that your office has 
been offered to any other person, although it is 
perfectly true that, in discussions, the Lord~ 
Lieutenancy of Ireland, like all other offices, has 
been talked over, with reference to future and 
contingent arrangements. How is it possible 
that a Government should fall to pieces, without 
entailing the necessity of considering every part 
of it with a view to its reconstruction ?' 

1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 265. 


154 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [z821- 


GEORGE CANNING fo THE MarRQuEss WELLESLEY 
Foreign Office: April 27, 1827 

T think you will not disapprove of William 
Lamb? as successor to Mr. Goulburn. 

If not, will you have the goodness to direct the 
usual letter of appointment (which I understand 
comes from your side of the water) to be written ? 

P.S. Our arrangements are only this moment 
settled. I enclose a list. There are Whigs, as 
you see, in it, earnest of future and of present 
support. Thecountry will like the gradual infusion 
better than a more precipitate one.” 


GEORGE CANNING to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private Foreign Office: April 27, 1827 

You are aware, no doubt, of Plunket’s destina- 
tion to the House of Lords and the Rolls, and of 
the high-mindedness with which he rejected the 
latter, when he found the profession in England 
adverse to that appointment. 

Plunket, thus peered but not placed, has turned 


1 William Lamb, second Viscount Melbourne (1779-1848). 
A strong adherent of the Catholic Emancipation party; 
Chief Secretary for Ireland under Canning, 1827, and Welling- 
ton, 1828. Succeeded his father in 1829 and became Home 
Secretary under Grey, 1830-4. He formed a Ministry and 
resigned in 1834, was Prime Minister for six years from 1835, 
and acted as adviser to Queen Victoria until 1841, when he 
resigned office. 

2 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 267. 

3 Plunket (see ante, p. 142, note) was in 1827 raised to 
the peerage and made Master of the Rolls, but the opposi- 
tion of the English Bar to the appointment of an Irish lawyer 
was so strong that he resigned in a few days. He was then 
appointed Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in Ireland, and 
in 1830 was made Lord Chancellor of Ireland, which position 
he held for eleven years. 


1827] WELLINGTON RESIGNS 185 


his thoughts to the Chief Justice’s seat in Ireland, 
and is very desirous that Lord Rosebery should 
be sounded as to his willingness to resign. It is 
imagined, I know not how truly, that a step in the 
Trish peerage would tempt him. If so, will you 
have the kindness to find the mode of administer- 
ing that ‘temptation ? 

Plunket will be of infinite use to us in the 
House of Lords, but his substantial interests 
must not be sacrificed (if we can help it) to our 
convenience.’ 


When Canning became Prime Minister, Welling- 
ton resigned the office of Commander-in-Chief. 
He was, he declared, dissatisfied with the tone of 
one of Canning’s letters, but that can scarcely 
have been the reason for retiring from his high 
office. It was known that when Liverpool 
retired Peel had suggested to Canning that 
Wellington should become Prime Minister, but 
that Canning had chosen himself to be the head 
of the administration. Canning’s friends and 
supporters declared that jealousy was at the root 
of Wellington’s decision, but this the soldier- 
statesman repudiated scornfully in the House of 
Lords on May 2, declaring that it was inconceivable 
that he should have dreamt of giving up the 
command of the army for “ a station to the duties 
of which I was unaccustomed, in which I was not 
wished, and for which I was not qualified.” Yet 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 268. 


156 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [x8a21- 


it must be remembered that within two years 
Wellington with no reluctance accepted an invita- 
tion to form a Government. 


GEORGE CANNING to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private and confidential Downing Street 
May 15, 1827 

To say that I have not an hour in the day to 
myself for private correspondence is little—I have 
not five minutes. I am up before the world this 
morning, in hopes of finding time to write to you, 
but I daresay I shall be interrupted before I have 
written two pages; and, the influx of the world 
once begun, I have no peace, till the hour when 
the worry of interviews is merged in the worry of 
the House of Commons. 

I wish it were possible for me to give you in a 
few words the history of all that has been passing 
here, but it is not so. 

The enclosed copies of letters which have passed 
between me and the Duke of Wellington, since 
his speech in the House of Lords, will put you 
in possession of some of the most prominent 
points of difference and disputation. The prin- 
ciple on which the two parties acted were these. 
The Protestant part of the Government did me the 
honour to think that they could not make an 
administration without me, but wished to have 
me as cheap as possible, to task me to the utmost 
for their support in the House of Commons and 
in the Foreign Office, but to place over me a Pro- 
testant master, 


1827] CANNING’S DETERMINATION 157 


To make the drudging goblin sweat 

To earn his cream bowl duly set, 
but to repress all higher aspirations as strictly 
as if I were of another species than their Lord- 
ships. 

My determination was either to inherit poor 
Lord Liverpool’s situation in the Government, 
or retire—a determination which I announced to 
the King at the very first audience that I had of 
His Majesty (which was not till the middle of 
March) and from which I never swerved for a 
moment. To have done otherwise would have 
been to admit, in my own person, that the holding 
of a Catholic opinion disqualified tfso facto for 
the first situation in the Government. 

I am—and have been twenty times—interrupted. 
But I think it better to send off this letter (with 
its enclosures) imperfect, as it is, than put it 
by for the chance of finding time to complete it. 

I hope to have an opportunity of writing to you 
more fully by a safe conveyance very shortly.’ 


GEORGE CANNING to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private and confidential Downing Street 
May 22, 1827 
The return of Colonel Shawe (for the delay of 
which I am in a great degree answerable) affords 
me the opportunity, to which I have been long 
looking forward, of putting you in possession 
of all that has been passing, as well respecting 

public affairs in general as respecting yourself. 
The difficulties of my position have been such 

1 Add. MSS. 37297 £. 269. 


158 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1821- 


that I have had enough to do to overcome them, 
without attempting to describe their amount or to 
detail the progress of my struggle with them to 
anyone. I think they are now abating. The 
Government is, I really believe, established; but 
in what strength I fear we shall hardly have an 
opportunity afforded to us of showing by division 
in either House of Parliament before the close 
of the session. In the House of Commons our 
majority would be immense. In the House of 
Lords the enemy would make more head (2.e., 
numerically, not morally). But in the House the 
Corn Bill must not be taken as a criterion—so 
many of the peers had pledged themselves, even in 
Lord Liverpool’s time, to vote against it. 

I have not continued my correspondence with 
the Duke of Wellington, the tone of his letter 
leading me to apprehend that it might degenerate 
into a controversy, which was of all things what 
I least desired. It appeared to me, from that 
letter, I confess, that he intended to shut the door 
which I had wished to open. But I have received 
sO many positive assurances from persons with 
whom he has conversed upon the subject that 
such was not his intention, and so many indica- 
tions have, at the same time, reached the King of 
his willingness to return to the command of the 
army, that it has been thought advisable that the 
King should let him know that His Majesty is 
prepared to permit the Duke to withdraw that 
resignation. I transmitted to him last night a 
very kind letter from the King to this effect. I 
sincerely hope that he will avail himself of the 


1827] OVERTURES TO THE DUKE 159 


opening thus made for him. It were a pity that 
one false move, whether of temper or of policy, 
should deprive the country of his mzlitary services; 
and his acceptance of the command will probably 
dissipate the remains of the wretched, disgraceful, 
and disgusting opposition which still harasses 
us in both Houses of Parliament, but without 
making any way in either. Possibly, before I 
close this letter, I may be enabled to apprise 
you of the result. 

To come now nearer to our concerns. 

The simultaneous withdrawing of all my Pro- 
testant colleagues at once disabled me from form- 
ing the Cabinet as the King wished, and as I had 
intended in a manner which should show the 
division of opinions upon the Catholic question. 
The new Chancellor? was the only member of it 
professing the anti-Catholic opinion. We con- 
trived to get Lord Derby back, and subsequently 
Lord Anglesey, whose Jas¢ vote (in 1827) was 
anti-Catholic (though all his preceding ones had 
been of the other complexion), has been added 
to our number. Three Protestants to nine origin- 
ally, and, since the accession of the Whigs, to 
twelve Catholic members! Thus foiled in England 
—but acquiescing with the most perfect confidence 
and good humour, the King insisted the more 
strenuously upon a due infusion of Protestantism 
into the Irish Government. Had Goulburn re- 
mained, or could I upon his secession have replaced 
him by a Protestant, I might have been able to 
satisfy His Majesty. But Goulburn’s resignation, 


1 Lord Lyndhurst. 


160 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [x821- 


with the utter impossibility of finding a successor 
of the same kidney (there is literally but one such 
man in the service of Government, Mr. Herries, 
and for him it was wholly hopeless to find a suc- 
cessor in his present situation as Secretary of the 
Treasury), rendered His Majesty more impatient 
for that change in the Lord-Lieutenancy which I 
understood from His Majesty to have been settled 
between him, Lord Liverpool, and (I suppose) 
Mr. Peel, as to be necessarily consequent upon 
the issue (whatever that might be) of the first 
discussion of the Catholic question in the new 
Parliament. 

My impression that such a settlement had been 
agreed upon was confirmed by all that Lord Liver- 
pool had said to me for the last eighteen months 
before his illness: of his wish to have the trial 
of strength on the Catholic question as early as 
possible in the new Parliament. If the issue 
should be in favour of the Catholics—and he 
(Liverpool) fully expected it to be so—he would 
(m my conscience, I believe) have retired, recom- 
mending to the King to form a Government fit 
to manage the final adjustment of the question, 
and to the House of Lords to acquiesce in that 
adjustment. In the other event he would, I 
presume, have thought himself entitled to expect 
that the question should have been suffered to 
sleep for a while—an expectation which might, 
or might not, have been realised. 


1 John Charles Herries (1778-1855) entered Parliament in 
1823. He became Chancellor of the Exchequer in Goderich’s 
Ministry, 1827. He was President of the Board of Trade in 
1830, and held office under Peel and again under Derby. 


1827] LIVERPOOL IMPARTIAL 161 


With these views Liverpool was above all 
things anxious that no change whatever should 
take place during the year of abeyance preceding 
the dissolution of Parliament. He required the 
prolongation of your stay in Ireland ; he persuaded 
the Lord Chancellor (of Ireland) to recall his 
resignation ; he proposed that the new Parlia- 
ment should find everything exactly as it then 
stood in official arrangements. He was scrupu- 
lously impartial, I can bear witness for him, in 
Parliamentary arrangements, so far as the dis- 
tribution of seats in the power of the Government 
could go—for of ten seats placed at his disposal 
half were given to Protestants and half to Catholics, 
friends of the administration. I cannot answer 
for it that the like impartiality was observed by 
the persons acting under him. I believe other- 
wise, and I believe still more that after his seizure, 
and at the moment when the Catholic question 
was brought on for discussion, no effort was left 
unestablished by those into whose hands the 
power of the Treasury fell, to influence the decision 
in the way in which it actually turned. 

Be all that as it may, I found the King’s mind 
thoroughly impressed with the notion of the 
existence of a compact, of something more than 
an understanding, that a change was to take place 
in the Government of Ireland at the end of the 
present session of Parliament ; a compact wholly 
connected with antecedent events, and wholly 
unconnected with the present change of administra- 
tion. His Majesty considered the Chancellor as 
included in this change. His Majesty wrote to 

2 M 


162 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS § [1821- 


Lord Manners not to resign in a hurry, because 
His Majesty apprehended that he might otherwise 
be instigated to strike with the rest of the Ultras, 
and so anticipate the natural time of his removal, 
and give to the renovation of the Irish Government 
the air of an angry breaking-up, which of all 
things the King wished to avoid. 

As I could not dispute the King’s construction 
of what had been Lord Liverpool’s intention— 
as there was no consideration devised from the 
time of your residence in Ireland to warrant my 
insisting on the prolongation of it; as there was 
obviously nothing to be done this year towards 
the forwarding of the Catholic question in Ireland, 
after its unexpected defeat in the House of 
Commons; and as the composition of the new 
administration was (as I have said) from the force 
of circumstances so almost exclusively Catholic 
that I could hardly accuse the King of unreason- 
ableness in wishing to give a more impartial 
complexion to the Government of Ireland, I 
sincerely thought that the best thing that I could 
do for you was, instead of endeavouring to gain 
for you a few months’ prolongation of your vice- 
royalty, to seek to make your retirement from it, 
for which the time was (according to all usage) 
so fully assured, honourable and satisfactory. 

The existing vacancy in the Government of 
India appeared to me to afford the means of such 
an arrangement. 

I have already told you—and I will not, there- 
fore, repeat at length here—that I was fortified 
in this opinion by that of more than one of the 


1827] OFFERS TO WELLESLEY 163 


persons who (as I believed) knew your wishes 
best, and who (I am sure) tendered your interests 
more clearly. I grieve that I was misled. But I 
had in no degree committed you before I dis- 
covered my error. However unacceptable the 
government of India may be (as I new understand 
it to be) to you, I have not thought it right to let 
it go out of my hands until I see whether it can 
be turned, in any way, to your advantage. 

Shall I open the Embassy to Vienna to you 
by recommending Sir Henry Wellestey for the 
succession to Lord Amherst ? 

Answer me this question frankly, and as soon 
as you conveniently can. I will do and say nothing, 
in the meantime, to commit you or myself or 
Henry Wellesley. I will not write to him till 
I have heard from you; nor then unless your 
answer is affirmative—for it is only on your account 
that I should think of that appointment. I have, 
however, reason to know that he (Henry Wellesley) 
would accept it if tendered to him; and I have 
reason to believe that I could obtain it for him. 
But there is no time to lose in coming to the 
decision, as the Court of Directors are anxious for 
a nomination, in order to relieve Amherst, who 
presses to come home, and to avoid an interregnum 
in India. This necessity of haste, however, 
extends only to the Indian arrangement, not to 
your return from Ireland. 

No steps need be taken as to the appointment 
of your successor till after the close of the session. 

There can, I trust, be no doubt on your-part of 
the feelings which dictate this proposal. 


164 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1821- 


If you think that the termination of your 
government ought to be marked by some signal 
proof of the King’s approbation, such as a rise 
in your English peerage, say so, without scruple, 
and I will propose it. But having once acted for 
you in the faith of what appeared to me and others 
to be for your advantage, I hesitate to do so again 
without a precise knowledge of your wishes.’ 


GEORGE CANNING fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 

Private and confidential Downing Street 

May 24, 1827 

I said, in my letter of yesterday, that I should 

perhaps be enabled before Colonel Shawe’s depar- 

ture to report to you the result of the overture 
to the Duke of Wellington. Here it is. 
I permit myself no’ comment on it.’ 


[ENCLOSURE A] 

Memorandum 
April 14, 1827 
From the commencement of Lord Liverpool’s 
illness the Duke of Wellington never went near 
the King’ but when he was sent for, and never 
spoke to him (except on the business of his own 
department) but when he was spoken to. He did 
not wish to interfere in the arrangement of the 
new Government. The accusations against him 
in the papers of a wish to settle the Government 
in his own way, and of intriguing to obtain the 
situation of Prime Minister for himself, and also 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 272. 
2 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 287. 


1827] THE DUKE’S REPLY 165 


of encouraging a faction or a combination of the 
Protestant members of the Cabinet and others 
for the purpose of opposing Mr. Canning’s appoint- 
ment to the head of the Government, are particu- 
larly unjust. On the contrary, he had prevented 
the formation of such a faction. He had been 
spoken to on the subject, and he discouraged it, 
and he had also discouraged some proposals of 
that party to put him forward as a candidate for 
the situation of Prime Minister. He said his wish 
was to remain in the situation he then filled, 
which suited his taste, and for which he felt that 
he was qualified, whereas he did not think himself 
qualified for the situation of Prime Minister, for 
which no man was duly qualified who was not an 
experienced speaker in Parliament. Circumstances 
might, he said, be conceived under which it would 
be his duty to accept the situation if he were called 
upon by the King to doso ; but he would be most 
reluctant under any circumstances to accept an 
office for which he did not profess all the requisite 
qualifications. As his sentiments on this subject 
were well known, he had hoped to escape the 
imputations now brought against him. 

He said that some days ago Mr. Canning told 
him he had a plan in contemplation for recon- 
structing the Government, and that he thought of 
putting Mr. Robinson at the head of it. On the 
Ioth inst. the Duke received a note from Mr. 
Canning saying he had just returned from an 
audience with the King at which His Majesty 
had been pleased to command him to form 
an arrangement as speedily as possible for 


166 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1821- 


reconstructing the Government, and saying how 
much the success of the arrangement would depend 
upon his Grace’s concurrence. The Duke seems 
to have thought the invitation a cold one, especi- 
ally when contrasted with the letters he saw to 
other members of the Cabinet who were requested 
to call on Mr. Canning to hear from him his explana- 
tion of his plan. The Duke, however, did not mean 
to show any dissatisfaction at this distinction, 
but adverting to what Mr. Canning had told him 
shortly before of his intention to put another 
person than himself in the situation of Premier, 
he wrote to acknowledge the receipt of Mr. 
Canning’s letter, and before he replied to his 
obliging communication regarding the Cabinet, 
he begged to know who Mr. Canning recommended 
to be placed at the head of the Government. 
Mr. Canning, perhaps forgetting the conversation 
of a few days before, seems to have taken offence 
at this question (as if the Duke did not conceive 
it possible that he, Mr. Canning, could be the 
person), and he replied in a manner that dis- 
pleased the Duke. The substance of Mr. Canning’s 
answer was as follows: He said that as it had 
always been understood that the person who 
received the King’s commands to submit an 
arrangement for a Government was the person 
intended to be at the head of it, it had not occurred 
to him to be necessary to say so to the Duke of 
Wellington ; that he had laid the correspondence 
before the King, and was commanded to say that 
His Majesty had not intended on this occasion 
to depart from the usual practice in such cases. 


1827] OBJECTIONS TO CANNING 167 


I cannot rely upon my memory for more than the 
substance, but I recollect distinctly that the 
Duke conceived that the first letter was cold, 
and that the second letter in reply to his question 
was sneering and uncivil, and he felt it the more 
as it appeared to be written by the King’s authority. 
He accordingly wrote a calm letter to Mr. Canning 
resigning his ministerial offices, and he afterwards 
wrote to the King giving his reasons for thinking 
that a Government formed upon the principle 
proposed by Mr. Canning would not have the 
confidence of the country or be beneficial for His 
Majesty’s service, and he therefore requested 
His Majesty’s permission to retire. To that letter, 
after the lapse of a day (and since I saw the Duke), 
he received a short answer from the King saying 
that he had received his Grace’s resignation with 
great concern. 

I saw the Duke on Saturday morning before he 
had received the King’s answer. He desired me 
to mention the leading circumstances to your 
Excellency, and declared that I knew as much 
of the case after that statement as he did 
himself. 

He said he did not think he could have done 
otherwise after the second letter he had received 
from Mr. Canning. 

The Duke, however, stated other considerations 
which (without reference to the letter) would have 
rendered it difficult for him to remain in the 
Cabinet with Mr. Canning at the head of the 
Government. But he would have been quite 
willing to have gone with him if any steady man 


168 THE .WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1821- 


had been put at the head of it; Lord Bathurst 
or Lord Melville would have satisfied him. He 
wanted rather that a person of the same opinions 
on the Catholic question with himself should be 
Prime Minister, but he would not have separated 
from his colleagues on that account, as is proved 
by his mentioning Lord Melville. But he tells 
the King that as he had great doubt of the success 
of several of the late innovations, and knew that 
some of them must be abandoned, he anticipated 
great difficulty from those measures, and if Mr. 
Robinson, who concurs with Mr. Canning in that 
system, were at the head it would be difficult for 
those who entertained a contrary opinion to go 
on for any time. Of course the same difficulty 
was to be apprehended, Mr. Canning being at the 
head. 

Differing on these material points, and seeing 
in Mr. Canning’s correspondence a lack of cordiality 
towards himself, he feared that if he retained the 
office of Commander-in-Chief his constant com- 
munication with the King in that capacity would 
render him liable to Mr. Canning’s suspicion of 
thwarting his measures, and he therefore thought 
it better to retire altogether whilst he could do so 
with honour. 

April 16 

P.S. The above is the substance of what his 
Grace said. He wished me to mention it to your 
Excellency in order that you might know the 
truth, and he conceived that I would leave town 
next day, and he wished to contradict several 
misrepresentations of his conduct and motives 


1827] MISREPRESENTATIONS 169 


which appeared in the newspapers of Saturday 
morning when I saw his Grace.' 


[ENCLOSURE B] 
GEORGE CANNING to THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON 
Downing Street: May 5, 1827 

I have read the report of your Grace’s speech 
in the House of Lords, from which I learn, in 
confirmation of rumours hitherto incredible to 
me, that your resignation is attributed by you, 
in part at least, to the letters which I addressed 
to your Grace on the roth and 11th of last month. 
As I am sure that the misrepresentations with 
which the statements recorded in the newspapers 
abound must have been involuntary, I offer to 
your Grace some explanations upon them, without 
any apprehension that the motives of my doing 
so should be mistaken. 

In the first place you are made to say: “I was 
not desired by the Right Hon. gentleman to come, 
nor was I referred to anybody for explanation. 
To me the Right Hon. gentleman neither came nor 
sent, but I have since heard that explanations 
were given to others of our colleagues. The Right 
Hon. gentleman either invited all to call upon him, 
or else he waited upon them, or sent a friend.” 

Now this is entirely an error. I received the 
King’s commands to form an administration so 
late in the afternoon of Tuesday the roth that 
(the day fixed for the adjournment of Parliament 
being Thursday the r2th) [had not an instant tolose 
in proceeding to the execution of those commands. 

1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 288. 


170 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [18zr1- 


Lord Grenville, Mr. Huskisson, and Mr. Planta? 
happening to be at my office when I returned from 
the King, I requested Lord Grenville to convey 
to Lord Harrowby, Mr. Huskisson to Lord Melville 
and Mr. Wynn, and Mr. Planta to Mr. Robinson 
verbally the same announcement which I addressed 
at thesame time in writing to Lord Bathurst, to Lord 
Westmorland, to Lord Bexley, and to your Grace. 

I wrote also to the Lord Chancellor to ask leave 
to call upon his Lordship in the evening, and I 
wrote to Mr. Peel to ask him to call here; but 
subsequently (Mr. Peel being at the House of 
Commons when my first letter was sent to him) 
I offered to call upon him on my return from the 
Lord Chancellor, which I did. 

What your Grace means by “ explanations 
given to others, and not to you”’ I really cannot 
comprehend. I had already stated to your Grace 
in the fullest detail all that passed at my audience 
with the King at Windsor. I had absolutely 
nothing more to tell, with the exception of the 
simple fact announced to your Grace in my letter 
of the roth, that: ‘‘ The King had directed me 
to lay before His Majesty with as little loss of time 
as possible a plan of arrangements for the recon- 
struction of the administration.” 

Fault is found by your Grace with the style 
or tone of my letters of the roth and 11th. 

1 Joseph Planta (1787-1847), was originally a clerk in the 
Foreign Office. He was private secretary to Canning, 1807- 
1809, and secretary to Lord Castlereagh on the mission that 
resulted in the Treaty of Paris, 1814. He was subsequently 


employed on other diplomatic service. From 1827 to 1830 
he was one of the joint secretaries of the Treasury. 


1827] WELLINGTON OFFENDED 171 


I have looked them over and over again in 
search of the supposed objectionable passages, 
but I confess I cannot discover any such. The 
address ‘My dear Duke of Wellington” is pre- 
cisely the same as has been uniformly employed 
in our private correspondence, and if some more 
formal words are introduced at the conclusion, 
it should be remembered that the letter was in a 
certain degree of an official character, and one the 
copy of which was to be submitted to the King. 
I recollect perfectly well that I doubted for a 
moment whether I should introduce those slight 
formalities or not—a doubt which, it appears, 
I decided unluckily, but certainly with no inten- 
tion of offending. 

My letter of the 11th I submitted to His Majesty 
before I sent it, simply because when a doubt has 
been expressed in any quarter (more especially 
in one so important) as to my position with respect 
to His Majesty, it became necessary for me to have 
His Majesty’s authority to confirm my description 
of it. 

Of your Grace’s answer to my letter of the roth 
I will not permit myself to speak. I am willing 
that the world shall judge of it. 

The question, whether the individual employed 
to form an administration is “ usually” placed 
at the head of it, is one upon which, till the receipt 
of that letter of your Grace’s, I did not suspect a 
difference of opinion to exist. 

Your Grace, indeed, is made to say, in justifica- 
tion of your doubt upon the subject, that ‘‘ when, 
upon the death of Mr. Perceval, Lord Liverpool 


172 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [182r- 


waited upon Mr. Canning to propose to him to 
become a member of the administration then about 
to be formed, the first question put to the noble 
Lord by Mr. Canning was: ‘‘ Whois to be the First 
Lord of the Treasury ? ” 

With your Grace’s leave this is not the question 
that I put, nor is it so stated in the printed record 
from which you draw your information. 

I beg your Grace to turn again to that record, 
when you will find the passage to run thus: ‘‘ In 
answer to a question put by me, Lord Liverpool 
stated that his colleagues were desirous that he 
should be appointed to the office of First Lord of 
the Treasury.” Now the question to which this 
was an answer was uot: ‘‘ Who is to be First 
Lord of the Treasury ?”’ but: ‘‘ Are you what you 
are by election of your colleagues ? ” I had heard 
a rumour to that effect, which I took this occasion 
of verifying. Your Grace has on a recent occasion 
agreed with me and with Mr. Peel in objecting 
to such a mode of constituting a First Minister. 

Your Grace states further that Lord Wellesley 
and Lord Moira successfully conducted in 1812 
negotiations for the formation of a Government 
without having previously accepted office. This 
may be true of Lord Wellesley. Of Lord Moira 
I speak with less certainty. But your Grace must 
recollect that both these negotiations failed, and 
my opinion was, at the time, and has always since 
been, that they failed mainly because Lord 
Wellesley and Lord Moira did not in the outset 
ascertain and assert their own precise situation 
as Ministers. 


1827] CONFLICTING STATEMENTS 173 


Your Grace will see, then, that the transactions 
of 1812 were full in my mind, but that I considered 
them not as precedents but as warnings. 

There are two very different versions of what 
your Grace said about Mr. Robinson’s possible 
appointment to be First Lord of the Treasury. 
In one (the new Times) your Grace is made to say : 
“T had a conversation with Mr. Canning, in which 
he stated that one of the plans submitted by him 
to His Majesty’s consideration was to call the 
then Chancellor of the Exchequer to the House of 
Lords, conferring upon him the office of First 
Lord of the Treasury; and this Mr. Canning 
stated as one of the modes of keeping men together. 
But I had no difficulty in expressing my entire 
persuasion that no scheme could be devised less 
calculated to produce the effect contemplated, 
viz., that of keeping a Government together.” 

In the other (old Zzmes) your Grace is reported 
to have said: “I had a conversation with Mr. 
Canning, in which he stated to me that, in case 
His Majesty should desire him to reconstruct 
the Government, one of his plans was to recom- 
mend that Mr. Robinson, then Chancellor of the 
Exchequer, should be called up to your Lordships’ 
house, and should be made First Lord of the 
Treasury ; and I confess to your Lordships that 
it was my intention, if I had heard anything more 
of that scheme, to have proposed such a modifi- 
cation of it as would have kept the members of 
the old administration together.” 

If the latter version be the correct one, and if 
the sort of ‘‘ modification’? which your Grace 


174 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1821- 


would have proposed was the substitution for 
Mr. Robinson of a peer holding your Grace’s 
opinions on the Catholic question, the proposition 
would have resolved itself into one which I had 
from the beginning, and invariably, rejected. 

I do not believe, therefore, that any good could 
have arisen from a discussion with your Grace 
on the subject of that particular arrangement. 

Your Grace evidently was determined to insist 
upon the superinduction of an anti-Catholic First 
Minister over my head, on the principle which, 
if it was not (as your Grace does me the honour 
to say repeatedly it was not) one of personal 
objection to me, could be no other than this—that 
an individual holding my opinions upon the Catholic 
question was 7so facto disqualified from occupying 
that post. 

J, on the other hand, was determined, as your 
Grace from the beginning perfectly well knew, 
to quit the Government rather than submit to 
the degradation of exhibiting in my person the 
exemplification of that principle of proscription. 

We had long understood each other distinctly 
on this main point, and there could be no use in 
discussing it unless your Grace was prepared 
to waive your objection. 

But a head of the Government is not always 
necessarily ‘‘ First Lord of the Treasury.” 

In the reign of George I., Lord Townsend as 
Secretary of State was the Minister, while Sir 
Robert Walpole, though uniting the offices of 
First Lord of Treasury and Chancellor of the 
Exchequer, acted under him. In the Seven 


1827] CANNING TO BE HEAD 175 


Years’ War Mr. Pitt is generally supposed to have 
been the Minister, while the Duke of Newcastle was 
at the head of the Treasury (but I think this 
instance doubtful). In the year 1766 Lord Chat- 
ham unquestionably formed an administration 
in which he took to himself the comparatively 
unimportant post of Privy Seal, and was in that 
post the Minister, putting the Duke of Grafton 
at the head of the Treasury. 

Now it was His Majesty’s especial desire that I 
should retain the seals of the Foreign Depart- 
ment, uniting with that department the attributes 
of First Minister. And the instance of Mr. Pitt 
during the Seven Years’ War was particularly 
pressed upon me, as showing such an arrange- 
ment to be practicable. 

If practicable I had not the slightest objection 
to it. I liked my then office a thousand times 
better than any other, and I had no ambition 
for the title of First Lord of the Treasury, pro- 
vided there were no misapprehension as to where 
the chief power of the Government was to reside. 

It was on these grounds that I stated to your 
Grace in our conversation of the 2nd of April my 
willingness to remain where I was, Mr. Robinson 
going to the House of Lords, with the Department 
of First Lord of the Treasury. I presently found, 
however, that it would be impracticable to make 
this arrangement without incurring one or other 
of two inconveniences : either the new First Lord 
of the Treasury would have been considered as in 
effect First Minister, or he might have been induced 
to think himself degraded by the abstraction of 


176 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [z8z21- 


the attributes most usually attached (in latter 
times) to that office. 

This second inconvenience I should deeply 
have lamented ; the former was the very one the 
avoiding of which I had declared from the begin- 
ning to be a sine gud non condition of my acquies- 
cence in any arrangements. 

The only advice which I tendered to His Majesty 
was to form an exclusively anti-Catholic adminis- 
tration—not certainly from an abstract partiality 
to such an administration, but because I thought 
it of the utmost importance to His Majesty’s ease 
and comfort that His Majesty should clearly 
ascertain whether they who advised His Majesty 
to proscribe a Minister favourable to the Catholic 
claims would undertake to form a Government 
in their own sense. I knew not what had been 
the advice of His Majesty’s other counsellors upon 
this point, nor what was His Majesty’s final 
decision upon it, till I went into the closet on the 
roth of April. 

There is but one other part of your Grace’s speech 
which appears to call for any observations from me. 

Your Grace emphatically says that your being 
at the head of the Government was “ wholly 
out of the question.” 

T learnt this opinion of your Grace with sincere 
pleasure. The union of the whole power of the 
state, civil and military, in the same hands (for 
your Grace as Prime Minister could never have 
effectually divested yourself of your influence 
over the army) would certainly, in my opinion, 
have constituted a station too great for any subject, 


1827] PRINCIPLE AND PRACTICE 177 


however eminent, or however meritorious, and 
one incompatible with the practice of a free con- 
stitution. Nothing would have induced me to 
serve under such a form of Government, and I 
am rejoiced to find that your Grace’s opinion 
was always against such an arrangement. 

But, I confess, I am surprised that, such being 
your Grace’s fixed opinion, it should, nevertheless, 
have been proposed to me, as it was more than 
once, and up to the gth of April inclusive, to con- 
cur in placing your Grace at the head of the 
Government. There is in this apparent contra- 
diction a mystery which I cannot explain. 

In rejecting, however, as I did, that proposi- 
tion, I do assure your Grace I was not actuated 
by any feeling unfriendly or disrespectful to your 
Grace, nor am I conscious of any such feeling now. 
I take nothing personally amiss in your Grace’s 
speech. I retain a recollection corresponding 
with your own of the intercourse which has for 
some years subsisted between us on _ political 
affairs, and there is not in the nation, or in the 
army itself, an individual who regrets more 
deeply than I do that your Grace should have 
thought it necessary to withdraw from the com- 
mand of the army at the same time that you 
resigned your seat in the Cabinet. 

P.S. I must request you to excuse me for having 
employed another hand in this letter. I kept the 
draft by me twenty-four hours, in the hope of 
finding time to transcribe it myself, but it has 
really been out of my power to do so." 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 292. 
2 N 


178 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [z8z21- 


[ENCLOSURE C] 
Tue DUKE OF WELLINGTON to GEORGE CANNING 
London: May 6, 1827 


As you told me yesterday at the Royal Academy 
that you had written to me in order to avoid 
further discussion in Parliament upon the subject 
of my resignation (which I regret that I was ever 
under the necessity of discussing in Parliament), 
I willingly proceed to state to you the general 
purport of what I said in the House of Lords on the 
points referred to by you. 

I am very much surprised that you should not 
have known till after that discussion, and that you 
should have doubted the truth of the rumours 
which stated that my resignation was attributed 
by me to the letters which you had written to me 
on the roth and r1th of last month. I conclude 
that you advised His Majesty’s answer of the 13th 
to my letter of the 12th April, and at all events 
you must have seen the letter in which I expressed 
the grief and pain I felt in-requesting His Majesty 
to excuse me from attendance in his councils ; 
and in consequence thereof, and adverting to the 
tenor of the letters which I had received from His 
Majesty’s Minister by His Majesty’s command, 
in asking His Majesty’s permission to lay at his 
feet those offices which connected me with his 
Government. 

I have not read the newspapers, and I do not 
know whether they have accurately reported what 
I said in the House of Lords. I did say that in 
your letter to me of the roth April there were two 


1827] A COLD INVITATION 179 


important omissions—the first, who were to be 
my colleagues; the second, who was to be the 
head of the Government. This is fact, as you will 
see on reference to your letter. 

I did likewise say that I was not invited to 
receive further explanations, as Lord Westmorland 
(to whom by-the-bye your letter contained the 
explanation that his colleagues were to be in the 
Cabinet with him, which was omitted in that to 
myself) and Lord Bathurst were; nor referred 
to anybody for explanation, as Lord Melville and 
Lord Harrowby were, and as it now appears 
Wynn and Mr. Robinson were ; and in the House 
of Lords I also said that to some you went your- 
self, as for instance to the Chancellor and to Mr. 
Peel. 

But I admitted in the House of Lords, as I do 
now, that although I was struck by the omission 
in the letter of the roth inst. addressed to myself, 
when I wrote to you on that night, and although 
I thought it but a very cold invitation to belong 
to the Cabinet, yet I was not aware, till afterwards, 
of the different mode of communication adopted 
towards others. 

I have only further to observe upon the mode 
of concluding your letter to me, which you admit 
was not the usual one and which new mode you 
doubted whether to introduce or not, that-in the 
letter addressed to Lord Bathurst, and to Lord 
Westmorland, which I presume were, equally 
with that addressed to me, to be laid before the 
King, you did not think it necessary to introduce 
such or other formality. 


180 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _[1821- 


I said in the House of Lords, and I here repeat, 
that the question in my letter of the roth April 
was asked for the purpose of obtaining the informa- 
tion which yours of the roth did not convey ; 
and that my conversation with you on the 2nd 
had given me reason to believe that you had had 
in contemplation another arrangement (viz., that 
Mr. Robinson should be called to the House of 
Lords, and be made First Lord of the Treasury), 
in case the King should have proposed to you to 
lay before His Majesty a plan for the reconstruc- 
tion of the administration. 

Had you stated in answer to my question, as 
you might have done, that you still had that 
arrangement in contemplation, I would have 
taken the liberty of suggesting to you some other 
arrangement, better calculated, as I thought, to 
keep the Government together. 

I likewise said in the House of Lords that I did 
not think the practice as stated by you in your 
letter of the 11th was so general as to induce me 
to assign a meaning to the words of your letter 
of the roth which in my opinion they did not 
convey, more particularly when taking into con- 
sideration what you had yourself said to me 
respecting your plans. 

In relation to the practice, I referred to the 
record of the transactions of 1812, from which it 
appears clearly that there were two instances 
of persons of high rank and station and reputation 
employed by his present Majesty to make arrange- 
ments for forming a Ministry; and that these 
persons themselves stated that it was not settled 


1827] A QUESTION OF FACT 181 


that they were to be the head of such administra- 
tions. 

It does not signify in my view of the case whether 
the want of success of these persons was to be 
attributed to that fact or not. 

I might have quoted another instance—that 
of the formation of the last Ministry under the 
Duke of Portland, of which I was perfectly 
aware when I wrote to you on the roth April, 
and of course when I addressed the House of 
Lords. 

I was not in England in 1812, and knew nothing 
of the transactions of that period excepting what 
is in the record above referred to ; and I conceived 
that your question to Lord Liverpool was asked, 
as mine certainly was to you, for the purpose of 
obtaining information as to who was the person 
to be the head of the Government, and not in 
what mode he came to be placed in that situation. 
I must add that I was confirmed in that impression 
by the perusal of the speech which you made in 
the House of Commons in May 1812, in which 
you declared your reasons for declining to become 
a member of the administration. Your objection 
was not to the manner in which Lord Liverpool had 
been appointed to be the head of the Government, 
but mainly that a person differing from you on the 
Roman Catholic question was to exercise the 
influence of the Government. 

I did not state in the House of Lords, nor is 
it necessary that I should now state, what was the 
suggestion which I intended to make to you, in 
case you had answered my letter of the Ioth, 


182 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [r1821- 


as I expected you would, vz., that you still thought 
of Mr. Robinson. 

I am one of those who think it desirable that 
the King in forming his Ministry should select 
a person for its head of the same general opinions 
with himself upon the great questions of policy, 
whether foreign or domestic; and particularly 
in a case likely to come frequently under dis- 
cussion, on which the opinions of the Empire are 
so divided as to render it impossible to form an 
efficient Ministry composed exclusively of persons 
of either opinion. , 

I judged, from the conversation which I had 
with His Majesty at Windsor, that His Majesty 
did consider it important that the administration 
should be composed of persons of both opinions 
upon the Roman Catholic question, and that the 
head of the Government should be of the same 
opinion with His Majesty, and that it was essential 
that he should continue to enjoy the benefit of 
your services. 

But I do not know where you found the evi- 
dence, that I was determined not to act with any 
person as First Minister who did not entertain 
anti-Catholic opinions. 

Neither have I learnt where or when I was to 
know perfectly well that you were determined 
to quit the Government rather than submit to 
what you term the degradation of exhibiting 
in your person the exemplification of that principle 
of supposed proscription. 

I never had but one conversation with you upon 
the subject of the Government, and that was on 


1827] OFFENSIVE SUGGESTIONS 183 


the 2nd April. In that conversation, although 
we discussed the principle of exclusion from office 
on the score of Catholic opinions, it was not in 
reference to your own alleged right to be First 
Minister. Indeed, this was so much the case that 
I perfectly recollect stating to you that the con- 
clusion to which I understood we had come was 
that the arrangement must include persons of 
both opinions and no more; and that I should 
state that to be the conclusion, as I did in fact, 
so state to Mr. Peel. 

Although, however, I did not know that you 
claimed to be First Minister as a sine gud non, 
I was very sensible that to succeed to this post 
was a reasonable object of ambition to you. It 
never occurred to me that any man could have a 
right to insist on this post as a sine gud non, and 
I thought it not impossible that when you should 
come to consider the inconvenience to yourself as 
well as to the public interests of your being the 
First Minister, taking into account the history 
of your opinions and conduct and speeches upon 
the Roman Catholic question even to the last, 
and contrasting in your mind such opinions of 
yours with those of the King, you might have 
consented to act in a Government which was 
avowedly to be formed upon the principles of 
Lord Liverpool’s administration, in the same rela- 
tion to the Government in which you had stood 
when Lord Liverpool was at its head. 

I was mistaken in these expectations, but there 
was certainly nothing in them disrespectful or 
unfriendly towards you. 


184 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS § [1821- 


I never recommended to the King to form an 
administration composed exclusively of persons 
entertaining the opinion that no further concessions 
ought to be made to the Roman Catholics. I 
should have declined to serve His Majesty in his 
councils as one of such an administration, because 
I am convinced that such an administration would 
be under existing circumstances too weak to 
carry on the Government. The attempt, there- 
fore, to form such an exclusive administration 
would in my opinion be the greatest misfortune 
that could happen to His Majesty and the public ; 
and I must add that His Majesty’s honour and 
welfare and that of the State are the circumstances 
which I think ought on this subject to be con- 
sidered principally and in priority to the claims 
and pretensions of any individuals. 

It is not necessary that I should enter into the 
discussion whether as the head of the Government 
you ought to be First Lord of the Treasury. In 
modern times so much power has been given to 
the Treasury over the expenditure of other 
departments of the Government, and it is so 
necessary now for the Treasury to exercise that 
power, and it would be so inconvenient to have 
that power exercised by a subordinate Minister, 
that I believe you will find it to be most embarrass- 
ing, if not impossible, for the First Minister to 
hold any other office. 

In respect to myself, I did say in the House 
of Lords that I had always considered myself out 
of the question, as His Majesty also had, when 
speaking to me of the affliction visited upon us 


1827] AN AWKWARD POSITION 185 


all in the person of Lord Liverpool. Considering 
myself out of the question on account of the painful 
professional sacrifices which I should have had 
to make in relinquishing the office of Commander- 
in-Chief, and still more on account of the want of 
personal qualifications necessary in my opinion 
to enable any man to perform the duties of 
the head of the Government to the advantage 
of His Majesty, and to his own honour, it is not 
necessary that I should discuss whether a high 
military reputation is or is not a disqualification 
for office. Whatever others may have thought 
or said about me, and whatever may have been 
the proposition, and whenever made to you, 
it was not made in concert with me, and still less 
at my suggestion. 

There remains only one topic in your letter to 
which I have not adverted, and it relates to my 
resignation of the command of the army. I con- 
sidered your letters to me, and most particularly 
the one of the 11th April, in which, be it observed, 
you state that you had previously submitted it 
to His Majesty, to have placed me in such a 
relation towards His Majesty, and towards yourself 
as his First Minister, as to render it impossible 
for me to continue in my office of Commander-in- 
Chief. 

I could not be otherwise than in constant 
confidential relations with His Majesty on the 
one hand, and with yourself on the other, as you 
will find by-and-bye, when you shall come to con- 
duct the duties of the office of First Lord of the 
Treasury ; and it was impossible for me to look 


186 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [r82r- 


for that personal goodwill and confidence in such 
communications which are absolutely necessary 
and which J must deserve, after I had received 
from you a letter in which I thought you had 
made use of a tone of rebuke not provoked by 
anything contained in my letter to you, and for 
which the sanction of His Majesty was, as I think 
very unnecessarily, obtained. 

I know what I owe to His Majesty, but I should 
be unworthy of his favour and kindness, and quite 
useless to him hereafter, if I had continued to 
endeavour to serve him in the post of Commander- 
in-Chief of the army after I had received that 
letter. 

I am not in the habit of deciding upon such 
matters hastily or in anger; and the proof of this 
is that I never had a quarrel with any man in my 
life. 

If I could have entertained a doubt upon the 
subject of your letters to me, and the course 
which I ought to have pursued in consequence 
of them, the letter which I received from His 
Majesty of the 13th April, written, I conclude, by 
your advice as his Minister, must have confirmed 
the impression which the preceding communica- 
tions had made. 

I commenced to write this letter last night, but 
have only now been able to finish it—May 7, 
2 p.m." 

1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 311. 


1827] AN OFFER 187 


[ENCLOSURE D] 


THE Kinc fo THe DUKE OF WELLINGTON 
St. James’s Palace: May 21, 1827 

My DEAR FRIEND, 

I learn from my Government, as well as 
from other quarters, that you have obligingly 
expressed your readiness to afford your advice, 
if required, upon any matters of military importance 
or detail that might occur. 

These circumstances renew in me those feelings 
towards you, which, God knows (as you must 
know), I have long and so sincerely felt, and I 
hope on all occasions proved; at least it was 
always my intention so to do. 

I cannot refrain from acquainting you that the 
command of the army is still open, and, if you 
choose to recall that resignation which it grieved 
me so much to receive, you have my sincere 
permission to do so. 

Your sincere friend, 
G. Ri 
[ENCLOSURE FE] 
THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON fo THE KING 
London: May 22, 1827 

Your Majesty’s most gracious letter of yesterday 
reached me last night, and I beg leave to return 
Your Majesty my grateful acknowledgments for 
your kindness. 

I cannot claim the merit of having had any 
communication of any description with Your 
Majesty’s Government since I quitted office. I 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 329. 


188 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [18zI- 


did state, both to Lord Anglesey and to Sir 
Herbert Taylor, that I should be most happy 
to render to each of them every assistance in my 
power, to enable them to carry on the duties of 
their several offices; and to the latter in par- 
ticular I have written twice, in consequence of 
reports which had reached me of the state of 
affairs in Portugal inducing me to believe that it 
was desirable that Your Majesty’s forces in that 
country should be collected in one body, and 
encamped in the neighbourhood of Lisbon. 

I have served the late King and Your Majesty 
for forty-two years, thirty-five of which either 
in the field against the enemy in command of 
Your Majesty’s armies abroad, particularly for 
six years in the Peninsula, or in active political 
office; and even if I had not been, asI was, a 
party to the advice given to Your Majesty to 
send a body of troops to Portugal, the anxiety 
which I feel for the honour of Your Majesty’s 
arms, and the gratitude which I owe to Your 
Majesty for Your Majesty’s most gracious favour 
towards me, would have induced me to state my 
opinion to that officer who was principally con- 

1 Henry William Paget, first Marquess of Anglesey and 
second Earl of Uxbridge (1768-1854), soldier, served in Flanders, 
1794, and in Holland, 1799. He commanded the cavalry in 
Spain under Moore, and at Waterloo, where he lost a leg. 
He was created Marquess of Anglesey, 1815. He was Lord- 
Lieutenant of Ireland in 1828, succeeding Wellesley. 

2 Sir Herbert Taylor (1775-1832), Lieutenant-General, saw 
active service in his youth. He was much employed about 
the Court. He was secretary to George III. in 1805, and 


subsequently served Queen Charlotte and William IV. in the 
same capacity. 


FREDERICK, DUKE OF YORK, AND GEORGE IV SILMOUETTED AT 
BRIGHTON 
From the National Portrait Gallery 


1827] THE OFFER DECLINED 189 


fided in by Your Majesty in military affairs, when 
it appeared to me that the position of Your 
Majesty’s troops was becoming critical. 

I am delighted that my doing so has attracted 
Your Majesty’s favourable notice; but I assure 
Your Majesty that I had not a notion that the 
existence of these letters would ever be made 
known to Your Majesty. Still less did I intend 
in writing them to manifest any desire to withdraw 
my resignation of the office of Commander-in- 
Chief. 

Your Majesty has been pleased to observe that 
the command of the army is still open, and that 
if I choose to recall my resignation of that com- 
mand I have Your Majesty’s permission to do 
SO. 
I earnestly hope that Your Majesty will have 
the goodness to refer to the reasons which I stated 
to Your Majesty on the r2th April, and more 
fully to Your Majesty’s Minister on the 6th of May, 
as having imposed upon me the painful necessity 
of offering to Your Majesty my resignation of the 
command of Your Majesty’s forces. 

I humbly entreat Your Majesty to bear in mind 
that the reasons still continue in force ; and, were 
I under such circumstances to recall my resigna- 
tion, I should by that act admit that I had not 
been justified in retiring, and I should disable 
myself from rendering that useful service to Your 
Majesty which it would be, as it ever has been, 
the pride of my life to render. All of which, 
together with the expression of my gratitude for 
the kind sentiments contained in Yout Majesty’s 


190 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [z1821- 


letter to me, are submitted to Your Majesty by 
Your Majesty’s 
Most devoted subject, 
WELLINGTON.” 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo GEORGE CANNING 
Private and confidential Phoenix Park 
June 2, 1827 

Your kind and affectionate letter of the 22nd 
May would be quite sufficient to assure me of 
your continued friendship and regard, if I had 
ever entertained a doubt on that subject. I am 
incapable of harbouring any suspicion so injurious 
and unjust to you, and so painfully unworthy of 
the whole spirit and character of my mind. 

It is, however, but candid to inform you that 
the changes which you state to have been con- 
templated in the Government of Ireland, on the 
principles and connected with the contingencies 
which you mention, never were in the slightest 
degree hinted to me by Lord Liverpool or Mr. 
Peel; and as I continued to the last moment 
to possess the full confidence and declared appro- 
bation of both those respectable persons, I cannot 
suppose, without injury to their high and fine 
integrity, that they could have entertained such 
a project without imparting it to me—as they 
well knew that I had no intention of resigning 
this Government before the end of the present 
year, which period would have brought my 
government nearly to the same term as that of 
the Duke of Richmond. With respect to the 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 331. 


1827] WELLESLEY ANNOYED IQ 


principle on which my government has been con- 
ducted, I desire to appeal to the late Secre- 
tary for the Home Department [Peel], my able 
and most upright correspondent, whether I have 
betrayed any partiality to any party, faction, 
or religion; and whether in the exercise of the 
Royal patronage (especially of the Church) I 
have not discharged my duty to the honour and 
advantage of His Majesty’s service, and to the 
benefit of all the established institutions of this 
country, both religious and civil. 

With this consciousness, I certainly little ex- 
pected that any eagerness should exist to abridge 
my term here, merely on account of my supposed 
agreement with you on the policy of altering the 
laws respecting the Roman Catholic claims: I 
use the phrase supposed deliberately and stead- 
fastly, for I desire to be informed: ‘‘ Who now 
exactly knows the precise tenor of my opinions 
on that great question?’’ I might add: “ Who 
can point out one act or expression of mine in 
this Government by which any inclination of my 
judgment on that matter can be referred ? ” 

As it appears, however, to be evident that there 
is a great anxiety and an earnest desire for my 
early removal, I request you to assure His Majesty, 
with my humble duty and most affectionate 
respects, that, devoted as I ever have been to his 
Royal service, interests, and honour, and attached 
to his sacred person by the strongest ties of 
gratitude and respectful love, I shall resign this 
high and arduous trust into his hands with the 
same alacrity and cheerful obedience which marked 


192 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS § [182r1- 


my acceptance of it in a crisis of the greatest 
difficulty and danger. The trust has not been 
impaired in my hands; but although conscious 
of honest, zealous, and useful service, I shall feel 
dissatisfied in my mind if that service should 
have failed to obtain His Majesty’s gracious 
approbation. That is the only reward or honour 
for which I am solicitous; without that, all 
remuneration or distinction would be vain and 
without value to me. These sentiments contain 
sufficient replies to all your kind proposals of 
reward or honour: I desire none other than the con- 
tinuance of His Majesty’s confidence and favour, 
which, as they have constituted the principal 
pride and happiness of a long, active, and not 
inglorious life, will be necessary to strengthen 
me in any future course of public service to which 
His Majesty may call me; or (if I should be com- 
pelled to relinquish His Majesty’s service) these 
blessings will suffice to render my retirement as 
dignified and grateful to my own mind as my 
services have been zealous and useful to His 
Majesty’s dominions, and to the general interests 
of his great and flourishing Empire.’ 


GEORGE CANNING to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private and confidential Downing Street 
June 7, 1827 

I am highly gratified with the kindness of your 
answer to my letter on your own affairs, but 
greatly perplexed with the uncertainty in which 
it leaves me as to what I should endeavour to do 

1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 337. 


1827] MAKING ROOM 193 


to meet your wishes. If I had been early apprised 
that a continuance of your reign in Ireland to 
the end of the year was the specific object of your 
contemplation, I would have done my best to 
secure that prolongation. Thus what was repre- 
sented to me as that object was the indefinite 
extension, or rather, as it were, renewal of your 
tenure, and that I knew to be hopeless. 

Even now if to come away at the end of the 
year rather than in the course of the summer 
appeared to you to be important, I could endeavour 
to bring about that change in the present plan. 
But I cannot answer for it that in that case the 
name of your intended successor would not tran- 
spire long before your departure. Whether this 
would be any annoyance to you, you must judge. 

But even this arrangement, if it could be made, 
would not relieve me from the necessity of pressing 
upon your consideration the point which I sub- 
mitted to you in my last letter—I mean that of 
the Embassy to Vienna. J#, the Embassy, might 
remain for some months open, but the vacancy 
which is to be filled in order to vacate Vienna 
cannot be kept open without exposing both the 
Government in India, and the King’s Government 
here, to the most serious inconvenience. The 
leading individuals of the Court of Directors press 
every day for a nomination. There would (as I 
have already told you) be no reason for preparing 
Sir Henry Wellesley unless you were disposed 
to take his place at Vienna. Otherwise, any change 
in the Embassy would be at present undesirable ; 
and India could not be thrown away on 4 mere 


2 16) 


19 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1821- 


act of favour, being the only reasons in my hands 
either for effecting an opening or for gratifying 
individual pretensions. My fear is that, unless 
I can give the Court of Directors a distinct recom- 
mendation next week, private intrigue will go to 
work successfully, and we shall then have a conflict 
between the two authorities. As yet the East 
India Company are perfectly tractable and acquies- 
cent. 

Something was said to me by one of your 
friends of the expediency of opening the Embassy 
at the Hague rather than that of Vienna, as 
affording comparatively greater means of an 
economical establishment. This is perfectly true, 
and I would willingly have turned my views 
that way, but for these circumstances. The 
Embassy at the Hague is known to be what it is, 
distinctly overpaid—the only one of our Embassies 
that is so. We are on the eve of a session of 
retrenchments. If there is no change in that 
Embassy, it may not attract notice ; but a change, 
and so conspicuous a one, would infallibly attract 
public attention to it ; and I could not bear that 
your name should be mixed in discussions of such 
a nature. But further, the Hereditary Prince 
of Orange has taken up a course of behaviour 
towards the Corps Diplomatique at Brussels which 
has led to much discussion, and may lead to remon- 
strance, and possibly to the change of the character 
of our Mission, as the King of the Netherlands 
(though no party to the misconduct of his son— 
whom, however, he cannot control) is, and has 
been for the last three years, desirous of getting 


1827] | WELLESLEY’S FUTURE 195 


rid of the burden of the Embassy. In former 
times, it is true, we maintained an Ambassador 
at the Hague, though there was no Dutch Embassy 
here. But we then were Viceroys in Holland. 
We have now little to do with the external politics, 
and nothing with the internal concern of the 
Netherlands, and I think it would be quite impos- 
sible to maintain an Embassy in those countries 
in exchange for a mission here—when we had no 
peculiarities of political influence, or even of dis- 
tinguishingly kind reception, to plead for it. 

There is also this to be said, even in point of 
economy, for the successor to Vienna—that you 
would find your brother’s house and establishment 
there fixed at a rate, probably of not ruinous 
extravagance, and yet such as there could be no 
necessity to increase. 

I ought, perhaps, to ask your pardon for enter- 
ing into these details; but I know not how else 
to explain satisfactorily all the motives of my offer. 

In the same spirit, and from the same motives, 
Shawe will perhaps have told you that I had been 
making provision for the possible chance of your 
wishing to remain at home, by proposing for you 
one of the pensions, under the Act of Parliament, 
of £3,000, to which as Secretary of State for two 
years’ service you would be entitled. The warrant 
was actually drawn—when I found that by the 
Act of Parliament itself such pension is not tenable 
with the sinecure office which you hold in Ireland 
—a circumstance which had entirely slipped my 
memory. 

I say nothing more about honours, because I 


196 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1821- 


consider Colonel Shawe’s letter, written by your 
direction, as entirely conclusive upon that head. 

I have not seen Lady Wellesley, and I must 
explain to you why I have not done so. It is 
because, without doing any good, our interview 
would only place us both in an embarrassing 
situation. Any suggestion which she may have 
to make to me I could equally learn through 
others—through Shawe while he was here, since 
through Lord Plunket. But Lady Wellesley 
sees the Duke of Wellington (as it is natural that 
she should do) almost daily. If we (Lady 
Wellesley and I) meet, am I to stipulate that what 
passes between us is not to go to the Duke ?— 
or am I to discuss matters with Lady Wellesley 
at the risk of their being communicated to the 
Duke in his present temper of bitter political 
hostility ? 

This is the alternative, and I do not know which 
is more to be avoided—the inconvenience of such 
a confidence or the unseemliness of such a 
stipulation. 

I have now, I think, touched upon every topic 
which your letter either contains or suggests, 
except what relates to His Majesty’s feelings to- 
wards you. I am confident that they are feelings 
of unabated kindness—though I am not quite 
sure that there are not some trifling matters (the 
amount and nature of which I hardly know) in 
which you may inadvertently have fallen into 
some negligence towards His Majesty. 

But I state this only that I may conscientiously 
state the whole and exact truth, so far as I know 


1827] OFFERS DECLINED 197 


it. I am quite sure that these smaller feelings 
do not interfere with His Majesty’s general and 
long-established sentiments of regard. As to your 
return from Ireland—it never entered into His 
Majesty’s head that it was a recall, or any other 
than the natural and expected termination of your 
functions. I daresay that if a comparison of 
your stay with that of the Duke of Richmond 
(the longest lived of your predecessors, I believe, 
in modern times) had occurred to His Majesty, 
he would have taken that consideration into 
account. 

I must conclude, as I set out with requesting 
you to give me light enough to guide me in my 
movements about India. That is the point that 
presses in respect to time.’ 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo GEORGE CANNING 
Private and confidential Phoenix Park 
June 11, 1827 
I received your kind letter by the messenger 
Dawes, and now answer that part of it which 
relates to the Embassy to Vienna. I was very 
anxious to send you an answer immediately, but 
the proposition involved so many considerations 
that I could not in justice to myself, to you, or 
to others, make any hasty determination. I 
trust this letter will arrive in time to save you from 
any trouble at the India House. 
I am fully sensible of the kind motives which 
have dictated your conduct as well in this pro- 
position as in that which related to India, and 


1 Add. MSS. 372097 f. 345. 


198 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1821- 


which I declined, with every acknowledgment 
for the offer. I must pursue the same course 
on this occasion. It would occupy too much of 
your valuable time to enter into the reasons which 
preclude my acceptance of the Embassy to Vienna 
at present. I hope I need not say that they are 
totally unconnected with any other feelings than 
those of perfect cordiality and friendship. I have 
always felt and expressed a most cordial desire 
to serve in your confidence and under your 
directions, but I should prefer that service either 
here or in England, at least for the present. 

I feel most deeply your kindness to my brother 
Henry, who is truly worthy of every favour. I 
hope that my conduct in this matter may not 
prove injurious to him. He is perfectly qualified 
for the office of Governor-General of India, but I 
am aware that his views now are out of the question. 

I justly appreciate the friendly solicitude for 
my personal interests which pervades your whole 
letter, and I am greatly obliged to you for the 
frankness and delicacy with which you have 
combined some of your obliging suggestions. In 
the same spirit you will be glad to learn from me 
that some circumstances relating to my situation 
have been exaggerated, and that at the close of 
my government here [I shall be quite ready to 
accept any office under your government in 
England. 

I hope to be able to answer your letter fully 
to-morrow night, but I would not delay this 
communication.’ 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 351. 


1827] WELLESLEY’S INTENTIONS 199 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to GEORGE CANNING 
Private and confidential Phoenix Park 
June 13, 1827 

Having answered your kind letter of the 7th 
as far as relates to Vienna, I now proceed to the 
remaining suggestions. My intention always was 
to remain in Ireland until January next ; beyond 
that term (about, but not quite as long as that of 
the Duke of Richmond), of course it must have 
depended on the King’s Government to prolong 
my services here. I never made that point an 
object, nor intended to solicit it. Probably I 
should not have wished it. Now I certainly do 
not wish it. But it is of the highest importance 
both to my interests and honour to remain here 
until January next. To remove me before that 
period of time (whatever may be the ‘motive) 
would bear all the appearance ofa recall, and would 
expose me to great inconvenience. The public 
service also would be much injured by such a 
course. 

It is unfortunate that I had not a free communi- 
cation with you long ago on this and other matters. 
I am not at all anxious that the name of my 
intended successor should not transpire, provided 
he be not named in Council until the time of my 
departure shall approach. 

What I would propose on the whole subject 
would shortly be : 

That you should understand this letter to be 
an intimation of my wish to be relieved from this 
charge in January next. 

That you should (if you please) designate my 


200 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [18z21- 


successor, but not appoint him in Council until 
the month of December. 

That I should publicly signify my intention 
(with His Majesty’s permission) to resign this 
charge at the time specified, and that I should 
have leave to appoint Lords Justices (the Primate, 
Lord Chancellor, and Sir George Murray), so as 
to be able to move before the arrival of my 
successor. 

Tshould hope this plan would not be disapproved. 
It appears to me to be reasonable and just, and it 
would be quite satisfactory to me. 

As this matter may press upon you in the present 
moment, I have made it the subject of a separate 
letter and thus early communication.’ 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to THE KING 
Phoenix Park: June 28, 1827 

SIR, 

Your Majesty having most graciously con- 
descended to permit me to address directly to 
Your Majesty’s indulgent consideration any repre- 
sentations affecting the great and arduous trust 
which your Royal grace and favour have confided 
to my hands, I rely on that benignant heart, so 
propitious to me, for a kind and just construction 
of this letter. 

My intention has been formed, under a sense 
of duty towards Your Majesty, not to relinquish 
this charge, except by Your Majesty’s special 
command, until the month of January 1828. 

Many important internal regulations, com- 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 356. 


1827] RETIREMENT 201 


menced under my superintendence, remain to be 
completed before the next session of Parliament, 
and many useful reductions of expense may be 
effected in Ireland within the course of this year. 
It would be equally advantageous to my interests 
and honour, to Your Majesty’s service, and to the 
welfare of Ireland, that I should superintend these 
affairs to their conclusion. 

In the month of January next I shall be pre- 
pared to receive Your Majesty’s commands for 
relieving me from this government, if it shall be 
Your Majesty’s pleasure to signify them to me; 
and in that case I would humbly request Your 
Majesty’s permission to name Lords Justices in 
the usual manner, some time before my departure. 
The Lords Justices are usually the Primate, the 
Lord Chancellor, and the Commander of the 
Forces in Ireland. In submitting these humble 
suggestions to Your Majesty, I trust I shall not 
be supposed to intimate any inclination to with- 
draw from Your Majesty’s service in Ireland one 
moment before it may be vouchsafed to me in 
this life. But it is not my present wish to be 
employed in any foreign station. 

Your Majesty, I am persuaded, would deem 
any new expression of my zeal, attachment, and 
gratitude superfluous in your sight ; these senti- 
ments have been fixed in my heart from the 
earliest dawn of my reason; they have been mani- 
fested towards Your Majesty, without abatement, 
from the moment of my first introduction to 
Your Royal Person, and they can never be abated 
while my existence in this world shall continue. 


202 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _[r821- 


With the warmest devotion, and the most 
dutiful veneration, I have the honour to be, Sir, 
Your Majesty’s faithful and obedient servant, 

WELLESLEY.! 


GEORGE CANNING to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Downing Street: July 12, 1827 

I transmit to you, by the King’s command, 
His Majesty’s answer to your letter; and I am 
further commanded by His Majesty to enter into 
some explanation with you upon points of detail 
connected with the duration of your Viceroyalty, 
into which His Majesty has not entered in his 
own letter. 

His Majesty willingly consents that your suc- 
cessor should not take possession of the govern- 
ment of Ireland till the beginning of January, 
and that you should have the grace of originating 
your resignation for that period. His Majesty, 
likewise, consents to your coming away at any 
time that you may think proper, before the 
cessation of your term in the Government, 
appointing Lords Justices for the interval between 
your departure and the arrival of your successor. 
But His Majesty particularly desires that that 
arrival should not be delayed beyond the period 
which has been specified—the very beginning 
of January ; that the beginning of January should 
be the completion, not the outset of the whole 
transaction, and that the announcement of your 
resignation for that period should be made as soon 
as may be. You know the difficulty of keeping 

2 Add. MSS. 37207 f. 362. 


1827] WELLESLEY’S SUCCESSOR 203 


official secrets here, and are probably not surprised, 
therefore, that conjectures are already afloat 
respecting the selection of your successor. It 
would be idle to make any mystery with you as 
to the fact that these conjectures are well founded, 
and that Lord Anglesey is the man. But it is 
a considerable awkwardness to the Government, 
and personally to His Majesty (on account of 
communications which His Majesty has had with 
different persons on the subject of Ireland), not 
to be at liberty to speak precisely on this point— 
which can only be done after your intention to 
resign shall have been announced. 

You will consider this letter only as supple- 
mental to that of His Majesty." 


[ENCLOSURE] 
Royal Lodge, Windsor: July 10, 1827 

The King sends his kind regards to Lord 
Wellesley. 

The King receives with feelings of great pleasure 
and satisfaction the expression of Lord Wellesley’s 
affectionate attachment and dutiful devotion 
towards the King’s Person. 

Now that the King knows what Lord Wellesley’s 
wishes really are, the King will endeavour (as 
far as it may be practicable) to meet them; but 
the perplexing embarrassments to which the King 
has been exposed by the unaccountable conduct 
of the individuals forming a part of the late Cabinet, 
render it very difficult for the King to accede to 
Lord Wellesley’s proposal respecting Ireland. 

1 Add. MSS. 37297 £. 364. 


204 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1821- 


The King desires, however, distinctly to state 
that this does not arise from any indisposition 
towards Lord Wellesley, but from the force of 
circumstances. But relative to this point Lord 
Wellesley will hear from his kind and warm friend, 
Mr. Canning. 

The King will only add that Lord Wellesley 
may rest assured the King enters with the kindest 
feeling into every thing connected with Lord 
Wellesley’s peace, comfort, and future happiness. 

The King desires that Lord Wellesley will make 
the King’s kind remembrances acceptable to 
Lady Wellesley. 

G. R.? 


AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE STAPLETON* fo THE 
MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Chiswick : August 5, 1827 
Though the bulletins which have been pub- 
lished, and which will reach your Excellency 
at the same time with this letter, will inform you 
of the very alarming, I fear I must say hopeless, 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 366. 

2 Augustus Granville Stapleton (1800-1880), although 
entered in the register of Rugby School as son of John Staple- 
ton, of Barnstaple, is generally supposed to have been a 
natural son of Canning’s friend, the first Lord Morley. When 
he came down from Cambridge he was appointed by Canning 
his private secretary. At the instigation of George IV. he 
was, immediately after Canning’s death, made a Commissioner 
of Customs, which office he resigned after a few years. He 
wrote a Political Life of Canning, which he printed in 1830, but 
Wellington opposed the publication. In the same year, 
however, pamphlets attacking Canning appeared, and, as a 
reply to those, Stapleton issued his biography in 1831. His 
George Canning and his Times appeared in 1859. 


1827] CANNING’S ILLNESS 205 


state of our dear friend, Mr. Canning, yet respect 
for those warm feelings of attachment which I 
know that he entertained for you, and which I 
know that you returned, will not allow me to 
leave you without more circumstantial accounts 
than those which can be conveyed through the 
medium of a bulletin. 

Mr. Canning, though not well, yet went to the 
King at the Lodge on Monday, and on Tuesday 
went to the office in Downing Street, where he 
saw a physician who recommended a blister. 
On Wednesday he applied the blister, and on 
Thursday he was so uncomfortable in the morning 
that a consultation of physicians took place in the 
evening. On Friday morning he was alarmingly 
worse, and the danger has gone on gradually 
increasing, till, at the moment when I am writing, 
I dread to say that it is quite a hopeless case. 

I will not trouble your Excellency with my feel- 
ings of affliction. I am sure that you will feel 
most deeply the painful intelligence which I now 
convey to you. 

P.S. 5p.m. Iopen my letter to say that there 
as an improvement, and consequently a hope.! 


AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE STAPLETON to THE 
MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Chiswick: August 7, 1827 
You will see by the bulletin of this morning 
at eight the opinion of the physicians. 
Since that hour Mr. Canning has rallied in a 
wonderful way, but not, I fear, in a way to enable 
1 Add. MSS. 37310 f. 26x. 


206 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _[1821- 


me to induce your Excellency to build any more 
favourable hopes of a happy result.’ 


Lorp LANSDOWNE to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Secret and confidential Home Office « 
August 8, 1827 
I feel it a duty to acquaint your Excellency with 
the melancholy event of this morning. Mr. 
Canning expired between three and four o’clock. 
I am just returned from Windsor, where it was 
my province to convey this calamitous intelligence 
to His Majesty, who appeared much affected by it, 
however prepared by the medical reports of the 
last two days. 
I am happy to add that His Majesty is otherwise 
in excellent health. 


AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE STAPLETON /o THE 
MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Downing Street: August 10, 1827 

Since the fatal event which has deprived us of 
so invaluable a friend, and the country of so great 
a Minister, I have been unable to attend to more 
than those most painful duties of affectionate 
respect for his memory which the dreadful occasion 
rendered necessary, and from having done which, 
however distressing, I shall always derive a melan- 
choly satisfaction. 

This must plead my apology to your Excellency 
for leaving you to learn from the newspapers the 
first tidings of the death of Mr. Canning. 


1 Add. MSS. 37310 f. 263. 
2 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 368. 


1827] DEATH OF CANNING 207 


He died without a struggle, having been insen- 
sible for about two hours and a half before he 
died. It was a long time before Mrs. Canning 
could be brought to believe the dreadful calamity 
which had befallen her. On the morning of the 
next day, however, consciousness returned, and 
to-day I learn, with much pleasure, that she is 
better, and more composed. Lady Clanricarde? 
is as well as can be expected. Nothing could sur- 
pass the good feeling, the good sense, and kindness 
of Lord Clanricarde, whose unceasing attention 
to Mr. Canning’s wants and comforts during his 
illness evidently gave Mr. Canning the greatest 
pleasure. 

I will not fail, as soon as the first agony of grief 
is over, to communicate your message to his 
family. When that time is gone by, these 
testimonies of love and affection from the great 
and good for the dear object of their love will 
be to them one of the best and most gratifying 
sources of consolation? 


Memorandum by THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
August 11, 1827 
If the office of First Lord of the Treasury should 
be proposed to Lord Wellesley he would accept 
it, and would proceed to England with all practic- 
able expedition. 
In this case early permission should be given 
to him to appoint Lords Justices: the First 
1 Canning’s daughter, Harriet, had married Ulick John, 


first Marquess of Clanricarde. 
2 Add. MSS. 37310 f. 264. 


208 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1821- 


Commissioner of the Great Seal, Chief Justice 
Bushe, the Primate, Beresford, and Sir George 
Murray Commander of the Forces. 

The period at which the new Lord-Lieutenant 
might succeed Lord Wellesley could be fixed when 
Lord Wellesley arrived in England. 

If the Foreign Office should be proposed to 
Lord Wellesley he would accept, and similar 
arrangements might be made. 

If the office of President of the Council should be 
offered, his Lordship would not refuse it; but 
in that case he would not wish to vacate the office 
of Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland until the month of 
January, unless particularly desired to do sosooner. 

He does not think it necessary to mention any 
other office as likely to be proposed to him, or 
that he would accept. 

Lord Wellesley would not object to serve under 
Lord Lansdowne or Lord Goderich or the Duke 
of Wellington or Mr. Peel, or any other person 
approved by the King, for the head of a Govern- 
ment formed upon such principles as Lord 
Wellesley could approve, especially the principles 
of Lord Liverpool’s Government. 

It is Lord Wellesley’s intention to take an 
active and decided part in Parliament and in 
public upon his return to England, whether in 
office or not.” 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to COLONEL SHAWE 

Phoenix Park: August 14, 1827 

Some time since Mr. Blake informed me of 
1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 371. 


1827] A POSITIVE INSULT 209 


Mr. Wynn’s kind intention towards me with 
reference to the long neglect of my public services 
in India, and to the inadequate reward which 
had been conferred on me by the Company. 
Having never solicited Mr. Wynn, nor indeed any 
person on that question, I was more deeply im- 
pressed with Mr. Wynn’s generous and voluntary 
friendship, for which I shall feel the warmest sense 
of gratitude through life. At Mr. Blake’s desire 
I entrust him with a series of documents proving 
the injustice offered to me by the grant of 1799- 
1800, which was substituted in place of the reward 
originally offered to me. Mr. Blake has for- 
warded these papers to Mr. Wynn, but it may be 
useful also to present to him another set of them, 
and, accordingly, I sent you a packet last night 
which I request you to submit to Mr. Wynn. 
You can fully explain the whole case to him, and 
you can compare the rewards given to Lord 
Cornwallis and Lord Hastings with that which I 
have received. It is to be observed that I have 
received no reward whatever for the great 
Maratha war, by much the greatest service ever 
achieved in India, and of which the public opinion 
is now clear with regard to every principle of 
justice, policy, and beneficial result. The Company 
has fully enjoyed every advantage obtained by 
that war and by the general course of my govern- 
ment, and has left me not only unrewarded but 
unnoticed. It would now be a positive insult to 
grant additional rewards and honourable distinc- 
tions to Lord Hastings and family without any 
symptom of just consideration for me. It may 
2 P 


210 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS | [r821- 


be observed that the persecution which I endured 
for several years was not discountenanced if it was 
not encouraged by the Court of Directors, and 
you can inform Mr. Wynn of the heavy expense 
which was brought upon me by that persecution. 
Yet even under such sufferings I have always 
been an active friend to the Company. In 
addition to every other consideration it would 
be a great public object to me to be reconciled 
to my old masters, towards whom I always feel 
the same spirit which actuated me through the 
whole course of my conduct in their service. 
Such a reconciliation would be equally honourable 
to both parties, and must reflect credit on the 
characters of the Company.’ 


After Canning’s death, Wellesley, much to his 
disappointment, was not sent for to form an 
administration, and Goderich, who under Canning 
had been Secretary for War, Commissioner for 
Indian affairs, and leader of the House of Lords, 
became Prime Minister. Wellesley remained at 
his post in Ireland. 


M. G. PRENDERGAST to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Brooks’s Club House: December 20, 1827 

I feel greatly embarrassed how to make such 
conflicting reports to your Excellency as must 
constitute the subjects of this hastily written note, 
but being restricted from making the following 
communication to any human being, save your 


2 Add. MSS. 37310 £. 268. 


1827] HUSKISSON’S ENMITY 211 


Excellency, by a most honourable and respectable 
person, firmly attached to your interests, I have 
neither choice nor discretion to exercise. : 

My friend asserts positively that Mr. Huskisson 
is and has been for several days the sole cause 
of your Excellency’s not having been summoned 
by the King. He asserts that Huskisson has been 
intriguing during the last five or six weeks to work 
himself into the Premiership—knowing that Lord 
Goderich meant to resign before the meeting of 
Parliament; but finding neither the King nor 
the dristocracy of the country would stand it, 
he has suddenly veered round and has not only 
prevailed on Lord Goderich to remain (“‘ damaged 
as he is’) in office, but he has reconciled all the 
Cabinet to this flimsy arrangement. The fact 
is, he feels that he has Lord Goderich and Lord 
Dudley completely in his pocket, and that under 
this arrangement he will possess the complete 
control and direction of the Government. 

Aware that such would not be his situation if 
your Excellency were placed at the head of the 
Government, he has in the most decided manner 
opposed not only the will of his Sovereign, but the 
active and zealous exertions of your old protégé, 
Sir William Knighton,’ which, my friend says, 
“he will live to repent.”” He positively declared 
that he would resign his office and throw up the 
Leadership of the Commons if your Excellency 
were called to the head of the Government, and 

1 Sir William Knighton, first Baronet (1776-1836), was 
physician to George IV. when Prince of Wales, and afterwards, 


when he became King, was also his confidential adviser and 
man of business, being officially Keeper of the Privy Purse. 


212 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1821- 


on this point my friend remarked: ‘“‘ The dread 
of being resisted by such a mind as Lord Wellesley’s 
will always influence Huskisson to oppose his 
appointment to any office that may militate with 
his monopolising views of power. He will not 
oppose his getting the Privy Seal or the Presidency 
of the Council,” and the foregoing is the sub- 
stance of the communication I was enjoined to 
make exclusively to your Excellency—and I beg 
leave to submit that in the course of conversa- 
tion with my excellent friend Henry Ellis (Lady 
Goderich’s brother), I find the substance of my 
friend’s communication completely confirmed. He 
says there is no doubt but Huskisson has been 
intriguing for the Premiership, and as little that 
he opposes your Excellency’s being raised to that 
station. On Thursday, 12th, Lord Goderich was 
commissioned to present a Cabinet note to the 
King signed by Lords Goderich and Lansdowne 
and Mr. Huskisson, submitting the necessity for 
immediately strengthening the Government, and 
expressing as the wish of the Cabinet that Lords 
Wellesley and Holland should be invited to join 
or have Cabinet seats. It is a very curious fact 
that Lord Goderich delivered in writing his 
resignation at the foot of this Cabinet note and was 
ordered to wait on His Majesty at eleven o’clock 
the next morning, when he was pleased to accept 
it in a formal manner, accompanied, however, 
by some expressions of concern at his having 
found it necessary to withdraw from his service. 
Lord Goderich left town the following day at 
twelve o’clock to avoid the enquiries of his 


1827] GODERICH RESIGNS 213 


colleagues and friends, and the King sent a mes- 
senger for Lord Harrowby,’ who, it was well 
known, would positively refuse the Premiership. 
He came up from Staffordshire on Sunday night 
and waited on the King the next, accompanied 
(I believe) by Mr. Huskisson; but on that morn- 
ing a letter came from Lord Goderich saying that 
if the step he took in tendering his resignation was 
considered likely to break up or materially to 
embarrass the Government he was prepared at 
any risk of health or inconvenience to remain in 
office. This proposition was just what Mr. Hus- 
kisson wished. There was an immediate answer 
despatched, stating that his sacrifice of his own 
feelings and comfort was most gratefully felt and 
acknowledged, and imploring him to hasten his 
return totown. He accordingly came to town on 
Tuesday evening (a day sooner than he intended), 
and a Cabinet was called for the next day, at 
which some knotty points were discussed, as I am 
informed. Stratford Canning’s despatch of the 
24th ult. holds out no prospect of adjustment with 
the Sultan, and he expected that his next despatch 
would be dated from on board ship. This news 
has excited serious discomfiture. The subject 
of strengthening the Government was, I am told, 
brought forward in as far as related to Lord 
Holland, and the result, I believe, was a determina- 
tion not to force upon His Majesty a measure which 
it was known he was opposed to. The real cause 
of the decision against Lord Holland was the 


1 See Dudley Ryder, vol. i. p. go, note. He had retired 
from office on the death of Canning. 


214 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [18z21- 


determination taken by the Chancellor of the 
Exchequer to resign if another Whig, and par- 
ticularly Lord Holland, were brought into the 
Cabinet. All that occurred at yesterday’s Cabinet is 
more the conjecture of my friend than any positive 
knowledge he had obtained whenI saw him. Lord 
Lansdowne and Mr. Huskisson went to Holland 
House when the Cabinet broke up at half-past 
six o'clock, and my friend argues that if it had not 
been decided to keep him out there would not have 
been a necessity to pay that visit. Lord Goderich 
is gone down to the Cottage to kiss hands and be 
forgiven.? 


The result of Wellesley’s seven years’ administra- 
tion of Ireland has been admirably summed up 
by his earliest biographer: “‘ Economy in the 
public expenditure—a removal of various obnox- 
ious and oppressive imports—a remission of the 
Union duties, which acted prejudicially against 
the commerce of Ireland—an enquiry into the 
state of education—the purification of the magis- 
tracy—the establishment of Petty Sessions—the 
appointment of Assistant Barristers [for the 
administration of justice]—a more impartial 
administration of justice, in consequence of the 
judicious selection of men to fill the vacancies 
on the judicial bench—the organisation of an 
efficient police force—the effectual suppression 
of ‘ Whiteboy ’ offences—the extinction of secret 


1 Add. MSS. 37207 f. 373. 


1827] WELLESLEY’S WORK 215 


and illegal societies—the mitigation of the severity 

of the Tithe Law—the extension of public works 

—and the diffusion of sentiments of moderation, 

kindliness, and public spirit among all classes. 

These were some of the fruits of his government.’’? 
1 Pearce: Wellesley, iii. 394. 


BOOK Ix 


LAST YEARS OF OFFICIAL LIFE 
1828-1835 


BOOK Ix 


LAST YEARS OF OFFICIAL LIFE 
1828-1835 


Goderich resigns: Wellington becomes Prime Minister: 
He does not offer any post to Wellesley : They cross 
swords over the Catholic Emancipation Bill: 
Wellington resigns and is succeeded by Grey: 
Wellesley accepts the office of Lord Steward of the 
Household : The state of Ireland : The choice of a 
King for Belgium : Wellesley offers his services for a 
diplomatic mission to Spain : He is appointed Lord- 
Lieutenant of Ireland : Grenville on Wellesley : 
Irish affairs : A breach in the Ministry : Lord 
Brougham : Irish Coercion Bill: Irish Tithes Bill: 
Death of Lord Spencer : Melbourne resigns: 
Wellington proposes Peel to the King : Peel accepts 
office : Wellesley retires with the Melbourne 
Ministry : Melbourne again Prime Minister: 
Wellesley Lord Chamberlain : He resigns soon after 
accepting the office : Reasons for his resignation: 
A paragraph in a leader in The Times causes much 
trouble. 


ODERICH resigned again in January 1828, 
and this time his resignation wasaccepted. 


The King sent for the Duke of Wellington, 
who undertook to form an administration. Welles- 
ley, whose term of office in Ireland had run out, 
came to England. There is no question but that 
he expected from his brother the offer of an 
important part in the new Ministry. 


219 


220 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


Rev. HENRY WELLESLEY fo LADY WELLESLEY 
[January 5, 1828] 

I am very anxious to know whether my father’s 
cold is better to-day, as I heard with sincere regret 
from you yesterday that he was confined by it 
to his bed. I was well enough to call at your 
house yesterday, but did not feel quite equal to a 
visit, and I am certain that you will ascribe it to 
the real cause. 

I believe that the Cabinet is not yet arranged, 
and even if it is, I should not resign the hope of 
seeing my father’s name in it at an early period, 
as the first arrangement will most probably not be 
permanent. 

I hope and trust that the Duke has not only 
remembered my father’s claims, but has pressed 
them strongly on his colleagues and on the King. 
This would be but an act of justice, and of sound 
policy as regards his own character. For all the 
world will with one voice condemn his conduct 
if he neglects this proof of respect and of attach- 
ment to his brother. There is a very general wish 
that my father should be in the Ministry, and the 
Duke must be aware of this fact. We shall, I 
assure you, feel the sincerest pain if my father is 
not placed in the Cabinet, as himself may desire, 
and as his services and character justify us in 
expecting.’ 


Wellington, however, did not offer his brother 
any part in the new Ministry. The Duke was 
pledged to Protestant ascendancy, the Marquess to 

1 Add. MSS. 37316 f. 3. 


1835] BROTHERS AT VARIANCE 221 


Catholic emancipation, and in the House of Lords 
on June 10 they had a passage of arms in the 
debate on the question. In the end, however, 
the Prime Minister had to give way, and on April 
13, 1829, the Catholic Emancipation Bill became 
law. 


RICHARD WELLESLEY fo THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
Brighton: June 13, 1828 

MY DEAR FATHER, 

It is with sincere pleasure that I have read 
the report of your speech on the Catholic question, 
and with still greater satisfaction that I have 
heard from many quarters the general impression 
which it has madeinthe country. Your testimony 
was at this season of more than common value 
to the cause itself; but that value was much 
increased by the clear and forcible manner in which 
your confirmed opinions were expressed. I cordi- 
ally hope that this may be only the prelude to 
many exertions in the House of Lords during the 
present session. 

With this public proof of your health, it is need- 
less to trouble you with enquiries about it, more 
especially as I hope in a few days to have the 
pleasure of seeing you in London. Having found 
my health and general strength improved grad- 
ually at this place, I have persevered in residing 
here ; and the climate has, with very little aid 
of medicine, so much restored me that I intend 
for the next three or four months to attend my 
duty at the Stamp Office. 


222 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


I regret having been so long an absentee from 
it, though not a voluntary one, for I can assure ~ 
you that, however contrary to the habits and feel- 
ings of my earlier life, the very subsistence of my 
family obliges me to adhere to it. 

Your affectionate son, 
R. WELLESLEY.’ 


Finding himself on November 15, 1830, in a 
minority in the House of Commons on Sir H, 
Parnell’s motion with regard to the Civil List, 
. Wellington resigned, and Earl Grey, became 
Prime Minister. ‘‘ Lord Wellesley,” Croker wrote 
ts Lord Hertford, November 18, “ is to get some- 
thing—some say Lord Chamberlain, others the 
Board of Control; but I don’t think they will 
give any office of business to the most brilliant 
incapacity in England.” ‘The office offered to, 
and accepted by, Wellesley was that of sLord 
Steward of the Household. 


LorD BROUGHAM to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Hill Street: [1830] 
Allow me to express (which I do very heartily) 
the extreme gratification which 1 feel in the pros- 
pect of belonging to a Government in which you 
are to hold a high station. I believe it to be a 
general feeling that the advantage would have 
been great of your being in the Cabinet. 
But you have chosen otherwise; and at all 
events and in all cases we shall have access to the 


1 Add. MSS. 37316 f. 7. 


1835] THE NEW GOVERNMENT 223 


opes consili which our connection with so renowned 
a statesman places within reach.” 


LorD PLUNKET to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Old Connaught: January 8, 1831 

I ought not to have left your very kind letter 
of the 8th of December so long unanswered. 
During part of the time I was not fully assured of 
my appointment {as Lord Chancellor of Ireland], 
and since that I have been incessantly occupied. 

We certainly are not at present here in an 
enviable state of repose. The fallibility of the 
poor Irish is deplorable. My confidence is in the 
absence of all real grievance, and I trust the 
present agitation will soon subside. Lord Angle- 
sey acts with firmness and promptitude and 
temper. I often wish we could have the oppor- 
tunity of drawing on the wisdom and compre- 
hensive views of a friend of ours who, I firmly 
believe, possesses more resources applicable to the 
extraordinary crisis in which the Empire is placed 
than any man in or out of office. Remember me 
to him with respect and attention. 

All my people, young and old, male and female, 
send you their warm regards.* 


The first and most pressing matter to which 
the new Government had to turn its attention 
was Parliamentary reform. Although defeated 
on the matter of the Civil List, Wellington’s 
Government had really fallen on this subject. 


1 Add. MSS. 37310 f. 365. 
8 Add. MSS. 37311 f. f. 


224 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1828- 


Wellesley had for some time been convinced of 
the necessity for reform, and gave his warm 
support to the measure introduced by Earl Grey. 


EARL GREY fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Downing Street: March 4, 1831 

I have been much gratified by your Lordship’s 
complete and cordial approbation of our plan of 
reform ; the necessity of reform being admitted, 
to have proposed anything that would have been 
inefficient would have been the height of folly. 
The opposition in Parliament would not have been 
less from those who now resist the measure, and 
would have been assisted by the disappointment 
and dissatisfaction of the public. The public is 
now completely with us, and the first effect of 
what we have done has been to set aside, at once, 
all the clamour for universal suffrage, annual 
Parliament, and ballot. If interest and prejudice 
were not too strong to let them see the advantages 
which might be derived from even a temporary 
state of contentment and satisfaction, what advan- 
tages might we not look to from the adoption of 
this measure ? 

The King continues to act most steadily and 
honourably, and I receive continued assurances 
of his full confidence and approbation. With the 
King and the people it will be a strange and still 
more lamentable event, if a measure so supported 
is defeated by the supporters of decayed boroughs 
in the House of Commons. But according to 
present appearances we shall not incur this 
disgrace, and the more public opinion is declared, 


1835] THE REFORM BILL 225 


the more reason there is to expect that its influence 
in both Houses will ultimately prevail.’ 


It is unnecessary to give here a detailed 
account of the progress of the Reform Bills 
through the Houses of Parliament, but it is 
interesting to note that when the King refused 
to give the Royal assent in person, the commis- 
sion appointed for the purpose included Wellesley, 
along with Earl Grey, Lord Brougham, the 
Marquess of Lansdowne, Lord Durham, and Lord 
Holland. Wellesley apparently took no part in 
the debates, for on June 11 Lord Durham wrote 
to him: ‘“ Why do you, who view everything so 
justly, and have greater powers of enforcing your 
views by reasoning than almost anyone, never 
take a part now in the debaté? It is a great 
loss to the country and to the Liberal cause.” 
In May Wellesley resigned the Lord Stewardship. 


EarL GREY to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Downing Street: April 15, 1831 
I have been prevented from answering your very 
kind letter of the 13th as immediately as I wished. 
It gave me great pleasure to hear that your 
health was so far re-established as to afford the 
hope of your being soon able to appear in your 
place in the House of Lords. We shall be in great 
want of your assistance there, upon many of the 
matters that will soon come under discussion ; 
and I look forward with anxious hope to the effect 
1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 6. 
2 Q 


226 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1828- 


of a powerful speech from you on the question of 
reform. 

Indeed, there are many questions on which I 
should wish to have the benefit of your opinion 
and advice, if our opportunities of intercourse 
were more easy—more especially with respect to 
Ireland, the situation of which country becomes 
daily more afflicting. Weare much pressed to renew 
the Insurrection Act. We have hitherto resisted 
these applications, but I fear that the moment is 
fast approaching when we shall no longer be able 
to avoid having recourse to this or to some similar 
measure. 

The question of reform is going on, I think, with 
a fair prospect of success, and the increasing 
violence of its opponents is no bad indication of 
their fears of its passing. There is no species of 
misrepresentation to which they are ashamed to 
resort. Their last attempt to propagate a belief 
that we were willing to compromise the efficiency 
of the measure has been, I trust, completely 
defeated. I am confirmed in my belief that all 
their future efforts, like all that have been already 
used, will fail in deluding the good sense or exciting 
the mass of the public to any degree that may be 
favourable to their views. The Duke of Cumber- 
land’s conduct in circulating the scandalous libel, 
which you were so good as to send me, is of a piece 
with all the rest. He has been reconciled lately 
to the Duke of Wellington, and they have been 
seen, more than once, in sweet and harmonious con- 
versation on the same bench in the House of Lords.! 


1 Add. MSS. 373113 f. 11. 


1835] THE IRISH BILL 227 


EarRL GREY to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private East Sheen: July 26, 1832 


I have just received your Lordship’s note, and 
am very sorry to learn that you have been suffering 
so much from indisposition. I am not surprised 
that what passed on the second reading of the 
Irish Bill should have produced the remarks which 
you make uponit. They are most just as applied 
to both the speeches. The one was detestable in 
principle, and pitiable in expression. The other 
was excellent in all ways. 

They have made a great muster to carry some 
point to-day in the committee, and we shall be 
in the utmost want of every vote we can procure. 
I am unwilling to urge anything that might be 
inconvenient to you, or injurious to your health. 
But if you can come, even to pair off, I shall be 
much obliged to you. You know proxies are not 
available in the committee. 

I came here to dinner yesterday after the levée, 
and am just returning to town, with more 
reluctance than I ever did to Eton after the 
holidays. The Duke of Cumberland, who is more 
violent and bitter than ever, talks loudly of what 
they are to do to-night." 


The selection of a king for the newly-formed 
kingdom of Belgium was the cause of much 
trouble to the chancelleries of Europe. All sorts 
of suggestions were made. Auguste Beauharnais, 
Duke of Leuchtenberg, the grandson of Napoleon’s 

4 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 54. 


228 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1828- 


first consort, was proposed, but he was objected 
to by Louis Philippe, who naturally enough did 
not like the idea of a Buonaparte reigning so near 
France. Then Louis Philippe’s second son, the 
Duke of Nemours, was put forward, and actually 
elected on February 3, 1831, by the Belgian 
National Congress ; but he was ineligible by virtue 
of the Conference of London, which decreed that 
members of the reigning dynasty of the great 
Powers should be excluded. Finally, it was 
offered to, and, after much negotiation, accepted by 
Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg. The Portuguese 
trouble had more serious results, and resulted in a 
war between Peter and Miguel in which Great 
Britain, Spain, and France were later involved. 


EARL GREY to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private Howick: September 15, 1832 


I have had the pleasure of receiving your 
Lordship’s letter of the r2th. 

My correspondence with Windsor Castle entirely 
confirmed the account you give of the good 
disposition that appears to prevail there. I 
cannot doubt, however, that there exists in some 
quarters a spirit which nothing will ever conciliate. 

All our prospects seem at present to be good: 
the revenue increasing, the internal state of the 
country much improved, even Ireland compara- 
tively tranquil, and everything so far promising 
success to the resolution of the Government to 
enforce the authority of the law. Abroad we 


1835] DIFFICULTIES ABROAD 220 


have still the difficulties of Belgium and Portugal. 
The former might be easily settled if all the 
members of the Conference were animated with 
one will ; and so would the latter if all the qualities 
required in such an enterprise as that in which 
Don Pedro is engaged were not wanting. 

You may be assured of my sincere disposition 
and desire to do anything in my power to meet 
your Lordship’s wishes ; and I will immediately 
make the necessary enquiries respecting Mr. 
Greville’s office. But I believe it will be subject 
to new regulations in the department, and 
connected with other arrangements which may 
become necessary. I will enquire, however, but 
nothing, probably, can be definitely settled 
respecting it before my return to town, early in 
the next month. 


VISCOUNT PALMERSTON fo THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
Private Stanhope Street: December 2, 1832 


I am very much obliged to you for so early a 
communication. The period within which you 
think that you could be prepared to set out upon 
the important mission which we conversed about 
yesterday, is indeed as short as one could have 
expected you to name. Whether in the opinion 
of the Government the urgency of affairs would 
admit even of that short delay, I cannot take 
upon myself to say, but I will immediately send 
your note to Lord Grey, who is at Sheen. I need 
not, I am sure, say how much the Government, 

1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 56. 


230 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


and I in particular as more directly concerned in 
the matter by my office, appreciate the very 
handsome manner in which you have offered your 
valuable services to the public upon this important 
occasion ; and what an advantage we should think 
it to be able to bring the weight of so powerful a 
representative of Great Britain to bear upon the 
great questions which are now pending in the 
Peninsula. ? 


EARL GREY to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private East Sheen; December 4, 1832 


I received your Lordship’s very kind note, with 
the enclosed memorandum, this morning, but was 
unable to answer it immediately. 

T am afraid the immediate object of the mission 
to Spain would not admit of so long a delay as a 
fortnight. It is‘ probable, therefore, that the 
original intention of sending Sir Stratford Canning 
may be carried into effect. 

But as his appointment to St. Petersburg will 
only allow. of his staying a short time at Madrid, 
and as there will be much to be done, if things go 
well, to settle the affairs of Spain and Portugal, 
in their relations with this country, upon a 
satisfactory and permanent foundation, I see no 
means by which that important object may be 
so well effected as by your Lordship’s going, if it 
should be agreeable to you, to take up and finish 
the work which may have been begun by Sir 
Stratford Canning. The footing upon which this 
might be arranged, as it appears to me, would be 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 £. 380. 


1835] AN URGENT MISSION 231 


still that of a temporary mission, but for an 
undefined period. The character of the mission, 
and the period at which you should set out, which, 
however, should be early, would be best settled, if 
this proposal should appear to your Lordship to 
deserve consideration, by a personal communi- 
cation with Lord Palmerston or with me, as may 
be most convenient to your Lordship. 


VISCOUNT PALMERSTON to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
Private Stanhope Street : December 6, 1832 


The Government are of opinion that if anything 
can be effected at Madrid upon the subject of 
Portuguese affairs, our only chance of doing any 
good is by an immediate communication ; for the 
condition of Don Pedro with respect to his financial 
means has become so critical that help postponed 
would come too late. Under thee circumstances, 
and considering that on the one hand it would be 
impossible to expect that you could set out upon 
such a mission without a certain time for pre- 
liminary arrangements, and that, upon the other, 
Sir Stratford Canning has, upon notice given him 
ten days ago, prepared himself to start as soon as 
his instructions are given him, the Government are 
of opinion that it will be advisable to send Sir 
Stratford without delay to open the treaties. But 
Sir Stratford will not be able to remain long at 
Madrid, as his duties lie elsewhere, and the 
Government would wish very much to know 
whether, if this Portuguese question should be 

1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 63. 


232 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


more difficult and tedious of adjustment than we 
imagine, and should require a weightier hand, or 
if the affairs of Spain should take a turn which 
afforded an opening for the suggestion of large 
views by the representative of a friendly power, 
you would in either of those events feel disposed 
to give us the temporary aid of your important 
services at Madrid in the course, perhaps, of a 
couple of months from this time.’ 


Sir WILLIAM HENRY FREMANTLE? fo THE 
MARQUESS WELLESLEY 


Private and confidential Stanhope Street 
Apni 18, 1833 
I am commanded by the King to express His 
Majesty’s extreme satisfaction at the attention 
your Lordship has shown to his wishes on the 
subject of the y.O6posed dinner to the Directors of 
the East Indéa Company, and at the very judicious 
and proper consideration you have given to the 
question of issuing the cards of invitation. The 
information contained in your note to me of 
yesterday, which I laid before the King, has 
relieved His Majesty from all difficulty. He has 
not, however, thought proper to issue his com- 
mands finally upon it, but I will take care that 
Mr. Marrable should immediately inform your 
Lordship when the day shall be fixed. 
His Majesty regrets that your Lordship is still 
confined, but hopes the weather and the improve- 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 383. 
2 Treasurer of the Household, 1826-1837. 


1835] LORDS AND COMMONS 233 


ment of your health will enable you to fulfil your 
intentions of attending the dinner of the Knights 
of the Garter.’ 


EarRL GREY to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private Downing Street: June 4, 1833 


I regretted your absence last night very much," 
but still more the causes of it, and I shall be 
anxious to hear that you have got rid of this very 
troublesome complaint. Our defeat last night 
was in some degree a surprise; but if we had 
been better prepared the result would not have 
been materially different. It is quite clear that 
this was a deliberate plan to strike a decisive blow 
against the Government. They must then be 
supposed to have been prepared with a new ad- 
ministration. Yet how it was tg be formed, or how 
it could be expected to stand, iNjs not easy to 
conceive. Already the House of mons are 
beginning to stir, and I am afraid that there is 
only one result of all this that is quite certain, 
viz., the further loss of influence and character 
by the House of Lords. The Bishops, above 
all, will have reason to rue the vote of last night. 

I am to go to Windsor early to-morrow, 
to submit to His Majesty the very grave 

1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 73. 

2In the House of Lords on June 3 Wellington moved, 
“That an humble Address be presented to His Majesty, to 
entreat him that he would be graciously pleased to give such 
directions as are necessary to enforce the observance of his 
subjects of His Majesty’s declared neutrality in the contest 


now going on in Portugal.’’ Lord Grey opposed the motion, 
but it was carried against the Government by 79 to 69 votes. 


234 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1828- 


considerations which arise out of the present cir- 
cumstances. I shall then take his pleasure as to 
the answer to the Address, which, if I am to be the 
adviser of it, cannot be a compliance with its 
request. I will take care that your Lordship shall 
have early intimation of the time when His Majesty 
may be pleased to receive it. 

I return Mr. Littleton’s letter. I had seen one 
from him this morning which gave an equally 
favourable account of his prospects. The coalition 
between Lord Ingestre and the political bruins is 
very disgraceful. 


SiR MARTIN ARCHER-SHEE to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 

isi Square: August 16, 1833 
xr dated the r4th from 
M ate last night. I beg to 
ass at I am fully sensible of 
the g manner in which you 
ha His Majesty’s gracious 
int rtrait of your Lordship 
and find an appropriate situation for it in Windsor 
Castle. 

The high estimation in which the King holds 
Lord Wellesley has led His Majesty to look with 
favour on the imperfect representation of that 
distinguished nobleman which my pencil has been 
able to produce. I am perfectly aware, my Lord, 
that to the subject of my picture, and not to its 
merits, I am indebted forthe honourable destination 
thus assigned to it, and I am more than gratified 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 79. 


1835] WELLESLEY’S PORTRAIT 235 


by the reflection that to your Lordship’s kindness 
I shall owe my first pictorial appearance in the 
Royal collection. 

I shall immediately prepare the picture, and it 
will be ready for removal in the course of a week 
or ten days, when I shall be happy to receive your 
Lordship’s instructions as to the proper person to 
whose care it should be addressed at Windsor 
Castle. The best mode of conveyance is, I believe, 
by a carriage which is called a van, and which will 
preclude the necessity of a packing-case for so 
short a distance. 

In compliance with your Lordship’s desire, I 
subjoin a memorandum which relates to the only 
subject of communication with your Lordship in 
which I can feel neither pride nor pleasure. 


s. d. 


£ 
Portrait, large, whole length : 315 0 Oo 
Paid at three payments ee 250 0 O 


Remaining price of portrait... 65 0 0 
Frame and expenses of conveyance 3915 0O 


Due £104 15 0? 


The state of Ireland was still a cause of great 
trouble to the Government, and Lord Anglesey, 
the Lord-Lieutenant, was at daggers drawn with 
O’Connell. “ Things are now come to that pass,” 
said Anglesey, ‘‘ that the question is whether he or 
I shall govern Ireland.” ‘I wish,’’ O’Connell 
remarked, “‘ that ridiculously self-conceited Lord 

1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 88. 


236 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


Anglesey were out of Ireland. I take him to be 
our present greatest enemy.” The bitter struggle 
between the men ceased only in September 1833, 
when Anglesey resigned, and Wellesley was ap- 
pointed in his stead. 

Wellesley’s appointment was not well received 
in some quarters, and no one was more bitterly 
opposed to it than Charles Greville. “ Yesterday,” 
wrote the diarist on September 16, 1833, “‘ the 
announcement of Lord Wellesley’s appointment 
to be Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland was received 
with as great astonishment as ever I saw. Once 
very brilliant, probably never very efficient, he is 
worn out and effete. It is astonishing that they 
and one does not see why, 
find a good man, they 
ery worst they could hit 
S appointment, which is 
f all. For years past he 
has the world. He comes to 
the House of Lords, and talks of making a speech 
every now and then, of which he is never delivered, 
and he comes to Court, where he sits in a corner 
and talks (as those who, know him say) with as 
‘much fire and liveliness as ever, and with the 
sdme neat, shrewd causticity that formerly dis- 
tinguished him; but such scintillations as these 


1 Plunket was Lord Chancellor; Lieutenant-General Sir 
R. H. Vyvian Commander of the Forces; Littleton Chief 
Secretary ; Francis Blackburn Attorney-General ; and Philip 
Grafton Solicitor-General. 


1835] YOUTH RENEWED 237 


prove nothing as to his fitness for business and 
government, and as he was quite unfit for these 
long ago, it is scarcely to be supposed that retire- 
ment and increased age and infirmities should 
have made him so now.” But presently Greville 
found that he had been mistaken, and he made the 
amende honorable. ‘‘ Dined with. Sefton yester- 
day,” he noted on November 14. “Talked of 
Lord Wellesley, who, since he has been in Ireland, 
has astonished everybody by his activity and 
assiduity in business. He appeared, before he 
went, in the last stage of decrepitude, and they 
had no idea the energy was in him ; but they say 
he is quite a new man, and it is not merely a 
splash, but neat and bond-fide business that he 
does.” The fact is that taking up an adminis- 
trative office revived Wellesley’sSqrmant energies. 
He was not happy as Lord Steward ®yith nothing 
to do, but the moment he was given work of 
importance and invested with authority he became. 
the man he had been when he was taking his 
share of securing India for England. ' 

The Cabinet was hopelessly divided on Irish 
affairs, especially on the question of the revenues 
of the Church, some Ministers holding that 
such revenue should be at the disposal of the 
State, others that it belonged absolutely to the 
Church. Henry Ward introduced in the House of 
Commons on May 27 a motion, seconded’by Grote, 
that affirmed the right of the State to regulate 


238 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1828- 


the distribution of Church property, and the 
expediency of reducing the Irish establishment ; 
but Althorp begged the House to adjourn the 
debate, owing to the resignation of several im- 
portant members of the administration. 


EARL GREY to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private Downing Street: May 28, 1834 


As you will necessarily have heard of the breach 
that has taken place in the Cabinet, I make use 
of the last moment before the post goes out, having 
been constantly occupied during the whole day, 
to tell you how matters now stand. 

The Duke of Richmond, Lord Hipon, Mr. 
Sta raham retire I did all 
6 t it was impossible. 
ost flattering expressions 
wered me to fill their 
pla my own first resolution, 
Ih n with the Government, 
un ents and difficulties to 
whi . I could not resist the 
strong representations of the danger and confusion 
into which everything might be thrown by my 
giving it up. 

The new arrangements are not yet made, but 
the offices that become vacant will be filled from 

1 The Duke of Richmond, Postmaster-General, was 
replaced by the Marquess of Conyngham ; the Earl of Ripon, 
Lord Privy Seal, by the Earl of Carlisle; E. G. Stanley, 
Secretary of State for War and the Colonies, by Thomas Spring 
Rice; and Sir J. R. Graham, at the Admiralty, by Lord 


Auckland. Auckland, who had been at the Board of Trade, 
was succeeded by C. P. Thomson. 


of 


1835] CONFIDENCE 239 


our own ranks, and in a way, I trust, which will be 
satisfactory to our minds and to the public. 

You shall know the moment anything is settled. 
Excuse haste.’ 


Lorp BrouGHAM fo THE MARQuESS WELLESLEY 
Private and confidential [May 1834] 


As you and the Chancellor must be anxious to 
hear of our news—les voici: 

I went to the King yesterday morning and was 
near an hour with him, and found His Majesty in 
a state of vigour and spirit and of confidence and 
cordial affection towards us all such as I cannot 
describe, and have never, I may say, seen equalled 
since we came in. He regrets the resignations, 
but speaks with ease of our filling up the blanks ; 
and it 7s easy—though Stanley is an irreparable 
loss in debate. Our favour ‘with His Majesty 
leaves no chance of failing, and my views of all 
things and all men were laid before him both 
verbally and in writing very fully. 

He says he will stand fast by the Cabinet as 
long as it stands by itself, and I for one will never 
abandon the public service and leave all in remedi- 
less confusion as long as I can find any six men to 
stand with me; that is certain. 

The confidence and delight of House of Commons 
and the public are unequalled. When Althorpsaid 
“confidence ’’ last night they tell me such was the 
roar, andso long, as never was heard in that place. 

Lord Grey in excellent heart.? 


! Add. MSS. 37311 f. 141. 
2 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 143. 


240 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


EArt GREY to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 

Private Downing Street 
June 3, 1834 

T could not, till the result of last night’s division 
was known, say that everything was definitely 
settled. Indeed, there have been moments since 
I last wrote to your Excellency when I thought it 
would be impossible for me to continue in the 
Government. 

The division of last night imposes on me the duty 
of going on, as long as I can hope to avert the 
difficulties in which both the King and the country 
might be involved by a change of the adminis- 
tration at this moment. I feel, however, by no 
means confident of my ability to sustain the 
duties which I have undertaken. 

We have agreed to issue a Commission, such as 
was proposed by-your Excellency at the beginning 
of the year, for enquiring into the circumstances 
of the Irish Church. It was then given up in 
consequence of the objections of those who 
resigned ; and this, considering that the concession 
has not accomplished the purpose for which it was 
made, is now much to be regretted. 

The new appointments will be, as you will have 
seen in the papers: Ellice in the Cabinet ; Rice, 
Colonial Secretary ; Auckland, Admiralty. 

Lord Carlisle, for whom I had designed the 
Privy Seal, wishes to decline it. I must, therefore, 
look out for another. 

I congratulate you on the termination of the 
war in Portugal. On arriving at Montémor o 
Nova, after evacuating Santarem, Don Miguel pro- 


1835] GREY’S RESIGNATION 241 


posed an armistice. This was refused. He then 
retreated further to Evora, from whence he sent 
to accept the terms of submission which had 
been offered to him, and is to embark on board 
an English ship at [illegible]. Sarmento, the 
Portuguese Minister here, tells me that Don Carlos 
is to embark also. What is to be their destination 
T know not. 


Grey, who was now seventy years of age, no 
longer felt equal to the strain occasioned by 
holding the office of Prime Minister in troublous 
times, and he resigned on July 9, 1834. The 
King then sent for Melbourne, and expressed a 
desire for him to form a coalition Ministry that 
should include Peel and Wellington, but to this 
both Melbourne and Peel were averse, and 
in the end Melbourne went ou with the old 
administration. He was succeeded at the Home 
Office by Duncannon. Althorp rejoined his friend 
as Leader of the House of Commons and Chancellor 
of the Exchequer,? and Hobhouse, who had been 
Secretary at War, became First Commissioner of 
Woods and Forests, with a seat in the Cabinet. 


Lorp BrRouGHAM fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private [July 1834] 


All is well, all right. The Government will go 
well and truly on, though the loss of Lord Grey is 

1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 145. 

2 It was Althorp’s resignation of his office and leadership 
in the Commons, consequent on Littleton’s indiscretion (see 
infra), that had finally decided Grey to resign. 

2 R 


242 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


quite irreparable. The Cabinet is to be recon- 
structed in one place only, Lord Melbourne’s,' 
Duncannon? coming in as Home Secretary, with a 
seat in the House of Lords, and Hobhouse has 
Woods. I have not a moment more but to say 
that we stood by Littleton stoutly, and nothing will 
be thought of that can annoy him. This is due to 
his interests as well as his connection with your 
Excellency. 

These arrangements are, of course, not known 
to any but the Cabinet, so pray say nothing till 
next post? 


When in June 1834 it became necessary to 
consider the renewal of the Irish Coercion Bill, 
Littleton had a conversation with O’Connell in 
which, in order to placate the agitator, he told 

; 4 
him that certain clauses would probably be 
omitted. , The clauses in question were not 
omitted in the Bill, and O’Connell on July 3 
charged the Government with breach of faith.‘ 
Grey declared his ignorance of the fact that there 
had been any communication with O’Connell. 
Littleton admitted that he had been guilty of 

4 Lord Melbourne had been Home Secretary under Gre 
but now exchanged that position for the office of First Lord « 
the Treasury. 

2 John William Ponsonby, Viscount Duncannon (1781- 
1847). He entered the House of Commons in 1805, and was 
called to the House of Lords as Viscount Duncannon in 1834. 
He succeeded as (fourth) Earl of Bessborough in 1844, and 
was Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, 1846-1847. 


3 Add. MSS. 37297 f. gor. 
* See Hansard, Series 3, vol. xxiv. p. II00. 


1835] LITTLETON’S INDISCRETION 243 


indiscretion, and tendered his resignation, which, 
however, was not accepted. He remained in 
office until Melbourne retired in November 1834. 
He was created Baron Hatherton in May 1835. 


LorD BrouGHAM to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private July 1834 

I have much satisfaction in assuring you that 
nothing could go off better than all did in the 
Lords last night, and I had a real gratification 
in both speaking from my heart as to your 
Excellency, as well as much pride also in stating 
how ridiculous all idea is of any of Lord Grey’s 
colleagues having plotted to get him out, especially 
Althorp and myself, who had five times in one year 
kept him in by main force. 

It is highly agreeable to find that Littleton has 
risen and not fallen in public opinion. In truth, 
he has gained over everyone by his manly and 
honourable and able conduct. 

T enclose you a good inscription on Buonaparte, 


by Baron Williams, one of our new judges and 
avnp wavptAopovcos. 


If you like it I shall give you another.’ 


Lorp BrRouGHAM to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private [July 19, 1834] 
All went off admirably in both Houses last 
night.2 Melbourne made another excellent speech, 
1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 153. 
2 Lord Wharncliffe in the House of Lords on July 18 
moved that Wellesley’s private correspondence on the 


Coercion Bill be laid before Parliament. After a debate, the 
motion was withdrawn. 


244 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


firm, eloquent, and conciliatory; all allow this. 
Lord Grey almost exceeded himself in generous 
and honourable support of the Government,’and 
said, ‘‘ Had he been in our place he should have 
taken our course.’ The absurdity of the motion 
was glaring, and. Wortley gave it up; indeed,- 
nobody supported him. He was hustled into 
making it because their wise and angry Lordships 
are all going to leave town and court the shade, 
associating with their dogs and sheep. 

(You will naturally exclaims “ Quid meruistis 
oves placidum pecus?’’ !) 

All agree you do right in not allowing your 
private correspondence to be produced, and 
Ellenborough alone, I believe, of either house, holds 
the novel doctrine that no Minister can write a 
private letter to a Lord-Lieutenant without con- 
sulting his colleagues. Indeed, if the corre- 
spondence I have the happiness to have with your 
- Excellency were produced many a Lord would find 
it an unpleasant perusal. Remember me to the 
Chancellor. 

You'll see the London Press furious at me, 
especially The Times, which must puzzle Lord 
Londonderry, whose faith is that I am the editor 
of that journal. The key to it is that they all 
wanted dissolution and revolution—or at le 
some confirm—and some want government at ft! v 
mercy of the gentlemen of the Press, and they accuse 
me, most justly, I am glad to say, of having 
defeated their prospect by standing firm. 

But my attacks in the Libel Committee on their 
slanders and their monopoly are also a cause of 


1835] THE IRISH TITHES BILL 245 


this spite. I succeeded, I believe, in putting an 
end to the newspaper stamps, which the great 
papers hold to be one of their great securities 
against competition. I also have fulfilled a threat 
I then held out of ending the violent and 
slanderous Press by an association. For, joined 
by the most respectable merchants and bankers 
in London (Smith, Lloyd, Grote, and Goldsmith), 
and by lawyers, and by literary men, I have 
launched a Society for Diffusing Political Know- 
ledge, and this The Times perceives will emanci- 
pate the “ courteous readers”’ and put them in 
the hands of gentlemen.’ 


LorD BROUGHAM to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 


Private House of Lords 
August 8, 1834 
We go on most perfectly in all respects. The 
Opposition Lords are supposed to have made up 
their minds to throw out the Irish Tithes Bill? 
I will not say “‘ Verily these men have a devil.” 
But “ they have a Primate,” who is a weak man, 
and he wisely holds tithe can be collected by the 
ordinary course of the law. I fancy that the 
whole tithes collected will go into one small barn 
and leave room for the Bishops to have a dance in it. 
I doubt, after all, if their courage will be so 
screwed up, but if it is, I know never were a more 
fatal error for the said Opposition. It will throw 
1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 201. 
2 O’Connell’s plan of abandoning some two-fifths of the 
existing Irish tithes and partially compensating the owners 


out of suppressed bishopric revenues and a State grant was 
defeated in the House of Lords. 


246 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


the Irish Church entirely on their hands, for who 
but they will be responsible for the starving ? All 
our colleagues are firm. We shall fight it to the 
uttermost, and if the Bill is lost, the fault is not 
ours. At all events, the poor Opposition folks 
have ascertained fully that, throw it out as they 
please, they will throw out nobody else. 

I have at present the inconvenience of a Bishop 
preaching upon bastardy in my right ear. His 
discourse is composed of equal parts of bawdry 
and blasphemy, and, notwithstanding, it proves 
so dull that I see the peers are yawning by benches 
at a time.’ 


LorD BrouGHAM to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private Brougham: August 21, 1834 

I have reached my Penates at length, and 
“ solutus curis”’ am reposing “ desiderato lecto.” 

The folly of the Lords seems well felt throughout 
the country, and it certainly—however hurtful 
to the Irish Church—is very much to our benefit, 
selfishly speaking, and has really done for the 
Opposition as much as twenty defeats. 

I am credibly informed that the Irish parsons 
gave their voices against the Bill in pure fear of 
their Bishops, who had no interest in it anyway as 
they supposed, but who will perhaps find the 
contrary if their incredible folly shall pull down the 
inferior parts of the fabric. 

The decided tone assumed of late by the 
Government, and their putting the Lords and their 
votes so entirely out of the question, has given 

1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 167. 


1835] BROUGHAM’S SCOTCH TOUR 247 


our friends in the country mighty comfort and 
confidence. 

The Scotch are in high glee particularly, and 
it is, as your Excellency knows, a thrifty and 
calculating people. They are inviting Lord Grey 
and myself to a grand banquet. As they are of 
the wise and reflecting race who admit the 
impossibility of a country living on stimulants for 
years, and therefore rest satisfied with one or two 
great measures a session (and well may they truly), 
it seems to me that we cannot too much encourage 
them and show respect for them. They have a 
House of Commons club of forty-eight out of fifty- 
three Scotch members—all supporting us—and 
they gave Althorp, Melbourne, and myself a 
dinner some weeks ago—when your Excellency’s 
health was so warmly received that I conclude 
they have already invited you to the ministerial 
banquet of next month. If you had time it 
would be well worth while to come for a few days 
to Portpatrick, among your friends, and see as 
many of your old Indian followers as are anywhere 
scattered there. 

Iset off next week with my daughter on a pilgrim- 
age to the shrine of the Countess at Dunrobin.? 


Lorp BrouGHAM to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private and confidential (Sept.] 1834 
I have just been proroguing to 23rd October in 
case Ireland shall (which it will not) require a 
November meeting. But it will be the less likely 
to require it if we are seen to be prepared. 
1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 169. 


248 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


My Scotch tour was very unexpectedly and not 
very agreeably turned into business instead of 
relaxation, by the great kindness of the people 
wherever I went. Had I foreseen it, I should 
certainly not have stirred from my fireside, but 
being once in for it, I resolved to go through with 
it so as to do good to the Government, and the 
stability of the country’s institutions. I really 
think I preached the word with some good fruits. 
The enthusiasm for the Government all over 
Scotland is at its acme, and Lord Grey’s reception 
in the north was as gratifying as could be wished 
by his warmest friends. The same reception 
attended me all the way home, and on the Scotch 
border I was drawn through a town, every house 
of which belongs to the Duke of Buccleuch and is 
at his gate, all the people literally flocking, of all 
vanks. If any fools believed Lord Grey and I to 
be foes, the familiar footing on which we were in the 
face of all, both in public and private, must have 
opened their silly eyes—even to the trifle of my 
girl (Miss Spalding) being chaperoned by his ladies 
to the assembly which both of us wanted to 
attend. Allis right and well here; John Company 
(your old friend) wants a Governor-General of 
John’s own shop—a second chop-statesman called 
Metcalfe and John is busy intriguing for this, 
but we have to-day given his honour a most 

1 Charles Theophilus Metcalfe (1785-1846), who had been 
Resident of Hyderabad, 1820-1827, and a Member of the 
Supreme Council from that year. He was appointed Pro- 
visional Governor-General in 1835, and in 1836 Lieutenant- 


Governor of the North West Provinces. He held other high 
appointments, and was in 1845 created Baron Metcalfe. 


1835] MELBOURNE RESIGNS 249 


positive no to this or anything of this sort. I shall 
soon let you know more of the matter. Colonel 
Grant wants to go, and we shall do all we can for 
him, but I see no chance of said Company taking 
him. So it may be Auckland,’ whom I dare to 
say John would swallow. Ihave sent for my man 
of confidence in the India House to sound and hear 
all about their views, and I shall let you know 
when I have seen him. What think you of this 
whole matter? I need not say this is quite entre 
nous. 

I beg my best respects and regards to Lady 
Wellesley, and in this Miss Spalding joins. We go 
to Brougham to-morrow.? 


The death of Lord Spencer on November 10, 
which withdrew Althorp from the House of 
Commons, necessitated a rearrangement of minis- 
terial offices, and Melbourne proposed Lord John 
Russell as leader of the Lower House’; but the 
King was bitterly opposed to him, in consequence 
of the line of conduct he had taken in the case of 
the Irish Church Bill. He was angry at the 
tremendous success of Brougham’s progress 
through Scotland, and also he was weary of Whig 

udictation. After much negotiation Melbourne 
resigned on November 14. The King sent for 
Wellington, who recommended Peel as the most 


1 George Eden, second Baron Auckland (1784-1849), was 
appointed Governor-General of India, 1835. He was created 
Earl of Auckland, 1839. 

2 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 175. 


250 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


suitable Prime Minister. His Majesty consenting, 
Peel, who was at Rome, was sent for, Wellington, 
in the meantime, holding all the Secretaryships of 
State. Peel arrived in London on December 9, 
and at once began to constitute a Ministry. Peel 
himself was First Lord of the Treasury and 
Chancellor of the Exchequer ; the Home, Foreign, 
and War members were, respectively, Goulburn, 
Wellington, and Aberdeen, and the Lord Chancellor 
the Earl of Rosslyn. Wellesley was succeeded in 
Ireland by the Earl of Haddington. 


Lorp BrRouGHAM fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private [November 1834] 


I was so busy yesterday I had no time to write. 
The Court intrigue has succeeded, and His Majesty, 
solely because Althorp was removed from the 
House of, Commons, has made the Duke of 
Wellington Minister and commanded the three 
Secretaries of State to give up their respective 
seals to-morrow, when he holds a council to receive 
them. No difference of opinion, no disapprobation 
of our manners, no disagreement among ourselves 
is present. But we are said by His Majesty 
‘not to have the House of Commons now that 
Althorp is gone from it; and the suggestion” 
(worthy of all the powers of reasoning which 
distinguish the eminent logician now at the head of 
His Majesty’s counsels): “‘ Therefore let me have 
a Ministry whom neither this nor the next House 
of Commons can endure ”’—observe the reasons 


1835] BROUGHAM AND THE KING 2sr 


given about loss of confidence—makes it extremely 
difficult to dissolve said House, for if he dissolves 
his Ministry because the Parliament confides too 
little in them, he cannot very consistently dissolve 
his Parliament for confiding too much. But still 
less could he do so after meeting them and their 
passing a vote in our favour, so that I expect a 
dissolution. 

I wrote to His Majesty a letter, of which I 
enclose a copy. The thing is strong, for it tells 
His Majesty: ‘“‘ You choose to ruin the country. 
I wash my hands of your proceeding, and hold 
you answerable for the consequences,” and above 
all I warned His Majesty about dissolving, as that 
would make another dissolution necessary after- 
wards. Nevertheless, his answer is extremely 
gracious, the most so I ever received! I think 
this has a view to my new position as an Opposition 
chief. His Majesty says he well knows the ability 
and indefatigable zeal which I put, into all I 
undertake. Aye, but His Majesty’s royal father 
and brother could have told him something of the 
zeal I have when in Opposition, and which his new 
Government will soon see.’ 


[ENCLOSURE] 
LorD BROoUGHAM fo THE KING 
[November 1834] 


Most GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN, 
I have received the intimation through Viscount 
Melbourne of Your Majesty having come to the 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 186. 


252 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1828- 


resolution of dismissing your present Ministers in 
consequence of Lord Althorp’s removal from the 
House of Commons. 

That Your Majesty in this, as in every other act 
of Your Majesty, is guided solely by the sense of 
duty, and by your views of what you really deem 
for the good of your country, is a truth of which I 
have an intimate persuasion, and to which I yield 
an unhesitating assent; at the same time, I 
should have felt that a very heavy and indeed an 
unbearable load of responsibility rested on me if 
I had not set before Lord Melbourne, for the 
purpose of being submitted to Your Majesty, my 
own decided opinion upon the inevitable con- 
sequences of such a proceeding at the present 
moment. Lord Melbourne has sufficiently ex- 
plained the grounds of that opinion to relieve me 
from being in any way answerable for whatever 
may be the result. No one can more earnestly 
pray that it may be such as will contribute to the 
good of the State and to Your Majesty’s own 
personal satisfaction. 

My own retirement from Your Majesty’s service 
will be accompanied with a sense, too deep ever 
to be effaced from my mind, of the gratitude which 
I owe my Sovereign for his unvarying kindness 
and the uniformly gracious manner in which he 
has condescended to accept my poor endeavours 
to assist him in the government of his realms. 
The last efforts which I had made in this behalf 
were directed towards investigating the impatience 
which in many quarters seemed dangerous to the 
country, without leading to any sound or 


1835] BROUGHAM’S ADVICE 253 


satisfactory measures of amendment—and though 
this change may frustrate these attempts, which 
had certainly begun to be attended with success, 
I shall ever retain an attachment to the principles 
on which I have always acted, steering clear alike 
of the policy of those who will have no improve- 
ment, and of those whom no change can satisfy. 
Nor, let me add, will any vicissitudes of party 
connection, to which I am as likely as any man to 
be exposed, ever make me, in all that personally 
concerns Your Majesty, forget for a moment the 
obligations which your gracious kindness have 
laid upon me. I should not, while I convey for 
the last time my sentiments to Your Majesty’s 
will, discharge the duty of a loyal subject or 
faithful counsellor, if I did not humbly, but very 
earnestly, express the hope that the experiment 
of a Tory Government may, if possible, be tried 
without dissolving Parliament. If so—as failure 
may lead to no extensive and irreparable evils— 
if it be accompanied with one dissolution and then 
fails, as I conscientiously believe it must, a second 
appeal to the country will be inevitable, and no 
man can foresee the consequence of that.’ 


EpwarpD JoHN LITTLETON to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
Grosvenor Place: December 2, 1834 
I write this on the chance of your receiving it 
before your departure—not that you will lose 
much missing it. 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 188, 


254 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1828- 


I leave town this morning for Staffordshire, 
where I have much to do. I have not seen the 
King, as no Court has been held since my arrival. 
I have written a note to Sir Herbert Taylor, which 
I hope will satisfy His Majesty of my respectful 
intentions, and procure me a continuance of the 
entrée, and the privilege of wearing the official 
uniform. Lord Spencer advised me how to write. 

The ex-Ministers, still holding their seals and 
keys, of which there are several (Lord Spencer, 
Auckland, Hobhouse, P. Thomson, and Attorney- 
General), met to-day to consider whether they 
should not remonstrate with the Duke or the King 
on their embarrassing situation under their pro- 
visional derangement, already prolonged most un- 
constitutionally, and apparently likely to continue 
for some time. The general feeling, however, was 
that they were in no degree compromised by it, in 
that the longer it continued, the greater would be 
the Duke’s difficulty in justifying it to Parliament. 
Nothing, therefore, will be said about it by them at 
present. . 

The Duke, Shawe, Lord Lyndhurst and Lord 
Rosslyn are at work daily on our Irish Church 
Reform Bill! I am assured that this is the fact 
on very good authority. 

Leslie Porter a commissioner of the Great Seal ! 
I have sent an article to The Morning Chronicle 
about it. 

I am extremely sorry I shall not see you on your 
road through Staffordshire, nor, indeed, probably 
till Parliament meets. It would be very satis- 
factory to me to know how the King receives you, 


1835] THE DICTATOR 255 


and whether he offers you an opportunity of 
speaking your opinion. IJ have not a doubt that 
the Duke of Wellington will, if he decently can, 
postpone your audience. 

Mrs. Petre told me last night she had seen a 
letter from the Queen that morning, in which Her 
Majesty said: “‘May God prosper the King’s 
noble undertaking.” 

I expect a bitter contest in Staffordshire. The 
Tories will all desert me, and the Radicals will 
support me, I had rather it was the other way. 
Bute <:. 


EARL GREY fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Howick : December 9, 1834. 

By this time, or about this time, I ‘ calculate ” 
that you will be in London, and therefore no longer 
delay thanking you for your very kind letter, 
which I received a few days ago. 

I concluded that the extraordinary event which 
we have lately witnessed would occasion your 
resignation. The manner of it surprised me very 
much. Circumstances concerned to inspire me 
with a belief that the existence of the late ad- 
ministration had become very precarious, and that 
its dissolution would probably be hastened by the 
death of Lord Spencer, which might have been 
expected at any moment during the last three 
years. But the manner in which it was at once 
dismissed @ la militaire by His Highness the 
Dictator, had never, I confess, offered itself to 
my imagination. 

1 Add. MSS. 37311 £. rgo. 


256 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


You ask my opinion as to the consequences 
of this event, and of the conduct which it would 
be expedient to pursue upon it. Both are matters 
of difficult speculation. With respect to the first, 
I see no consequences that might not be dis- 
astrous. It appears to me impossible that the 
new Ministers can conduct the Government upon 
the new principles of moderate but efficient 
reform ; and I do not see how either this country 
or Ireland can be governed on any other. They 
could not exist for a week with the present House of 
Commons. I look upon a dissolution, therefore, 
as inevitable and immediate. Will it produce 
a Parliament more suitable to their purpose? 
I doubt it. The moderate Whigs may and pro- 
bably will fail in many of the elections ; the new 
House therefore will come to be more divided 
between Toryism and Radicalism, which I con- 
ceive to be the worst thing that can happen. It 
will render the Commons more unmanageable 
by this or any other Government. 

As to what is to-be done in so perplexing a 
state of affairs, it is a question to be answered 
by those who must take henceforward the lead 
in active politics, rather than by me. I consider 
myself as having taken leave of public life for ever, 
except upon occasions when some important 
question may require that I should, as a matter 
of duty, take a part. I should recommend great 
moderation as far as it may be practicable, with 
a steady adhering to the principles of the late 
Government. But it is easier to say this in general 
than to suggest a plan of action according to 


1835] GREY’S POLICY 257 


which a system of policy can be worked out. 
The tendency of things is to engage men on different 
sides with extreme principles, and it seems hardly 
possible for an active politician to steer between 
them or take an even course. I have already 
proof of this here. Howick has offered himself 
again to his constituents on the moderate principles 
which I have stated. He is, nevertheless, opposed 
by a Tory candidate brought forward by the Duke 
of Northumberland. His most active supporters, 
still influenced by the excitement of the Reform 
Bill, and, like men used to brandy, not satisfied 
with any weaker liquor, require something more 
pungent than what he has offered them. He 
will probably, therefore, be obliged to take a 
higher tone, but, I trust, without overstepping 
those limits which a sense of duty, paramount 
to any private interest, must prescribe. For the 
rest I should entirely approve of a line for them in 
uniformity with the views so ably and so prudently 
described in Lord Melbourne’s answers to the 
Derbyshire address. 

Harry was very sorry not to see you again before 
you left Ireland, but as it could only have been 
for two or three days, and I was able to obtain an 
extension of his leave of absence from his regiment 
till the end of January, I rover you would 
excuse my taking him with me? 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 194. 


258 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1828- 


CHARLES THEOPHILUS METCALFE! to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
India: December 23, 1834 
Few things in life have given me greater pleasure 
than the receipt of your Lordship’s kind letter, 
delivered by Lieutenant Campbell. It is now 
within a few days of thirty-four years since I had 
the honour of being presented to you. You were 
then the Governor-General of India, and I was 
_a boy of fifteen entering on my career. I shall 
never forget the kindness with which you treated 
me, from first to last, during your stay in India, 
nor the honour and happiness which I enjoyed 
in being for a considerable period a member of 
your family. So much depends on the first turn 
given to a man’s course, that I have a right to 
‘attribute all of good that has since happened to 
me to the countenance and favour with which you 
distinguished me at that early period. My public 
principles« were learned in your school, pre- 
eminently the school of honour, zeal, public 
spirit, and patriotism, and to my adherence to 
the principles there acquired I venture to ascribe 
all the success that has attended me. 

As I was proceeding to join the new presidency, 
after being relieved from the vice-presidentship 
at Fort William by the return of the Governoy- 
General from Madras, about the time of Lieutenant 
Campbell’s removal from England, I asked him 


} Charles Theophilus Metcalfe (1785-1846) held various 
official positions in India, and was provisional Governor- 
General 1835-6 ; he was very successful as Governor of 
Jamaica, 1837-42, and was Governor-General of Canada 
1843-5; he was created Baron Metcalfe in 1845. 


1835] METCALFE’S ELECTION, 259 


to accompany me, his regiment bene also in that 
quarter. We are now together on our march. 
I shall seriously look out for an opportunity of 
advancing him. It may be more distant and more 
difficult than I wish, or altogether impracticable, 
owing to the retention by the supreme Govern- 
ment of all patronage connected with the army, 
but I will ascertain his views and do my best for 
him as soon as I can. 


LorD BrouGHAM to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
London: May [1834] - 
Many thanks, my dear Lord Wellesley, for your 
kind and entertaining letter. Here I am till 
November, or rather I am at Brighton, but I came 
up to swear in Pepys? as Master of the Rolls. We 
expect Bickersteth? will succeed as Solicitor-General. 
Well, the Honourable Company Behauder held 
a council on Saturday and made a desperate 
plunge in favour of Metcalfe, refusing* a motion 
of adjournment by fourteen to four, and carrying 
a cunningly devised resolution by sixteen to two 
that Metcalfe should be appointed provisionally 
while the new system is brought into operation. 
Now, as this may be five or ten years, it meant 
1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 198. 
e? Sir Charles Christopher Pepys, third Baronet (178r1- 
1851), Solicitor-General, 1834; Master of the Rolls, 1834- 
1836; created first Baron Cottenham in 1836 on his appoint- 
ment as Lord Chancellor, which office he held until 1841 ; 
cance Lord Chancellor 1846; raised to an earldom, 
: 3 Highiy Bickersteth (1783-1851), called to the bar, 1811 ; 


took silk, 1827 ; created Baron Langdale of Langdale in 1836, 
when he succeeded Pepys as Master of the Rolls. 


260 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1828- 


in truth to appoint Metcalfe Governor-General. 
This is seen through and will be at once rejected 
by the controlling power. Indeed, I fancy Grant 
must have some pleasure in so doing, as the vote 
was really against himself. It seems to put him 
almost hors de combat, which I regret much, as 
he was greatly bent on it, though we should all 
deeply feel his loss. 

The Dissenters and University speech, dedicated 
to your Excellency (as is most due), is just got 
through the Press, and a dedication copy will be 
sent as soon as binders will allow. 

I dined yesterday at Holland House ; all well. 
Lady Holland is going to treat him with a week 
at Ampthill, which delights our friends as much 
as you used to enjoy taking a native kingdom. 
I doubt if any such great operation would make 
Lord Holland more happy. Lord Lansdowne 
was there, being in town on his way for a trip to 
Belgium. .But this time Lady Lansdowne comes 
up to-morrow to accompany him, for she con- 
siderately thinks that a man always likes to travel 
about (especially should Paris be in the wind) with 
his wife and family about him. 

I am quite delighted you have seen Lord 
Duncannon. I assure you the pleasure has been 
mutual. He writes in raptures.’ 


LorD BROUGHAM fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private and confidential Cannes (en Provence) 
~~ ——sts«SWN ew Yeear’s Day, 1835 
I wish you and yours many happy New Years. 

2 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 207. 


1835] BROUGHAM’S OSTRACISM 261 


In the word yours I do not include [a] “ certain 
Duc” [Wellington], for to him I wish many 
returns not of the season but of the session which 
is approaching, and which he will find worse 
than any one French or Mahratta general he ever 
licked found his beating. 

IT am anxious to tell you first why I am here and 
not in London; next, what I think of affairs. 
I came abroad to recreate my health, ruined after 
thirty-four years of slavery, with the liberty and the 
liberties of Paris. Peel would gravely and con- 
sequentially put it down as a discovery that liberty 
is good and licentiousness is wrong. I agree with 
him, especially being at Cannes. Were IJ at Paris 
I should crave a short exception. My stay at 
Paris would have been a week, but I heard that 
the good people, not of England, but of Brooks’s, 
had laid me under an ostracism. In truth it 
really was such for a fortnight or three weeks, 
and all I could learn of the cause was, that no 
reason was assigned; nor indeed could any, for 
all I had done was to refuse a pension of £5,000 a 
year. Seeing the prevalence of this folly, I 
resolved to come and see some old and dear 
friends I have in the north of Italy, and to 
examine minutely the state of things in the south 
of France, well knowing that the said ostracism 
would be soon over, and that it would then be in 
my power to make them eat the shells of their 
own oysters. I always intended to be back before 
the meeting [of Parliament] one week at least, and 
so I shall. 

Here I find the beast-ridden and priest-ridden 


262 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


Government of Sardinia (your Lordship remembers 
its follies well) has chosen to lay all France and 
Italy under an interdict because five or six people 
out of 160,000 died of cholic at Marseilles after 
keeping Christmas ; and though I have not been 
near Marseilles, all I can obtain is fifteen days 
off my quarantine. 

I have refused and now go to Hiéres, Toulon, 
and Marseilles, whence I wish I could send cholera 
and put to death the Sardinian Government. 

Then as to England: I am clear that Duke 
Arthur’s sense is better than Peel’s, and that he 
never dreams really of returning in power after 
dissolution, but that he hopes by that necessary 
step to increase his minority in the Commons 
enough to give the majority in Opposition in the 
Lords spirit to resist all reforms. I can calculate 
his plans no other way. Not to dissolve would 
be drivelling. The elections may give him roo 
more than-he has, and leave him in a minority of 
250 to 400; but that is better by much than his 
present position. ‘I write to no one else, avoiding 
all correspondence, but I did not leave Paris 
without transmitting much good ammunition, 
which I hope has been well used. This is January, 
and I am sitting at 7 p.m. with the windows 
open. What a divine climate.’ 


EDWARD JOHN LITTLETON to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
January 23, 1835 
I like decided advice, and therefore was not 
1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 211. 


1835] THE SPEAKER 263 


at all displeased with Duncannon’s letter. Indeed, 
its spirit towards myself is evidently most friendly. 
I return it to you and will write to Duncannon 
myself to-morrow. 

The fact is, Spring Rice? means to occupy the 
ground whenever he sees a fair opening. I have 
perceived him working at this object for these last 
four years. He was furious when Lords Grey and 
Althorp promised me the Government support 
two years ago. When you see Grey, he will tell 
you many proofs of Spring Rice’s ill-humour on 
that score, and of the plans he then formed to dis- 
lodge me. He has been busily at work with the 
Whigs in town ever since the dissolution of 
Parliament to promote his own views. Knowing 
that he had his ground good with his late col- 
leagues, if Abercromby?* could be propitiated, he 
has opened the discussion in the newspapers, 
making his advance under other names, in order 
that they, and not he, might receive the enemies’ 
fire. You will see he will show himself when he 
can no longer conceal his purpose. 

I have always felt so confident that he was not 
popular with the majority of the party, that, 
had there been an actual vacancy in the Chair 
by the removal of Manners-Sutton* I should not 

1 Thomas Spring Rice (1790-1866) was Secretary to the 
Creasury, 1830-4; Chancellor of the Exchequer, 1834 and 
1835-9 ; created Baron Monteagle, 1839. 

* James Abercromby (1776-1858), a son of Sir Ralph 
Abercromby ; Speaker of the House of Commons, 1835-9; 
created Baron Dunfermline, 1839. 

3 Sir Charles Manners-Sutton (1780-1845), Speaker of the 
House of Commons from 1817. In 1835 he was accused of 


partisanship, and was not re-elected. In that year he was 
raised to the peerage as Viscount Canterbury. 


264 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1828- 


have hesitated at once to accept the offers of 
support that have been made to me, and to 
desire my friends to canvass for me. When Lord 
Melbourne might have had time to learn the 
general opinion, I should have appealed to him ; 
and I should have had little doubt that that pro- 
cess would have produced on his mind the same 
favourable effect that the same course did on the 
minds of Lord Grey and Lord Althorp two years 
ago. Having kept my friends quiet, while Spring 
Rice has been at work, has made them imagine 
the majority is for him, and as far as declarations 
go it must appear so. 

I am sure no one will displace Manners-Sutton 
if heis proposed. The intention of Peel, I imagine, 
was to make him and Goulburn change places. 
His force in the House of Commons will not enable 
him to carry Goulburn. Sir C. Manners-Sutton, 
therefore, will be compelled, bien malgré lui, to 
take the harness again. I cannot support Spring 
Rice. Were I now to support him I should be 
pledged to him for a future occasion. But I have 
also personal objections to him, in acting on which 
I am guilty of no littleness. I cannot in a letter 
state them, but Craig shall see you, if you will 
permit him, and satisfy you of the propriety of 
my motives. 

If Abercromby stands, my respect and personal 
regard for him would induce me to support him, 
though I should still think his chance a bad one. 

I write this solely for your own information. 
Your great kindness to me on this and on all other 
occasions entitles you to know all my motives.’ 


1 Add, MSS. 37311 f. 223. 


1835] RIVAL CANDIDATES 265 


Lorp HOLLAND to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private January 29, 1835 

Melbourne and John Russell have come to town 
and have seen Abercromby. He says, “ He will 
serve as Speaker if chosen, but will not solicit 
nor express any opinion on the expediency of 
proposing him.” They determined to put their 
application to him and his answer into the formal 
shape of a correspondence, and then to request 
a committee of House of Commons friends to 
ascertain by canvass the prospect of success, 
reserving to themselves the right of dropping the 
scheme if it should be very doubtful. The advan- 
tages of this course of proceeding I apprehend to 
be this: having now determined at all hazard to 
attempt the exclusion of Sutton, they would, if the 
result of the canvass prove unfavourable, be 
disposed to consider calmly the comparative 
disadvantages of submission without battle, and 
of battle and defeat. It is quite*clear that 
Abercromby and Abercromby only gives them 
a chance of success. It is almost equally clear 
to me that if there is mo chance of success, it is 
highly desirable, if it be practicable, not to hazard 
a battle. 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo SIR FRANCIS 
BURDETT 


Private and confidential Clarendon Hotel 

February 6, 1835 

No excuse can be pleaded for this intrusion 

but my sincere respect and esteem for your high 
1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 230. 


266 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS = [1828- 


public character and my extreme anxiety that its 
powerful influence should not be alienated from 
the great cause to which the Empire now looks 
with so much solicitude. 

The administration of the executive power 
has fallen into hands of which the nation has 
plainly signified its distrust, and a general union 
has been formed for the purpose of rescuing the 
State from this dangerous usurpation, and of 
opening the way to the restoration of a more 
liberal Government, and of securing the ultimate 
benefits of the late reform in the representation 
of the people. 

It appears most expedient for this purpose that 
the earliest occasion should be taken to manifest 
the determination of the House of Commons 
to maintain without deviation, and in the most 
vigorous manner, the principles of the reform and 
the general character of liberality, civil and 
religious, so strenuously asserted by the Parlia- 
ment which has been dissolved. 

The election of a Speaker will afford the first 
trial of those principles and of that character, 
and the nation will be grievously disappointed 
if the choice of its representatives should fall 
on any person not fully tried and approved by 
conduct and public service and one animated by 
the same spirit which pervades the whole body 
of the people. 

That Sir Charles Manners-Sutton is not such 
a person now requires no proof; without any 
reflection on his character it is now eviden that 
he is firmly attached to a system which the people 


1835] CONFIDENCE ABUSED 267 


disapprove, and which they have earnestly endeav- 
oured to destroy. 

But it has further appeared that Sir Charles 
Manners-Sutton, having been generously entrusted 
by the House of Commons with the high and con- 
fidential office of their Speaker, has been unfaithful 
to that sacred charge, and has been actively en- 
gaged in the expulsion of public servants possess- 
ing the confidence of Parliament, and afterwards 
in the dissolution of that House of Commons by 
whose favour he had been distinguished with 
special honours and emoluments. 

To elect him would be to sanction all his acts 
since his last election, and amongst them his act 
of ingratitude towards his patron and benefactor, 
the late House of Commons. 

This case is very different from the circum- 
stances under which he was chosen by the late 
House of Commons. The event has proved that 
confidence was then misplaced and has been 
abused. At tFat time no such charge was alleged, 
and therefore your arguments, in your excellent 
speech on that occasion, are not at all inconsistent 
with a different course in the present case. 

His first election, to preside over the first 
reformed Parliament, is, in truth, a decisive 
precedent against his re-election to the same 
honour; it has proved the danger and mischief 
of placing such an authority in the hands of any 
enemy to reform. His conduct in promoting 
and assisting the expulsion of the late administra- 
tion and the dissolution of the late Parliament 
furnishes a substantive and sufficient ground for 


268 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


excluding him from the Chair on the present 
occasion. They who raised him to the Chair 
are now fully justified (if not positively required) 
to vindicate the precedent which they established 
from false and mischievous misapplication, and 
to manifest to the people that confidence abused 
will not be renewed, and that, although the most 
exalted wisdom and integrity may occasionally 
be deceived, the time will come when “ public 
faith will be cleared from the shameful brand of 
public fraud.” 

The observations are submitted to you in con- 
sequence of a prevalent rumour that the generosity 
and benevolence of your temper will induce you 
to admit the nomination of Sir C. Manners-Sutton 
to the Chair on the 19th inst. Such an indulgence 
on your part would deeply affect the character of 
the general cause, although I do not think it would 
frustrate the success of that cause, so powerfully 
is it founded in the almost universal support of 
the people, and of sound public opinion. 

But the choice of a Speaker will be the first 
trial of strength between the Government and the 
people, whom His Majesty says he is resolved to 
meet, and whose advice he desires to receive in 
Parliament. Iam convinced (and I have employed 
some pains to gain information) that a consideg- 
able majority of the House of Commons will reject 
Sir C. Manners-Sutton. It would, however, be 
most painful if your voice should not sanction his 
exclusion ; your support of him would be construed 
into an inclination towards the Government which 
nominates him, and such a notion would furnish 


1835] FRAUD AND VIOLENCE 269 


them with a strength (tending perhaps towards 
temporary, however baseless, stability) of which 
they are now totally destitute. 

The object of the nation is to repulse this 
usurpation, which has obtained power by a com- 
bination of fraud and violence almost unequalled 
in all the black catalogue of human wickedness. 

The general sentiment is that the battle (in 
Lord Chatham’s language) must be “ prompt, 
short, sharp, and decisive,” and if it be not prompt 
the remaining epithets will be vain and idle. 

The question, therefore, of the choice of a 
Speaker being the first, involving the principle 
of reform, the character of the House of Commons, 
and the influence of the present administration 
opposed to the voice of the people, on this primary 
ground the repulse should be given with every 
possible energy of fortitude, vigour, and skill. 

The importance of effecting a speedy dissolu- 
tion of the present administration is sufficiently 
apparent in every part of the Empire; and in all 
its relations foreign and domestic, but more 
especially in Ireland. My accounts from that 
country, from most authentic and impartial 
sources, state that the Orange faction is in posses- 
sion of the Government, that the most odious and 
long-exploded Orange partisans, ecclesiastical, civil 
and legal, lead the public councils, and that the 
Government is employing every effort to fill all the 
offices with the most notorious and flaming bigots, 
and that a religious conflict of the most dreadful 
description is rapidly approaching. This crisis 
is anxiously desired by too many in Ireland, and 


270 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


it is now urged and even hurried on by the Goyern- 
ment, as if they foresaw their speedy dissolution, 
and were eager to complete their designs before 
it should overtake them. 

Here is an additional and most urgent call for 
a speedy blow in Parliament. Whenever I can 
have the honour of seeing you I will produce to 
you such documents from Ireland as will fill your 
benignant mind with indignation and horror. 

For God’s sake interpose your great powers to 
deliver us fronf all these evils, and strike your 
first blow to save the Commons of the Empire 
from the degradation and ignominy of again 
confiding the custody of their privileges to him 
who has once betrayed them !? 


Str FRANcIs BuRDETT to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 

West Chg House: February 10, 1835 
There is no man’s opinion, upon any states- 
manlike subject, that would carry with it more 
weight in my mind than yours, and I have given 
all the consideration to the letter you have done me 
the honour to write, upon a mere party question, 
the choice of a Speaker of the House of Commons, 
which the ability you manifest upon every 
subject you touch upon cannot fail to command, 
I cannot, however, come to any other conclusion 
than that which I previously had arrived at on the 
impossibility of my acting upon this occasion but 
in the same manner as upon the last, when I pro- 
posed Sir C. Manners-Sutton—as I cannot but 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 234. 


1835] A MIRACLE EXPLAINED 271 


feel, with all respect for Mr. Abercromby, that 
there is no comparison between the two as to the 
point at issue, no more than between St. Paul’s 
and a nutshell ; and I cannot but think it unwise 
in the Whigs to make battle upon this ground. 
As to Ireland, Mr, Q’Connell and his priests go 
far to justify the Orangemen, and will, I think, 
certainly and greatly strengthen the administra- 
tion. What wonder Ireland produces no venomous 
reptiles, seeing that her erect walking serpents 
absorb all her venom ?? 


Peel’s first administration did not endure long. 
After the general election of January 1835 the 
Conservatives numbered 270, but they might at 
any moment be outvoted by the Whigs, the 
Radicals, and the Irish, a combination far from 
unlikely, as was soon to be proved. On the 
meeting of Parliament on February 9, the first 
task was to elect a Speaker. The Government 
proposed the re-election of Manners-Sutton, the 
Opposition Abercromby, and, in a House of no 
less than 622, the latter was elected by a majority 
of six. Peel was defeated again and again, and 
on April 7, when, on the Irish Church Bill, he found 
himself in a minority of twenty-seven, he tendered 
his resignation to the King. Melbourne returned 
to power with most of his old colleagues, but 
without Brougham, to whom Melbourne would 
not again offer the Woolsack. The Great Seal 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 238. 


272 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


was placed in commission, Lord Cottenham being 
appointed Lord Chancellor in the following January. 
Nor was Wellesley invited to return to Ireland, 
but was given the post of Lord Chamberlain. 


VISCOUNT MELBOURNE fo THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY ; 
South Street: April 19, 1835 

I am sensible that I must have appeared to you 
both negligent and ungrateful, and during the 
last week I have often reproached myself severely 
for not having before answered your letter and 
communicated personally with you. Constant 
occupation made it impossible. It has not been 
the want either of respect or of affection. I feel 
that most deeply, especially the last, as well for 
personal liking as for the gratitude which I owe 
you. 

It gave me great pain to be unable to offer you 
your former situation, but plainly and frankly, 
after what passed last summer, it always appeared 
to me that if the Government should break up it 
would be impossible before a reconstruction again 
to constitute the Government of Ireland as it 
was then constituted. 

I hope you will allow me to offer you one of the 
best offices in the Household, which I know will 
be agreeable to His Majesty. Your acceptance 
will be some consolation to me in circumstances 
most worrying to my feelings, and for which I 
trust you will make some allowance." 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 254. 


1835] LORD CHAMBERLAIN 273 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to VISCOUNT 
MELBOURNE 
Clarendon Hotel: April 19, 1835 

The very great kindness of your most obliging 
letter has relieved me from painful suspense, and 
satisfied me that I still possess (what I have ever 
valued with the highest estimation) your respect 
and affection. 

The best assurance which I can offer of my 
sincerity in returning those sentiments is to accept 
without hesitation the offer which you make of 
one of the great offices of the Household. 

If the office of Lord Chamberlain should be 
vacant I should prefer that, and I shall then devote 
the remainder of a long life to the assiduous 
discharge of my duty in His Majesty’s service, 
to whom I owe every obligation of affection and 
gratitude for uniform kindness and favour, ex- 
tended to me for above half a century. 

With the most anxious wish for yoyr success 
in the great charge you have undertaken . . 3 


Lapy WELLESLEY to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
April 24, 1835 

Ally’s? letter of the 21st confirms the report 
of your not returning to Ireland. I have no further 
news except from the papers, which say that you 
have accepted the office of Lord Chamberlain. 
I have no language strong enough to express my 
indignation at the treachery, the baseness, the 
impudence of Lord Melbourne and his followers. 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 256. 
2 Alfred Montgomery. 


274 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1828- 


Did no one express their horror at such conduct 
to such a man, and under such circumstances, 
the party owing you everything ? I fervently 
hope, as soon as the Irish Church is settled, the 
King willturn them out. A trick so dishonourable 
to men, so silly as statesmen, cannot succeed. 
I am confident you would not have had any 
office but for the King, and I think by his not 
insisting on your return to Ireland he will get rid 
of them. Ireland is the object of his greatest 
solicitude, and if he thought the Whigs were 
firm in their places he would not have trusted 
so silly a profligate (whom he never liked) to govern 
that country. I have renounced for ever all my 
Whiggery. The Tories as friends would not 
twice have put such a man in the Household. 
For myself, I have not a wish to return to Ireland, 
or for any office ; I should prefer your living in the 
country, but I hope and believe I shall yet see 
you triumph over your enemies. 

I am delighted to hear from Ally that you are 
well. I have scarcely left my bed for a week. 
The cold has gone upon my chest and I am really 
very unwell. I have not seen Lord Cowley for 
nearly two weeks ; he is very attentive in calling. 
He thinks you have been infamously treated, 
and the general opinion is, that Mr. O’Connell 
has made his selection, as he can govern Ireland 
through Lord Mulgrave, and not if you were 
Lord-Lieutenant. I believe the Whigs may say 
this, but I do not believe O’Connell has had any- 
thing to do with it. It is not surprising that an 
act of such folly and unkindness the party should 


1835] “OUR HARLEQUIN FRIEND” 275 


try and find an excuse for. Keep up your spirits 
and your health. God has protected you under 
many difficulties, and in His merciful goodness 
will yet bring you through triumphanily. I hope 
to leave Paris the 2nd of May. Mama and Bessy 
beg their best love ; their lamentations are doleful. 
Culling Smith is still confined to his room. I have 
not heard when Lord Cowley returns to England. 
I am still in suspense about your office. If you 
take it you will be bored, but there are advantages 
which you cannot have out of office. If I only 
consulted my wishes, I should not like you to 
accept any office ; but under present circumstances 
I hope you may accept. What becomes of Much 
Ado? Is he to be a peer ? 

Poor Ally, I often think of him; tell him with 
my love I have written so much I have nothing 
more to say. I am anxious to know what is to 
become of the Duke of Devonshire.’ 


LorD BROUGHAM to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private Salt Hill 


[April 1835] 
My DEAR LorD CHAMBERLAIN, 

Many thanks for your kind letter announc- 
ing the improbable—not to say the tmpossible— 
transmutation of our theatrical and excellent 
ffiend Mulgrave into a viceroy, and yourself into 
a Superintendent of Stage Plays.? It is a feat 
of our harlequin friend Melbourne’s round which 
diverts and surprises rather than pleases me. 


1 Add. MSS. 37316 f. 18. 
2 One of the duties of the Lord Chamberlain is the licensing 
of plays. 


276 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


The allusion to the mysteria promissa naturally 
enough occurred to the prosecuted—possibly to 
the bystanders. But it required Melbourne’s 
ingenuous and honest nature to make it actually 
be avowed by himself (this is quite entre nous) 
as a parallel case, in a letter I had from him 
yesterday. Many a time have the excitable 
triumvirs been much more closely imitated, but 
never with so much candour. In fact, Melbourne 
is not to blame. Howick, through Lord Grey, 
rules all things, and he has ¢wo followers in the 
House of Commons, viz., his two brothers, and 
no more.! 


THE REv. H. WELLESLEY to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 

Private Dunsfold, Godalming 
May io, 1835 
My removal to this neighbourhood has among 
other advantages procured me the intimate 
acquaintance of a very worthy and respectable 
family, Dr. and Mrs. Mackenzie of the Rectory, 
Hascombe. They havea young and very pleasing 
daughter to whom I have become deeply attached, 
and who accepts me for a husband with corres- 
ponding feelings. Her good sense, disposition, and 
acquirements give me every hope of her proving 
a valuable wife and making the happiness of miy 
life. As she is, of course, a goddess, my report 
of her beauty and merits cannot be received, but 
Hyacinthe has made her acquaintance, and is 
willing and able to speak of her very highly. She 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 258. 


1835] A SUITABLE MATCH 274 


thinks the match likely to be happy to myself, 
free from objections and from any circumstances 
unpleasant to my fémily or my friends. 

As there is a son, she brings to me no fortune, 
.but her own means and prospects are very fair, 
and she has been accustomed to live in the same 
moderate, retired way as myself, without any 
taste for dissipation and expense. 

In taking this step I trust and pray that I may 
obtain your approbation and sanction, and that 
your blessing will rest upon the happy prospect 
now before me. 

May I add the hope that you will continue to 
interest yourself in my preferment, which now 
becomes to me an object doubly important ? 
Some favourable occasions may arise, and perhaps 
there may be some pieces of clerical patronage 
in the Lord Chamberlain’s department. I believe 
that he appoints the King’s chaplains upon a 
vacancy, and to obtain ¢hat could not but be of 
advantage to me. There is no emolument, but 
it is a step, and gives rank, and above all would 
appease my longing for something which I might 
be known to owe only to your affection and 
influence.’ 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to VISCOUNT 
MELBOURNE 


Private and confidential Clarendon Hotel 


May 11, 1835 
After having fully considered all the circum- 
stances connected with the recent change in the 


17Add. MSS. 37316 f. 29. 


278 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [x828- 


Government of Ireland, together with the relation 
which they bear to my public character and 
honour, I feel it to be impossible for me to retain 
the office which I now hold in His Majesty’s 
service. I therefore request your Lordship to 
submit to His Majesty (with the humble assur- 
ance of my most grateful duty) my desire to resign 
the office of Lord Chamberlain to His Majesty’s 
Household.? 


VisCOUNT MELBOURNE to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 

South Street: May 11, 1835 

I have this instant received your Lordship’s 

letter of this day, marked private and confidential. 

It is needless for me to assure your Lordship 

that I have read it with great concern, but I will 

lose no time in submitting to His Majesty the 

desire expressed on the part of your Lordship to 

resign the' office of Lord Chamberlain of His 
Majesty’s Household.? 


Much comment was occasioned by Wellesley’s 
resignation, and the reason underlying it was 
canvassed in all companies interested in political 
affairs. Why Wellesley retired from the Ministry 
is explained clearly in the following letters, but at 
the time the matter was complicated by the Duke 
of Cumberland misunderstanding a conversation 
he had with Wellesley on the subject. The 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 260. 
2 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 261. 


1835] WELLESLEY RESIGNS 279 


subject was dealt with in The Times of May 15 
in the course of a leader on Irish affairs : 

“We have to amnounce that the Marquess 
Wellesley, the last Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland 
but one before Lord Mulgrave, the Whig Lord- 
Lieutenant under Lord Grey and Lord Melbourne, 
has resigned his office of Lord Chamberlain. On 
being asked yesterday if the report was true, the 
noble Marquess, we have reason to believe, 
declared to this effect, ‘That he had not resigned 
from any inability to perform the duties of the 
office, but because, if he retained it, he must 
support Lord Melbourne’s administration, and 
this, as a man of honour, he could not do, it being 
evident to him that the Government of Ireland 
had been delegated by Lord Melbourne, or some 
irresponsible colleague of the noble Lord, into the 
hands of Mr. O’Connell.’ We have received the 
above statement from such authority’ as entitles 
it to implicit credit.” 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo VISCOUNT 

MELBOURNE 

Clarendon Hotel: May 15, 1835 
Having by accident seen in The Times news- 
paper a paragraph, imputing to me, in very 
positive terms, a declaration (which I never have 
made, and never could make) of the grounds of my 
late resignation, I beg leave to assure your 
Lordship that the whole statement is absolutely 
groundless. How the fabrication has originated 


280 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


I cannot imagine, as I answered nothing to any 
enquiry yesterday but that I had resigned, without 
assigning any motives for my conduct. 

It is superfluous to state that the observations 
ascribed to me respecting Mr. O’Connell are 
entirely fictitious. Your Lordship’s sentiments 
and mine having hitherto been the same on that 
subject— 

“Neither to persecute, exclude, nor to be 
governed by Mr. O’Connell.”’ 

I have established for myself a rule never to 
notice any observations in newspapers, otherwise 
I would answer the paragraph to which I have 
referred.’ 


VISCOUNT MELBOURNE to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
Downing Street: May 15, 1835 
I have received your letter with great satis- 
faction. When I read the statement in The 
Times newspaper this morning, I was at once 
convinced that it was a fabrication, and I have 
now, therefore, only to thank your Lordship for 
the readiness and alacrity with which you have 
enabled me to direct the statements to be con- 
tradicted. The manner in which you have done 
this, and the sentiments which you express, only 
add to my concern at your having withdrawn 
from the situation which you held in his Majesty’s 
Household.” 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 £. 262. 
2 Add, MSS. 37311 f. 263. 


1835] LORD LONDONDERRY 281 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to THE MARQUESS 
OF LONDONDERRY 
Clarendon Hotel: May 24, 1835 

I have received the honour of your Lordship’s 
letter of the 23rd inst., which did not reach me 
until seven o’clock p.m., as I happened to be 
absent when it was delivered here. 

Your Lordship may be assured that I should be 
as anxious as any of your numerous friends to 
repel with indignation any imputation on your 
Lordship of having advanced statements un- 
founded in facts to serve the purposes of party. 

I am totally unconscious of having in any 
manner concerned myself in any proceeding 
relating to your Lordship, for whom I have ever 
entertained and manifested the most perfect 
respect. I was entirely ignorant of the para- 
graphs in the newspapers (to which you refer) 
until my attention was directed to them by your 
Lordship. I cannot be answerable, for their 
contents, and I really do not comprehend their 
purport. 

The matter which your Lordship proposes to 
bring before the House of Lords on Monday or 
Tuesday next does not appear to me to require my 
personal attendance, and I, therefore, request 
yqur Lordship to make such arrangements as may 
suit your convenience respecting the day of 
introducing the subject to their Lordships. 

I am much obliged to your Lordship for your 
kind consideration in notifying your intentions to 
me, but as I have already stated to their Lordships 
all that appears to me to be proper relating to my 


282 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


resignation, and as I have expressed my readiness 
to afford every facility within my power to any 
course of proceeding which«may be regularly 
instituted in that matter, it is unnecessary for me 
at present to take any part in any discussion which 
may be revived on the subject. Your Lordship 
will recollect that the Lord Chamberlain is not a 
responsible Minister of the Crown, and that his 
resignation is not of the same nature as that of one 
of His Majesty’s confidential advisers. 

Under these circumstances I trust your Lord- 
ship will feel that my conduct on this occasion is 
founded on no disrespect or disregard towards your 
Lordship, but on a strict sense of public duty, and 
of submission to the rules and orders of Parlia- 
ment.’ 


THE MARQUESS OF LONDONDERRY to THE 
MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
‘ Holderness House: May 25, 1835 

I received your Lordship’s letter of yesterday’s 
date in the country, ot would have replied to it 
sooner. , 

I fully concur with your Lordship in the opinion 
that, as the Lord Chamberlain is not a responsible 
Minister, your Lordship could not under ordinary 
circumstances be called upon to assign your reasans 
for your resignation of that office; but I feel 
persuaded when your Lordship considers the 
peculiar circumstances attending the present 
question, viz., that His Royal Highness the Duke 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 423. 


1835] IMPUTATIONS 283 


of Cumberland has communicated to his friends 
the reasons which you voluntarily gave to His 
Royal Highness at tHe Drawing-Room on the 14th 
inst. for your having resigned your office, and the 
statement made by Lord Melbourne, as Minister 
of the Crown, in his place in the House of Lords, 
that he had your Lordship’s authority to give a 
contradiction to it; and, further, when your 
Lordship considers that imputations have been 
cast upon His Royal Highness and upon me of 
having been the authors of fabrications of such 
statements, your Lordship will at once perceive it 
will be impossible either for His Royal Highness 
or myself to abstain from a further investigation 
of this affair, and that the most clear, regular, and 
satisfactory mode of obtaining that object is by 
His Royal Highness and your Lordship giving me 
an opportunity in the presence of both of you, as 
well as in that of Lord Melbourne, of repeating the 
assertion, to which he had given a contradiction 
on your Lordship’s alleged authority. 

I have no party motive in this transaction. My 
sole desire is to free His Royal Highness and 
myself from the assertions which have been so 
publicly cast upon us. And I am sure your 
Lordship will not deny us the opportunity of so 
doing, in the simple mode that I suggest, and 
thereby force us to have recourse to a more 
circuitous, though I should hope not less effica- 
cious, manner of justifying ourselves before the 
public. 

1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 425. 


284 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo THE MARQUESS 
OF LONDONDERRY 
Clarendon Hotel: May 25, 1835 

I have received the honour of your lordship’s 
letter of the 25th May, referring again to the 
question of my resignation of the office of Lord 
Chamberlain and to the discussions which have 
passed on that subject. 

The transaction in question (as far as I am 
concerned) is very plain and clear, and nothing 
could have been more remote from my mind than 
any notion of involving your Lordship’s name, or 
that of His Royal Highness the Duke of Cumber- 
land, in this matter. 

By accident I saw in The Times newspaper a 
paragraph which contained an erroneous state- 
ment of the cause of my resignation of the office 
of Lord Chamberlain. 

That paragraph makes no mention of the name 
-of any authority from which it was derived. 
Without the least knowledge or even conjecture 
of the name of the author, and least of all imagin- 
ing that it could proceed from His Royal Highness 
the Duke of Cumberland, I wrote to Lord Mel- 
bourne and noticed the error which the paragraph 
contained. The paragraph states that I “ resigned 
because it was evident to me that the Government 
of Ireland had been delegated by Lord Melbourne 
(or through some irresponsible colleague of that 
Lord) into the hands of Mr. O’Connell.” 

These are the words attributed to me by the 
newspapers. His Royal Highness has not favoured 
me with any communication, but my answer is 


1835] MISUNDERSTANDING 285 


plain and distinct on the whole subject. It was 
morally impossible for me to have assigned. any 

*such cause for my resignation, because I believed 
that any such imputation on Lord Melbourne was 
unfounded, and because my resignation was 
utterly unconnected with any circumstances rela- 
ting in the most remote degree to Mr. O’Connell, 
or to his supposed influence. These facts are well 
known to every person in my confidence, and the 
words imputed to me, or any similar sentiment, 
never have been heard to proceed from me by 
any of my friends. 

In a desultory private conversation (held for 
about ten minutes in a crowded Drawing-Room, 
and while I was in actual attendance on His 
Majesty) I may have failed in conveying my 
meaning ; but I could not have used the words or 
expressed the sentiments ascribed to me, because 
they not only contain what is untrue, but are 
totally dissimilar to the whole tenor of my 
opinions, and of the motives of my conduct. It 
is, however, far from my purpose to impute 
intentional misrepresentation to the Royal Person- 
age, who seems to have misunderstood me. Such 
misunderstandings must frequently occur in hasty 
private intercourse, and especially in crowded 
assemblies, and above all during the ceremonies of 
Royal Courts. I have no doubt that the mis- 
understanding must have arisen from the combina- 
tion of all these circumstances. 

It is very unfortunate that His Royal Highness 
should not have condescended to make a previous 
intimation to me of his intention to publish my 


286 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1828- 


private conversation. If he had graciously pur- 
sued that kind course, a moment of confidential 
explanation would have précluded all misinter-° 
pretation. 

It is unnecessary to add that I am no party to 
any imputation on your Lordship; indeed, I 
cannot understand how you can be implicated in 
this affair, or how you can be touched by any of 
its results. This letter comprehends all that I can 
state on the subject, and it does not appear to me 
that I can make any further communication.’ 


H.R.H. THe DUKE oF CUMBERLAND to THE 
MARQUESS WELLESLEY 

St. James’s Palace: May 26, 1835 

Lord Londonderry having just communicated 
to me your Lordship’s reply to his letter of yester- 
day, in which your Lordship declares that there 
has been a misconception or mistake on my part as 
to the conversation which took place at the 
Drawing-Room on Thursday the 14th, and that it 
was unfortunate that I had not made a previous 
intimation to you of my intention of publishing 
that conversation, I must positively deny the 
application of the word “ publishing,” if your 
Lordship supposes for one moment that I either 
authorised, or was in any manner privy to, the 
paragraph in the papers. But if by that word 
“publishing” you mean that I did relate the 
conversation to my friends, I have only to say I 
certainly did, and could not consider my so doing 
as a breach of confidence, as the conversation was 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 £. 427. 


1835] THE DUKE OF CUMBERLAND 287 


not a private one, but passed openly at the 
Drawing-Room ; and as also I never had in my 
life the honour of arfy confidential communication 
with you, I considered what passed as your undis- 
guised opinion, freely given and unasked for by me ; 
and, coinciding myself completely in what you said, 
I related it to some of my friends immediately. 

When Lord Melbourne showed Lord London- 
derry a letter from you declaring that you never 
had any difference of opinion on the subject of 
Treland, and of managing Mr. O’Connell and the 
Government of Ireland, I thought it necessary to 
impart to Lord Melbourne the conversation that 
passed between your Lordship and myself; and 
Lord Melbourne in his reply to me the next day 
particularly states ‘‘ that it is unnecessary for him 
to say that he relies completely on what I stated of 
my recollection of the conversation, and does it 
with the more satisfaction as it differs but in a few 
words from the statement of your Lordship (these 
words on Ireland, which was under Mr. O’Connell), 
but that the rest of the conversation, as recollected 
by me, was entirely consonant with your Lordship’s 
own declaration.” It is impossible for me to 
suppose that Lord Melbourne did not communicate 
my letters to your Lordship, as your authority is 
expressly cited in it. 

However, to make it quite certain, I even 
enclose you the copies of the correspondence, and 
I have only to add that I must positively maintain 
theaccuracy of my recollection of the precise conver- 
sation which took place on the occasion alluded to.” 


1 Add. MSS. 37207 f. 429. 


288 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1828- 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to H.R.H. THE DUKE 
OF CUMBERLAND 
Clarendon Hotel: May 28, 1835 

I have the honour of respectfully acknowledging 
Your Highness’ communication of the 26th May, 
enclosing copies of Your Royal Highness’ corre- 
spondence with Lord Melbourne, which I received 
yesterday (27th) in an open cover by the hands of 
Lieutenant-Colonel Shawe. 

This is the first communication which I have 
had the honour to receive from Your Royal 
Highness on this subject, and it is stated to be 
written in consequence of my letter to Lord 
Londonderry of the 25th inst. 

Lord Melbourne has not communicated to me 
directly or indirectly any part of Your Royal 
Highness’ correspondence, nor even any intima- 
tion of its existence. 

My letter of the 25th to Lord Londonderry 
cannot bear reference to any statement made by 
Your Royal Highness, as at the time of writing it 
I had not seen any such statement, although I had 
heard of its general purport. 

Having now seen the statement contained in 
Your Royal Highness’ letter to Lord Melbourne, 
I have no hesitation in confirming the accuracy 
of its general tenor, although it is impossible for 
me to speak positively to particular phrases used 
in a hasty conversation in a crowded Court. 

With regard to the words Iveland, which was under 
Mr. O’Connell, 1 certainly could not have intended 
to use them with reference to the causes of my 
resignation ; but it is very natural that Your Royal 


1835] A POLITE REBUKE 289 


Highness should have applied them to those causes, 
under all the circumstances of the conversation. 

After having spoken a very few words respecting 
my resignation, I believe I proceeded to state some 
of my general principles respecting the government 
of Ireland, and especially the great principle of 
pursuing an even course, above the movement of 
parties and factions, and of those agitations which 
have placed Ireland under the government of Mr. 
O’Connell. 

It appears that my general sentiments with 
regard to the condition and state of Ireland have 
been transferred to the supposed motives of my 
resignation. The distinction is obvious when 
deliberately considered, but it might easily escape 
observation in a desultory conversation. 

It was never my intention to commit so dis- 
respectful an act as to impute to Your Royal 
Highness the publication of a private conversation, 
in the newspapers ; but I certainly did consider 
that the conversation with which Your Royal 
Highness was pleased to honour me was strictly 
of a private nature; otherwise I should have 
spoken with much more deliberation and attention 
to accuracy. However, on that point Your Royal 
Highness is a much more competent judge of the 
eee of the Court than I can pretend to be. 

atever errors IJ may have committed in this 
transaction, I trust I shall be acquitted of any 
failure in those sentiments of sincere respect and 
humble duty with which I remain Your Royal 
Highness’ faithful and devoted servant, 
WELLESLEY." 


1 Add. MSS. 37297 £. 435. 
2 U 


290 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1828- 


VIscouNT MELBOURNE to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
South Street : May 30, 1835 
His Royal Highness the Duke of Cumberland 
has communicated to me copies of two letters 
which have passed between His Royal Highness 
and your Lordship on the subject of the con- 
versation at the Drawing-Room on the 14th inst. 
I perceive that in His Royal Highness’ letter some 
allusion is made to having given my opinion upon 
the import of your Lordship’s observations without 
having communicated with your Lordship upon 
the subject. It appeared to me to be unnecessary 
to trouble your Lordship upon the occasion, 
because I conceived myself to collect, from His 
Royal Highness’ own statement, that he had 
misapprehended the application of your Lord- 
ship’s remarks, and I am happy to find myself 
confirmed in this interpretation by your Lordship’s 
authority ? 


LorpD MULGRAVE to T HE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private and confidential Clarendon 


As I perceived by your manner to me that your 
Lordship was ann yed at something, and as 1 
think it possible this may arise from my having 
accepted an appointment which your Lordship 
formerly held, without previously notifying the 
circumstance to you, I think it due to myself, as 
well as to those habits of confidential communi- 
cation which your Lordship had on some previous 
occasions kindly invited, to state that so far was I 

1 Add. MSS. 37297 f. 439. 


1835] | MULGRAVE’S EXCUSES 291 


from seeking, desiring, or contemplating, up to 
the evening before, that appointment for myself, 
that in point of fact f was till then the medium of 
private communication with a friend of mine to 
whom the office was not offered, but suggested, 
whose acceptance of it would have placed it on a 
different footing, but whose appointment at the 
present moment would in my opinion have 
possessed many peculiar advantages. 

As to myself, it is well known not to have been 
what I should most have wished, but I cheerfully 
accepted. It is the arrangement thought best 
by my friends, and I can assure you that no one 
will more sincerely rejoice at some post being, in 
the progress of the Ministers’ formation, offered for 
your acceptance, agreeable to your Lordship and 
worthy of your high station in the popular party.’ 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f£. 286. 


BOOK X 
IN RETIREMENT. 1835-1842 


BOOK X 
IN RETIREMENT. 1835-1842 


Wellesley’s breach with Melbourne : An unsatis- 

factory explanation : Occupations after retirement : 

The Indian despatches : Brougham’s review : The 

East India Company’s compliment : Queen Victoria’s 

accession : A further tribute from the East India 

Company : Wellesley’s appreciation of Pitt : Politics 

and pastimes : The Etonian muse : Niceties of 

criticism : His interest in Eton : A review of his 

services to the Empire : An unworthy reward : His 
views on the policy of France : The Company’s 
gratitude : Tll-health : Death. 

T had been a sore blow to Wellesley to be 
offered by Melbourne only a post in the 
Household; but he accepted it under the 

impression that he was serving the new Prime 
Minister. When, however, he saw that he was not 
consulted concerning the arrangement for the 
government of Ireland, he took umbrage, and he 
would have no more to do with the adminis- 
tration. 


VISCOUNT MELBOURNE to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
South Street: January 16, 1836 
I have been for some time intending to write to 
you upon the occasion of the approaching session of 
Parliament, and I certainly should have fulfilled 


this intention, if I had not been prevented by 
295 


296 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [x835- 


pressure of business and also by an access of 
indisposition. Your Lordship is well aware of the 
value which I, in common with the rest of the 
world, attach to your Lordship’s constancy and 
support, and my anxiety to retain that advantage 
induces me to express to your Lordship my anxious 
hope that the principles upon which the King’s 
Government has been lately conducted have been 
such as to merit your Lordship’s approbation, and 
to obtain a continuance of that confidence with 
which we were manifestly honoured and strength- 
ened during the last session of Parliament. The 
great personal respect, esteem, and regard which 
I entertain for your Lordship will greatly add 
to the satisfaction with which I shall receive a 
favourable reply. 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to VISCOUNT 
MELBOURNE 


Private ‘ Hurlingham, near Fulham 
January 19, 1836 

Your Lordship’s obliging letter of the 16th inst. 
having been addressed to Marble Hill, did not 
reach me until this afternoon, otherwise the 
peculiar kindness with which it is expressed would 
have been sooner acknowledged. 

No supporter of the present Government his 
ever surpassed me in zeal for the great cause in 
which we have been so long united; and, I doubt 
not, your Lordship will readily acknowledge that I 
have made great sacrifices for that cause, and have 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 291. 


1842] MELBOURNE’S EXPLANATION 297 


served it effectually on many occasions of severe 
trial. 

It would be insificere to disguise from your 
Lordship that, in my judgment, my services have 
not been duly requited; and I must in candour 
add that some transactions, both in Ireland and 
Great Britain, appear to me to bear a character 
and spirit which must be prejudicial to the 
Established Constitution, and which menace the 
unity, strength, and general interests of the 
Empire. 

It had been my intention previously to the 
meeting of Parliament to request the honour of an 
interview with your Lordship, for the purpose of. 
receiving from you some explanation on all these 
subjects; and I now request you to appoint a 
time for that purpose, when I may have the honour 
either of waiting on you in South Street, or of 
receiving you here, any day at two o’clock.’ 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to Lapy WELLESLEY 
Hurlingham: January 29, 1836 

As your last letter affords little hope of your 
returning ta me as soon as I had expected, I think 
it necessary to acquaint you in this manner with 
the result of Lord Melbourne’s recent visit to this 
plage. 

To my great surprise I received the enclosed 
letter from Lord Melbourne You will observe 
his Lordship’s inaccuracy in the direction, which 
furnishes an additional instance of his high 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 292. 
2 See previous letters. 


298 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


qualifications for public office. His letter, how- 
ever, was addressed with so specious an appearance 
of kindness and respect, that { did not hesitate to 
send the enclosed answer,’ in which I signify my 
willingness to meet him, and to receive from him 
explanations: First, on the causes of my removal 
from the government of Ireland, and, secondly, 
on the attempts now in progress to destroy the 
Constitution in Church and State, and to break up 
the foundations of the Empire. 

I thus apprised his Lordship of the matters on 
which I required explanation ; the first related to 
my own personal honour in the highest degree, and 
the second to the encouragement afforded to 
persons whose mischievous intentions were now 
clearly and openly avowed. Here I intended to 
have required a full explanation of the apparent 
support given by His Majesty’s Government to 
the designs of O’Connell and others. If, on either 
of these points, due satisfaction had not been 
afforded to me, it was my intention to have 
declared to Lord Melbourne that I could not 
continue to his Government the support which 
they had hitherto received from me. 

Indeed, every principle of honour, duty to my 
King, and affection to my country, preclude the 
possibility of my aiding any Minister who does 
not in deeds, as well as mere words, repulse ‘the 
principles avowed by O’Connell. It is not enough 
to disclaim those principles ; they must be stig- 
matised, and punished by adequate force of law. 

When Lord Melbourne came to me I opened 

1 See previous letters. 


1842] A GENERAL SWEEP 299 


the subject by reminding him of the zeal and 
irreproachable honour with which I had supported 
Lord Grey and himéelf, and especially, with regard 
to himself, of the favours I had conferred on his 
family (Sir F. Lamb), of the real attachment 
which I had always manifested towards him, and 
of the sacrifice I had made in resigning the govern- 
ment of Ireland. He admitted all this with an 
appearance of feeling. I then asked why I had 
been expelled from the Government of Ireland, on 
a late occasion ? 

He immediately answered (in a very rough and 
vulgar manner, and in such language as I believe 
never was applied before by a person of his station 
to a person of mine), “ You wrote an imprudent 
letter to Lord Grey. The moment I read that 
letter I determined that on the reconstruction of 
the Government of Ireland there must be a general 
sweep.” These were his words. They incensed 
me to the highest degree. I replied that I did not 
submit to the charge ; that if I were placed in the 
same situation again I would act in the same 
manner, and that the letter in question, instead 
of an act of imprudence, was an act of absolute 
necessity, and of caution and prudence. That the 
cause of that letter was his Lordship’s negligence 
in not having answered nor even acknowledged 
two very important despatches from me; one 

1 Frederick James Lamb (1782-1853), third son of first 
Viscount Melbourne and brother of the Prime Minister, held 
many diplomatic posts, and at this time was Ambassador at 
the Court of Vienna. He was decorated G.C.B., 1827, and 


created Baron Beauvale, 1839. He succeeded as (third) 
Viscount Melbourne in 1848. 


300 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


(which was printed) on the internal state of 
Ireland, the other, a private despatch, requesting 
instructions respecting the renewal of the Coercion 
Act, by which I might be enabled to draw my 
official letter on that subject in such a manner as 
to avoid all collision in the Cabinet. These 
important communications from me were never 
even noticed by his Lordship, much less answered. 
In this state I was left in complete ignorance of the 
opinions and proceedings of the Cabinet and of his 
Lordship, having received also no information 
from Mr. Littleton. At length I received a letter 
from Mr. Littleton, detailing at great length 
reasons of prudence respecting the temper of the 
House of Commons, which should induce the 
Government to relinquish certain clauses in the 
Coercion Act, unless I deemed those clauses 
absolutely essential to the safety of Ireland. Mr. 
Littleton requested that I would write to Lord 
Grey on the subject, which request I complied 
with, not being at that time informed that Lord 
Grey had already prepared a Bill and laid it before 
the Cabinet. Uninformed as I was, my letter to 
Lord Grey was an act of necessity and of caution. 
It did not in any degree insist on any point, but 
merely contained suggestions for Lord Grey’s 
private consideration. It was no public docu- 
ment. If Lord Melbourne had noticed my former 
despatches, my letter to Lord Grey would never 
have been written. The occasion could not have 
occurred if Lord Melbourne had done his duty. I, 
therefore, so far from acquiescing under his Lord- 
ship’s imputation of imprudence, or admitting that 


1842] OFFENDER AND VICTIM 301 


I had committed any offence, charged him with 
having committed the offence of neglect of duty, 
in consequence of which all the subsequent 
mischief had arisen: “‘ You, my Lord, are the 
offender ; I am the victim.” 

To this he could make no other answer than 
that he admitted that he had not either answered 
or acknowledged the despatches to which I 
referred ; that I ought to have concluded from his 
silence that he approved the first despatch ; and 
as to the private despatch, he could not answer it, 
because he did not know the opinions of the 
Cabinet. 

I observed that still, in common propriety, he 
should have acknowledged the receipt of such 
important documents; that the common con- 
clusion from his absolute silence on the first 
despatch (which contained such weighty matter) 
would be that he disapproved some part of it ; 
one word of acknowledgment would have relieved 
me. Why did he not at least acknowledge the 
private despatch, and give me his own view, if he 
could not give that of the Cabinet, respecting the 
best way of proposing the renewal of the Coercion 
Act? But his Lordship now admitted that he 
left me in the dark on the whole subject. 

, Icontend, my Lord, that in this proceeding you 
neglected your duty, and I will maintain against 
your Lordship, before any authority, and before all 
of the highest authorities in this Empire, that in 
this transaction J am entirely innocent, and you 
are highly blamable. 

“ But, although the real offender, it appears that 


302 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


you constituted yourself to be, not only the judge, 
but the arbitrary ruler of my fate. Without 
hearing my defence, withouteadmitting me even 
to undergo a preliminary question before your 
supreme authority upon the first view, you, in your 
own breast, condemned the whole Government of 
Ireland to the punishment of ‘a@ general sweep,’ in 
which J (poor imprudent wretch !) was to be swept 
off with the rest of the rubbish by your mighty 
hand. This is not the estimation in which I have 
been held, and, despite your Lordship, am still 
held by a gracious Sovereign and a just public. 
When you were my Chief Secretary in Ireland, 
when you were my ruler in Ireland, did your 
Lordship find me so imprudent that you deemed 
me unfit to be trusted with the government of 
Ireland ? 

“Here arises another view of the subject. I 
insist that the condemnation of my conduct 
respecting the letter to Lord Grey was unjust ; but 
what followed? Did your Lordship announce 
the sentence (passed, it seems, in the recesses of 
your breast) tome? No; so far from it, that, on 
your appointment to the situation of Prime 
Minister, your first act was to request, most 
earnestly, that this imprudent creature, this weak 
wretch (!) would continue to hold the important 
office of Chief Governor of Ireland. Not long 
after, you sent the Home Secretary, Lord Dun- 
cannon, to consult with the oracle of imprudence, 
to drink the waters of imprudence at the fountain 
-head, to frame, with the Captain-General of 
imprudence, all those important measures on which 


1842] WELLESLEY’S RESENTMENT 303 


you proposed to found the strength and glory 
of your Government in the approaching session 
of Parliament. Many important measures were 
framed under my express direction, and the utmost 
confidence (apparently) was placed in me. Nota 
breath then escaped your Lordship or your friends 
of my imprudence, although at that time, it is now 
evident, I was sentenced and doomed to destruc- 
tion whenever the favourable opportunity should 
offer for the predetermined execution. 

““ Now came the sudden blow of your Lordship’s 
expulsion with your whole party from office. 
What was my conduct in that crisis? Imprudent, 
perhaps, but such as might have mitigated the 
severity of your secret sentence upon a criminal 
guilty of that horrible crime of imprudence. In 
this case the imprudence arose from a high sense of 
party honour. I resigned my high office when the 
grace of my King, and the respect of many of his 
new servants, might probably have permitted me 
to hold it. Through the whole of this period I 
received unbounded proofs of your Lordship’s 
highest consideration and friendship. I arrived 
in London from Ireland, and was received by your 
Lordship and all your friends with the utmost 
cordiality. This continued throughout that whole 
time, from December 1834 down to the time when 
your Lordship was called by His Majesty to frame 
anew Government. I was admitted into all your 
councils, entrusted with all your views (except 
one: that of my ruin), and even (with that sole 
exception) your most secret arrangements were 
imparted to me. What confidence in a creature 


304 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


destined to be swept away for his imprudence ! 
At length, when your Lordship’s appointment was 
known, I wrote to your Lerdship tendering my 
services for the post which I had resigned in 
Ireland. This letter your Lordship never answered, 
nor even acknowledged. Lord Mulgrave’s kissing 
hands was the only answer I received to my 
application for my restoration to the office which 
I had held without reproach, and had resigned 
from the purest motives of party honour. 

“Now, I contend that my letter to Lord Grey did 
not justify any censure ; it was an act of prudent 
caution, instead of imprudence. Even if it had 
been imprudence my subsequent services to your 
Lordship and to your party should have obliter- 
ated any such trivial charge. Where would your 
Lordship now be if every act of your imprudence 
were visited with such severity ? But I ask again: 
Why was this sentence concealed from me? By 
what rule of good faith was this concealment to be 
justified, through such a long course of active 
confidence on your part, and of active confidential 
service on mine? You also thoroughly knew the 
deep and cruel injury you were inflicting ; you knew 
that you were destroying the dearest and most 
long-cherished hopes of my honest and honourable 
ambition, and also that you were deeply wounding 
my interests, and ruining my fortune. I theréfore 
assert that this punishment was unjust in principle, 
cruel and barbarous in extent, and inflicted with 
additional aggravation by the secrecy with which 
the intention was veiled, and by the sudden 
execution of a sentence long predetermined.” 


1842] MELBOURNE IMPENITENT 305 


To this statement Lord Melbourne made no 
answer but this, with much faltering and confusion, 
“ Did you ever know such a resolution to be com- 
municated to the object of it? and if you thought 
yourself so ill-used, why did you accept the office 
of Lord Chamberlain ? ”’ 

I answered, “‘I never read of, nor heard, nor 
witnessed such a resolution’; but I insisted that 
it ought to have been communicated to me before 
he asked me to accept the government of Ireland ; 
before he allowed me to resign it; before he 
trusted me with such apparent confidence ; before 
he received such important service from me; and 
at least before he appointed Lord Mulgrave. 
“With respect to accepting the office of Lord 
Chamberlain,” I said, ‘‘ I accepted it because his 
letter was so urgent that I feared, if I had declined 
it, I might have occasioned serious embarrassment 
to the Government at its formation.” 

He then said, “‘ Why did you resign it ?” 

I replied, “‘ Your Lordship has already answered 
that question. I resigned because I became 
acquainted with some of those circumstances which 
your Lordship has now avowed and defended. I 
found that the determination to remove me from 
Ireland had long been formed, and Lord Mulgrave 
designated, and I felt that my personal honour 
prectuded me from holding any office under a 
Government which had treated me in such a 
manner.” Some other remarks occurred, but not 
the slightest symptom of any regret on the part of 
Lord Melbourne, or of any feelings for my suffer- 
ings, much less of any desire of retribution. I 

2 x 


306 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


therefore closed the conversation here, and took 
leave of him nearly in these words, “‘ My dear Lord, 
I should be sorry for any breach of our private 
friendship, but I can no longer act with your 
Lordship publicly. I am the victim of your 
Lordship’s omission.”” I did not use as harsh a 
term as the occasion would have justified. 

You perceive that Lord Melbourne’s rude, 
unjust, and insulting imputation of imprudence, 
and his defence of the want of good faith towards 
me for nearly a year of apparent confidence, con- 
cealing the most hostile designs, gave the whole 
transaction a character and spirit so injurious to 
my personal honour that I could not hold any 
further intercourse with him without disgrace and 
ignominy. This is as nearly as I can recollect the 
substance of what passed. 

How he could write such a letter to me with such 
intentions appears inconceivable; but [I really 
believe that his whole conduct arises more from 
habitual indolence, carelessness, imbecility, and 
utter inaptitude for serious business than from 
positive depravity, or any active quality of the 
heart or understanding.’ 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to LADY WELLESLEY 
Hurlingham: January 30, «836 

The papers sent in this cover ought to have been 
sent yesterday. They are the letters from Lord 
Melbourne, 16th inst., 1836, and my answer, which 
led to our meeting, and the letter from his Lordship, 


1 Add. MSS. 37316 f. 52. 


1842] A BETRAYAL 307 


toth April, 1835, requesting me to accept an office 
in the Household. 

In this letter you Will observe that, instead of a 
direct charge of imprudence, it is only stated, in very 
moderate though rather obscure terms, “in 
consequence of what passed last summer.” The 
letter is full of respectful and even affectionate 
language, and the request is urged most earnestly, 
and almost imploringly. His Majesty’s name is 
also used. How could I have supposed such a 
letter to conceal such a sentence as had then been 
passed on my imprudence ! 

In my letter of yesterday I should have observed 
that I asked, “Is Lord Grey a party to this 
transaction?’ Lord Melbourne replied with 
marked eagerness, “Oh no! Lord Grey has 
nothing todo withit!” Isaid, “ No, lamsure of 
that. Lord Grey is a man of strict honour !” 

I send a copy of Lord Grey’s speech on his 
resignation, in which you will remark,the terms 
in which he speaks of this transaction, and of me. 

You will observe that Lord Melbourne did not 
attempt to deny the charge of his neglect of duty 
in not answering my despatches and letters, but he 
attempted to state that I ought to have been 
satisfied with his silence, although some of those 
papers contained earnest requests for instructions, 
which were never furnished, nor the letters even 
acknowledged. 

But on inspecting the correspondence, I find 
that his Lordship makes most humble and penitent 
apologies for his indolence (his own word), and 
admits that it placed me in the very difficulty of 


308 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


which I complain. Yet he afterwards has the 
audacity to punish me for the difficulty which he 
had created. The letter of the 19th April, 1835, 
was written on the night after Lord Mulgrave had 
kissed hands, and you will see in it a most penitent 
excuse for neglect in not having noticed my tender 
of service sooner. This letter is the first notice 
~ Lord Melbourne took of that tender, at the distance 
of ten days. 

There is no end to his negligences and incon- 
sistencies. No member of either his first or second 
‘ Cabinet knew anything of the matter, except 
Mulgrave. The truth is that the whole charge was 
a fabrication, to cover the iniquity of Mulgrave’s 
appointment. 

Melbourne said something of Brougham, when I 
observed, as I have often done, that Brougham’s 
note was a mere trivial remark, which I should not 
have noticed at all had I not received the letter 
from Littleton. 

P.S. This should be annexed to the letter sent 
yesterday.’ 


In spite of his retirement from active political 
life, he continued to take a keen and close interest 
in the affairs of the day and the policies of the 
parties on the different questions. His opinions, 
indeed, were much sought after and highly prized, 
particularly on those subjects on which he was 
especially qualified to speak, the administration 
of India and Ireland. 

4 Add. MSS. 37316 f. 60. 


1842] PUBLICATIONS 309 


There were, however, other things to occupy his 
time. He had never lost his early interest in the 
classics, especially in‘Latin verse, which, a drudgery 
to some, had always been a pastime to him. He 
had a gift of easy versification in both Latin and 
English, and now he spent much time in the 
writing of odes and poems, some of which he 
published in a volume which he dedicated to 
Brougham. 

The first years of his retirement were, however, 
taken up with a publication of a different” 
nature. 


EDWARD STIRLING! to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
South Place, Knightsbridge: April 20, 1836 


Having for some days hoped for an intimation 
from Mr. Montgomery that your Lordship had 
quite shaken off a bilious cold, by which it gave me 
much concern to hear that you had.been lately 
affected, and that I might in consequence have the 
honour of paying my respects to you, I delayed, 
perhaps longer than I ought to have done, the 
gratification of returning your Lordship my warm 
acknowledgments for the splendid gift which 
Mr. Montgomery conveyed to me in your name, on 
the 10th inst., and for the kind and to me inestim- 
able memorandum with which it was accompanied. 
It needed not such an additional and unperishing 
record of your Lordship’s achievements as a 

1 Edward Stirling (1773-1847), a valued member of the 


staff of The Times, with which paper he was associated from 
1811 until 1840. 


310 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


statesman and a conqueror to confirm or vindicate 
in my own eyes those public tributes to your 
eminence in both characters, which it was the 
pride of my former days to render you. Still less 
did I require such an honourable and interesting 
testimony of: your personal regard to reanimate 
those feelings of grateful attachment towards your 
Lordship which no time nor circumstance can 
efface or weaken. 

I do earnestly trust, however, that, masterly 
as were the views and provident the combinations, 
and signal and memorable the results exhibited by 
this authentic narrative of the movements of a 
single mind, under difficulties altogether un- 
exampled, India will not stand alone in her 
contribution to your Lordship’s fame, as connected 
with the political history of Great Britain. 

‘Spain and Ireland, I may be permitted to hope, 
will bear their respective parts. Spain, which I 
believe to have been actually saved by the 
development of your principles, and by a recourse, 
however tardy, I might almost say posthumous, 
to your originally neglected counsels ; and Ireland, 
which, if lost irretrievably, has been so, I fear, by 
their frustration. 

At all events, I would beseech your Lordship, do 
not be niggardly to your own renown. Give the 
world all that can, without wounding your sénse 
of duty to the state, be promulgated. 

The first dawn of upright and enlightened 
government in Ireland was opened by yourself. 
Your Lordship has administered that country 
amidst crises and during transitions which will 


1842] INDIAN DESPATCHES 311 


leave their marks upon our institutions for many 
ages. Very few, nevertheless, of those facts 
which constitute the “ within-door” history of 
that important period are known or even guessed at 
by the nation. Yet are they indispensable to a 
clear understanding of the course of events, and of 
the relations of parties—above all, to a just 
appreciation of the embarrassments by which this 
government was beset, which means the merits of 
those by whom it was conducted. In this respect 
there is a large debt due to posterity, and it will 
soon begin to press. 

But I have to apologise to your Lordship. Isat 
down to thank you, not to discuss with you, or 
importune you. Let the deep interest I take in 
the subject be my excuse for both. 


Wellesley was most desirous that there should be 
an adequate and permanent record of the work 
he had done as Governor-General, and he decided 
to publish a selection of his despatches. The 
selection was edited by Montgomery Martin, and 
the five volumes, which appeared during 1836 and 
1837, were entitled, The Despatches, Minutes, and 
Correspondence of the Marquess Wellesley, K.G., 
during his Administration in India. Upon the 
appearance of the first volume Brougham at once 
made it the subject of an article in the Edinburgh 
Review. 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 349- 
2 July 1836; vol. Ixiii. PP. 537-559. 


312 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1835- 


Lorp BrRouGHAM fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 


Private and confidential Harrington, Spilsby 
July 13, 1836 

I am desirous of mentioning a circumstance to 
you which may possibly have reached you, and in 
that case I trust you will accede to my request— 
that it may go no further. This is, indeed, one of 
my reasons for mentioning it. I have deemed it a 
duty of friendship, as well as a public duty, to write 
a paper upon your Indian administration, which is 
inserted in the Edinburgh Review. My unbounded 
admiration of the history of a real statesman 
disclosed in the volume published by Mr. Martin 
is already known to you, though I really hardly 
think when I last wrote that I expressed myself 
strongly enough. Iwas aware that if the subject 
were left in other hands, however well disposed, the 
chances were that one secret known to me might be 
unknown to them, namely—that when a friend is 
to be defended there is but one course, to admit 
nothing at all against him. In fact, you had 
better not defend him at all, for the enemy 
pounces upon the admission and that becomes 
conviction; the rest goes for nothing. You 
perceive that I am a little of old Jack Lee’s 
opinion, who, when the judge said, ‘‘ You admit 
that, Mr. Lee, I suppose,” answered, “ Admit! I 
never admitted anything in my life.” Of course I 
am applying my doctrine only to such a case as the 
one in question, and such a country as we live in. 
When there is party against party and gross 
injustice—and nothing like justice will be done if 
one side affects the judge while the other plays 


1842] THE EDINBURGH REVIEW 313 


the advocate—to speak of a discussion of a political 
subject in the Edinburgh Review as anything else 
would be the grossest absurdity. 

However, I must really add that I have seen 
absolutely nothing that I could have found fault 
with had I been ever so much disposed. I only 
state what is above written to excuse my breaking 
in, when I truly felt that from being out of the 
practice of such writing I was not likely to do it 
even tolerably well; and you will consequently 
find the disproportion extreme between the work- 
manship and the materials. Something came to 
my knowledge that made me suppose it possible 
Hatherton might have learnt the circumstance of 
my writing it, and my first reason for now troubling 
you, therefore, is to beg that it may be counted by 
you as a strict secret, and that if he happens to 
know it you should enjoin him to the same secrecy. 

My other reason is this: You will find no 
reference—or but a very slight general one—to a 
more recent passage: I mean Ireland and the 
unprecedented treatment you have met with. I 
thought it (after much consideration) far better 
that everything should be avoided which might 
give a pretext for attack to the retainers of the 
Government, and that there might be a unanimous 
expyession of the admiration which all must feel 
upon the main subject of the paper. The allusion 
to Ireland is, therefore, made very general, though 
I believe it is intelligible enough. 

I expect daily to receive proof sheets, which I 
shall correct as carefully as I can, and if time is 
allowed shall send to you, in case there should be 


314 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1835- 


any oversight as to names and dates. But it is 
not likely that there will be time, as the professor 
(who is editor since Lord Jeffrey quitted it) is in 
London unwell and is rather later in his publication 
than usual.’ 


Brougham’s article on the Despatches was 
entirely eulogistic. It is impossible here to follow 
it in detail, but one passage may be quoted. 
“The consummate ability, the true statesmanlike 
views, the admirable combination of temper and 
firmness, the rare unison of patience with despatch, 
of vigour with perseverance, by which the forma- 
tion and the execution of Lord Wellesley’s plans 
were characterised, and by which their uniform 
and complete success was secured, have never been 
questioned by anyone at all acquainted with the 
subject ; and have indeed been amply recognised 
by the voice of his countrymen in Europe, as well 
as in India, ” Brougham wrote, especially in regard 
to the period that ended with the capture of 
Seringapatam. “ Although the contemporary 
events of the continental war were calculated to 
draw aside men’s regards from the theatre, how 
splendid soever, of a remoter empire, the govern- 
ment of Lord Wellesley, and the exploits of the 
captains who served under him, were anxiously 
canvassed at a time when the French Revolution 
was shaking the thrones of our hemisphere, and 

2 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 363. 


1842] BROUGHAM’S REVIEW 315 


the political fortunes of Napoleon were dawning 
after the tempest, whose fury they were to direct 
rather than allay ; nédr is it to be doubted that even 
after passages occurred which created serious 
opposition to Lord Wellesley’s views, and much of 
his public conduct had become the object of attack 
and defence by the adherents of conflicting 
political parties, there still prevailed a very general 
impression, both on the continent of Europe and in 
England itself, that in him we possessed the man 
whose genius, matured by long and varied ex- 
perience of affairs, afforded the best chance of 
counteracting the vast plans of the French ruler.” 

It is not to be doubted that Wellesley, than 
whom no man hungered more for appreciation, 
was delighted by this article, and the cup of his 
pleasure was shortly to be filled by the news that 
the Directors of the East India Company had 
decided to issue copies of the Despatches to their 
servants at home and abroad. “ To the eventful 
period of your Lordship’s government the Court 
look back with feelings common to their country- 
men,” so ran the Chairman’s letter to Wellesley ; 
“and anxious that the minds of their servants 
should be enlarged by the instruction to be 
derived from the accumulated experience of emi- 
nent statesmen, they felt it a duty to diffuse widely 
the means of consulting a work unfolding the 
principles upon which the supremacy of Britain 
in India was successfully manifested and enlarged, 


316 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


under a combination of circumstances in the 
highest degree critical and difficult.” 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to SIR JAMES RIVETT 
Carnac? 
Hurlingham: October 20, 1836 

I request you to accept my grateful acknowledg- 
ments for your obliging kindness in submitting my 
letter of the 27th of September to the Court of 
Directors withso much expedition and promptitude. 

The reply, which you have transmitted to me 
under the authority of the Court, confers one of the 
highest and most acceptable honours which I have 
ever received in a long and eventful course of 
public service. 

That the authentic record of the principles on 
which I acted, during the most critical and difficult 
emergency of the affairs of the British Empire in 
India, should be deemed by the Court of Directors 
to contain an instructive and useful lesson for 
their servants, is a testimony most glorious to the 
memory of my services. I receive this most 
distinguished mark of consideration with the 
warmest sense of its value, and with the most 
cordial sentiments of respectful gratitude. 

The kind feelings which dictated the wish 
expressed by the Court at the close of your letter 
are well calculated to revive early and ardent 
impressions of sincere zeal, attachment, and 

1 James Rivett Carnac (1785-1846) served the East India 
Company in India from 1801 to 1822, when he returned to 
England. He was created Baronet in 1836, in which and the 


ollowing year he was Chairman of the Company. Subse- 
quently, 1838 to 1841, he was Governor of Bombay. 


1842] MEMOIR OF PITT 317 


affection. To whatever period of time my days 
may be extended, I can never forget my duty 
towards the East Irtdia Company. 

I assure you that the favour of the Court 
receives additional value in my estimation from 
being communicated to me through a channel so 
justly respected and esteemed in India, as well as 
in the United Kingdom.’ 


VISCOUNT SIDMOUTH fo THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
Richmond Park: December 14, 1836 

At the moment when your packet arrived, a 
friend who was with me was speaking with 
admiration and delight of the justice, the noble 
and splendid justice, which you had rendered to 
the memory of Pitt.2 To have had such an 
opportunity of performing such a task will be to 
you a subject of the most cheering reflection to 
the latest period of your life. 

You are not, I fear, to be induced to renew your 
acquaintance with the ‘‘ Pectoral Claret.” Ifyou 
are, I shall rejoice to see you at my family dinner 
at half-past six on Friday next ; if otherwise, I shall 
hope for the pleasure of receiving you between two 
and three on that day. ® 


THE*’DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM AND CHANDOS to THE 
MARQUESS WELLESLEY 

Avington : December 22, 1836 

An attack of gout must plead my excuse for not 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 383- 
2 See ante, vol. i. p. 190. 
3 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 392- 


318 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1835- 


having sooner answered your very kind letter, and 
also for now employing another hand than my own. 

I read with the greatest admiration and pleasure 
your letter to Mr. Croker in vindication of the 
character of the late Mr. Pitt, and I feel deeply 
obliged for sending me a copy of it ; it is the fate 
of many illustrious characters to have their public 
services rewarded by ingratitude, and even Mr. 
Pitt’s character is at the mercy of a convicted 
libeller. 

It is a great gratification and comfort to his 
family and those who were attached to him to see 
the libel triumphantly exposed by one of his 
earliest and warmest friends, in a manner so 
eloquent and beautifully expressed. 

The letter is a monument of your Lordship’s 
excellent heart and feeling, as well as of Mr. Pitt’s 
public virtue and private character. 

Your Lordship has also singularly obliged me by 
transmitting to me copies of the correspondence 
between you and the Court of Directors of the East 
India Company. 

It was not necessary for that body to send 
printed copies of your Despatches to India, in 
order to recall to the recollections both of British 
and natives in that country your magnificent 
plans, your extraordinary combinations, and your 
splendid exertions by which you established in 
that quarter of the globe, and in one of the 
proudest pages of English history, the glory of the 
British name. 

It gives me sincere pleasure that you condescend 
to recollect with satisfaction the feeble exertions 


1842] AN EFFECTIVE TRIBUTE 319 


which I was enabled to make in Parliament, in 
humble but heartfelt vindication of your measures. 

Be assured, my dear Lord, that I look back with 
the greatest satisfaction to that portion of my 
political exertions.’ 


THE EARL OF CLARENDON to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
North Audley Street : December 22, 1836 

I cannot sufficiently express how much I am 
gratified and flattered by your letter, and by being 
thought worthy of receiving from yourself a copy 
of your able and eloquent defence of our illustrious 
friend [Pitt]. 

As a portrait painter you have mixed some of 
the finest traits of Sir Joshua with the characteristic 
and delightful delineations of Wilkie. 

The partial opinion and confidence of Mr. Pitt, 
which I so long enjoyed, has certainly been the 
greatest honour of my life; and my, intimate 
knowledge of his sentiments enables me to record 
how strongly the impressions on his mind which 
your earliest reputation had created were con- 
firmed and increased by every subsequent year’s 
experience of your honour, talents, and public 
services. It is matter of no small praise and 
delight to see those talents so kindly, ably, and 
justly employed in his posthumous defence. 

To do justice to the effective tribute which you 
have rendered to Mr. Pitt’s memory would require 
a mind and pen equal to those from whence that 
tribute has proceeded. 


1 Add MSS. 37311 f. 399. 


320 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


I shall certainly make no such pretension, nor 
shall I enter more into your composition than to 
gratify myself in making one or two observations 
upon it. 

You brilliantly dispel the foul vapours with 
which malice, ignorance, and mischievous views 
still strive to malign the real character of one of the 
noblest and best of men, and you have contrived 
(while pursuing that object) in Mr. Pitt’s remark- 
able praise of the Duke of Wellington to give the 
only new honours which the military honours of 
your illustrious brother were capable of receiving. 
In truth, the concentration of thought, and the 
apparent lightness and ease of expression in Mr. 
Pitt’s remark, is not among the least striking 
instances of his familiar as well as his public 
eloquence. 

You gratify me much by recalling to my mind 
the intimate knowledge which I had of Mr. Pitt’s 
mind. I neveravailed myself of that knowledge 
with more confidence, nor with more success, than 
on an occasion to which perhaps to this hour you 
are a stranger. When your conduct in India was 
grossly attacked, party spirit, ignorance, and 
malice joining the attack, the Court of Directors 
highly offended, and the Board of Control at last 
wavering in its sentiments, Lord Maryborough 
(then Mr. Pole) came to me, and in all the warmth, 
I might say agony, of his brotherly feelings, 
condescended to ask me what he could do. I told 
him instantly, “Go to Mr. Pitt ” (though at that 
time they were barely acquainted), ‘‘ tell him your 
whole case, and leave to him, unasked, to decide 


1842] IRISH MISMANAGEMENT 321 


what is due to such a Minister as the Governor- 
General zealously engaged in the most critical and 
arduous services, absent, and at a great distance.” 

I knew the reception which he would meet 
with, but I had not the smallest share in what 
passed, beyond the mere use of that knowledge. 
The result was everything which could be wished, 
and the effect at the time important to yourself, 
and, through you, to the Empire, inasmuch as 
it tended to prolong your brilliant and able 
administration in India. 

It would be most pleasing to discuss many 
similar traits of our deceased friend’s character 
with one who feels as you do towards his merits 
and his memory ; but I must not intrude further 
upon you. Pray excuse what I have already done, 
and believe me to be, with all the sentiments 
which this letter implies, and with sincere regard 
and attachment ... 2 


THE MARQuEsS WELLESLEY fo Lorp BrouGHaM 
Hurlingham: February 10, 1837 

Your Lordship will not be surprised to find that 
the disclosures made in, the House of Commons, 
and the conduct of His Majesty’s Ministers 
towards me, have determined me to relinquish all 
connection with them, and to hold myself at 
liberty to act against them in Parliament. 

Their existence as a Government is now the 
shield of protection to the champions of revolution, 
and their whole mismanagement in Ireland is 
entirely contrary to my public principles. On 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 401. 
2 Y 


322 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


these grounds I quit them. My personal wrongs 
are not of a private nature. They involve public 
offences of a deep dye, and constitute public 
objections which render it impossible for me to act 
with the wrong-doers. But, in addition to my 
personal feelings, it is my sincere opinion that the 
continuance of the present Ministry in power must 
produce confusion, if not ruin, to this Empire. 

It appeared to me to be my positive duty to 
communicate my determination to your Lordship 
before I made it known to any other person, and 
I hope you will receive this communication as a 
testimony of that sincere respect and esteem, and of 
those warm sentiments of friendship and attach- 
ment, with which I shall ever remain. . . 

I do not feel it necessary to make my com- 
munication to Lord Melbourne.* 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo SIR ROBERT PEEL 
Private « Hurlingham: February 10, 1837 


As you have been so kind as to accept the 
former volume of my Indian Despatches, I now 
send you the second and third volumes. The 
second contains papers relative to the foundation 
of the college of Fort William, the third the history 
of the Maratha war. 

I cannot forward these books without expressing 
to you the very great satisfaction which I derived 
from reading your very able speeches at Glasgow. 
The inaugural speech greatly interested me. It 
should be placed in the hands of every young 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 £. 436. 


1842] THE IRISH CHURCH 323 


man. You may well believe with what pleasure I 
remarked your ardours in recommendation of 
classical literature, *now so much descried in 
despite of all reason and experience. Any person 
but yourself would have cited your own example 
as the most prominent of our age. Iam happy to 
have contributed my mite to your examples of the 
past age, and I am deeply sensible of the kindness 
with which you mentioned me. The speech in the 
Grand Temple at the banquet (which I trust will 
prove the “ Feast for Persia won ’’) is admirable. 
In all the great principles I agree completely with 
you, especially in considering the Protestant 
establishment of the united realm as the great 
bulwark, not merely of our religion, but of our 
liberties and laws. This was always my sentiment, 
as you will find in a speech delivered so long ago as 
the 31st January, 1812 (see Hansard’s Debates) ; 
my sentiment was deliberately uttered, and printed 
under my revision. 

My view was never to admit the Roman 
Catholics to any right, otherwise than under the 
Protestant constitution of the realm. Judge then 
with what horror I find Government countenancing 
the utter demolition of the Protestant establish- 
ment in Ireland, as the necessary consequence of 
the Act of Relief! 

The disclosures made in the last debate, and 
the full display of the deeds of Grizzle and his 
master (although highly amusing) are most alarm- 
ing. It is now quite evident that the present 
system (if so it can be called that ‘‘ shape has 
none ’’) serves merely as a protection to the 


324 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1835- 


mining party, who carry on the work most 
regularly, and will finish it most successfully, 
unless the protecting guard be forced by a vigorous 
sortie from the citadel. The scene in Ireland 
surpasses any passage in Yes and No. It is folly 
and vanity mutually offering incense to each other, 
and then kneeling together in joint adoration at 
the bloody shrine of O’Connell. 

There were some mistakes made in the debate 
respecting Janus Vitalis. He was not an old 
monkish writer, but a favourite (I believe secretary) 
of Pope Leo X. His poem on the “ Ruins of 
Rome ” is printed in a Westminster school book, 
containing a selection from Martial, Claudian, etc. 
I read it at Eton. You must not judge him from 
Lord Holland’s quotation of a very bad line. He 
wrote some noble verses. You may quote these 
on your next visit to Rome: 

Aspice murorum moles, praeruptaque saxa, 
Obrvutaque horrenti vasta theatra situ ! 


Haec sunt Roma—vidén, velut ipsa cadavera tanta 
Urbis adhuc spirent imperiosa minas.* 


StR ROBERT PEEL fo THE Marquess 
WELLESLEY 

Whitehall: February 11, 1837 

I feel very much flattered by the communication 

which I had the satisfaction of receiving from you 
yesterday. 

The two volumes of correspondence are not 

transmitted by you to one indifferent to their 

contents or insensible of their value, for I read the 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 438. 


1842] A BEWILDERING DEBATE 325 


first of the series with the greatest care, and need 
scarcely add that it was with the utmost satis- 
faction that I hailed*the arrival of its successors. 

I rejoice that you have given to the people of 
this country such materials for faithful history, 
and such lessons of enlightened and successful 
policy in the government of her Indian Empire. 

Your kind approbation of my Glasgow addresses 
is very gratifying. 

I can with perfect truth assure you that the more 
attractive part of my exhortation to my youthful 
constituents was your beautiful testimony to the 
classical acquirements and refined taste of Mr. Pitt. 

We are all bewildered by our debate in the 
House of Commons, and can only account for the 
diversion made by Lord John Russell from the 
proper subjects of discussion on the assumption that 
he was not apprised of the freaks committed by 
them in authority in Ireland. The “‘ Lamentations 
and Woe” of Sir John Hobhouse coyld only be 
justified by the prospect of immediate dissolution ; 
and the very different language held by Lord John 
Russell from that held by Lord Melbourne in the 
Lords was very remarkable. I should have 
inferred from it that His Majesty’s Government 
was more familiar with Janus Bifrons than Janus 
Vitais. I was not aware that the Poet was 
capable of four such lines as those quoted in the 
postscript of your letter. 

They are a fine funeral oration on the departed 
splendour of Rome, and reminded me, by the force 
of contrast, of Ovid’s commemoration of its 
infancy. 


326 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1835- 


Frondibus ornabant, quae nunc Capitolia, gemmis, 
Pascebatque suas ipse Senator oves. 

Nec pudor in stipula placidam cepisse quietem, 
Et foenum capiti supposuissé, fuit. 


When I was trying to find a justification for Lord 
Mulgrave in the precedent of Tom Thumb, I was 
wholly unaware of the important fact that it is 
one of his Lordship’s favourite characters in which 
he is eminently successful in private theatricals. 
This clearly brings it home to him.? 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to VISCOUNT 
MELBOURNE 
Hurlingham, Fulham: June 21, 1837 

The affecting circumstances under which our 
young Queen has been called to the throne must 
excite the strongest interest in every heart 
attached to our Monarchy and Constitution. In 
such a crisis every loyal subject should forget 
private and personal wrongs and should fix his 
mind on the obligations of duty towards his 
Sovereign and towards the public safety. 

Her Majesty’s declaration to the Privy Council, 
in my opinion, is admirable, and must inspire 
general confidence. Her Majesty’s Government, 
founded, as it must be, on the principles of that 
declaration, demands cordial and steady support. 

Casting away, therefore, from my mind all 
remembrance of former injustice or injury (how- 
ever severely I may suffer under their pressure), 
I renew to your Lordship my sincere assurances of 
hearty support to the Government, and accord- 


1 Add. MSS. 37311 f. 440. 


1842] QUEEN VICTORIA 327 


ingly I shall take my seat in the House of Lords at 
the earliest opportunity. I request your Lordship 
to mention in whose hands my proxy shall be 
placed ; Lord Lansdowne hitherto has had the 
kindness to take that charge. ? 


VISCOUNT MELBOURNE fo THE MARQUESS 

WELLESLEY 

South Street: June 22, 1837 

I have hardly time to write, but I cannot for a 

moment delay expressing the very great satis- 

faction with which I have received your letter. I 

will not enter into the past; but I assure you 

that Iam deeply touched by the rectitude and 

generosity of the feelings which have actuated 
you upon the present occasion.® 


Jos—EPpH Hume’ fo THE Marquess WELLESLEY 
Bryanston Square: June 29, 1837 

I beg to offer your Lordship my best thanks for 
the copy of your Indian Correspondence, which 
you have been so obliging as to send me. 

I shall peruse with great interest these memorials 
of that eventful period when the destinies of the 
Indian Empire were in your hands; and, having 
had the honour to serve in the Maratha war for 
several years of the time to which your corre- 
spondence relates, I can the better appreciate the 

1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 7. 

2 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 9. 

8 Joseph Hume (1777-1855) served the East India Com- 
pany from 1797 until 1807. He entered Parliament in 1812 in 


the Radical interest, and was a staunch supporter of a pro- 
gramme of economy and retrenchment, 


328 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1835- 


principle of policy which regulated your Lordship’s 
government. 

Allow me to add that it must be highly satis- 
factory to you to find that the judicious policy 
which you adopted towards the Native Powers, 
and which, after Lord Cornwallis’ arrival had been 
objected to, and altered, has after twenty years of 
fruitless negotiation and unsuccessful experiment 
been again resorted to, and acknowledged to be 
the best calculated to promote the British interests, 
as well as the peace and prosperity of the natives. ? 


Lorp BROUGHAM to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private St. Leonards : October 3, 1837 


I have been reading with the greatest interest 
and delight the third volume, and I am strongly 
minded to send a few pages upon it to the Edin- 
burgh Review. But I believe there is only a day or 
two left in which to doso. Therefore I beg of you 
to give me a note or memorandum, by return of 
the post, of what the Company (Behauder) did 
last winter, which should be stated (though 
certainly not in terms) as a kind of amende 
honorable. J have only a vague recollection, which 
I do not like to print, and I beg you to state 
precisely what you think ought to be mentioned. 

I cannot express to you how entirely I go along 
with you in the whole question. I declare that 
“ drivelling ’’ would have been too light a term 
for the conduct of him avho could have hesitated. 
Indeed, self-defence almost to the letter and in the 


4 Add. MSS. 37312 f. rz. 


1842] BROUGHAM ON INDIA 329 


particular instances (on the larger scale and in the 
long run altogether) is a perfectly tenable ground 
after the Biron villain and the Scindiah creature 
had come so near the Peshwa ass, and were ogling 
and ogled by old Holkar. But the Perron affair 
reminds me of the great Mysore year, only I can 
not help suspecting M. Pferron] had a bridge of 
gold personall (sic) one way or other. ? 


VISCOUNT PALMERSTON to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
Foreign Office : October 11, 1837 
I am extremely obliged to you for having had 
the goodness to send me the remaining volumes of 
your Indian Despatches. That highly interesting 
work will acquire an additional value to me from 
being a memorial of your kind recollection of me. 
I have desired that your Spanish Despatches 
should be collected together that I may look over 
them, in order to be able to answer yoyr question 
respecting them ; but I confess to you that I 
should fear that confidential despatches of so 
recent a period from an Ambassador to a Secretary 
of State could scarcely be published without 
considerable public inconvenience. * 


The East India Company was now given an 
opportunity to show, albeit belatedly, their 
appreciation of the value of the work done by 
Wellesley during the years he was in their service, 
and it is-pleasant to be able to record that they 


1 Add‘ MSS. 37312 f. 37. 
2 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 41. 


330 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


availed themselves of this. Ata Court of Directors 
held on October 18, 1837, it was resolved : 

“The Court having learned with deep regret 
that the Marquess Wellesley is involved in 
pecuniary difficulties which greatly interrupt his 
personal comfort in the decline of life, have been 
led to review his Lordship’s career in India with 
the view of considering whether it would not 
become the Company to offer some further 
acknowledgment of the distinguished services of 
that illustrious individual. 

“The Court observe that upon the fall of 
Seringapatam, an intention was entertained of 
appropriating from the value of the Military Stores 
captured there a sum of £100,000 to the Marquess 
Wellesley, which intention was abandoned on his 
Lordship’s own suggestion from motives of delicacy 
towards the army, and it was then determined 
by the Company to grant to the Marquess an 
annuity of £5,000, which is still paid, but in which 
there is too much reason to apprehend that his 
Lordship has very little, if any, beneficial interest. 

“ After the fall of Seringapatam Lord Wellesley 
continued to hold for several years the office of 
Governor-General, and during that period military 
operations were conducted upon an extensive scale, 
and with brilliant success and diplomatic arrange- 
ments were concluded, upon which the mainten- 
ance and consolidation of the British power in 
India have since essentially depended. 


1842] A HANDSOME RESOLUTION = 331 


“In reference to the important services of the 
noble Marquess and to his present circumstances, 
the Court of Directdrs do by the Ballot resolve 
that, subject to the approbation of the General 
Court of Proprietors and the Board of Com- 
missioners for the Affairs of India, the sum of 
£20,000 be vested in the Chairman, Deputy 
Chairman, and two other persons, to be named by 
the Court of Directors as trustees, to be applied 
to the benefit of the Marquess Wellesley in such 
mode as shall appear to them to be best calculated 
to promote his Lordship’s welfare.” 


THE Marguess WELLESLEY fo ALFRED 
MONTGOMERY 
October 18, 1837 

This day a most handsome resolution and a 
grant of £20,000 were passed by a great majority 
of the Court of Directors. They have summoned 
a Court of Proprietors for the 1st November, where 
they have no doubt of success. 

The few who did not approve the grant acknow- 
ledged “the eminent merits of the whole of my 
most brilliant administration,” and called me 
“the modern founder of the British Empire in 
India.” * 


THoMAS CREEVEY fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Brooks’s Club, St. James’s Street 
October 27, 1837 


I beg your Lordship will permit me to offer you 
1 Add. MSS. 37316 f. 72. 


332 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


my sincere congratulations upon what I under- 
stand has recently taken place at the India 
House. 

It must always be agreeable to public men to be 
gratefully remembered by their country, but the 
homage then offered to your Lordship’s Indian 
government after so long an interval of time, when 
its beneficial consequences can no longer be 
matters of opinion, but are confirmed by experience 
and admitted by those whose interests were the 
most immediately and deeply involved in it, is per- 
fectly invaluable, and it makes the conclusion of 
your Lordship’s connection with the East India 
Company as honourable to that body as it must 
be gratifying to the feelings of your Lordship. 

I have read with very great pleasure the three 
first volumes of your Lordship’s History of India 
(for such in truth it may be called), and I was 
particularly gratified on hearing from Mary- 
borough the other day at Brighton that your 
Lordship most kindly intended to send me a copy 
of it. I need not say with what pleasure I shall 
receive and preserve so invaluable a present from 
your Lordship’s own hands. 

Before I conclude I must touch upon one other 
subject, though a more unworthy one. I mean 
myself. My conduct to your Lordship in never 
having paid my respects to you since I had’ the 
pleasure of seeing you in Ireland has been that of a 
brute, and yet a most inconsistent one, for I have 
never ceased to feel and to express to others the 
great obligations I owed you for your signal 
kindness to me when in Ireland, and for the 


1842] TARDY RECOGNITION 333 


sincere pleasure I enjoyed from being permitted 
to partake of your Lordship’s society. 

May I request yeur Lordship to present my 
respectful compliments to Lady Wellesley ? * 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo THOMAS CREEVEY 


Hurlingham House, Fulham 
October 28, 1837 


In returning my grateful thanks for your very 
kind congratulations, I trust you will believe that 
I fully appreciate their value. You are not of that 
sect of philologists who hold the use of language to 
be the concealment of thought, nor of that tribe of 
thinkers whose thoughts require concealment. 
You would not congratulate me on the occasion of 
any false honour, the result of prejudice or error, or 
of the passionate caprice of party, or of idle vanity, 
or of any transient effusion of the folly of the 
present hour; but you think the deliberate 
approbation of my government in India declared 
by the Court of Directors (after the lapse of thirty 
years, after full experience of consequences and 
results, and after full knowledge of all my motives, - 
objects and principles) a just cause of satisfaction 
tome. ... Intruth, they have awarded to mean 
inestimable meed of honour, which has healed much 
deep sorrow, and which will render the close of a 
long public life not only tranquil and happy, but 
bright and glorious. .. .? 

1 

2 Gas pee i poe By kind permission of Mr. John 
Murray. 


334 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


Lorp BrouGHAM to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private St. Leonards : October, 1837 


I am extremely obliged to you for the prompti- 
tude with which you answered my letter, and the 
books you sent. Infact, when I came to grapple 
with the subject I had been reading so much upon, 
and found I had only four or five hours to do what 
should have taken as many weeks, I should have 
given it up in despair but for these books coming 
to my relief. You will ask how an increase of the 
materials could shorten the labour? As thus: 
I had found anything but a mere reference to the 
subject out of the question, and those invaluable 
documents, Castlereagh’s observation and the 
Duke’s answer, which I set to reading immediately, 
enabled me to give something like a notice of the 
question as to the Basseim Treaty, to which I 
added a few sentences upon the going to war with 
Sindia. 

I assure you nothing can be worse or less 
satisfactory than the whole is, and I am beyond 
measure provoked at the accident by which I 
mistook the time by a month, so that this is the 
very last post by which I could transmit what I 
had to say. Something I was determined should 
be done, and accordingly I have despatched it by 
this post. However, when I see what a ‘field 
there was for an ample discussion worthy of the 
subject, and when I find such rich materials in the 
fifth volume, I really have a doubt if I had not 
better have postponed it in order to do justice to 
the question. That would, indeed, be a delay of 


1842] A MEAGRE REVIEW 335 


three months, and I might be interrupted by 
Parliament. I have, therefore, resolved upon 
sending the miserable stuff which alone I could 
throw together, writing literally as hard as I could, 
“to save the post,” and to let you decide whether 
it shall stand as it does or be countermanded by 
Saturday’s post. Ihave made a point in my letter 
to the professor (who is the editor) of his inserting 
it how late soever it may reach him, and have 
dropped no hint of even the possibility of a counter- 
mand. But if you shall so determine, I dare to say 
there will be time on my receiving your answer to 
this. 

In order to enable you to make up your mind, I 
shall briefly give the outline of what I have sent 
and which may occupy about six pages. It is 
indeed meagre enough. 

After compliments there is a very distinct state- 
ment of the East India House orders, and a 
quotation of the proper passages from the circular 
and from the letter of the Chairs. There is then 
a reference to the Tipu correspondence with the 
“citizens”? and the Grand Signor. Then a 
reference to Castlereagh’s observation and the 
Duke’s answer, then to the cause of war and 
Sindia’s “‘ We shall then know whether it is to 
be peace or war.”’ In passing I have done justice 
to Castlereagh, who behaved well, and I may say 
ably ; this paper does him considerable credit, 
though he is so entirely wrong that it hardly 
required so very excellent an answer as the Duke’s 
to make “‘ minced meat” of him. I have then 
made, I think, a very proper and most just 


336 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


reference to Lord Sidmouth’s conduct, and also to 
his general character for boldness, which I am sure 
he had beyond most political men. This would 
have entirely escaped me but for your letter, but 1 
feel his whole behaviour to your Lordship to have 
been admirable, and he would not be justly dealt 
by were this not acknowledged. As for General 
Lake, I never felt more admiration, and I may say 
regard, for anyone I have read of, than the whole 
of his action and his letters have given me for him ; 
and there is no one now (as far as I know) at all 
related to him who can look after his fame. I 
should, therefore, even if you had not mentioned 
him, have done my best to render him some little 
justice. This I have done, I think in a way to 
avoid giving the least offence in the other quarter. 
It closes with some expression of regret that 
several things are omitted, as suttees—sacrifices 
—etc., and a mention of your great care and love 
for the arts of peace, and a reference to the 
expected European Despatches. 

Now, counting that all this was most rapidly 
thrown upon paper ‘between four and six o'clock, 
the perusal of the necessary parts of Volume V. 
having taken from morning to four o’clock, it is 
hardly necessary to say how scanty and superficial 
the whole is. But unless I hear to the contrary by 
Saturday’s post it will goon. Even should I then 
find your Lordship prefers the delay, it may be 
too late to countermand it, but I shall try. 

I was much touched with again reading Pitt’s 
letter in Volume V." 


1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 61. 


1842] CONGRATULATIONS 337 


THE EARL OF CLARENDON to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
Leamington : November 3, 1837 

I heard at Beaudesart (where I assure you the 
gratifying intelligence had been received with 
cordial satisfaction) of the just honours paid you 
by the Court of Directors, and I only waited with 
my congratulations till their tribute of gratitude 
and praise should be completed by the general 
assent and concurrence of those who have now 
shown the sense they entertain of such services as 
yours to the Empire and to themselves. 

It is most rare to see public gratitude and public 
justice awakened, after much injustice and long 
insensibility. But it is a spectacle highly gratify- 
ing whenever it does occur, and not the less so 
from the proof it affords how great must have been 
the merit which has had the power within itself of 
working such an effect. Pray accept my humble 
but most sincere congratulations, and believe me 
to be, with every sentiment of regard, as well as 
with just admiration of the services to which this 
letter refers... 

P.S. Lady Clarendon charges me to offer you her 
congratulations and to assure you of the pleasure 
which she has had in the event which has taken 
place.” 


SIR JAMES RiveTr Carnac to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
East India House: January 4, 1838 
As one of the trustees of the grant recently made 


1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 71. 
2 Z 


338 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


by the East India Company in testimony of its 
sense of the benefits derived from your Lordship’s 
administration in India, J] have the honour of 
informing you that in pursuance of the resolution 
under which the grant was made, the sum of 
£20,000 was invested in the three per cent. 
Reduced Annuities; that a sum sufficient. to 
purchase an annuity for your Lordship’s life of 
£3,650 per annum has been transferred to the 
Commissioners for the Redemption of the National 
Debt, and that an annuity of the amount and for 
the period above named has accordingly been 
granted to the trustees, payable half-yearly. The 
first payment will fall due on the 5th of April next. 

Your Lordship will believe that the trustees 
derive great satisfaction from the completion of the 
transaction, upon which they beg to offer their 
hearty congratulations and to express their ardent 
hope that your Lordship may long enjoy the 
provision tendered by public gratitude as an 
acknowledgment of eminent public service. 

After making the necessary payment for the 
purchase of the annuity there remained un- 
appropriated a sum of £801 gs. 9d., for which I 
have the honour of enclosing a draft, 


JOHN WILSON CROKER fo THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
West Moulsey, Surrey: April 5, 1838 
I trust your Lordship may be inclined to excuse 
my desire to avail myself of an opportunity of 
renewing our literary correspondence, which has 
2 Add. MSS. 37312 f£. 105. 


1842] THE ROLLIAD 339 


already done me honour and never can fail to give 
me pleasure. 

I have been lately looking into the collection of 
political yeux d’esprit, commonly called the Rolliad, 
and have been very much struck, not merely with 
the elegance of the versification and the poignancy 
of the wit, but with, what the authors never 
expected, the honour that is done to the memory 
and policy of Mr. Pitt and his friends. For 
instance, Mr. Pitt is ridiculed and censured for 
having confided an important trust to a fat-headed 
and fat-rumped youth to the exclusion of the 
matured talents of a distinguished man nominated 
by Mr. Fox. Theclumsy youth was Lord Grenville 
—clarum et venerabile nomen gentibus ; the rejected 
statesman was one Fletcher,’ of whom nothing 
is remembered but that Fox made him a baronet. 

But in looking through this volume I was vexed 
to find how much of it is become obscure, and I 
have been endeavouring by marginal notes to 
catch what straws I can from the oblivious stream 
of time. Your Lordship and Lord Clarendon are 
now, I believe, the only contemporaries left, and 
it has occurred to me that you might be willing to 
help me with some of your reminiscences. I have 
no thoughts of publishing an annotated edition, 
but I should like to prepare one for my own better 
amusément and that of my friends, and for the 
sake of doing justice to the wit of that party and to 
the characters of ours—for I presume to call my- 
self an humble and far distant follower of Mr. Pitt. 


1 Sir Henry Fletcher, Bart. (1727-1807), for eighteen years 
a director of the East India Company. 


340 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


I was too far removed in station as well as age 
to know anything prior to 1795; but you were 
already distinguished both by Mr. Pitt’s friendship 
and the enmity of his opponents ; so that if you 
chose to amuse an occasional hour in that way you 
could probably explain all that is worth explaining. 
How say you, my Lord, content or not content ? 

I greatly regret not to have obtained from my 
old friend, Lord John Townshend, the authorship 
of the several pieces. He once told me that he 
was the author of Jekyl, and Jekyl himself con- 
firmed it; and both assigned to General Fitz- 
patrick a large share in the poetical compositions. 
I cannot say that I ever admired the Preliminary 
Odes so much as the verse of the Rolliad and the 
Prologues, which I understood were almost entirely 
the General’s and Lord John’s. 

I suppose there must be some of that party, Lord 
Holland, for instance, who could assign the 
authorship; yet Lord Devon, who was likely to 
have access to such information, told me that he 
had failed to doso. He and I had agreed to try 
what I now venture to propose to your Lordship ; 
but he died suddenly, and the project with him. 
I have a mind to do something of the kind, ere 
it is too late, for, if I may be forgiven for saying so, 
on so trifling a subject, wé yap épxeras.? 


JOHN WILSON CROKER ‘fo THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 


West Moulsey: April 25, 1838 
I have to thank your Lordship for a very 
1 Add. MSS. 3732 f, 112. 


1842] A POOR BIOGRAPHY 341 


flattering letter. I fear that your kindness over- 
mastered your judgment, or I should rather say I 
hope, for I should be more pleased at finding myself 
indebted to the former than even to the latter. 

My Rolliad project would be the work, or rather 
the trifling, of a few half-hours. I could do it, 
indeed, in one morning, if I had my previous 
information ready ; and shall probably do so en 
attendant the elucidation of what my own memory 
cannot explain. 

But the hint in your Lordship’s letter about a 
more complete development of the political charac- 
ters of Mr. Pitt and Lord Grenville has very much 
struck me ; but chiefly with an impression that no 
living hand could do it so well as your own. If 
you would again allow me to have the honour of 
ringing the bell to a discourse of yours on that text, 
I should be happy and proud to lend my humble 
assistance, and it has occurred to me that an 
opportunity now presents itself. Mr. Murray has 
sent your Lordship his new publication, the Life 
of Wilberforce. Could we not hang on that peg 
something better than the shreds and patches of 
morbid pietastery in which the injudicious bio- 
graphers have disfigured their father, or, to speak 
more justly, allowed him to disfigure himself; or 
if you think that a canvas already so occupied 
would not afford space for two additional figures 
—augustiores quam humanae formae—could you 
not, at least, do for Lord Grenville what you did 
so beautifully and so piously for Mr. Pitt in the 
article on Wraxall ?? 


1 See ante, vol. i, p. 190. 


342 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1835- 


I have not yet read more than half the first 
volume, and have dipped loosely into the others, 
and I do not therefore know whether there be any 
very convenient opportunity for introducing a 
separate sketch of Lord Grenville ; but I take the 
liberty of suggesting the idea that in reading the 
book your Lordship might, if the thought pleases, 
look out for such an opening, and I would under- 
take to review the whole work, gladly, with the 
hope of setting such a gem in my ring. The book 
itself, as far as I can yet judge it, is really pitiable ; 
as the “ devout exercises ”’ of William Wilberforce 
it may bea very good and perhaps useful book, but 
as the Life of the friend of Pitt, Grenville, and the 
rest of you, it seems to me to be a miserable 
failure. But still, in reviewing it, one might and 
indeed ought to say a good deal of those great men, 
and as we on another occasion threw so splendid 
a wreath on Pitt’s grave, I think we might now 
throw a chaplet on Lord Grenville’s—perhaps not 
in the same form. That might seem tautologous 
—but a sketch of. Lord Grenville, of a couple of 
pages, would not be displaced in any period of 
Wilberforce’s history, but might, I suppose, be 
particularly well introduced at the point when in 
1806-7 he carried the Abolition Bill. 

I feel that I should be taking an unwarrantable 
liberty in making these suggestions to your 
Lordship if I had not the encouragement of your 
former co-operation and your recent advice on 
this very topic. 

You alone of living men can say: 


1842]  WILBERFORCE’S DIARIES 343 


Ev@ Fros elws pév eyo xat AIOZ ’Odvacets 

obre wér’ civ dyopy diy’ éBdcoper, obr’ évi Bovdy, 

GAN Eva Ovpdv exovre vow kal ér’ ppove Bovdy 

Ppaldpel”’ "Apyeiourw Srus dy’ dpwrta yévyras. 
I wish I were a Telemachus to be able to profit by 
what you could tell me, but at least I may be able 
to record it for the use of others.* 


JOHN WILSON CROKER to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
50, Albemarle Street: May 29, 1838 

You may perhaps wish to know what I have done 
about Wilberforce’s Life, which I thought (before 
I had read it) might have been made the vehicle 
of some justice to the political lives of Mr. Pitt and 
Lord Grenville. On reading the work I found it 
wholly unfit for that purpose, and I have been 
obliged to confine myself to a criticism on Wilber- 
force himself, by which I have, I hope, extenuated 
much of the ill effect which his foolish and unjust 
diaries might produce against all his old friends. 
Indeed, I do not think that the profligate Sheridan 
or the’ caustic Francis could have written a more 
unfair and uncharitable account of you all than 
good, saintly friend Wilberforce. 

I have had occasion to bring in on the interment 
of Wilberforce near Pitt, Fox, and Canning the 
beaytiful quotation 

ede. www Cyepoipov Urvov K.T.A. 

If you should have any idea of using it yourself 
I would strike it out, for it is undoubtedly yours 
more than Theocritus’. You gave it its sublime 
and Christian application, which is too admirable 

1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 118, 


344 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1835- 


not to be preserved, but too valuable to be filched 
away, if you have any prospect of using it yourself. 

If your Lordship had leisure and any curiosity 
to see how I have treated the subject of Wilber- 
force, I should be but too happy to submit the 
proofs to your inspection.’ 


Lorp BrouGHAM to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private Colehill, Charing 
: July ro, 1838 
I rejoiced greatly to receive such excellent 
accounts by A[lfred] M{ontgomery] of your con- 
tinued good health, and I only wish I could 
contribute in any degree to your amusement by 
any intelligence from this quarter. But nothing 
can be more barren of such than all my letters, 
except that from France I hear accounts which 
shake materially my confidence in the present 
storm blowing over. I still incline to think, on 
the whole, that it will, and that the war, which 
seems inevifable, will be postponed till some new 
occasion ; but I confess that with such a strong 
popular feeling as exists there, and with all the 
preparations which it excites and enables the 
Government to make, the utmost difficulty exists 
to prevent them (the French mob) from having 
what they are so desirous of—a fight with some- 
body, it seems not to signify, in their estimation, 
with whom. 
In the present state of things, and if the craving 
remains unsatisfied and keeps up the irritation, 
. one can hardly be sure that an outbreak may not 


1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 120. 


1842] A VALIANT SPORTSMAN 345 


take place on some such occasion as Buonaparte’s 
funeral so as to shake the Government. 

Will you tell Alfred that my astonishment at 
his audacity is boundless: first, his daring to fire 
at so considerable a bird as a pheasant ; next, at 
his venturing to pretend he had the better of it, 
when we know that a rabbit (to be sure he asserted 
it was a wild one) put him to the rout last year. 
Pray ask him to thank A. D’Orsay for his letter 
which I have just received, and to give many kind 
remembrances to Lady Bilessington}. 

Can you, without much inconvenience, dictate 
to him (Aflfred] M[ontgomery]) an answer to the 
following query? When a jaghire is granted in 
Hindostan, there being in many cases at least a 
condition of military service annexed to it, does 
the jaghirdar ever grant out parts of the land to 
sub-jaghirdars—on a similar condition, resembling 
our subinfeudation? I conclude not, and that 
he only collects his men to bring into the field the 
best way he can. Pray do not give yourself the 
least trouble about this, but some things I have 
lately been reading in the Despatches make one a 
little curious about it. 

I am no believer of course in all these foolish 
rumours of coalition. Indeed, the Duke and Peel 
would be frantic to think of such a thing, when by 
a little delay, to which they seem not at all averse, 
they have the power in their hands; and surely 
whatever squabbles they may have with the 
Ultras and Orangemen, they never can suppose 
that these will again commit the error they did in 
1830—of going against them. 


346 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


But this Repeal agitation I perceive is alarming 
some who have jobs to do with the peasant ; 
people are apprehensive it ‘may upset them. I 
cannot see much cause to think so, for O’Connell 
is not enough in earnest about it to quarrel with 
the present Government. Ebrington’s slap seems 
to have been taken after the manner of holding up 
the other cheek ; and indeed it was gentle enough, 
though somewhat applied to a sore place (patron- 
age). It will keep off many Irish jobbers from 
joining the Repeal cry. I am informed, by one 
who has taken pains to examine the subject, that 
Minister has held entirely back from the present 
agitation, from the prevailing belief that 
O [Connell] is not in earnest. I should add, 
however, that my informant differs with me, and 
thinks he is and that he will take means to 
convince them of it.’ 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo SIR RICHARD 
JENKINS ? 

Private ’ Hurlingham: July 20, 1838 

In the whole course of a long public life I have 
never received more pleasure from any event than 
I feel from that which you announce to me. The 
honour conferred on you far exceeds in lustre, and 
is much more suitable to the services which you 
have rendered to the Empire. Besides, it is the 

1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 128. 

2 Richard Jenkins (1775-1853), who had rendered good 
service in India between 1798 and 1827, was on July 20, 1838, 
made a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath. He was 


in that year Deputy-Chairman of the East India Company, 
becoming in 1839 Chairman. 


1842] PARENTAL PRIDE 347 


first conferred on the Civil Service of India, in any 
instance, below the rank of Governor; and you 
are the first on this new foundation of honour for 
that service, of which all must allow you to be the 
principal ornament. 

I feel a personal and a parental pride in this 
most judicious and noble act of justice towards 
genuine merit, fostered under my own eyes, and 
led by my own hands into the path of glory. The 
conduct of Lord Glenelg? and of Sir John Hob- 
house? exceeds all praise, and it is most creditable 
to the Government in general to have moved 
above the low track of ordinary patronage on this 
occasion, and to have taught the civil servants in 
India, by this example, that their merits will be 
rewarded in their country without regard to 
differences of political opinion, or to considerations 
of party. 

The part which I have taken in this affair was 
an act of strict public duty, but I shall always 
rejoice in having been instrumental in any degree 
to a proceeding of Government from which such 
great advantages are likely to arise in the ad- 
ministration of our Oriental dominions, now and 
hereafter. 

That you may long live to enjoy this well- 
deserved honour, and to augment it by future 
public service, is the sincere wish and confident 


1 Charles Grant, Baron Glenelg (1778-1866), who was 
President of the Board of Control, 1830-1835, carried in 1833 
the charter vesting the East India Company’s property in the 
Crown. 

2 Sir John Cam Hobhouse, Bart., after Baron Broughton de 
Gryfford (1786-1869), President of the Board of Control in 
succession to Glenelg, 1835-1841, and again 1846-1852. 


348 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1835- 


expectation of your true friend and faithful and 
obliged servant.? 


THE MARQUESS OF LONDONDERRY? to THE 
MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Rose Bank: July 15, 1839 
Your Lordship’s private and confidential letter 
has been most gratifying to my feelings. I have 
studiously endeavoured that my tone to Lord 
Brougham should be as moderate as possible under 
the heavy calls his Lordship has made on my 
indignation. Forgive me, my dear Lord, but I 
cannot think Lord Brougham can suppose he 
has greatly served my brother’s memory, unless 
his Lordship has entirely lost his senses; and if 
his Lordship has really an excellent heart and a 
kind disposition, it is a pity he does not employ 
them in sparing those who are departed from the 
restlessness of his mind and the venom of his pen. 
Your Lordship has a just right to defend as far 
as possible your friend. But alas! Lord Brougham 
has proved a bitter enemy to the man I loved 
above all mankind, and I do assure you I take 
no small credit to myself (and I attribute it 
entirely to your Lordship) that I have been so 
temperate in reply as I think I have been. 
I will attentively consider your Lordship’s very 
kind suggestions, and although I frankly own I 
1 Add. MSS. 37312 £. 132. 
2 Charles William Stewart, third Marquess of Londonderry 
(1778-1854), half-brother of the second Marquess (better 
known as Lord Castlereagh), soldier and diplomatist. He 


compiled the Memoir and Correspondence of Viscount Castle- 
reagh, 1848-1853. 


1842] A GREAT CHARGE 349 


have not the feeling of diluting the pungent, I will 
see if there is yet time in the Press for softening the 
parts you deem objectionable. ? 


THE Marquess WELLESLEY to SIR CHARLES 
THEOPHILUS METCALFE 
Kingston House: August 1839 

Your appointment (so highly honourable to you) 
to the Privy Council affords me the opportunity 
of repeating in writing the congratulations which 
I have already offered to you on the very dis- 
tinguished manner in which you have been called 
by Her Majesty to the arduous and interesting 
duties of the Government of Jamaica. 

At this moment, and under all the circumstances 
of that Government, it is one of the most im- 
portant stations in the British Empire. 

It is a matter of cordial joy and affectionate 
pride to me to witness the elevation of a personage 
whose great talents and virtues have, been culti- 
vated under my anxious care, and directed by my 
hand to the public service in India ; where, having 
filled the first station in the Government of that 
vast Empire with universal applause, his merits 
and exalted reputation have recommended him to 
his Sovereign and her country as the man best 
qualified to consummate the noblest work of 
humanity, justice, and piety ever attempted by 
any state since the foundation of civilised society. 
You have been called to this great charge by the 
free, unsolicited choice of your Sovereign ; and 
that choice is the universal subject of approbation 

1 Add. MSS. 37312 £. 154. 


350 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1835- 


by the voice of her whole people. No appoint- 
ment ever received an equal share of applause. 
In a letter which I had the honour of receiving 
from you, and which is published in my Indian 
Despatches, you are pleased to say that you were 
educated in my school, and that it was the school 
of virtue, integrity, and honour. That school has 
produced much good fruit for the service of India. 
You are one of the most distinguished of that 
produce, and in your example it is a high satis- 
faction to me to observe that the benefits of my 
institute are now extended beyond the limits of 
that Empire for whose good government it was 
founded. 

It is among the principal blessings of advanced 
age to witness the successful results of early 
service; and if I have failed in all my other 
endeavours to serve the British Empire, the 
foundation of the College of Fort William, which 
has given you and others to the pubiic service, 
must ever ‘be to me the subject of satisfactory 
reflection. 

May your future career be as glorious as the 
past, and may the termination of your govern- 
ment be blessed by the happy settlement and 
orderly establishment of that interesting society 
which under your wisdom and temper will, I trust, 
afford an additional proof that the freedom of the 
people, duly regulated, is the best security for the 
prosperity, happiness, and peace of nations.' 

1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 162. 


1842] A POET’S CRITICISM 351 


SAMUEL ROGERS? fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
St. James’s Place: November 12, 1839 

Many, many thanks! [I discovered your letter 
among others on my table when I returned home 
last night from the Continent; and I need not 
say, I am sure, with what delight I read the 
verses. They are beautiful, and well worthy of a 
better age. May they bring again into favour a 
tree which on its arrival here was hailed univers- 
ally, but has, I think, most unaccountably been 
neglected of late. 

You mention it as flourishing on the banks of 
the Thames. Was it not first planted there by 
one of our poets? I mean Mr. Pope. Lord 
Orford, if I am not much mistaken, says so.* 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo Lorp HOLLAND 
Private and confidential Kingston House 
. November 13, 1839 

My acknowledgments of your most .kind, ami- 
able, and, I must add, able letter of the 11th 
October, would have been returned to you long 
ago, had I not been engaged by the very impudent 
intrusion of an acquaintance of yours, who came 
upon me, not manfully and boldly, as he is said to 
visit you, and used to visit the great Lord 
Chatham and his son, but (as some Ministers are 
accused of doing their work) under false colours, 
sneaking and shuffling and cheating, and hardly 
1 Samuel Rogers (1763-1855), the banker-poet, was intimate 
with all the eminent men of his day. He was offered, but 


declined, the Laureateship in 1850. 
® Add, MSS. 37312 f. 180. 


352 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- - 


perceptible until you feel the pinch or bite. This 
was the character of my first attack of gout, which 
is said to be the renewal of a lease of which the 
regular and legitimate instrument expired nine 
years ago, and which is now held merely on 
sufferance. 

My sentiments respecting the present Govern- 
ment were never extended to your Lordship, from 
whom it would be the extreme of ingratitude not 
to acknowledge that I have always experienced 
the greatest kindness and indulgence. Nothing 
has been more ‘painful to me in the unjust, 
treacherous, and cruel act by which Lord Mel- 
bourne expelled me from the public service, than 
my necessary separation from your society. My 
exile is more painful because it is entirely in- 
voluntary ; and (if ever I have the happiness to 
converse with your Lordship again) I will prove 
the conduct of Lord Melbourne towards me to 
have been such as to render it impossible for me to 
pursue any other course than that which I have 
adopted. The case, indeed, is such, that it must 
for the benefit of history be made public: I am 
in possession of ample materials (under Lord 
Melbourne’s own hand) for my justification, and 
if that gracious Providence which has hitherto 
deigned not only to preserve my life, but all the 
faculties of my mind, should extend its indulgence 
for a few weeks, I hope to be able to submit to 
the world a statement of truth which will produce 
astonishment in those who have any feeling for 
the honour of a great party, or any sense of truth, 
justice, or honest dealing. 


1842] RELIGIOUS CONVICTIONS 353 


So much for my political feelings. Now for 
dear Eton and Latin verse. I am very happy to 
hear that Eton is not to be mutilated by Sheil, 
Wyse,* or O’Connell. I had heard some alarming 
reports on that subject, and from authority which 
I credited ; but I no more intended to involve you 
in any such projects than to include you in my 
complaints against Lord Melbourne’s persecution 
of me, 

The attempt in my verses to unite the Etonian 
muse with the principles of religion is not founded 
on mere fancy, with a negligence of fact ; in me it 
arose not only from conviction of general truth, 
but from positive experience in my own person. 
My tutors (Davies and Norbury) were very able, 
kind, and attentive ; they were certainly aided by 
the Archbishop of Canterbury (an old and true 
Etonian), who put me to Eton, and constantly 
superintended my career through that noble 
institution. ” , 

The whole frame of the institution, with the 
vicinity of royal Windsor and the connection 
between Lambeth and Eton, certainly bred me 
(not to be a citizen of the world, nor of America, 
nor of any fantastic fabric of visionary and 
impracticable self-government, nor a subject of 
Petersburg, Paris, Vienna, Madrid, or Rome) to 

1 Richard Lalor Sheil (1791-1851), barrister, politician, and 
dramatist, Member of Parliament from 1830. He was 
Vice-President of the Board of Trade, 1838-1841, and Master of 
the Mint, 1846-1850. 

2 Sir Thomas Wyse (1791-1862), politician and diplomatist, 


entered Parliament in 1830. He was a Lord of the Treasury, 
1839-1841, and Secretary for the Board of Control, 1846-1849. 


2 AA 


354 THD WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


be the subject of a limited Protestant monarchy, 
and to be a dutiful member of a Protestant 
Established Church. In this allegiance and faith 
I was born, bred, and hope to die. At Oxford I 
continued the same ; and yet (notwithstanding the 
slanders of that ungrateful, graceless bog-trotter 
O’Connell) I will not yield the palm of liberality in 
the administration of Government even to un- 
paralleled Normanby. To prove that I imbibed 
the principles of religion at Eton, and cultivated 
them at Oxford, I have annexed some extracts 
from exercises at both places, which I recommend 
to your patient indulgence. 

Pray present my best and most grateful respects 
to Lady Holland.* 


Lorp HoLtanp to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
December 1, 1839 

I obey your commands and send you copies of 
your letters and verses ; but I value the originals 
so much that I trust you will allow me to keep 
them for myself. - 

The fidelity of my amanuensis not altogether 
consorting with the Etonian or Latin muses 
(Musis consociata), I ventured to return your 
admirable exercises in my own scrawl, and I 
rejoice that I didso. In the execution of my task 
I had leisure and opportunity to observe and to 
admire the classical purity of the thought and 
diction, and the beautiful run (you will excuse an 
Eton phrase, however homely) of the versification. 
Whether they logically “ show the religious spirit 


1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 181, 


1842] TRUANT 355 


of the verses” at Eton I will not presume to 
determine, but they certainly prove most amply 
and agreeably the poetical spirit of one Eton boy’s 
religion, and I am not quite sure that the con- 
clusion you so triumphantly draw from these 
excellent verses accords jas strictly with the rules 
of logic and the principles of Aldrick, which you 
afterwards studied at Christ Church, as they 
unquestionably do with those both of prosody and 
composition inculcated in the purest models of 
antiquity. 

If Pope, who was a Roman Catholic and not 
an Etonian, had learnt the Latin language and 
prosody as well as Eton could teach it, he might 
have written his “ Messiah”’ in hexameters and 
alcaics as beautiful as your fragments and lyrics, 
and superior to Johnson’s translation of it, with- 
out borrowing any religious instruction from the 
Protestant schools, and without knowing more 
of the thdological tenets of our Church than 
those whom she repudiates as idolaters and 
stigmatises as ignorant and benighted dunces. 
From this I gather that the verses, warm as is 
the devotion that they breathe, prove the great 
proficiency in language, prosody, and taste of the 
writer, rather than his knowledge in divinity, or 
that abiding sense of the blessed truths of the 
Gospel which our Bishops nowadays exact, but 
which I humbly contend that for the ten years I 
was at Eton was allowed to play the truant 
unquestioned, and was as much of a “non- 
resident ’’ as most of the beneficed clergymen of 
the Establishment. 


356 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [183s- 


Goodall? had surely no reason to turn up his 
nose at “adamata.” If ‘ adamare’”’ be generally 
to be “‘ enamoured of,” it is yet used in prose as 
well as verse to express filial affection, and unless 
I am mistaken Cicero applies it to the fondness 
with which controversial philosophers occasion- 
ally embrace and cling to their doctrines. Had 
he objected to another participle in the preceding 
line, and yet more in the second of your hexameter 
fragments ‘“‘ Per terras sacrata fides,” I should 
have been more startled; but Ovid, by using it 
for dedicated when he calls the work of the “ Fasti”’ 
“opus sacratum Augusto,’ proves that it is not 
always used in a bad sense, and that the impression 
I had of its meaning accursed rather than con- 
secrated, sacré rather than consecré, is erroneous. 

Accept again my warmest thanks for your 
verses and letters, and above all forgive my 
sauciness in remarking on the first and answering 
the last. The first impertinence arisés, I assure 
you, from the sense I have of the general per- 
fection of the verses and the habit (caught and 
taught at Eton, by-the-bye) of labouring hard to 
find fault with any piece of modern Latinity that 
one admires. I should have taken these copies 
myself to Knightsbridge if the weather and remain- 
ing cold in my head had not detained me at home ; : 
and Lord Denman, who penetrated so far in the 
fog, tells me that you were confined by indis- 
position. Lady Holland joins me in cordial remem- 
brances, and hopes that you are entirely recovered. 


1 Joseph Goodall (1760-1840), Provost of Eton from 1809. 
2 Add, MSS. 37312 f. 188, 


1842] LITERARY EFFORTS 357 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo LoRD PLUNKET 
Kingston House, Knightsbridge 
December 26, 1839 

You accepted my Latin tribute to my revered 
and beloved Alma Mater with so much grace and 
indulgent kindness, that I am induced to lay at 
your feet an attempt to convey the same senti- 
ments in English. This effort was made by desire 
of Lord Brougham. It is not a translation; no 
man knows better than your Lordship that the 
simplicity and severity of the Latin muse repudiate 
translation. It is an attempt to transfuse the 
spirit of the former verses into our language. In 
some parts I have opened my heart with more 
freedom ; both compositions come directly from 
that source, and are, therefore, curious, if not 
pardonable. I preserve your letter as an invalu- 
able monument not only of your high classical 
taste and judgment but of your pure and sound 
principles of religion and government; (may I 
add ?) and of that honourable and firm friendship 
by which you have always distinguished me. It 
is among the proudest recollections of my public 
life that my hands placed your Lordship on the 
highest seat of justice in my native land, which 
you have filled not merely with honour and 
dignity, but with glory and splendour. 

I was grieved to have missed the pleasure of 
seeing you when on your late visit to London you 
honoured me with a visit. The distinguished 
reception you met (so honourable to you, and to 
those great lawyers and statesmen who paid that 
just tribute) will, I hope, induce you to renew your 


358 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


intercourse with us, when I shall hope to be more 
fortunate.’ 


SAMUEL Rocers to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
St. James’s Place : December 27, 1839 
Again must I break in upon you to thank you. 
But you have perplexed me beyond measure, for 
I am really at a loss to say which I admire most— 
the Latin or the English poem. Surely no tree 
was ever before so honoured ; and if she continues 
to weep after this, she must indeed be fond of 
grief. 
As to the laurel, she must be dying of jealousy, 
and would most certainly desert your brows if she 
could.* 


JouN KEATE, D.D.,® io THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Hartley Westpall, Hampshire 
january 21, 1840 
The receipt of your Lordship’s beautiful English 
lines, attached to another copy of the Latin Salix 
Babylonica, ought to have been acknowledged 
before this time; but I trust that your Lordship 
has not concluded from my silence that I under- 
value the present. The fact is, that absence from 
home since I received it, and other circumstances, 
have hitherto prevented me from returning my 
best thanks for this fresh instance of your Lord- 
ship’s kindness and condescension. No one, who 
1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 2or. 
2 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 203. 
3 John Keate, D.D. (1773-1852), Headmaster of Eton, 


1809-1834; Canon of Windsor, 1820; Rector of Hartley 
Westpall, 1824-1852. 


1842] CURAE SENILES 359 


has any taste for poetry, can fail to admire both 
the Latin and English verses. I hardly know to 
which I give the preference. They are both, in 
my opinion, equal to the highest strains of our 
Eton poet, Gray. 

That your Lordship may retain these powers 
unimpaired, and be able curas lenire seniles by 
such successful converse with the muse for many 
years; and that Eton may long be allowed to 
class you among her great living poets, is the 
sincere wish of one who does not yield even to your 
Lordship in attachment to our Alma Mater. 

I feel highly flattered and gratified by your 
Lordship’s opinion of my youthful composition, 
which I took the liberty of sending you, not merely 
for itself, but because it was reprinted last year 
(without my knowledge) in company with the 
three beautiful poems of “‘ Bobus ” Smith,’ which 
I thought your Lordship might not have seen, and 
which I lrave always considered first-rate com- 
positions.? 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to VISCOUNT 
SIDMOUTH 

Kingston House: February 19, 1840 
I am deeply sensible of the kindness of your 
enquiries. I have suffered a great deal of incon- 
venience from a complaint which they tell me 
is a usual companion of my advanced age, and 
is not dangerous. But I am not so infirm of 
1 Robert Percy Smith, called ‘‘ Bobus ”’ Smith (1770-1845), 
elder brother of Sydney Smith, Advocate-General of Bombay, 


1803-1810, famous for his Latin verses. 
2 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 223. 


360 TH" ‘VELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


mind as to be unprepared for a call; and in 
this I know I agree with you, as on most other 
subjects for sixty years, our first meeting being 
in the theatre of Oxford in July 1779. Thank 
my God, He has granted me the use of all my 
faculties to this hour, when they are all not only 
as perfect (especially memory) as they ever were, 
but even more so. This is a resource which 
sheds balm over every infirmity of body. The 
other day I quoted the old verses to my brother 
Arthur, ‘‘ My mind to me a kingdom is,” but it is 
strictly truth; for the vivacity of my mind (by 
the grace of its Maker) supplies me with new life 
and spirit every hour of my existence. 

I am much better, indeed nearly well of my 
original complaint, but the Arctic night which has 
overspread the land for the last three months has 
sadly checked my recovery. 

I am grieved to hear that you have not been well, 
but I trust your complaints are not greater than 
mine ; and that we meet again and see one another 
whenever the light of day shall shine in this quarter 
of the world. 


THOMAS GRENVILLE to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Hamilton Place: March 19, 1840 
T hasten to acknowledge with very many thanks 
the kind and flattering expressions of your letter 
and the book of Primitiae et Reliquiae, which was 
its valuable accompaniment. 
It shall be placed in my library next in succession 
to a similar volume of my beloved brother’s, which 


1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 235. 


1842] ARCADES AMBO 361 


I trust you will think, as he would have thought, 
its most appropriate position ; for he had for you 
through life the most devoted, sincere, and 
unvarying friendship. You were fellow-students 
in youth, you worked together in public life, and 
in the page of history your fame and his may 
probably be commensurate. 


Arcades ambo 
Et cantare pares et respondere parati.t 


Lapy BLESSINGTON to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Gore House: March 27, 1840 

I have been touched to tears by the charming 
verses you have confided to me, and moved by 
your great goodness to me in granting them to 
grace my book. Never did I feel more proud of 
our country than while perusing them, for where 
could hearts more warm and generous be found, 
or genius to mould the expressions that flow from 
them be met, to surpass those of the three charm- 
ing persons engaged in this interesting’ exchange 
of sentiments that do honour to them ? 

I had the honour and happiness, and I esteem 
it as both, to have known the Lord Chief Justice 
Bushe in my early youth, and even then he had few 
warmer admirers of that amiability and talent for 
which all the world must give him credit. Judge 
then, my dear Lord, with what interest I perused 
his beautiful letter, in which his attachment to 
one whom I admire and reverence so profoundly 
as I do your Lordship has found an echo in my 
heart. The verses of Miss Fox delight me, and 

1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 250. 


362. THI WELLESLEY PAPERS [1835- 


those written by you will serve as a monument 
more indestructible than marble, to do honour to 
her noble grandsire and herself. 

Happy and proud will it make me should the 
Lord Chief Justice have no objection to permit 
the correspondence so honourable to all engaged 
in it to appear in my book. Such examples of 
friendship among the highly gifted are unhappily 
so rare, that this delightful proof is well calculated 
to make a deep and salutary impression. 

I beg again to renew the expression of my 
gratitude, and to add my prayers that you may 
long be spared to reflect honour on our country. 

P.S. Iknownot if I have done right in keeping 
the letter and verses until the sanction of the Lord 
Chief Justice arrives, but if I have erred, they can 
be immediately returned to your Lordship. 


JouN KeEartE, D.D., to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Cloisters, Windsor: Aspril 7, 1840 

I cannot sufficiently express my gratitude to 
your Lordship for the kind interest which you have 
taken in my success, and your exertions to ensure 
it, which I am afraid I shall presently prove to 
your Lordship that I have not deserved. Your 
very flattering letter of the 4th would have 
received an earlier answer if I had not thought it 
better to wait for the event of this day. I have 
now to inform your Lordship that Mr. J. Lonsdale, 
a very distinguished Etonian and Kingsman, 
bencher at Lincoln’s Inn, and head of King’s 
College, London, was this day elected Provost by 


1 Add, MSS. 37312 f. 289. 


1842] THE PROVOST OF ETON 363 


the college. Your Lordship will naturally be 
surprised by these words, but the fact is, that the 
Minister did not send down the Queen’s nomination 
till late last night, and that was Archdeacon 
Hodgson, Lord Denman’s son-in-law, who is not 
eligible by statute, as not having the required 
qualification of a degree of Doctor, or Bachelor of 
Divinity, or of Bachelor of Laws, in addition to 
that of Master of Arts. The college, therefore, of 
necessity rejected him, and the election, which had 
been fixed for this day, could not be deferred. 
They offered me the Provostship, which I, un- 
wisely, as I fear your Lordship will think, declined ; 
and this morning they elected Mr. Lonsdale. 

I had nearly made up my mind, after many 
struggles, to refuse the Provostship, even if it had 
been offered me by the Crown, which, I must own, 
I did expect, even after your Lordship’s allusion 
to political considerations (which ought not to 
have affected me, who have had no connection 
with Eton during the present admiriistration), 
because I knew that, independently of your 
Lordship’s assurance, Lord Melbourne, more than 
a year ago, had expressed himself as very favour- 
ably disposed towards me, when Lord Denman, 
supposing that I was to be set aside, applied for 
Mr. Hodgson. I know that Lord Melbourne upon 
that occasion said that he could not pass over my 
strong claims, and Lord Denman in consequence 
very handsomely withdrew his application in my 
favour. I certainly should have been gratified 
with the offer, though, as I have said, I had nearly 
made up my mind to refuse the Provostship, 


364 THI WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


because I had no doubt but that I should be 
required to give up my canonry, without which I 
thought that I could not sypport the expenses of 
the Provostship; and the late lamented Provost 
felt this, and declined it, when Mr. Perceval 
required the resignation of the canonry. When 
the Provostship was offered me by the college I 
own that I was unwilling to be the subject of this 
experiment, the issue of which was not certain ; 
and, besides, I felt that if I had accepted it at their 
hands, though the Government in that case could 
not have deprived me of the canonry, yet the 
Plurality Act would have taken away that or a 
favourite country residence upon my living near 
Strathfieldsaye, on which I have expended a 
considerable sum, and am still spending more with 
the view of making it private property for the 
benefit of my family after me. This would have 
been a great loss to me and mine, and this con- 
sideration has in a great measure infkienced my 
decision. But a still stronger reason for having 
come to the resolution is my time of life. If the 
Provostship had been within my reach ten or 
twelve years ago, I should have had less hesitation 
in accepting it ; but’sixty-seven is, in my opinion, 
too advanced an age to begin a new mode of life, 
and particularly to take the reins of so important 
a government as that of Eton College, and 1 
readily resign it to a younger and more efficient 
Provost. I ought to apologise for troubling your 
Lordship with these details, but I am anxious to 
justify myself in your eyes, for I am very much 
afraid that you will condemn this act of mine asa 


1842] AN EXCELLENT CHOICE 365 


proof of weakness and want of spirit. Yet I am 
convinced that Eton will be no loser by it ; and I 
have great satisfaction in assuring your Lordship, 
who takes such an interest in the credit of the 
college, that Mr. Lonsdale is a first-rate scholar, a 
learned divine, and an excellent man, one who is 
likely to uphold the dignity of his office, and to 
promote the general good of this noble establish- 
ment." 


Joun KEATE, D.D., to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Cloisters, Windsor: April 17, 1840 

The great interest which your Lordship takes in 
the affairs of Eton induces me to continue my 
history of its present state, which I am afraid will 
rather disappoint than please your Lordship. 
Eton, I am sorry to say, is still without a Provost. 
Mr. Lonsdale, who, when the Provostship was 
offered him by the college, expressed his delight, 
and said that no preferment could be more 
acceptable, after his election began to waver, and 
when presented by the college to the Bishop of 
Lincoln, the visitor, asked for a day’s consideration 
before he was confirmed. That was granted. He 
then asked for five days. That was also granted, 
and during that period he discovered that by 
taking the Provostship he should be doing an 
injury to Mr. Hodgson, who had only lost it by a 
mistake. He has now resigned it in favour, as he 
says, of Mr. Hodgson, thus in effect giving away 
the patronage of the college. A new election must 
now take place, and in the meantime Mr. Hodgson 


1 Add. MSS. 37312 £. 311. 


366 {U2 WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


is qualifying himself by taking his degree of 
Bachelor of Divinity at Cambridge. I conclude 
that the Queen’s second nomination of him will 
soon arrive, and that he will be elected, for the 
college never objected to him, but to his want of 
qualification; and I am happy to assure your 
Lordship that I think Archdeacon Hodgson a very 
amiable man and a good scholar. He was my 
pupil in former days, and a very distinguished one. 
He is author of a very good translation of Juvenal. 
I understand that he is indebted to the Duke of 
Devonshire for his interest with Lord Melbourne 
in procuring the appointment. 

His living, Bakewell, is near Chatsworth, and 
the Duke has had opportunities of hearing him 
preach, and has been pleased with him. It may 
thus be true that Lord Denman has not personally 
opposed me with Lord Melbourne, though Lord 
Melbourne may have forgotten what he said above 
a year ago in my favour to Lord Dennian. In the 
midst of these circumstances, which I am afraid 
will not please your Lordship, I think it will be 
some consolation to you to be assured that Lord 
Normanby was not,an Etonian. 

It gives me great satisfaction to hear that your 
Lordship does not disapprove of my conduct in 
these transactions.! 


Memorandum by THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Kingston House: August, 1840 

After nine years of service as a Lord of the 
Treasury and a member of the India Board, and 


1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 330. 


1842] OFFICIAL LIFE 367 


when the British Empire in the East was not only 
menaced by external foes but reduced to the most 
alarming state by national hostility and dis- 
affection, Lord Wellesley was unanimously chosen 
by the Cabinet to proceed to India as Governor- 
General. 

The events of his Lordship’s administration for 
upwards of five years are detailed in the recently 
published edition of his Despatches, wherein it will 
be perceived that, not only was every feeling of 
danger from without annihilated, and all domestic 
foes destroyed, but that public credit was restored, 
commerce augmented, the entire sea-coast of the 
peninsula of Hindostan, including Cuttack, Bala- 
sore, and the whole of Orissa, occupied by England, 
and 250,000 square miles of territory, 35,000,000 
subjects, and {6,000,000 annual revenues added to 
the British Crown in India. 

His Lordship’s first act in 1798 was the dis- 
arming of £4,000 troops officered by Frenchmen 
at Haiderabad, without the shedding of a drop of 
blood ; 

and.—The dethronement of Tipu Sultan, and 
the partition of his dominions, after the capture of 
Seringapatam, the entire country occupied by 
Hyder and Tipu being now in the peaceable pos- 
session of England ; 

3rd.—The breaking up of Z4man Shah's 
threatening power on our North-West frontier, 
by a well-arranged mission to Persia, which forced 
Zaman Shah to return to his own dominions ; 

4th.—The entire destruction of the Maratha 
confederacy ; the total dispersion of the forces 


368 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


of Sindia and Holkar; the glorious military 
actions of Agra, Delhi, Laswari, Coel, Assaye, etc. ; 
the capture of the formidable artillery of the 
Marathas and French brigades under Perron; 
the possession of Delhi and of the person of the 
Mogul ; the acquirement of the whole of the North- 
West provinces, and of the sea-coast line, Cuttack, 
etc., and of the whole of Orissa, connecting Bengal 
with Madras; the establishment of subsidiary 
alliances throughout India ; and the arrangements 
consolidated for giving to Britain the undivided 
supremacy throughout Hindostan and the Dekkan. 
5th.—The plan of combining a British and 
Anglo-Indian army on the plains of Egypt, for the 
expulsion of the French from Cairo and Alexandria, 
was entirely Lord Wellesley’s.* His part of the 
plan was triumphantly executed by Baird’s 
successful expedition to Egypt. 
{* See his letter to Mr. Dundas, written on the day 
Lord Wellesley received the news of the fall of 
Seringapatam, by despatches.—Wellesley’s note. 
6th.—The captures of the isles of France, 
Bourbon, Jarva, and Manila were all planned in 
their original details by Lord Wellesley. 
7th.—The important question of the British 
acquisition and sole government of the Carnatic 
and of Tanjore was entirely the work of Lord 
Wellesley. 
8th.—The attainment of half the territories of 
Oudh, and the important acquisition of a line of 
valuable frontier territory in that quarter, was 
the result of his Lordship’s personal arrangements 
at Lucknow. 


1842] SUCCESS IN INDIA 369 


gth.—The reform of the East India Company’s 
finances, the extension of their commerce, and the 
infusing of a noble and patriotic spirit into every 
branch of the service, civil and military, are felt 
in their beneficial results to the present day} 
while the encouragement given to Oriental litera 
ture by the establishment of the College of Fort 
William, the Christian aid given to religion by the 
translation of the Scriptures and the reform of 
the Protestant ecclesiastical establishment in India, 
the suppression of infanticide, and of human 
sacrifice at the mouth of the Ganges, all tended to 
place the British power in the East on the most 
durable and respectable basis. 

For all these splendid services Lord Wellesley 
received only an addition to his hereditary title of 
an Irish Marquisate !!! 

And on his return to England, a measure of 
impeachment for high crimes and misdemeanours 
was commenced, which ended not until the first 
and second charges were thrown out by the House| 
of Commons, after the defence had cost Lord 
Wellesley {£30,000.* The Irish Marquisate was 
conferred on Lord Wellesley for the capture of 
Seringapatam, entirely against his own wishes, while 
the pecuniary benefit amounting to {100,000 was 
offered to and refused by his Lordship, in order 
that the gallant army which had taken Seringa- 
patam should receive the fullest and largest amount 
of prize-money, without any deduction on his 
account. 

[*He was obliged to establish an officein London with 
clerks, etc., for nearly two years.—Wellesley’s note. | 

2 BB 


370 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


The Ministers of the Crown (Lord Castlereagh, 
etc.), officially communicated to Lord Wellesley * 
the intentions of his Sovereign to reward his 
Lordship in a manner suitable to the great benefits 
conferred on India and on England, as soon as a 
mature opinion could be formed on the policy of his 
measures. That promise has never been fulfilled 
to the present day. The wars engaged in by Lord 
Wellesley and the policy he pursued in India were 
in opposition to the opinions of almost every 
person in England and in India; but time has 
sanctioned the wisdom of the course pursued by 
him. Upwards of forty years have elapsed; all 
Lord Wellesley’s conquests and acquisitions of 
territory and revenue have been retained, his 
policy sanctioned by precept and example, and 
public men of all parties have joined in ascribing 
the salvation of India and the stability of our 
power to his Lordship’s bold, wise, and compre- 
hensive government. 

[* Despatches from Lord Castlereagh.—Wellesley’s 
note. | 

The next in the list of Lord Wellesley’s services 
was his Lordship’s Embassy to Spain in 1809, 
a mission which prepared the way for the British 
occupation of Spain, and the expulsion of the 
French troops from the Peninsula of Europe., This 
is fully shown by his Lordship’s Spanish des- 
patches. For this mission, specially, his Lordship 
received the Order of the Garter, in fulfilment of 
a promise made by George III., before Lord 
Wellesley would undertake the mission. 

The Order of the Golden Fleece was tendered 


1842] FOREIGN AFFAIRS 371 


to his Lordship by the Spanish Minister, M. De 
Guray, but was refused until the Spaniards should 
by their exertions prove themselves worthy of 
British assistance. 

As Minister for Foreign Affairs, Lord Wellesley 
planned the Northern Alliance, which ended in 
detaching Russia and Sweden from the power of 
France, and in breaking up the combination of 
Europe against England, the first prelude to the 
downfall of Napoleon. While Secretary of State 
for the Foreign Department, Lord Wellesley 
commenced measures for recognising the indepen- 
dence of South America. This and other questions 
of his Lordship’s policy were subsequently followed 
up and acted on by Lord Castlereagh and by 
Mr. Canning. 

The government of the Marquess Wellesley as 
Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland has never yet had 
justice done to its liberal and impartial policy. It 
is a remarkable fact that Lord Wellesley’s ancestor 
(Walter Cowley) was the first Protestant Solicitor- 
General of Ireland at the Reformation; and his 
Lordship appointed the first Roman Catholic (Sir 
M. O’Loghlan) Solicitor-General since the Reforma- 
tion. 

When the Marquess Wellesley first went to 
Ireland he truly declared, shortly after his arrival, 
in answer to an address, that he came “ to ad- 
minister, not to alter the law,” and while Lord- 
Lieutenant of Ireland he caused the majesty of the 
law to be respected; but he never ceased to 
advocate equal laws for all classes of His Majesty’s 
subjects; and his constant efforts for the local 


372. THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


improvement of Ireland are now beginning to 
yield the full fruits, and to demonstrate the 
advantage of extending public works. 

Lord Melbourne and Lord Duncannon can 
testify that every liberal improvement in the 
laws of Ireland was approved, and many originated 
with him.* 

{* On reading this to Lord Duncannon, he said, 
“ All.” —Wellesley’s note.} 

It was a great satisfaction to hear the first 
Minister of the Crown declare solemnly in his place 
before the assembled peers of the United Kingdom, 
that ‘‘ never were services rendered by subject to 
Sovereign in any state equal to those of the 
Marquess Wellesley.” 

Mr. Pitt in 1805 had settled that Lord Wellesley 
should be made a Marquess of the United Kingdom 
immediately on his return to England. This 
arrangement Lord Wellesley would not carry into 
effect when he found his dearest friend 6n the point 
of death. 

Lord Grenville in 1806 offered the same rank to 
Lord Wellesley; but it was then refused, on 
account of differences with that administration. 

If the offer of either Mr. Pitt or of Lord Grenville 
had been accepted, Lord Wellesley would have 
been above the majority of British Marquesses. 
He would have ranked next to the Marquess of 
Exeter. Lord Wellesley, therefore, submits the 
justice of his claim to a dukedom of the United 
Kingdom, as a reward merited by public service, 
and, therefore, injurious to no other person. 

If any other person can prove that he has saved 


1842] RENUMERATION 373 


so large a portion of the British Empire from 
imminent danger, greatly increased that empire 
in territory, revenue, power, and resources of 
every kind, and that all his conquests and 
acquisitions have been retained, and the benefit 
received from them enjoyed for nearly half a 
century, and that those vast possessions and 
territories are now flourishing in full prosperity 
and glory, Lord Wellesley would think such a 
person’s claims might stand in such a competition 
with his. But he feels it to be his duty to submit 
that such services as his should have an adequate 
record in the peerage of the United Kingdom ; and 
that nothing inferior to the elevation which he 
suggests could afford such arecord. He is far from 
disparaging the services of others ; but when Lord 
Minto, Lord Amherst, and Lord Auckland have 
received each two steps in the peerage of the 
United Kingdom for their services, he must 
observe that he has received only one step, and 
that in the Irish peerage. 

Lord Wellesley was a Baron in the peerage of 
the United Kingdom when he went to India. 

Lord Wellesley knows that this act of justice 
and honour would be most acceptable to the Court 
of Directors, and to the whole of the East Indian 
service, both at home and abroad. 

Although his claim is submitted merely on public 
grounds, its recognition and admission would be 
such an act of generous and noble and patriotic 
spirit as must for his life render gratitude and 
attachment his primary{dutygand obligation. 


1 Add. MSS. 37317 f. 80. 


374 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1835- 


’ 
Lorp BrRovuGHAM to THE Marouress WELLESLEY 


Private Colehill, Charing, Kent 
October 18, 1840 


I am exceedingly sorry that I was prevented 
from having the pleasure of seeing you before I 
came away. I had arranged so as to call on 
Monday evening, after seeing poor Lady Augusta 
Paget (about her affairs), but was kept till eight 
o’clock in the Lords on judicial business, and did 
not get away from Lady Augusta till it was too 
late to wait upon you. However, I hope soon to 
be in town for a day or two, and that I shall then 
see your Lordship as well as last week—better 
seems impossible. 

I have no news of any kind. The French anger 
seems subsiding, nor did I ever expect to see any 
immedtate mischief ; but I fear the bad feeling is in- 
creased, which will before long break out in mischief. 

This place is dull but quiet, and there is a very 
tolerable Jibrary. The neighbourhood, too, is 
scanty—which I reckon a prime recommendation. 

Will you be so kind as to make Alfred [Mont- 
gomery] send me a few lines to say how you are, 
and how you like Pow’s? “ elevation to the peer- 
age’’? I suppose no one can affect to doubt 
the whole history of it—namely, that it was 
necessary last year to remove Rice from the 
Exchequer, and no one durst propose Pow for his 
succession. So Pow threatened (as anyone may) 

1 Charles Powlett Thomson (1799-1841) entered Parliament 
in 1826, and became President of the Board of Trade. He was 


made Governor-General of Canada, 1839, and created Baron 
Sydenham in the following year. 


1842] TRIBUTE TO PALMERSTON 375 


to break them up, and thln before they sent him 
to Canada he required a peerage to boot." 


THE MarQUESS WELLESLEY to VISCOUNT 
PALMERSTON 
Kingston House: September 16, 1840 

Your very kind letter of the 12th of this month 
demands my very warmest acknowledgments and 
my sincere gratitude. Iam truly sensible of your 
obliging attention to Lady Wellesley’s nephew, 
whom I believe to be endowed with the best 
qualities. He has not received the best education, 
but I think he is capable of bearing a very hand- 
some polish by a further mixture with good society. 
Lady Wellesley desires me to offer her grateful 
thanks to your Lordship for the notice you have 
been pleased to take of this young gentleman. 

My expressions respecting your Lordship are 
always the same as those which appear in my last 
letter. It, is impossible to feel more sincere 
respect and esteem for any public character than 
IT have always felt for your Lordship, since I have 
enjoyed the honour of your notice. These senti- 
ments are not only confirmed, but greatly aug- 
mented by the communication which I have now 
received. But where can language be found to 
convey my sense of the honourable confidence 
reposed in me by this most flattering testimony, 
or to express my gratitude for the kind language 
by which it is accompanied? You may be 
assured that the impression is indelible, and that 
the confidence will not be abused. 


1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 35. 


376 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1835- 


I have read these idvaluable papers with the 
greatest and most minute attention, and, I must 
add, with the greatest admiration. Amidst all 
this confusion and alarm, and in spite of all the 
flippant insolence of the French Ministers, and of 
all their treachery and perversion of facts and 
principles, your Lordship has maintained the firm 
and lofty character of the British power in its 
true and elevated position of consistency and 
firmness, without pride, or passion, or obstinacy. 
The contrast is most striking, and, I own, to me 
somewhat amusing. Mr. Thiers? appears to be 
more conversant with the Revolutionary Diplo- 
matic of Anacharsis Clootz, orator of the human 
race,” than with Grotius or Vatel; and to be 
worthy of the opprobrious term applied by Demos- 
thenes to his adversary, Tpiraywverns, or Actor 
tertiorum partium, a strolling player of the third 
(or Tier’s) class. 

His phrases respecting the relation between the 
rebel Vicerey and his sovereign master, respecting 
the revolt of the Libaniaris against the rebel 
Viceroy; and his claim (M. Thiers’) to be 
acquainted with the plans of operation against the 
rebel Viceroy, after having refused to co-operate with 

1 Louis Adolphe Thiers (1797-1877), statesman and 
historian, after holding minor offices, became Minister of the 
Interior in 1832 and again in 1834. From February to August 
1836 he was President of the Council and Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, and again from May until October he was head of the 
Ministry, during which period he propounded a scheme for 
the fortification of Paris, which was duly carried out. In 1871 
he became President of the Republic. His principal works 


are the Histoire de la Révolution Francaise and the Histoire 
du Consulat et del Empire. 


1842] FRENCH AMBITION 377 


the allies in such an operdtion, and after having 
betrayed the allies to the rebel Viceroy ; all these 
arts are of the Clootz,class of diplomatics; and, 
if similar acts had been done in Athens, would have 
attracted all the fire of Demosthenes. 

If your Lordship should desire it, I will write 
down my view of the whole question in detail, 
which will be entirely favourable to the line of 
policy which Her Majesty’s Government has wisely 
and nobly pursued. But in order to give such an 
opinion I must request your Lordship to permit 
me to converse with some intelligent officer of the 
Foreign Department. 

In the meanwhile, however, I beg leave to assure 
you that I cordially concur in the principles 
pursued by Her Majesty’s Government, that I will 
support them to the utmost of my power, and that 
I most ardently wish success to any operations 
which may become necessary in maintenance of 
our just and honourable cause. 

P.S. I confess I gntertain the strongest sus- 
picions of M. Thiers’ good faith, and of the sinister 
and ambitious designs of France.’ 


LorD BRouGHAM to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private Colehill, Charing 
October 22, 1840 

I gtieve to observe that you have been ailing 
again, and I only hope and trust that the com- 
mencement of the execrable season of the year will 
find you able fully to meet it, but determined wisely 
to fly from it, namely, by shutting yourself up and 


1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 361. 


378 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


resorting to the und&-ground sun of our happy 
climate. 

My view of the present alarming state of things? 
(I mean alarming for feay of the peace being 
broken) is short and simple. I do not care a straw 
which is right and which is wrong in this con- 
troversy between Palmerston and Thiers, because 
Thiers may be quite wrong and Palmerston quite 
right, and still we have no business to go to war 
on account of Syria. Nay, for aught I know, they 
may both be in the wrong. No, I am sure all 
must admit the French multitude are—not that the 
very worst symptoms of all, the 1792-3 tone of the 
late National Guards address proves anything, 
for it is the language of a few, and the body 
in general is averse to all violence, being the 
thousands of Paris shop-keepers; and Lord 
Palmerston, I know from himself, always reckons 
on them. 

But my great fear is this: Suppose we got out 
of the present scrape, as I on the whole expect we 
shall? The bad feeling remains; 1814 and 1815 
are not forgotten nor forgiven, and this unhappy 
Levant affair has roused it into mischievous 
action. Then comes some other affair, for example 
Spain, and we go to loggerheads because you 
cannot ¢wice stop a fight when people wish it. 

That Spanish question alarms one mort than 
any other. I fear that the French, if they cannot 
have a war towards the Rhine, will ride off upon 


1 On August 6, Prince Louis Napoleon, with General 
Montholon and other supporters, made a descent upon France, 
but he was arrested at Boulogne, and imprisoned. On 
October 6, Guizot became Prime Minister of France. 


1842] EUROPE’S SICK MAN 379 


a Spanish campaign ; and 4s their feeling toward 
us is stronger than any feeling they can have 
about liberal and absolyte in Spain, they will take 
the latter side and wy the former. Then Russia, 
Austria and Co., will be all with them and against 
us in this. 

Indeed, I am not at all sure that they will not 
before long make up their quarrel with Russia 
even as to the Levant affairs. 

Now, only see how impossible it would have 
been for Russia ever to have moved a man 
towards Constantinople, if England and France 
had continued firmly united. The only import- 
ance of Syria and M. Ali was as regards Russia 
mastering Turkey, and that could at any time 
have been prevented by France and England, 
even had Austria stood aloof, which assuredly she 
would not have done. 

However, if Palmerston can prove to me that 
France refifsed to have anything to do with an 
arrangement whereby we and they should prevent 
Russia from marching southwards, then I can 
only say we shall appear not to be so very much 
in the wrong (I mean the wrong as regards our 
interests and those of peace), though I still should 
hesitate before I said that it was worth a General 
War, ,even to prevent Russia from encroaching 

1 In 1831 Mehemet Ali, Pacha of Egypt (1769-1849), 
captured Syria from the Turks and remained in possession of it 
undisturbed until 1839, when the Sultan unsuccessfully tried 
to wrest itfrom him. Then England and the allies came to the 
assistance of the Sultan, and an English fleet, under Stopford 


and Napier, took Beyrout, Acre, and Sidon, and restored 
Syria to its rightful monarch. 


380 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1835- 


on one part of TurkeY and France on another— 
as they now will probably end in doing.’ 


Miss CAROLINE Fox to THE }IARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Holland House: October 27, 1840 

Sympathy in sorrow, the sense of one common 
calamity, emboldens me to execute the com- 
mission which my dear Lady Holland has given me 
with less difficulty, and to address you with a 
freedom, my dear Lord, which otherwise our slight 
intimacy would hardly allow me to assume.* 

She is unequal to the task herself; the very 
kindness of your letter, the warmth of the attach- 
ment you express for him whose loss we all, and 1 
would fain believe the country, deplore, all this 
disables her from collecting her thoughts or 
holding a pen, but not indeed from feeling heart- 
felt gratitude and pride at your Lordship’s offer 
of attending the last sad ceremony, in token of that 
affection and respect you bore him through life. 
But it must not be, it cannot be, my dear Lord, 
at this season of the year, at fifty miles from 
London, at Millbrook in Bedfordshire, where are 
deposited the remains of their beloved little 
daughter—a child who in sweetness of disposition 
and in intellect gave promise of being the counter- 
part ofhimself. For this reason your offer must not 
have been accepted, evenhad it not been a written 
desire of his, that the whole should be as private 
as possible ; so that the attendance is confined to 
the sons and the nearest relations and connections. 


1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 385. 
2 Lord Holland died on October 22, 1840. 


1842] LORD HOLLAND’S DEATH 381 


For this, however, it makes"no difference in Lady 
Holland’s sense of grateful obligation and that of 
the family to your Lordship for having given them 
such an unequivocal\proof of the respect and 
affectionate attachment in which you hold his 
memory.' 


Copy of Testimonial to LoRD HOLLAND 
No man ever lived more honoured and beloved 
than the late Lord Holland, and no man ever died 
more sincerely and cordially lamented. It would 
be a disgrace to society that his memory should 
not be distinguished by some testimony of respect, 
esteem, and affection. It is, therefore, proposed 
that such persons as concur in these sentiments 
should send their names privately to Lord Edward 
Howard, Norfolk House, London, in order that 
arrangements may be made for the purpose of 
giving effect to the general desire of paying a due 
tribute to such a memory. 

Augustus F, 

Wellesley 

Lansdowne 

j. Russell 

Norfolk 

Melbourne 

Bedford 

Ed. Ellice.’ 


CoLoNEL Fox to THE MaArQurEss WELLESLEY 
West Hill, Puiney : November 4, 1840 
My aunt has desired me to reply to your letter 

1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 391. 2 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 393- 


382 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1835- 


and to say how much She values, as we all do, the 
kind feeling that dictated it, and which prompts 
you to wish to take the lead in showing esteem and 
respect, which we love to fhink is just, towards 
the memory of my dear father. 

It is most gratifying indeed to us to receive so 
many marks of respect for his character, both 
public and private, and from those of all shades of 
opinion and of all ranks and stations of life—from, 
in short, such as Lord Wellesley, down to the 
servants who attended and watched him with 
disinterested affection. 

With respect to the monument : as your Lordship 
observes, it cannot originate with his family, and 
much as we are all justly flattered with your 
kindness, the whole arrangement of such an 
intention must rest with the feelings of his friends 
and of the public.’ 


LorpD BROUGHAM to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private Colehill, Charing 
November 19, 1840 
I am extremely obliged to you for your great 
kindness in sending me the beautiful copy of the 
Primitiae et Reliquae, with the verses on poor 
Princess Augusta, who to my knowledge was one 
of the best of human beings—full of kindness and 
benevolent feeling. The verses are really admir- 
able, and the Latin translation I even prefer to the 
original. 
I shall not detain you with the nothings which 
alone I can have to say from the country, except 


1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 394. 


1842] AN EARLY FRIENDSHIP 383 


one rather awkward matter which I hear from 
Paris, and which I should be truly sorry for. They 
say that Louis Philippe at first was extremely 
warlike, and that Thiers and Co. have a strong 
case on that ground. Whatever tends to weaken 
Louis Philippe’s weight at the present moment I 
regard as very unfortunate and bad for peace. I 
hope very soon to have the gratification of seeing 
you, as I shall go to town for the judicial business 
in the Privy Council which begins the first of next 
month." 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to THE DUKE OF 
RUTLAND ? 
Kingston House: December 28, 1840 
Having been honoured with the intimate friend- 
ship and confidence of your Grace’s truly illus- 
trious and amiable father,’ and having observed 
with the highest sentiments of respect and esteem 
the course of your own most honourable career in 
public and private life, I can appréciate the 
pleasure it must afford you to know that you have 
contributed most essentially to the happiness of 
my closing days by your excellent and, to me, 
invaluable letter. My early intimacy with the 
late Duke of Rutland has always been estimated 
by me as among the greatest blessings which 
Providence has been pleased to bestow on me, and 
1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 407. 
2 John Henry Manners, fifth Duke of Rutland (1787-1857.) 
3 Charles Manners, fourth Duke of Rutland (1754-1787), 
entered Parliament in 1774 and succeeded to the dukedom 


five years later. He was Lord Steward in 1783 ; Lord Privy 
Seal in Pitt’s Ministry ; and Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, 1784. 


384. THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1835- 


one of the mainspring’ of whatever I have been 
able to effect for the prosperity and glory of the 
British Empire. He’ was, himself an abundant 
source of public honour afl public virtue. He 
was the pupil of the great Lord Chatham, and he 
reflected honour even on that most accomplished 
master. He was the beloved friend of the 
lamented Pitt. Iam well able from full knowledge 
to attest his character, and I most solemnly (after 
the expiration of upwards of half a century) declare 
that he was a most perfect patriot, truly attached 
to the liberties of his country, civil and religious, 
animated by hereditary spirit to maintain the 
British glory and power, and adorned with every 
quality which befits the highest rank and station 
in the freest and greatest statethat has yet appeared 
in the civilised world. Holding such sentiments, 
your Grace will not be surprised that I should view 
Mr. Pitt’s letter to your father as one of the highest 
honours I ever received, especially *when it is 
considered that, at that time, I had not been in 
office under Mr. Pitt, although well known to 
him. 

Your Grace’s extreme kindness in sending me 
Mr. Pitt’s letter demands my cordial and lasting 
gratitude. 

I was induced to take the liberty of intruding 
my little collection of verses by Mr. MontgSmery, 
who led me to hope that it might be agreeable to 
you to receive them. Your Grace’s reception of 
them is most obliging. 

Assuring your Grace that nothing can be more 
acceptable to me than your kind recollection of my 


1842] AN UNUSUAL DISTINCTION 385 


long attachment to your noble family, I have the 
honour to be.. .* 


The East India Cdmpany now paid a further 
tribute to Wellesley, and at a Court of Directors 
held on the roth of March, 1841, it was ‘‘ Resolved, 
nemine contradicente, that, referring to the im- 
portant services of the Most Noble the Marquess 
Wellesley, in establishing and consolidating the 
British dominion in India upon a basis of security 
which it never before possessed, a statue of his 
Lordship be placed in the general court-room of 
this house as a public, conspicuous, and permanent 
mark of the admiration and gratitude of the East 
India Company.” 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to THE DIRECTORS 
oF THE East INDIA COMPANY 

Kingston House: March 18, 1841 

So high is my estimation of the trahscendent 
honour conferred on me by the unanimous 
resolution of the whole body of the East India 
Company, that my first emotion was to offer up 
my thankful acknowledgments to the Almighty 
Power which has preserved my life beyond the 
ordinary limits of human nature, to receive a 
distinction of which history affords so few, if any, 
examples. Three years have elapsed since this 
great and powerful body conferred on me a signal 
mark, not only of honour, but of generous and 
affectionate consideration. The wisdom of that 


1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 429. 
2 cc, 


386 THE WELI,ESLEY PAPERS [1835- 


great body does no deem the value of public 
service to be diminishgd by the lapse of time ; it is 
for weak, low, and frivelous minds, incapable 
themselves of any great actipn, to take so narrow a 
view of public merit. True wisdom will ever view 
time as the best test of public services, and will 
apportion its rewards accordingly. I therefore 
consider the former act of the East India Company 
as greatly enhanced in value by the deliberation 
which preceded it. The present consummation of 
their justice and wisdom is marked by the same 
spirit of deliberation, reflecting equal honour on 
those who confer and on him who receives this high 
and glorious reward. At my advanced age, when 
my public career must be so near its close, it would 
be vain to offer any other return of gratitude than 
the cordial acknowledgment of my deep sense of 
the magnitude and value of this unparalleled 
reward. May my example of success, and of 
ultimate reward, encourage and in§8pire all the 
servants Of the East Indig Company to manifest 
similar zeal and devotion in the service of the 
Company, and of the British Empire in the East, 
and may their continued efforts preserve and 
‘improve to the end of time the interest of that great 
charge so long entrusted to my hands. 


THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON! to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 

London: March 20, 1841 

11 1ve received upon my return home this night 


many years the brothers had been estranged, but a 
lation had been effected in 1838. 


1842] THE DUKE’S SATISFACTION 387 


your note respecting the pi¢ture,! and I am happy 
to learn that it has reached you in safety, and that 
you are satisfied with it, and that it has recalled to 
your mind the transactions of the days in which it 
was painted. I trust‘in God that you will long 
live to enjoy those feelings, but Iam much obliged 
by the disposition which you propose to make of 
this picture. 

I have likewise just now received your note with 
the report of the proceeding in the Court of 
Proprietors of the East India Company on the 
resolution of the Court of Directors in relation to 
their last mark of respect for and justice towards 
yourself. I had before read the report in the 
newspapers of what had passed in the Court of 
Proprietors, and I was much gratified. 

But that which (next to the satisfaction which I 
felt that justice had been done to you without a 
dissenting voice) pleased me most was your answer 
to the Chafrman and Deputy Chairman. It is 
inimitable. Nobody cguld write such a*letter but 
yourself in these times. It states in the most 
beautiful language the principles on which such 
transactions ought to be governed, and in which 
they ought to be viewed. It must make an 
impression beneficial to the public interests upon 
the Government and the public, and I am 
delighted that you have availed yourself of the 
opportunity of stating the real ground on which 
all transactions of this description are founded, 

1 Probably the portrait of Wellesley, attributed to 


Gainsborough Dupont, painted before he went to India, 
which now hangs in Apsley House. 


388 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [(1835- 


and of the view whfth ought to be taken of 
them. 


SIR ROBERT PEEL #o Tae Marquess WELLESLEY 
Whitthall : March 25, 1841 
I thank you sincerely for the justice you have 
done me by presuming that I should hear with 
cordial satisfaction that it has been resolved, at a 
General Court of the East India Company, 
permanently to record their grateful sense of your 
pre-eminent services in India. 

I thank you, too, for having enhanced the 
pleasure which this intelligence could not fail to 
give me by the kind and flattering manner in which 
you have communicated it. 

True fame, like punishment, pursues its object 
pede claudo. I rejoice that it has overtaken you 
before your public career has closed, and while 
you can give such a proof as your letter of the 18th 
supplies, that your spirit is unde 0d and that 
your facukies are unimpaired by age.’ 


Str RoBerT PEEL to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
May 25, 1841 

I am exceedingly gratified by the assurance 
which you have had the goodness to convey to me, 
that the course which I am pursuing in this 
arduous crisis of public affairs? meets with your 


1 Add. MSS. 37312 f. 466. 
MSS. 37312 f. 474. 
ministerial crisis was brought about by a question of 
It was clear that there would be a deficit in the 
year, 1841-1842, and the Government was defeated 
nedies they proposed. Parliament was dissolved on 


1842] SUPPORT FOR PEEL 389 


approbation, and that You are prepared to 
encourage and support mq by a public demon- 
stration of your confidence. 

My respect and esteem for you have never 
varied with the occasiénal changes that have taken 
place in party combinations, and I am proud to 
think that my separation from you in politics arose 
rather out of the personal obligations of honour 
which party connection imposes, than any material 
differences as to the principles on which the 
Government of this country should be connected. 

The authority of your name, and the assurance 
of your approbation, will powerfully aid and 
animate me in the performance of my public duty, 
and I entirely concur with you in the propriety of 
placing your proxy in the hands of the Duke of 
Wellington, for I know no other peer who is so 
worthy of being entrusted with such a deposit.? 


e 
SIR ROBERT PEEL to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Drafion Manor: June 27, 1841 

I was about to take the fivst opportunity which 
the relaxation of Parliamentary labours offered 
me, of calling upon you, and enjoying the satisfac- 
tion of personal intercourse with you, when I 
was suddenly called away from London by the 
announcement of an opponent at Tamworth. 

I have been busily engaged for the last three or 
June 23, 1841, and when the new House of Commons assembled 
on August r9, Melbourne, who was in a minority, resigned. 
Peel then became Prime Minister, and formed his second 


administration. 
1 Add. MSS. 37313 f. 38. 


390 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1835- 


four days in all the pfeasures of canvassing, and 
write these few lineg in the interval between 
canvass and nonin: 

The opposition will only give me a little trouble, 
and will not endanger the sdat of my late colleague 
(Captain A’Court). 

Immediately on my return to London I will 
present myself at Kingston House. 

I cannot understand the object of the Govern- 
ment in superseding Lord Plunket and appointing 
Lord Campbell, under the circumstances under 
which the official arrangement has been made.’ 
Lord Plunket is dissatisfied, the Irish Bar incensed, 
and Campbell, it seems, is to retire, if retirement 
be his lot, unpensioned. 

T heard last year of a joke of Lord Plunket’s, 
which proves that the coming Chancellor had cast 
his shadow before. After a tremendously stormy 
night Lord Plunket said to his secretary, ‘‘ I hope 
John Campbell was on board the packet for Eng- 
land.” “*Why?” said the secretary. “Because 
he must have thrown up the seals.” 

I am surprised that Lord Plunket did not persist 
in withholding resignation, and in positively 
refusing to be a party to what he considers an 
indignity to the Bar of Ireland. If, refusing 
voluntary resignation, he had been dismissed by an 


1 As early as 1839 it was rumoured that Plunket, who since 
1830 had been Lord Chancellor of Ireland, was to be replaced 
by Sir John Campbell, the English Attorney-General. There 

wh negotiation about the matter, and in the end, on 
+, 1841, Plunket retired and was succeeded by Camp- 
o was raised to the peerage. Campbell held the post 
30, when he was appointed Chief Justice of the Queen’s 
He became Lord Chancellor of England in 1859. 


1842] THE IRISH CHARACTER 391 


act of authority, I should, have ‘envied him his 
loss of office under such circumstances.! 


EARL DE GREY ® fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
St. James’s Square: September 11, 1841 

My brother has communicated to me your 
Lordship’s letter, and the printed copy of your 
speech. I feel highly flattered at the opinion you 
are pleased to express respecting myself, which 
carries with it additional weight as coming from 
one whose general qualification to form a judg- 
ment is supported by the personal experience 
derived from your official residence in that country 
over which I am now placed. 

I go there with a hope, and, I may say, a 
confidence, that I shall meet with support and 
kindly feeling from those who feel that tran- 
quillity is valuable. I must be prepared to 
experience resistance and obloquy from those 
whose trade is agitation; but I cannot divest 
myself of the belief that they are diminishing in 
number. 

The Irish have always appeared to me to be a 
people easily managed by kindness and justice. 
As soldiers, sailors, and labouring peasantry, they 
are frank, confiding, and generous. Too easily 
led, perhaps, by designing men, but always keenly 
alive to a sense of what they deem just. Mercy, if 
allowed to assume the character of weakness, is 
easily seen through by their quick perception ; and 

1 Add. MSS. 37313 f. 46. 


2 Thomas Philip de Grey, Earl de Grey (1781-1859), 
Viceroy of Ireland, 1841-1844. 


392 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1835- 


vigour, if straihed beyond due bounds, is easily 
represented to them as severity. But I cannot 
help hoping that an hfnest, straightforward deter- 
mination to act upon printiple instead of feeling, 
to do justice to all sects, and parties without 
distinction, to be swayed neither by fear nor 
favour, must be appreciated ; and as I shall go 
there with the will, if not the ability, to conduct 
myself upon those principles only, I trust I may 
not be unsuccessful.’ 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to EARL DE GREY 
Kingston House, Knightsbridge 
September 12, 1841 

Your Excellency’s obliging letter has strongly 
confirmed those sentiments of satisfaction and 
confident expectation with which I hailed your 
appointment to the Government of Ireland as a 
blessing to that country, to the British Empire, 
and, I may add, to the cause of order, liberty, 
justice, and religion throughout the civilised world. 

An honest, straightforward determination to act 
upon principle instead of feeling, to do justice to 
all sects and parties without distinction, to be 
swayed neither by fear nor favour, contains the 
foundations of a system of government which 
cannot fail to conciliate the support of every 
honest heart. 

Such a system will also afford the best protection 
against that evil spirit which for some time past 
t 1: ‘rfested that country now happily committed 

r charge. 


1 Add. MSS. 37313 f. 62. 


1842] | EVIL COMMUNICATIONS 303 


It is perfectly true that the briginal national 
character of the people of Ireland was “ frank, 
confiding, and generous ”” Abut what nation could 
retain that noble* character unpolluted when 
subjected to the rwinous operation of those 
disorders by which Ireland has been afflicted ? 

First, the insidious and indomitable (to the 
present hour) agitations of the most laborious, 
artful, and bald array of demagogues which ever 
disturbed the peace of mankind; secondly, the 
machinations of a priesthood, perverting all the 
sacraments of religion to the service of sedition 
and treason and to the purposes of those dema- 
gogues ; and thirdly (proh pudor!) a Ministry 
wielding the sceptre against the crown, making 
war upon the monarchy and the Empire with the 
influence and power of both, rendering the royal 
name and strength an instrument of rebellion, 
and the royal prerogatives a shelter for murder 
and massacre. What innate strength of virtue 
in a nation could long withstand such a com- 
bination of assailing evils, where the Government 
itself was perverted into an engine of disorder, and 
law protected crime, and religion encouraged and 
pardoned the highest offences against God and man? 

This I know is not an exaggerated view of the 
condition of that people which you are sent, I 
trustpto save. With you, I hope that you are not, 
too late to accomplish this glorious work, and I 
hope materials still exist to be wrought by your 
hand into a noble fabric of peace and prosperity. 
The wishes of all good men are with you. Your 
principles are all sound and pure; may God 


394 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1835- 


prosper you, is the sincere prayer and expectation 
of your faithful servant.? 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo ALFRED 
MONTGOMERY 
Kingston House : October 23, 1841 

I was much amused by your two letters. 

Poor dear old East Cliff. It is twenty-five years 
since I left it for Richmond (1816). What scenes 
I have gone through since that date! Pray go 
and look at it all over, and see whether my trees 
have grown, for I planted largely. I do not know 
what has been done to the house. 

I was highly amused with your account of Deal, 
etc. The Irish story is admirable. I grieve for 
poor Lady Clarendon; she is one of the best of 
women. Isuppose Rosa gets some dew among you 
all ; Inever saw her. I continue to get better, and 
IT amtosee Chambers again to-day,but I don’t think 
he will persuade me totake his prussicag¢id draught. 

The papers say O’Connell will certainly be Lord 
Mayor of Dublin.? What* enormous wickedness 
of Melbourne and Co.! I hope Lord de Grey will 
knight him. 

Tell Arthur that I desired you to enquire 
particularly about his health, and that I mean in 
a few days to send him one of my books, with the 
last edition, containing some lines on Hise Civic 
Statue. 

MSS. 37313 f. 64. 


mell was elected Lord Mayor of Dublin on November 


| eing the first Catholic to occupy that position since 
of James IT. 


MSS. 37316 f. 115, 


1842] WELLESLEY GONSULTED 395 


LorD ELLENBOROUGH} to THE MARQUESS 
ie ale 


India Board : October 23, 1841 


I cannot proceed to India as Governor-General 
without soliciting the honour of waiting upon your 
Lordship. 

There is more than one point upon which I am 
most desirous of having the benefit of your 
enlightened judgment, and I am sure that, should 
it be inconvenient to your Lordship to receive me, 
you will yet excuse the liberty I take in requesting 
an interview, attributing my doing so to the real 
cause—an earnest wish to serve the country which 
your Lordship preserved. 

I am entirely at your Lordship’s disposal at any 
hour on any day during the ensuing week. 

I leave London for India on the 4th of 
November.? 


GEORGE LYALL? to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
East India House: December 17, 1841 


In consequence of the lamented death of Sir 
F. Chantrey it has become necessary for us to take 
some further steps towards accomplishing the 
resolution of the Genera] Court regarding the 
statue of your Lordship. 


1 Edward Law, second Baron Ellenborough (1790-1871), 
appointed Governor-General of India, 1841. He annexed 
Sind and subjugated Gwalior, but was recalled in 1844, in 
which year, however, he wa; created Earl of Ellenborough. 

2 Add. MSS. 37313 f. gg. 

3 George Lyall (d. 1853). M.P. for the City of London. In 
1841 he was Chairman of the East India Company. 


396 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1835- 


Mr. Weekes,‘* who,el believe, possessed the 
confidence of Sir Francjs Chantrey as his assistant, 
is very desirous of eine entrusted with the work, 
and has, I hear, communicafed with your Lord- 
ship respecting it; but before I give him any 
encouragement I am anxious to have the benefit 
of your Lordship’s opinion and judgment. 

My only wish is that the artist should be 
employed who may appear more capable of execu- 
ting the work in a manner worthy of its subject, 
and I should wish to be entirely guided by your 
Lordship in making the selection. 

In the event of your wishing to see the Deputy 
Chairman and myself, previously, we will do 
ourselves the pleasure of waiting upon your 
Lordship whenever you may be pleased to appoint.? 


THE MArQuEss WELLESLEY to GEORGE LYALL 

Kingston House: December 20, 1841 

Pray accept my warmest thanks for your very 

kind lettereof the 17th, which could have been 

returned sooner, had I not been afflicted with a 

severe bilious attack, which disabled me from 
writing. 

‘The death of Sir F. Chantrey is a most lament- 
able event. I had seen him more than once on the 
subject of the high honour conferred on me by my 
worthy masters (the East India Company, who 
must for ever be the first object of my affection, 

and gratitude). We agreed that the 
i1ould represent me as I was when, under 


1 Henry Weekes (1807-1877), sculptor, 
2 Add. MSS. 37313 f. 113. 


1842] WELLESLEYs STATUE 397 


the blessing of God Almighty, I' was enabled to 
save, establish, and greatly augment the British 
Empire in India; and, thtrefore, that the bust 
taken by Nollekens in 1809, and the picture by 
Lawrence in 1812, shotld be consulted for the head 
of figure. This was done, and Sir Francis has 
fully communicated with his assistant, Mr. Weekes, 
on the whole matter. It is my duty to leave the 
choice of the sculptor entirely to you and the 
Court of Directors, and I informed Mr. Weekes of 
my determination accordingly ; but I added that, 
if I should be consulted, I should undoubtedly 
recommend Mr. Weekes, as the person possessing 
Sir Francis Chantrey’s confidence and apprised of 
his intentions. As the work will principally be 
formed with reference to the bust and picture 
which I have named, I have no hesitation in 
submitting my opinion, that Mr. Weekes is the 
most likely to execute it with success, and I shall 
be happy té give every assistance in my power to 
forward its completion, 

I cannot conclude ‘this letter iat again 
expressing my high sense of the noble manner in 
which you and the Deputy Chairman (my highly 
esteemed friend, Sir James Lushington), and indeed 
the whole Court of Directors, have carried into 
effect the resolution of the Court of Proprietors. 
You Have added fresh lustre and grace to this 
signal act of deliberate justice and well-considered 
honour. May your wisdom and public spirit 
produce its congenial effects on the public service, 
and afford a great example to animate the whole 
body of your servants in India! 


398 THE WELL&SLEY PAPERS [1835- 


The Crown hag not kept pace with the generosity 
of the Company, but as left the salvation of a 
great empire, together With the firm establishment 
and augmentation of its vast power, dominion, and 
unbounded resources, almost without a record in 
the peerage and honours of the country; and he 
who has saved the former, and founded a new 
empire in the East, takes rank in the British 
peerage with the captor of the Fort of Ghuznee.’ 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY io ALFRED 
MONTGOMERY 
Kingston House: [March 20, 1842] 
I continue very ill. I was out of bed almost the 
whole of last night in a most painful fit of the 
cramp, but Smith continues to think me in no 
danger. I suffer, however, most dreadfully. I 
hope to hear better accounts of you. 
Was there ever anything so strange and shock- 
ing as Lord Munster’s? suicide 2° 


Lorp BrouGHAM to THE MARguEess WELLESLEY 
Private Brougham: August 29, 1842 
I return you in another cover with many 
thanks your most interesting paper, which has 
not been out of my hands since I received it. 
Accept my best thanks also for the ‘ Soda,” 
which is excellent, and (uti decet) merum solt. 
1 Add MSS. 37313 f. 117. 
‘2 Augustus FitzClarence, first Earl of Munster 
.), the eldest son of William IV. by Mrs. Jordan, 
1 suicide by shooting himself on March 20, 1842. It 


t his mind was affected by suppressed gout. 
MSS. 37316 f. 124. 


1842] PEEL PRIMB MINISTER 399 


I am in hopes of Alfrad [Mohtgomery] being 
soon able to send me a good report of your amend- 
ment. But the extreme héat being accompanied 
with cool mornings, you ought to be on your guard 
against chills. In cofisequence of these, cholera 
has been prevalent of late. 

The disturbances? seem to be over generally, 
and the Government have treated them with much 
wisdom; that is, with due forbearance and firm- 
ness combined. There never was for a moment 
the least risk of anything beyond a jacquerie, but 
that might have been very distressing. 

I suppose there never was a party more reduced 
to insignificance than our friends the Whigs now 
are. They are so low that every one seems 
ashamed of them, and denies them. The puffing 
of Palmerston’s speech* will serve them very 
little. But it is difficult to name that author of 
all the bad (or nearly all the bad) feeling of late 
prevailing m France, without being thankful to 
observe the fortunate appearances which now 
exist of it wearing away. Thiers has done himself 
much credit by his late allusion to the subject.’ 


Str ROBERT PEEL fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Whitehall: September 3 [1842] 

Of the thousand letters which I have received 
since my entrance on this arduous task‘ which has 


2 The Chartist riots. 

2 Speech in the House of Commons, August ro, on the 
public Bills of the Session. 

3 Add. MSS. 37313 f. 190. 

“ Peel had been Prime Minister since August 1841. In 1842 
he introduced his first budget and began his task of lightening 
the burden of indirect taxation. 


400 THE WELLESLEY PAPER 


been committed to me, £ have received none which 
has given me more co#dial satisfaction than that 
which you have had thé goadmess to address to me. 

I feel increased confidence in the efficiency and 
trustworthiness of the arrarfgements which I have « 
made for the conduct of public affairs, since you 
have expressed your general approbation of them. 

Excuse this hasty and imperfect acknowledg- 
ment of my obligations to you for the warm 
expressions of your personal esteem and hearty 
good wishes for my success." 


On September 26, 1842, after a long course of 
ill-health, Wellesley passed away at Kingston 
House, Brompton, and a few days later his mortal 
remains were, in accordance with his wish, interred 
in the chapel of Eton College. He was in his 
eighty-third year, but his faculties were unim- 
paired, and to the end he found pleasyre in books 
and in wrjting. Much of the bitterness he felt 
had been removed by tht recognition, so long 
delayed, of the East India Company of the value 
of the services which he, when Governor-General 
of India, had rendered to his country; but it 
remained always a sore point with him that he 
was never granted rank higher than that of a 
Marquess in the Irish peerage. He had his 
fanlts but, in spite of them, he was a great man, 

ightforward, honest, and fearless. 


2 Add. MSS. 37313 f. 192. o bin, 
Aa a a 


INDEX 


Aspy, Sir William, i, 41 ote ; ii, 
124 

Abercorn, Lord, i, 117 

Abercromby, James, Lord Dun- 
fermline, ii, 263 and note, 264, 
265, 271 

Abercromby, Sir Ralph, i, 56 and 
note, 73 note 

Aberdeen, the fourth Earl of, i, 
310-312 ; ii, 250 

Accession of Queen Victoria, the, 
ii, 326 

A’Court, Captain, ii, 390 

Adair, Sir James, ii, 57 and ote 

Adam, William, ii, 69 and note 

Addington, Henry, first Viscount 
Sidmouth, i, 20-22, 50, 59, EII 
128, 135, 137, 139-141, 148, 
150-158, 162, 163, 166-168, hee 
176 note, 177, 218, 251; li, 5, © 
11, 12 note, 13, 16, 19-33, 35, 36, 
93, 119, 317, 336, 359, 300 

Agra, ii, 368 

Agrarian disturbances, ii, 135-137 

Albuquerque, Dyke d’, i, 314 and 
note, 315, 316 323 

Ali, Mehemet, ii, 379 and note 

Althorp, Lord, third Earl Spences 
li, 238, 241 and note, 243, 247, 
249, 250, 252, 263, 264 

Amelia, Princess, ii, 41, 43 

Amherst, Lord, ii, 162 

Amiens, the Treaty of, i, 158 and 
note, 159 

Ancestors of the Marquess Wel- 
lesley, i, 3, 4 

Anglesey, the first Marquess of, 
ii, 159, 188 and note, 203, 223, 
235, 246 

Anstruther, Sir John, i, 104 and 
note, 106, 232 

Anti-Jacobin, the, i, 59, 61, 315 
note 

Arbuthnot, Charles, i, 250, 281 
and ote, 291, 292 

Archer-Shee, Sir Martin, ii, 234, 


235 
Arden, Lord, i, 270 
2 


Assassination of Spencer Perceval, 
the, ii, 86 

Assaye, ii, 368 

Athol, the Duke of, ii, 115 

Auckland, the first Baron, i, 44, 
48, 50-65, 107-116, 136-139, 
142-145, 187, 188 

Auckland, the second Baron and 
first Earl, ii, 238 note, 240, 249 
and note, 254 

Austria, ii, 52, 53, 59, 132 

Austria, Francis II. of, i, 29 

Aylmer, an Irish rebel, i, 75 

Bacor, Sir Charles, i, 258 and 
note, 207 

Baird, Sir David, ii, 140, 368 

Baji Rado, i, 149 

Basseim, the treaty of, ii, 334 

Bathurst, the third Earl, i, 31, 32, 
37, 38, 47-50, 87-91, 190, 260, 
262, 278, 280, 313, 318; ii, 70, 
I19Q, 130, 131, 152, 108, 170, 179 

Bathurst, R., i, 87, 259 

Beauharnais, Auguste, see Leuch- 
tenberg, Duke of 

Beauvale, Lord, ge Lamb, Sir 
F.C. 

Beer Alston, i, 13, 1 

Belgium, the choice of a King for, 
li, 227, 228 

Beresford, Marshal, i, 318 

Bernadotte, see Charles XIV. of 
Sweden 

Bernard, Scrope, i, 139, 140 

Berthier, i, 143 

Beverley, the Earl of, i, 12, 14 

Bexley, Lord, ii, 170 

Bhonala, i, 149 

Bickersteth, Henry, Lord Lang- 
dale, ii, 259 and note 

Biron, ii, 329 

Birth of Wellesley, the, i, 4 

Blackburn, Francis, ii, 230 note 

Blackwell, Major, i, 37, 38 

Blake, Mr., ii, 208, 209 

Blankett, Commodore, i, 125 and 
note 


401 DD 


INDEK 


Chatham, the first Earl, ii, 174, 


384 

Chatham, the second Earl, i, 22 
and note; ii. 9 

Chesterfield, Lord, i, 49, 58 © , 

Chichester, the second Earl of, 
see Pelham, Thomas 

Children of Wellesley, the, i, ?1- 
44, 50, 58-60, 81, 91, 128, 153, 
173-177, 188; ii, 70, 122-125, 
220-222, 270, 277 

Cintra, the Convention of, i, 246 

Ciudad Rodrigo, the capture of, i, 
71 note 

Clanricarde, Lady, ii, 207 and note 

Clanricarde, the first Marquess of, 
ji, 207 and note 

Clare, Lord, i, 64, 68, 109, 114 

Clarence, the Duke of, see William 
IV. 

Clarendon, the third Earl of, see 
Villiers, J. C. 

Clarendon, Lady, ii, 394 

Clarke, Mary Anne, ii, 41 note 

Classical scholar, Wellesley a, i, 
6, 7; ti, 309, 323, 357-359 

Clive, the first Baron, i, 49 mote 

Clive, the second Baron, Earl of 
Powis, i, 49, and note, 105, 106 

Clive, Lady, i, 106 

Clonmell, the Earl of, i, 68 and note 

Coel, ii, 368 

Conyngham, th@ Marquess of, it, 
238 note 

Coalition between Pitt and Port- 
land, i, 21 

Cochrane, Admiral, i, 179 

Cockbum, Captain George, i, 302- 
308 

Colley, Dudley, i, 4 

Colley, Elizabeth, i, 4 

Colley or Cowley, Richard, i, 3 

Colley, Richard, see Wellesley, 
Richard Colley 

Cooke, Edward, i, 114 and note, 


239 
Corn, restriction on the importa- 
tion of, ti, 134, 158 
Cornish, Francis Warre, i, 7 note 
Comwalis, Archbishop, i, 6 and 
note, 40; ii, 253 
Comwallis, first Marquess, i, 25 
and nute, 29, 30, 33, 34, 64, 66, 
hee 74-78, 85- 87, 104, 107, 117, 
52, 155; ii, 209, 328 


403 


@orrespongence between the Duke 
of Wellington and Canning, ii, 
164-186 

Cegry, Isaac, i, 114 and note 

Cottenham, Earl, see Pepys, Sir 
c. Cc. 

Courzel, Comte de, i, 62 

Cowley, , Baron, see Wellesley, 
Henry 

Cowley, Walter, ii, 371 

Craig, ii, 264 

Creevey, Thomas, i, 289; ii, 99, 
147, 331-333_. . 

Croker, John Wilson, ii, 147, 222, 
318, 338-344 

Cuesta, General Gregoreo Garcia 
de la, i, 314 and note 

Cumberland, the Duke of, ii, 226, 
227, 278, 283-290 

Curtis, Sir Roger, i, 52 and note 

Cuttack, ii, 368 


D’ ALMEIDA, i, 160, IOI 

Dalrymple, Sir Hew Whitefoord, 
i, 241 and note, 246 

Dartmouth, the third Earl of, i, 
137, 172 and note 

Death of Princess Amelia, ii, 41, 


43 
Death of George Canning, ii, 206, 


207 
Death of Charles James Fox, i, 
210 
Death of Lord pone ii, 380~- 
382 
Death of Spencer "Perceval, ii, 86 
Death of William Pitt, i, 197 
Death of the second Earl Spencer, 
li, 249, 255 
Death of the Marquess Wellesley, 


ii, 400 

Death of Wellesley’s first wife, ii, 
150 note 

Death of Wellesley’s second wife, 
ii, 151 

de Grey, Earl, ii, 391-394 

Denman, Lord, ti, 356, 363, 366 

Denmark, ii, 53 

Derby, Lord, ii, 159 

Despatches, Minutes, and Corves- 
pondence of the Marquess Wel- 
lesley, K.G., during his Adminis- 
tration in India, the, ii, 311-317, 
322, 324, 325, 327-329 332. 334° 
339, 307 


INDBX 


Foreign affairs, i, 50-52, 57, 59, 
61-64, 68, 69, 80, 81, 88, 95, 
96, 98-102, 107-109, ITI-I43, 
122-125, 131, 132, 143, 144, 58 
I61, 163, 164, 168- 171, 178,° 170. 
205, 206, 294-325 ; ii, 13, 14, 44- 
55» 59-65, 69, 75, 91, 92, 95, 100, 
107, 108, 120 and note, 126-1 
130-134, 227-233, 240, 241, 261, 
262, 344, 379, 371, 376-380, 383, 


399 

Foreign Office, Wellesley at the, i, 
289-325; ii, 3-78, 371 

Foster, Mr., ii, 55 

Fox, Charles James, i, 9 and note, 
to and note, 16, 54 and note, 96, 
202, 204, 210-212, 215, 218, 
291 note ; ii, 339 

Fox, Colonel, ii, 381, 382 

Fox, Miss, ii, 361 

Fox, Miss Caroline, ii, 380, 381 

France, ii, 344, 376-379, 383, 399 

France, Wellesley’s speech on the 
war with, i, 19, 20 

Francis, Sir Philip, i, 201 

Frazer, General, i, 171 

Free Trade, i, 1 

Fremantle, Sir William Henry, ii, 
232 and note, 233 

Frere, Batholomew, i, 315 and note 

Frere, John, i, 315, note 

Frere, John Hookham, i, 179 and 
note, 315 and #ote 


Gampier, Admiral Lord, i, 204; 
ii, 9 

Garlike, Benjamin, i, 113, and note 

Garter, the Order of the, i, 8 
note, 117, 127, 234, 280-285, 
293, 294, 312; li, 233, 370 

George I, ii, 174 

George III., i, 15-17, 54, 60, I11, 
114, 120, 121, 135-138, 144, 161, 
170, 172, 184, 229-231, 240, 241, 
248, 249, 253, 254, 259, 265, 
266, 203-272, 280-285, 290, 292- 
294; il, 12, 41-45, 55, 56, 188, 
370 

George IV., i, 15-17, 129, 130, 155, 
156, 170, 201, 204, 291; ii, 60, 
65-78, 87, 89, 90, 94. 95, 98-101, 
105, 106, 108-111, 113-115, 119, 
120, 131-133, 151, 152, 157-192, 
196, 197, 200-204, 206, 208, 211 
and note, 213, 219, 220 


405 


ibraltar, » 9 and xofe 

Geneis Lora, ii, 347 and note 
eisenau, Count Neidhard, ii, 

3 and note, 64 

Goderich, Lord, ii, 160 note, 208, 
210-214, 219 

Golden Fleece, Wellesley refused 
the Orger of the, ii, 370, 371 

Gosdeti, Nose. ii, 356 and note 

Goulbum, Henry, ii, 143 and note, 
146, 154, 159, £60, 250 

Gower, Lord, i, 136 

Grafton, the Duke of, ii, 175 

Grafton, Philip, ii, 236 

Graham, Sir J. R., ii, 238 

Grant, Charles, i, 208 and note 

Grant, Colonel, ii, 249, 260 

Grant, Sir William, i, 211, 215, 219 

Grattan, Henry, i, 8-10, 64 and 
note, 79, 114 note; ii, 82, 83 

Grenville, Lady, i, 49 

Grenville, Lord, i, 14 and nofe, 42- 
44, 81-84 912, 116-119, 129, 135, 
148, 152, 155, 157, 174 175, 190, 
192, 198 and mote, 201-203, 210- 
230, 234, 235, 250, 254, 255 note, 
256, 203, 208, 280, 282; ii, 99, 
106-108, 110-116, 134, 135, 142, 
143, 170, 339, 341, 342, 372 

Grenville, Charles, ii, 229, 236, 237 

Grenville, Charles on the Marquess 
Wellesley, ii, 236, 237 

Grenville, R.T.N.B.C., second 
Marquess and first Duke of 
Buckingham, i, 192 and note, 133, 


136, 238 ; li, 142-144, 317-319 
Grenville, Thomas, i, 101, 113, 
229; ii, 360, 361 


Grey, the first Earl, i, 18 and note 

Grey, the second Earl, i, 18 note, 
229, 250, 254, 255 note, 256, 263, 
268, 280, 299 ; ii, 28, 99, 106-116, 
133, 135-137, 222, 224-231, 233, 
234, 238, 240-244, 247, 248, 255- 
257, 263, 264, 276, 279, 298-300, 
302, 304, 307 

Grogan, an Irish rebel, i, 74 

Grote, ii, 237 

Guilford, the second Earl of, see 
North, Lord 

Guilford, the third Earl of, i, 49 

Guilford, the fourth Earl of, see 
North, Francis 

Guilford, the fifth Earl of, see 
North, Frederick 


INDHX 


Jacobi, Baron, ii, 64 
Jacobinism, i, 50, 58, 61, 132 
Jeffrey, Lord, ii, 314 
Jenkins, Sir Richard, ii, 346-348 
Jekyl, ii, 340 
Jourdan, i, 88, 95 
Junot, i, 246, 247 
° 
*kKate, Canon John, ii, 358 and 
note, 359, 362-366 
Kebbel, Mr., ii, 152 
Keith, Viscount, i, 106 
Keogh, an Irish rebel, i, 74 
Kildare, the eighth Earl of, i, 3 
Kilmorey, Lord, see Needham, 
Captain F. Jj. 
Kilwarden, the first Baron, i, 68 
and note, 169 
Kirkpatrick, Major William, i, 45 
Knighton, Sir William, ii, 211 and 
note 
Kléber, General, i, 98, 115 note 
Kolli, Baron de, i, 305-308 


Lake, General Gerard, Viscount 
Lake, i, 72 and note, 76 note, 110, 
165, 171; ii, 336 

Lamb, Frederick James, Baron 
Beauvale and third Viscount 
Melbourne, ii, 299 and note 

Lamb, William, see the second 
Viscount Melbourne 

Langdale, Lord, see Bickersteth, 
Henry 

Lannes, General, i, 160 

Lansdowne, Lady, ii, 260 

Lansdowne, the first Marquess of, 
see Shelburne, William Petty 

Laswari, ii, 368 

Laudmann, Captain, 1, 323 

Leeds, the Duke of, ii, 151 

Leinster, the Duke of, i, 14 

Leo X., Pope, ii, 324 

Leopold of Saxe-Coburg, 
ii, 228 

Letters from 
Scrope Bernard to Lord Adding- 

ton, i, 139, 140 
Lord Brougham to William IV., 
ii, 251-253 
George Canning to Viscount 
Lowther, i, 210-214 
to Viscount Melville, ii, 104- 
106 
to Spencer Perceval, ii, 35-39 


Prince, 


407 


Letters fom George Canning to 


Mr.? Sharp, li, 82-86 
to the Duke of Wellington, 
ii, 169-177 


Lord Castlereagh to Spencer 
Perceval, ii, 33-35 
George III. to Spencer Perceval, 
i, 283 
Gear IV. to the Duke of Wel- 
lington, ii, 187 
the Earl of Liverpool to George 
Canning, ii, 102, 104 
Viscount Melville to George 
Canning, ii, 102, 103 
Spencer Perceval to George 
Canning, ii, 39-41 
to Lord Castlereagh, ii, 22-33 
to George III., i, 280-283 
Vice-Admiral Purvis to Henry 
Wellesley, i, 324, 325 
the Rev. Henry Wellesley to 
Lady Wellesley, ii, 220 
the Marquess Wellesley to 
Henry Addington, i, 20-22 
to Lord Auckland, i, 44 
to Earl Bathurst, i, 31, 32, 37, 
38, 190, 276; ii, 130, 131% 
to Lord Brougham, ii, 321, 322 
to Sir Francis Burdett, ii, 
265-270 
to George Canning, i, 230; ii, 
190-192, 197-200 
to Viscount Castlereagh, i, 
177, 178 
to Sur James, Rivett Carnac, 
ii, 316, 317 
to Thomas Creevey, ii, 233 
to Captain George Cockburn, 
i, 303-305 
to the Duke of Cumberland, 
ii, 288, 289 
to Earl de Grey, ii, 392-394 
to Henry Dundas, i, I19, 120 
to the East India Company, ii, 
385, 386 
to Lord Eldon, ii, 73 
to George IIL., i, 290, 292, 293 
to George IV., ii, 200-202 
to Henry Grattan, i, 8-10 
to Lord Grenville, i, 42, 43,4 
81-84, I17-11g9, 12h, 127, 
198, 201-203 
to Lord Holland, ii, 351-354 
to Sir Richard Jenkins, ii,346- 
348 


INDIix 


Letters to the Marquess Welles- 
ley from Thomas Grenville, 


li, 360, 361 
from Lord Grey, ti, 133, 135- 
137, 224-231, 233, ®234, 


239-241, 255-257 

from Lords Grey and ed 
ville, ii, 111-113 

from Lord Hawkesbury, i i, ee 
81, 122-126; ii, 150, 155 

from Lord Hobart, i, 65-69, 
158-165, 168-171 

from Lord Holland, ii, 
354-356 

from Joseph Hume, ii, 327, 
328 

from John Keate, D.D., ii, 
358, 359, 362-366 

from Lord Lansdowne, ii, 206 

from Edward John Littleton, 
ii, 122, 123, 253-255, 262, 264 

from the third Marquess of 
Londonderry, ii, 282-283, 
348, 349 

from George Lyall, ii, 395. 396 

from Lord Melbourne, ii, 
272, 278, 280, 290, 295, 296, 
327 

from Viscount Melville, i, 189 

from Charles Theophilus Met- 
calfe, ii, 258, 259 

from the Earl of Moira, ii, 108 
110, 11% 

from Lady Mornington, i, 186, 
187 

from Lord Mulgrave, i, abo, 
261; ti, 290, 291 

from Count Munster, ii, 60- 


265, 


65 
from Lord Palmerston, ii, 
229-232, 329 


from Sir Robert Peel, ii, 324- 
326, 388-391, 399, 400 
from Spencer Perceval, i, 
261-263, 293, 294; ii, 9, 
11-13, 17, 21, 22, 33, 68-71 
frof{ William Pitt, i, 188, 189 
from Lord Plunket, ii, 223 
from the Duke of Portland, 
i, 38, 230, 231, 240, 241 
from M. G. Prendergast, ii, 
210-214 
from the Prince Regent, ii, 72 
from Samuel Rogers, ii, 351, 


358 


409 


2tters to the Marquess Wellesley 
frowh Viscount Sidmouth, 
ii, 317 
from Sir W. Sidney Smith, i, 
205-207 
from Lady Hester Stanhope, 
ii, 56-59 
from Augustus Granville 
Mapleton, ii, 204-207 
from Edward Stirling, i li, 309- 
311 
from B. Sydenham, i, 248-260 
from John Charles Villiers, i, 
308, 309, 312-314, 317-312 
from Gerald Wellesley, i, 171- 
173; ii, 273-275 
from Henry Wellesley, i, 266- 
268, 294-298, 314-317, 32I- 
323 
from the Rev. Henry Wel- 
lesley, 1i, 276, 277 
from Mary Hyacinthe Wel- 
lesley, il, 124, 125 
from Richard Wellesley, i, 
173; ii, 221, 222 
from William Wellesley-Pole, 
i, 69-79, 84-87, 140, 141, 
154-158; ii, 13%, 132 
from the Duke of Wellington, 
ii, 386-388 
from William Wilberforce, i, 
39, 92-97, 145-149, 207-210 
Leuchtenberg the Duke of, ii, 227, 
228 
Lewisham, Lord,,see Dartmouth, 
the Earl of 
Liberal, Wellesley a staunch, i, 17 
Lists, Canning on the danger of, 
ii, 128-130 
Littleton, Edward John, Baron 
Hatherton, i, 42 note ; ii, rz22 and 
note, 123-125, 150 mote, 234, 236 
note, 241 note, 242, 243, 253-255, 
262-264, 300, 308, 313 
Liverpool, Canning elected for, ii, 
I2I, 122 
Liverpool, first Eari of, i, 90, 145 
Liverpool, the second Earl of, see 
Hawkesbury, Lord 
Londonderry,the second Marquess, 
see Castlereagh, Lord 
Londonderry, the third Marquess, 
ii, 282, 283, 348 and note, 349 
Long,Charles, Baron Farnborough, 
i, 136, 253 and note 


- 


inpEx 


Nelson, Lord, i, 61, 68, 69, 80, 81, 
98, 109 

Nemours, the Duke of, ii, 228 

Newcastle, the Duke of, ii, 174 

Nile, the battle of the, i, 8189 

Nizam, expedition to the, i, 8 

Normanby, Lord, ii, 36@ 

_North, Lord, second Earl of Guil- 
ford, i, 9 and note, 10 

North, Francis, fourth Earl of 
Guilford, i, 49 and note 

North, Frederick, fifth Earl of 
Guilford, i, 49 and note, 103, 107 

Northumberland, the Duke of, ii, 


257 
Nugent, General, ii, 64 


O’CoIcHLY, Father, i, 54 note 

O’Connell, ii, 122 mote, 145, 235, 
236, 242, 245 note, 271, 274, 279, 
280, 284-289, 298, 324, 349, 354, 
394 and note 

O'Connell and Lord Anglesey, ii, 
235, 236 

O'Connor, Arthur, i, 54 and note, 
65, 79, 85 

Ogle, George, i, g and note 

O’Loghlan, Sir M., ii, 371 

Ompteda, Baron, ii, 60-63 

Onslow, Sir Richard, i, 52, and 
note 

“ Orange Boys,” the, i, 56, 57 

Ord, Miss, ii, €47 

Orissa, ii, 368 

Oudh, i, 134, 201-204, 232, 237- 
239; ii, 368 e 

Oxford, Wellesley at, i, 7; ti, 354 


Pacer, Lady Augusta, ii, 374 

Palacios, i, 239 

Palmerston, Lord, ii, 229-232, 329, 
375-379, 399 

Parliamentary Reform, i, 18, 19; 
li, 223-226, 200-270 

Parnell, Sir H., ii, 222 

Parr, the Rev. Samuel, i, 6 and 
note 

Patterson, Elizabeth, ii, 151 mote 

Patterson, Mary Anne, second wife 
of the Marquess Wellesley, 
ii, 150, 151, 196, 204, 220, 249, 
297-308, 333, 375 

Patterson, Robert, ii, 151 and note 

Paull, James, i, 201-204, 207-210, 
231, 232, 237-239 


4It 


Pearce’s Life of Wellesley, i, 1g and 
note, 128 and note, 178 and note, 
200 and note, 207 note; ii, 41 
and note, 145, 214, 215 

®edro, Don, ii, 228, 229, 231 

Peel, Sir Robert, ii, 143, 151, 152, 
155, 160, 170, 172, 179, 183, 
Igo, 1oL, 298, 241, 249, 250, 261, 
271, $22-326, 345, 388-391, 399 
and note, 400 

Pelham, Thomas, second Earl of 
Chichester, i, 136 and note 

Pellew, Mr., i, 114 

Pellew, Sir Edward, Baron Ex- 
mouth, i, 206 and note, 322 

Peninsular War, the, i, 246-285, 
294-309, 313-323; U, 13-15, 
44-49, 59, 69, 75, 91, 92, 95, 109, 
107, 108, 120 and ote, 126-128, 
130-134, 188 

Pepys, Sir Charles Christopher, 
Earl Cottenham, it, 259 and 
note 

Perceval, Spencer, i, 211, 215, 
220, 248-254, 258, 260-265, 269- 
272, 274, 275, 277-285, 293, 294, 
320; ii, 6, 7, 9-13, 16-41, 55, 
56, 65-78, 84-86, 89, 94, 103, 
17T, 364 

Perron, ii, 329, 368 

Peshwa, the, i, 149, 165 

Petre, Mrs., ii, 255 

Pitt, William, i, 10, 13, 14, 16, 20- 
22, 27, 28, 30, 32-37, 47 ang 
note, 48, 50, 53, 55, 57) 60, 64, 
65. 67, 80, 85, 86, 90, 96, 98, 
110, 120, 121, 126, 128, 129, 
132, 135-137, 140, I41, 147, 
148, 152, 153, 155, 158, 162, 
176 note, 188, 189 and note, 
190-199, 234, 236, 237; li, 12 
note, 56 note, 174, 317, 318, 320, 
321, 325, 339-342, 372, 384 

Pitt, ‘Wellesley’s admiration 
for, i, 190-198, 317, 318, 320, 
321, 325, 339-343 

Planta, Joseph, ii, 117 and note 

Plunket, William Conyngham, 
Lord Plunket, ii, 142 and note, 
146, 150, 152, 154 and note, 159 

Igb, 223, 236 note, 357, 353, 
390 and note, 391 
Poet, Wellesley a, ii, 399, 353-36), 


384 ; 
Pole, William, 1, 5 


INDEX 


Sheridan, Richard Brinsley, i, 20, 
54 note, 148, 155, 163 

Shore, Sir John, Baron Teign- 
mouth, i, 25 and note, 46, 66, 67, 
84, 106 and note 

Sidmouth, Viscount, see Addifg- 
ton, Henry 

yoims, Colonel, i, 176 

’Sindhia, i, 149; li, 368 

Sing, Ameer, i, 67 

Skeffington, W., i, 85 

Slave Trade, the, i, 17, 18 

Smith, Charles Culling, i, 5; ii, 
275 

Smith, Charles Spencer, i, 205 
and #ote, 206 

Smith, Robert Percy, ‘‘ Bobus,” 
ii, 359 and note 

Smith, Sir W. Sidney, i, 98, 99, 
205- 207 

Souham, General, ii, 120 note 

Soult, General, ii, 120 note 

Souza, i, 313 

Spain, i, 246-285, 294-308, 314- 
317, 320-325; li, 13-15, 44-49, 
54, 59, 120 and note, 126-128, 
130-134, 229-232, 310, 370, 371, 


378, 379 

Spain, Wellesley Ambassador-Ex- 
traordinary to, i, 246-286; ii, 
37% 372 

Spalding, Miss, ii, 248, 249 

Speaker, Well@sley as a public, ii 
7 8 

Spencer, 
Earl, i, 136; il, 249, 255 

Spencer, the third Earl, see Al- 
thorpe, Lord 

Spencer, Mr., 1, 54 

Spring-Rice, Thomas, see Rice, 
Thomas Spring 

Stafford, Lord, ii, 151 

Stanley, E. G., ii, 238 and note, 
239, 249 

Stanhope, Lady Hester Lucy, ii, 

56-59 

Stapleton, Augustus Granville, ii, 
204 and nole, 205-207 

Stapleton, John, ii, 204 note 

Starkemberg, Prince Ludwig Jo- 
seph Max, i, 290 and note 

Statue of Wellesley for the East 
India Company, ii, 385-388, 
395-398 

Steele, i, go 


7 


George John, second 


413 


Stirling, Edward, ii, 309-31 
Stopford, “Admiral, ii, 379 note 
Stratford de Redcliffe, Viscount, 
see Canning, Stratford 
Gtuart, Sir John, i, 316 and note, 
321-323 
Stuart-Wortley, James Archibald, 
Baron Wharncliffe, ii, 98 and 
note, #3 and note, 244 
Sturges-Bourne, William, i, 253 
and note 
Sullivan, John, i, 30 and nofe, 33- 


37 

Sumner, the Rev. Robert Carey, i, 
5 and note 

Sutton, Sir Charles Manners, 
Viscount Canterbury, ii, 122 
note, 263 and note, 2604-271 

Suv6roff, i, 99 note, at 123 

Sweden, ii, 53, 54, 5 

Sweden, Charles XIV. of, i, 
and note ; ii, 53, 54 

Sydenham, B., i, 248-263, 266, 
276, 277 

Sydenham, Baron, ii, 374 and 
note, 375 


TALAVERA, the battle of, i, 247, 
299-301 

Talbot, Earl, ii, 141 

, Talleyrand, i, 99 

Tanjore, the Rajah of, i, 66, 67 

Taylor, Sir Herbert, ii, 188 and 
note, 254 

Teignmouth, Bargn, see Shore, Sir 
John 

“The most brilliant incapacity in 
England,” ii, 222 

Thiers, Louis Adolphe, ii, 376 
and note, 377, 378, 383, 399 

Thomson, C. P., il, 238 note, 254 

Tierney, George, ii, 12 and note 

Times, the, ii, 125, 120, 173, 244, 
279, 280, 284, 309 note 

Tipu, Sultan of Mysore, i, 46, 116, 
117, 122; ii, 335, 367 

Titchfield, Lord, i, 279 

Townsend, Lord, ii, 174 

Townshend, Lord John, ii, 340 

Treasury, Wellesley a Lord of the,' 
i, 14; ii, 366 

Treaty of Commerce with France, 
i, 15 

Troubridge, Sir Thomas, i, 


207 
and note 


INDEX 


Wellesley, R. C., (Comtinwed) 
created a Marquess, i, 120; 
wished for higher honours, i, 
120-122, 126, 127, 134, 13%, 140, 
156, 233-237; ll, 306-373; 9re- 
signed the Governor-General- 
ship of India, i, 180 ;@his arbi- 
tary manner, i, 184; Bis 
admiration for William Pitt, 
i, 190-198; ii, 317, 318, 320, 
321, 325, 339-343; his maiden 
speech in the House of Lords, i, 
204; his observations on Can- 
ning’s letter to Lord Lowther, 

ei, 214-225 ; declined the Foreign 
Office, i, 231; Ambassador- 
Extraordinary to Spain, 1, 246- 
286; ii, 370, 371; accepted 
the Foreign Office, i, 208, 278; 
as a speaker, ii, 7, 8; on the 
illness of George III., it, 42-44; 
on the state of Europe, ii, 44-45; 
resigned the Foreign Office, 1i, 
69-78; asked to join Lord 
Liverpool’s Ministry, ii, 87-96 ; 
attempted to form a Ministry, 
ii, 98-116; changed his views 
on the war, ii, 133, 134; eS 
trangement between Wellington 
and, ii, 134; Lord-Lieutenant 
of Ireland, ti, 141-215, 236-250, 
371-372 ; reconciliation between 
Lord Liverpool and, ii, 141; 
second marriage of, ii, 150, 151 ; 
suggested return to India of, ii, 
162, 163 ; offered the Embas¢y to 
Vienna, ii, 163, 193, 195; Lord 
Steward, ii, 222-225; ottered to 
go on a mission to Spain, ii, 229; 
re-appointed Lord-Lieutenant 
of Ireland, ii, 236; retired from 
the Lord-Lieutenantship, ii, 250; 
Lord Chamberlain, ii, 272-290 ; 
had a breach with Lord Mel- 
bourne, ii, 295-308, 322, 326, 
352, 353 3 Yeceived a further 
rewafd from the East India 
Company, ii, 329-333, 337, 338; 
the death of, ii, 400 ; 

Wellesley, William, i, 4 


THE 


415 


Wellesley, William Pole, i, 291 and 
note 
Wellesley-Pole, William, Lord 
Maryborough, i, 5, 42, 43, 60, 69- 
79, 84-87, 107, 140, 141, 154- 
158, 170, 171, 231, 238, 248- 
251, 258-261, 263-267, 275-278 ; 
li, 96 ° 114, 120, 131, 332, 320, 


332 

Wellington, Duke of, see Wellesley, 
Arthur 

Westmorland, tenth Earl of, i, 49, 
58, 136, 137; ii, 170, 179 

Wharncliffe, Baron, see Stuart- 
Wortley 

“* Whiteboys,”’ the, ii, 145, 214 

Whittingham, Sir Samuel Ford, 
i, 315 and note 

Whitworth, Sir Charles, Earl 
Whitworth, i, 101 and note, 132 

Wickham, William, i, 58 and note, 
I0r 

Wilberforce, William, i, 17 and 
note, 39, 50, 92-97, ITI, 142, 
145-149, 199, 200, 207-210; 
li, 341-344 

William IV., i, 129; ii, 188 note, 
224, 225, 232-235, 238-241, 249- 
255, 208, 274, 278, 398 note 

Williams, Baron, ii, 243 

Willis, Dr., u, 43 

Willis, Mr., i, 107 

Windham, ‘William, i, 19, 136, 201,, 
204, 216, 221, 228 

Windsor, Welleskey, member Ben 


i, 15 
Wraxall’s Posthumous Memoirs, 
i, 109; ii, 341 
Wynn, Mr., ii, 170, 179, 209 
Wyse, Sir Thomas, ii, 353 and note 


Younce, Sir George, i, 89 and 
note, 90, 94, 95 

York, the Duke of, i, 113, 170, 204 
and note, 205, 246; li, 41 and 
note, 130 

Yorke, Charles Philip, li, 9 and 
notes, 11, 12 


ZAMAN, Shah, i, 47; ii 367 


END 


THE WINDHAM PAPERS 


Being the Life and Correspondenée of the Rt. Hon. 
William Windham (4750-s810), a Member of Pitt’s 
first cabinet, and the ministry of ‘All the Talents,” 
including hitherto unpublished I,etters from George 
III., the Dukes of York and Gloucester, Pitt, Fox, 
Burke, Canning, Lords Minto, Castlereagh, Grenville, 
Nelson, and Malone, Dr. Johnson, Cobbett, Dr. 
Burney, with an Introduction by the Rt. Hon. 
THE EARL OF ROSEBERY, K.G., K.T. 
Two Portraits in Photogravure and 32 other Illustra- 
tions. Demy 8vo (9 by 52 inches). 2 vols. Price 32/- 
net. Inland Postage gd. extra. 


WHO WAS WINDHAM? 


BURKE *¢ He was just as he should be.” 

MACAULAY “ The first gentleman of his age.” 

LORD ROSEBERY “The finest English gentleman of 
his, or, perhaps, of all time.” 

DAILY MAIL “A great English gentleman.” 

ATHENZUM “ A noble figure.* 

DAILY TELEGRAPH “A great English gentleman.” 


30) APPEARED WITHIN 10 DAYS oF PUBLicATION OO 
The “Secret” and “ Most Private ” letters of Princes 
and Premiers. A new light on Social and Political 
Life in*the time of George III. “Apart from the 
intensely human personality they present, the 
volumes add enormously to our knowledge of the age 
of Pitt."—Pall Mall Gazette. 


HERBERT JENKINS LIMITED 
12 ARUNDEL PLACE HAYMARKET LONDON S.W. 


UOMMTUUUATT MUU 
00026100 


Digitized with financial assistance from 


An Initiative by 


‘y 
1+ '/ Parekh, i HDFC 
FOUNDATION | WITH YOU, RIGHT THROUGI 


on 15 October, 2018 


1 wy epee as — wee 4 


a 


Pt Ons. 


‘ f “ 


\ 


a 
‘ 
a | 
eee ae Ss emeet bell 


