a 

oe ST 
mn (O 
— N 
— CO 
— 2 
— 
= 


UINANANA AUTIN 
00026424 


Digitized with financial assistance from 


An Initiative by 


1-7 Berckt, B2 HDFC 


FOUNDATION 


| WITH ¥OU, RIGHT THROUGH 


on 15 October, 2018 


THE:> WELLESLEY PAPERS 


WE MUST ENDEAVOUR TO DISCHARGE 
OUR DUTY TOWARDS OUR COUNTRY 
WITH FORTITUDE AND PERSEVERANCE 
Wellesley to Wilberforce, Fanuary 24th, 1805 


UN:FORM WITH TitIS VOLUME “4 


THE WINDBRAM PAPERS 
Being the Life and Correspondence of the 
Rt. Hon. William Windham (1750-1810), 
a Member of Pitts first cabinet, an the 
ministry of ‘ All the Talents,” including 
hithertU unpublished Lettezs from George 
III., the Dukes of York and Gloucester, 
aitt, Fox, Burke, Canning, Lords Minto, 
Castlereagh, Grenville, Nelson, and 
Malone, Dr. Johnson, Cobbett, Dr. Burney, 
with an Introduction by the Rt. Hon. 
THE EARL OF ROSEBERY, K.G., 
. Two Portraits in Photogravure and 32 
other Illustrations. 


c Vr Veeck Vs Mesler 


c 


a 
¢ s 
Coan tipnrdidr (cite Lag +Vote bcilion tas Ypsley Wunese 


4 


et b> ity ney a \Pprire ho On e Wi dangles ; KG 


THE 
WELLESLEY PAPERS 


“THE LIFE AND CORRESPONDENCE OF RICHARD 
COLLEY WELIESLEY. MARQUESS WELLESLEY 1760- 
1842 GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF INDIA 1797-1805 
SECRETARY OF SIATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 1809- 
"$12 AND LORD-LZEUTENANT OF IRELAND 1821-1827 
I] 1833-34. INCLUDING HITHERTO UNPUBLISHED 
CORRESPOrmENCE WiTH GEORGE III AND GEORGE 
I¥ THE KES .OF YORK AND CUMBERLAND 
THE DUKES. OF PORTLAND AND’ WELLINGTON 
a||aLORDS ABERDEEN AUCK?.AND BATHURST BROUG- 
HAM_C/STLEREAGH GxEY HOLLAND LIVERPOOL 
MELBOURNE ~AND PALMERSTON LADY” HESTER 
STANHOPE) AND LADY BLESSINGTON BURDETY 
CANNING CREEVEY ~CROKER PEEL SPENCER 
PERCEVYAL PITT. WILBERFORCE ETC ETC. 


26424. 


BY THE EDITOR OF - 
<THE WINDHAM PAPERS” 
She bart of Reseteny- 


IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOLUME ONE 


e 


4 Ae ° 


yy. x- 70 


“ARUNDEL FLACE BAYMARKET 
LONDON SW. 8 (> @ MCMXIV | 


HERBERT PEN ENG / LIMITED 
A 


25-42. 
wel]wel [wel 
DADA 


DEDICATEL BY PERMISSION 
TO 


H's GRACE THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON, 


K.G., G.C.V.O. 


PREFACE 


O write a detailed account of ‘the public- 
career of the Marquess Wellesley, “ the 


great Marquess,” as he was called in 
India, would be to give the history of India from 
1797 until 1805, and the history cf England from 
‘that date until 1835, when he retired from political 
life. Such a"task I do not propose to undertake, 
if for no other reason than that it would be supér- 
erogacory., “‘ The Marquess Wellesley’ S Indian 
a.ministration is justly regarded as the “most 
SE lendid period of his history,” Pearcc has written, 
“though perhaps its lustre has, in scme degree, 
tended to cast into the shade other portions of 
his public services of great utility.””' The Indian 
career of the Marquess is told fully in the Des- 
patches edited by Montgomery Martin, and in the 
biographies written by Torrens, Hutton, and Mal- 
leson. ‘While I print nvmerous letters written by 
and to Wellesley during the years he was Governor- 
General of India, I devote greater space to his 
later years, when he was ‘consulted again and 
again on, the political situation, and was in active 
ccrrespondence witn the most eminent statcsmen 
of the day. From the vast 1748s of unpublished 
correspondence, ‘T nave selected, first, those letters 
that turow ligh: on his character and actions, and, 

+ Memotrs of Wellesley, i. 10. 
vu 


Vili PREFACE 


second, those that supplement our knowledge of 
affairs during the period of history that comes 
within his lifetime. 

We shall see Wellesley, at the age of thirty- 
seven, going out to India as Governor-General ; 
a comparatively untried man, i.deed, but one of 
high promise. We shall sce something oi the 
admirable work he did there. . We shall see him 
return eight years later, embittered by the attacks 
made upon his policy. We shall see hir, proud, 
stern, autocratic, convinced that his abilities 
were not fully appreciated, trying to force a 
quarzel ou Canning on the supposition that that 
statesman opposed his pretensions to the office of 
Prime Minister; and at another time at cross? 
purposes with Melbourne. Having been Secretary 
of State for Foreign Affairs from 1809 until 1812, 
and in the latter year having endeavoured in vain 
to form a government, we shall see him expecting 
great posts in various administrations, yet never 
again holding any office higher than that of Lord- 
‘Lieutenant of Ireland, and actually accenting in 
1830 and in 1835 posts in the Household rather 
than forego power <ltogether. A perusal of the 
correspondence will suggest that the reason for 
his exclusion was his open contempt for his 
colluagues and his dictatorial manner. When 
he was at the Fcveign Office ke did not deign 
to consult the Ccbinet. Perhaps Only with 
Brougham, many of whose lettczs are inciuded 


PREFACE ix 


in these volumes, was it more difficult to work. It 
is @greeable to be able to record that in the evening 
9¥ the life of Wellesley the great work he had done 
in India was fully recognised, and substantial 
tribute paid to him. 

She hitherto wapublished Wellesley correspon- 
dence*is printed here by kind permission of the 
present head of the family, His Grace the Duke of 
Wellington, K.G., G.C.V.O., to whom I tender 
my very.sincere thanks. The Controller of His 
Majesty’s .Stationery Office has courteously 
allowed me to insert certain extracts from the 
Fortescue MSS. For assistance of vacidus kinds 
rerdered me during the preparation of this 
work I am indebted to the Rev. Edmond Warre, 
C.V.0., C.B., D.D., Provost of Eton; F. Warre 
Cornish, Esq., M.A., Vice-Provost of Eton; the 
Rev. Lionel Ford, M.A., Headmaster of Harrow ; 
William Foster, Esq., the Registrar and Super- 
intendent of Records in the India Office; the 
Rev. Henry W. Clark, D.D.; J. R. W. Robinson, 
Esq.; J. EB. W. Flood, Esq. ; and especially Arnold 
Winterbotham, Esq.,who has kindly read the proofs 
ofthis work. To the publisher, Herbert Jenkins, 
Esq., I must express my gratitude, for he has 
unreservedly placed, his experience and time at 
my dispesal, and has given me nvich sage counsel. 

“THE EDITOR. 

Lonpon, 

New’ Year'’s»Day, 1914. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 
PREFACE vil 
LIST QF ILLUSTRATIONS, xv 


BOOK I 
EARLY YEARS. 1749-1797 


Descent of the WeMesleys : The Colleys and the WelleYeys in 
Ireland : The families intermarry in the seventeenth century : 
The Wellefley estates bequeathed to Richard Colley : He 
assumes the name and a of Wellesley : He is created 
Bar@a Mornington : His son, Garret, raised to an earldom : 
His marriage : His children : His eldest soneRichag? 
Colley Wellesley. known® by the courtegy title of Viscount 
Wellesley : At Harrow : At Eton : His love of the classics : 
He contributes to the Mus@ Etonenses : At Christ Church, 
Oxford : He wins the Chancellor’s prize for Latin verse: He 
succeeds to the earldom : His return to Ireland: Ht attends 
the Irish House of Lords : An original Knight of the Order 
of St. Patrick : A member of the Privy Council in Ireland : 
A letter to Henry Grattan: Speeches in the Irish House of 
Lords : Enters the English House of Commons: Appointed 
a Lord of tfle Treasury : His speech on the, Treaty of Com- 
merce with France : His opposition to an unrestricted 
Regency : A staunch Liberal: A Free-Trader: A sufporter 
of the abolition of the Slave Trade : An opponent of Parlia- 
mentary Reform : His subsequent change of opinion on 
this subject : A member of the English Privy Council: 
Appoint®d a Commissioner of the Board of Control for 


IndianeA fiairs 3 
BOOK II 
GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF INDIA. 1797-1805 
\CHAPTER I 
1797 


Sir Jéhn Shore resigns t&g Sffice a Govern@r-General of India : | 
Lord Hobart’s claims to succeed him ignored : Lord Corn- 
wallis appointed {gs the secind time®Sovernor-General and 
Conynasder-in-Chie® : Mornington is offered, and accepts, 
the governmens ox*Madras, with the reversion of Bengal: 
Mis carreenondence with the Marquess of Buckingham 

xi 


xii CONTENTS 


concerning Lord Hobart’s claims : Lord Cornwallis goes tc 
Ireland as Commandér-in-Chief, and Mornington® i; 
appointed Governor-General of India : Created Baron 
Wellesley of Wellesley in the peerage of Great Britain ;¢He 
sails for India : His marriage : His children : His family 
does no& accompany him 25 


CHAPTER II 
1798-1805 


The state of India : Mornington’s confidence : News from home : 
European politics : The state of England : Unrest ‘in 
Ireland : Lord Hobart on hig recall : T&e Irish disturbances : 
Lord Hawkesbury on the Union : The Battle of the Nile: 
Mornington on his work : Ireland and the Union : Bathurst 
on affijrs: Letters from Wilberforce and Lord Aygekland : 
Engla flourishing : The Union : Morniffgton and the 
Mysore Campaign : Created Marquess Wellesley : His 
mortification : Congratulation agd sympathy  Miciviey in 
India : Friction with the Company : Pitt’s peta has 
pddingign’s ministry : Prosperity at home : Wellestey’s 

palicy in Madia : His success : He is urged to continue there : 

The treaty of Amiens : The Govetnment’s appreciation of 

his work : gAssaye : Wellesley’s high-handedness : War with 

Holkar : A letter from his son : He proposes tq retire: The 

ignominigus tyranny of Leadenhall Street : A vote of censure: 

Wellesley resigns 45 


BOOK III 
RETWRN TO ENGLAND. 1806-1808 


Wellesley sails from India : His whole-hearted devotion to his 
duty : His autocgatic nature : The difference between a 
Governor-General in office and in retirement : His arrival 

ein England : His reception on landing : His mother greets 
him : A letter from Pitt weleoming him : He visit® Pitt at 
Putney : The impeachment of Lord Melville : The death 
of Pitt : Letter¢o William Wilberforce : Sir Arthur Wellesley 
appointed Colonel ofethe 33rd Regiment : Sir W. Sidney 
Smith ; Wellesley’s igdignation when he learns that his 
policy is to be attacked in the House of Commons : James 
Pauli : Wilberforce on Indian affairs : The charges against 
Wellesley printed by order of the House of Commons : The 
death of Fox : Grenville endeavours to induce Cafining to 
jain the ministry : Letters of C&imming, Grenville, and. 
Wellesigy : The Duke of Portland becorffes Prime-Mjnister : 
He igvites Wellesley to take the Se Office : TH® offer 
declined : The moti§n impugajng his, ®nduct negatived by 
an overwhelming paige : A counter-resolution approving 
his conduct carried ; Retters from the Magquess of Bugking- 
ham, Lord Castlereagh, and the Dui:@,of Portlan@ : The 
battlé of Vimiera 183 


CONTENTS xiii 


BOOK IV 
AMBASSADOR-EXTRAORDINAKY TO SPAIN. 1809 


Qissensions in the Cabinet : Wellesley’s appointment : Sir 
Arthur Wellesley’s command: A superfiuity of commagders : 
The Convention “of Cintr8 : Indignation in England : A 
ministerial crisis? Resignation of the Duke of Portland, 
Canning, and Castlereagh : Canning’s “‘ treachery’: 
Wellesley and the Pgemiership : Perceval’s difficult task : 
Negotiations :eDuel between Castlereagh and Canning: 
Weligsley offered the post ¢f Foreign Secretary : His accept- 
ance: Perceval’s account of the resignations : Canning’s 

ccount : Wellesley on Canning’s conduct : Wellesley desires 
a Garter : Perceval’s*® acquiescegce : Wellesiey’s thanks: 


His impatiencee 245 
BOOK V 
SECRETARY OF STATK FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 
1809-1812 
CHAPTER I 


Ganeral opinion of Wellesley : Creevey’s criticism : Bifficulties 
of his situation : Lord Holland’s tribute : Wellesley’s 
Garter : British policy in the Peninsula: Spanish neistrust : 
Reform essential to success : Wellesley on Wellington’s 
achievements : Unsuccessful attempt to rescue the King 
of Spain : Reinforcements needed in Portugal : The Near 
Eastern question : The defence of Cadiz: The situation in 
the Peninsula > Progress of the siege of Cadiz 289 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


0 FACE PAGE 
THE Marquess WELLESLEY’ Frontispiece 
From a miniature by Andrew Robertson in Apsley House, by permission of 
His Grace fhe Duke of Welfington, K.G. 


FIENRY Ronpas, 1st Viscourr MELVILLE 18 
Enare by S. Freeman, from a painting by Sir Hy. Raeburn 
HENky, 3RD Ear BATHURST 32 
Engraved by H. Meygr, from a drawing by J. Wright, after a painting by 
T. Phillips 
WiLtiAM Epix? 1s BaRoN AUCKLAND 58 
From an eneraving 
( 
Ropert BANKS JENKINSON, 2ND EARL oF LIVERPOOL 8a 
Engraved by J. Thompson, from a drawing by Wivell 
Wirtiam WILBERFORCE 92 
Engraved by T. Blood, from a painting by Russell 
- Tipu Sutran 116 
From an engraving by W. Ridley 
Wiriiam Prirr 136 
Engraved by G. Clint, from a painting by J. Hoppner 
Henry AppincTon, ist Viscount SipMouTH 152 
A lithograph by R, J. Lane, from a drawing by Catterson Smith 
Joun Jerrreys Pratt, 1st MaRQuess CAMDENe 178 
Engraved by G. Adcock, from a painting by J. Hoppner 
CHARLES James Fox oe 


Engraved by J. Young, from a painting by A. Heckel 


Writtam Hen, ney CAVENDISH pth ge 3RD DUKE OF PORTLAND *230 
Engraved by J. Murphy, from a painting by Sir J. Reynolds 
e 
SPENCER PERCEVAL 248 
Engraved by J. Brown, from a painting by Sir V® Beechey 


-Rie@arp Cottey, Marquess WELLESLEY” 268 
e@ Engraved by G. Cook, from a painting by Sir T. Lawrence 


\Gzoncs IIL 1N His PaRLiaMENTaRy Ropes 290 
From an engraving - 


ARTHUR WELLESLEY, 1st DUKE OF WELLINGTON 
~ From a painting by Sir T. Lagrence “ 


Georce HAMILTON-GoRDOR, 4TYMEARL OF ABERDEEN 10 
Engraved by T. Woolnoth. from a AAiitting by *® Wivell 3 


300 


xv 


o 


CHRONOLOGY 
a, 760 
June 20. Richard Colley Wellesley born. 


After his father was created Earl of Mornington, known 
by the cour’ece title of Viscount Wellesley. 


’ 2970 
At Harrow. 


1772. 
At Etoa. 
19778 ? 
December. Matriculated as a nobleman at Christ Church, Oxford. 


¢t78o 
Won the Chancellor's Prize for Latin Verse. 
x © 1978: 
May 22. Left the University on succeeding as (second) Earl of 
sa) Mornington. 
Took his seat in the Irish House of Lords. 
1783 
February 5. Created an original Knight of the Order of St. Patrick. 


, 1784 

Member of Parliament for Beer-Alsto2, Devonshire. 
1785 

Created an Irish Privy Councillor. ‘ 
19786 

- Appointed by Pitt a Lord of the Treasury. 
1787 
Jaxsrry. Elected for Saltash, but unsea‘ed on petition. 

1788 

Returned for Windsor. 


1793 
Juve 2x, °Sreated an English Privy Councillor. 
June 22. Appointed a Commnissioner of the Board of Control. 


’ 
~ £494 


November 2, + Married Ma + tlyacinthe Gabrielle Roland. 
XV 


xviii 


February. 
May. 
November 3. 


December 2. 
August 5. 
January, 


March 24. 


March 8. 


July. 
December, 
December. 


March. 


February 19. 


June. 


October 29, 


December, 


Nov. 1830- 


Sep. 1833. 


CHRONOLOGY 


1797 


Appointed Governor of Madras. 

Appointed Governor-General of India. . 

Created Baron Wellesley of Wellesley, SomerSef in the 
English peerage. 


1799 
Created Marquess Wellesley in the trish peerage. 
1805 
Sailed from India. 
1806 
Landed in England. 
1807 
Offered by Portland the Foreign Office. 
1808 


Charges brought originally by James Paull against 
Wellesley’s policy in connection w@h Oudh finally 
disposed of. 


1809 


Ambassador-Extraordinary to Spain. 

Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs. 
1810 

Povested Knight of the Garter. 


1812 


Resigned the Foreign Office and declined the Lord-Lieu- 
tenancy of Ireland. ee ks 
Endeayoured, unsuccessfully, to form a ministry. 
Published Correspondence and Documents explaining the Pro- 
ceedings in the recent Negotiations for the formatiammef an, 
Adminigiration. 
1816 
Death of the (first) Marchioness Wellesley 


1821 
Lord-Lieuter®nt of Ireland.- 
1825 


Married, second, Mary Anne, the widow of Robeft 
Patterson. =~ { 


1827 
Resigned the Lord-Lieutenancy of Ireland. 


1830-1833 
Lord Steward the HouNegoia. 


Sep. 1833- 
Dec. 1834. 


A RAN Me ‘ay® 


November 27. 


March. 


September 26. 


CHRONOLOGY xix) 


1833-1834 


_ Again Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland. 


1835 
Lord Chamberlain. 
1833-1837 
Despatches, oMinutes, and Correspondence of the Marquess 
Wellesley, K.G., duving his Administration in India, Edited 
by Montgomgry Martin. 5 vols. 
9837 
Granted £20,000 by the East India Company. 
1838 
Despatches and Corvespondence of the Marquess Wellesley, K.G., 
during his Mission to Spain, 1809. . Edited by Montgomery 
Martin. 
P 1840 
Published, for privatg circulation, Primitia et Reliquie. 


1841 
The East India Company resolve to place in the Iadia 
House a marble statue of Wellesley. 


1842 
Died. 


BOOK I 
EARLY YEARS. 1760-1797 


BQOK I 


EARLY YEARS. 1'760-1'797 


Descent of tke Wellesleys : The Colleys and the 
Wellesleys in Ireland : The families intermarry in 
the.seventeenth century : The Wellesley estates 
Bequeathed to Richard Colley : He assumes the 
name and arnts of Wellesley : He is created Baron 
Mornjngton : gHis son, Garret, raised to an earldgm : 
His méarriage: His children : His eldest “son, 
Richard Cglley Wellesley, known by the courtesy 
title of Viscount Wellesley : At Harrow: AtEton: 
His love of the classics : He contributes to the 
Muse Etonénses : At Christ Church, Oxford ;: He, 
wins the Chaneellor’s prize for Latin verse : He 
succeeds to the earldom : His return to Ireland: 
He attends the Irish House of Lords : An original 
Knight of the Order of St. Patrick : A member of 
the Privy Council in Ireland : A letter to Henry 
Grattan : Speeches in the Irish House of Lords: 
Enters the English House of Commons : Appointed 
a Lord of the Treasury : His speech op the Treaty 
of Commerce with France : His opposition to an 
unrestricted Regency : A staunch Liberal : A Free- 
Trader : A supporter of the abolition*of the Slave 
Trade : An opponent of: Parliamentary Reform: 
His subsequent change of epinion on this subject : 
A member of the English Privy Council » Appointed 
a Commissioner of the Board of Control for Indian 
o¢iflairs. 


HE Wellesleys (or Wesleys, as the name 
was frequently written) of the eighteenth 
century trace their descent directly from 

that Richard Colley, o« Cowley, who was sent to 
Ireland in the reign of HenryVII. to watch the 
conduct of Gerald,“4ighth Earl of Kildare, Lord- 


4 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1760- 


Deputy of that country. The Colleys settled in 
Ireland and acquired property. They lived: the 
life of cguntry gentlemen, the succeeding héads 6f 
the family usually holding some*useful but not 
highly distinguished office. The connection with 
that branch of the Wellesleys of, Wellesley,.in 
Somersetshire, which from the thirteenth century 
had resided ip Ireland, was brought about by the 
marriage of Elizabeth, daughter of that Dudley 
Colley *st Castle Carbery who died¢ir 3674, with 
Garret Wellesley of Dungan, Co. Meath. The 
eldest son of this alliance,’ William, died without 
issle, and was succeeded by his brdther Garret, 
who, likewise having no heirs, when he died in 
1728 left his property to his cousin, Richafd 
Colley, who thereupon assumed the surname and 
arms of Wellesley. 

This Richard Colley Wellesley sat, in the Irish 
Parliament as member for Trim until 1746, when 
he was raised .to. the peerage of Ireland.as Baron 
Mornington. His son, Garret, who succeeded him 
in 1758, was, two years later, advanced 10,the digni- 
ties of Viscount Wellesley of Dungan Castle, and 
Earl of Mornington$ Co. Meath. The Earl marréed, 
in 1759, Anne, eldest daughter of Arthur Hill-Trever, 
first Viscount Dungannon, and by her had issue : 

Ricard Colley Wellesley,-born June, 20, 1%60,) 

1 Most writers are in doubt as te whether Wellesley was 


born at Dungan Castle™or at thefamilygresidence in Grafton 
Street, Dublin. The question is agfparently answered by 


1797] AT HARROW 5 


afterwards Marquess Wellesley, the subject of this 
book is 

William, born May, 20, 1763, who m 1778 
assumed the name of Pole on becoming heir to 
the estates of his copsin, William Pole of Ballyfin, 
Quten’s County ; 

Arthur, born April 29, 1769, afterwards Duke of 
Wellington ; 
weGerald Valerian, born December 7, 1770, who 
entered tRe’ Church, and became Preberffary of 
Durham; © 

Henry, born January 20, 1773, afterwards Baron 
Cowley ; 

Anne, born 1768, who married, first, in 1790, 

the Hon. Henry Fitzroy (died 1794), and, second, 

Charles Culling Smith, of Hampton, dying om 
December 16, 1844. 

After his ‘father’s elevation to, an earldom, 
Richard Colley Wellesley was known by the 
courtesy title of Viscount Wellesley. At an early 
age he was sent to a private school at Trim, 
and eventually to Harrow when ten years old. 
His stay there was brief. ‘ Pr. Sumner’s’ suc- 
cessor as Headmaster of Harrow began his reign 


Wellesley hipself, who, replying to an address of the Cor- 
poration of Dublin on the gccasion of his appointment in 1821 
as Lérd-Lieyjenant of@reland, referred to the time agvMnen I 
had the honour of being enrolled in the distinguished list of 
the freemen of my native city.” 

1 The Rev. Robey Carev Sumner? D.D. (1729-1771), the 
friend of Ox Johnson@and the author of Concio ad Clerum 
(1768). He died September 12, 1771. 


6 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1760- 


in storm,” Messrs. Howson and Warner state. 

. Local feeling espoused the candidatyre of 
Parr? for the headmasteyship, and exploded ‘in 
a riot when Heath*—a third Etonian head- 
master in succession—was qselected. In that 
riot, as, a century later, the Earl of Verufam 
related at the Tercentenary Festival, the carriage 
of one of his ancestors, Mr. Bucknall, a govefnor 
of the school, was wrecked by Parr’ Ss too zealewe 
partisans. The émeute lost to Harrow ‘one who 
would have been among her brightest orna- 
ments. A young Harrovian, eleven years and 
a half old, who had shared in the sacrilegious 
act, arrived at the house of his guardian, Argh- 
bishop Cgrnwallis,> waving one of ‘the tassels of 
"Mr. Bucknall’s carriage, and shouting ‘ Victory.’ 

. . . He was a Harrovian, at any rate for 

eighteen months.” * After this trouble, young 
Wellesley was transferred without delay to 

Eton, where, during the six years he remained 
there, he devoted himself, with morg than the 
average school-boy’s interest, to the study of 
the classics, an@ contributed Greek and Latin 


1 The Rev. Samuel Parr (1747-1825), the well-known 
controversialist, was first assistant at Harrow under Sumner; 
and was so angered at not being appointed to tlfe headmaster- 
ship#hat he started a rival school #t Stanmore. 

2 THE Rev. Benjamin Heath, D-D., was Headmaster of 
Harrow from 1771 until 1785. 

8 Frederick Cornwajs epesasesy. Archbishop of Canter- 
bury from 1768. 

4 Harrow School, p. 162. 


1797] ETON AND OXFORD 7 


verses to the Muse Etonenses.*. In December 
1778 he matriculated as a nobleman at Christ 
Church, Oxford. His tutor was William Jackson, 
who persuaded him to compete in 1780 for the 
Chancellor’s prize jer Latin verse, the subject for 
the year being Captain Cook, and was made happy 
by his pupil’s victory. Wellesley had indeed a 
gift for ‘the study of the classical languages, and in 
later years, when his active career was over, he 
found pleasute in collecting the scatterg verses 
of earlier days. He did not remain at Oxford 
to take his degree, cofhing down when his father 
died on May 22,1781, and he succeeded as sesond 
Earl of Mornington..- 

The new Earl at once returned to Ireland, and 
when, a year later, he attained his nfajority, 
showed that he was prepared to regard seriously 
his duties as head of his family. He at once 
announced that he would take ufon himself the 
considerable debts of his father,,and he charged 
himself with the education of his brothers and 
sister. fe made stretiuous endeavours to put 

1 Mr. Francis Warre Cornish, Vice-Provost of Eton, has 
k®dly supplied the Editor with the following extracts from 
the School Lists : 

Lord Wellesley. 1772: Lower School (second division). 
1774: Foarth Form (first division). Christmas 1775: Fifth 
Foem. July 1778:, Sixth Form. 

2 Williat Jackson (1751-1815) had himself in 106 gained 
the€hancellor’s prize for atin verse. In 1783 he was elected 
Regius Professor of Greek at,Oxforg. He was preferred to a 


canonryat Christ @hyrch,Oxford, in 1799, and was consecrated 
Bishop of Oxford in 1812. 


8 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1760- 


his estates upon a more profitable basis, though, 
for a while, he left their management to his mother. 
He assiduously attended the sittings of th® Irigy 
House of Lords, where he distinguished himself by 
the vigour with which he championed the cause of 
Roman Catholic emancipation, and by denoundng 
with spirit the extravagantes of the Irish Estab- 
lishment. When, in 1783, George III. institutedsthe 
Order of St. Patrick,’ Mornington was one of the 
twelv@tiginal knights ; andtwo yearslater he was 
sworn a member of the Privy Councilefor Ireland. 

The keenness of Mornington’s interest in public 
affairs from an early age may be dedficed from the 
following letter, written to Grattan, with whom he 
was on intimate terms, during a visit to England 
phen he Was in his twenty-third year. 


THE EARL OF MORNINGTON to HENRY GRATTAN 
Albemarle Street, London: December 9, 1782 


I seize the first opportunity of offering my 
sincere congratulations to you upon the recovery 
of Miss Fitzgerald,*? which I heard of jast night 
from O’Beirna I have felt very anxiously both 
for your situation and hers, and believe me, 
nobody rejoices more thoroughly in the prosp&ct 
of happiness which the return of her health has 
opened to you both. 

* Tit} Marquess Wellesley resigned-the dignity ef a Knight 
a Patrick in 1810, on his investment as a Knight of the 

arter. 


2 Henrietta Fitzgeralf, afterwards the Girst wife of Henry 
Grattan. 


1797] ENGLISH POLITICS 9 


I sant a hasty account of the first day’s business 
in the House of Commons to Ogle’: the debate 
was very uninteresting, and did not deserye to be 
particularised. “Since that day nothing has passed 
of any consequence. The reports of a peace 
gain ground every hour: this morning it was 
believed fo have beenesigned, and that Gibraltar 
was ceded for Porto Rico and. Minorca. The 
cession of Gibraltar*will be an unpopufar measure ; 
itawvas but hinted on the first day, and very. 
suggestid¥r thréw the House into a fermenf. The 
language generally held is that our successes in 
the last campaign’ entitle us to an honourable 
peace ; and that if France should be unreasonable 
-in her demands, the war must be prosecuted with 
“vigour. The situation of the Ministry® seems to 
be very singular; the number of their devoted 
friends is certainly inferior to that of their declared 
enemies ; but their enemies are divided. Lord 
North’s party is certainly the strgngest in the 
House, but Lord North is equally averse to 
Shelburne and to Fox. Lord Northss language is, 
that he will support Government as far as may 
be necessary for the strengthening of the nation’s 

1 George Ogle (1742-1814), Irish poMtician, a keen sup- 
*porter of the legislative independence ¢f Ireland. 

2 On April 12 Rodney defeated Grasse in the “ Battle of the 
Saints.” In September the great attack on Gibraltar had 
been gloriously repulsed be Eliott, and a month later Howe 
skilfuy relieved the gagrigo 

® The Shelurne Administration, formed on the ath of 
Rockirgham in July 1782, imwhich Pitt was Chancellor of the 
Exchequer. It fell in April, and was sycceeded in the follow- 
ing April by the shof-ljved Coalition Ministry led by North 


and Fox. 


10 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1760- 


hands against foreign enemies, but that ke will 
suffer no alterations in the Constitution. * You, 
can eagily conceive what a scene of confuSion the 
contest between these three parties must afford: 
Fox, Lord North, and Pitt equally and by turns © 
opposed to each other. As yet there has been no 
division in Parliament, sosthat I cannot with any 
accuracy state the numbers in these parties. 

Not one *word hase been skid in debate tipon 
Irish affairs ; the subject is touched, as you will 
see, Véry cautiously both in the*Sp@ech and 
Addresses. I have seen both the Duke of Portland? 
and Fitzpatrick,? and have from both received 
the most firm assurances of their ‘intention, and 
that of Mr. Fox, to stand by ‘the settlement of 
the last session.® 


In the Irish Parliament Mornington showed 
himself an able speaker and a fearless antagonist. 
In October 1783 he made a vigorous’ onslaught on 
“the profusion practised by the administration in 
several instances.” He protested against the grants 
which, in his opinion, went into the pgckets of the 
great cottonemanufacturers rather than in benefit 
of trade. He corfdemned the increase in the salary 


1 William Henry Cavendish Bentinck, third Duke_ of 
Portland (1738-1809), Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, 1782% 
Prime Minister, 1783. 

3 ee Richard Fitzpatrick (1747-5813), the intimate friend 
of Chfrles James Fox; Chief Secretary for $reland, 1782 ; 
Secretary at War in Coalitiow Ministry, 1783, and in the 
ministry of “ All the, Talents,” 1806-7. He was also one of 
the principal writers of the ‘‘Rolliad,~ 

8 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 5. 


1797] IRISH POLITICS II 


of the Lord-Lieutenant, the {2,000 a year paid 
to his, secretary, and such other items. ‘I do 
Aot mention these things, or rise merely ‘with an 
intention to oppose Government,” he said, “ but 
I want to know what is the economical plan of 
GoVernment, or whether they have any such. If 
they run into extraordinary expenses, I will, if I 
should have the misfortune of standing alone, op- 
pose every expensive measure.’ But though Morn~ 
ington was, in such cases, always to be found acting 
independenfly, yet as.a rule he supported the 
Government., Later in the year he spoke frankly 
on the volunteer movement in Ireland? and 
eudorsed a resolution sent up from the House of 
Commons protesting against an armed assembly 
holding regular sittings in the neighbourhood 6? 
Parliament. “This address comes from the 
Commons, ahd they desire your Lordships to con- 
Cur in it,” he declared. ‘‘The assembly of the 
‘volunteers has sat for nearly three*weeks, with all 
the forms, of Parliament; and will any noble 
Lord say that they have no intentéon to infringe 
the privileges of Parliament, afid to attempt the 
total extinction of the laws of the land? Have 
not both Houses of Parliament been surrounded 
by armed mobs? and will any man pretend to 
say \it is*not time for this House to intérfere ? 

* The first regiment’ of Irish volynteers was formed at 


Dublin, wader the®cqnmand of the Duke of Leinster, in 
October, 1779. 


12 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1760- 


Shall any noble Lord, high in office though #ot in 
confidence, or any noble Lord in confidence fhoughe 
not in éffice, not have a sense of the danger of tife 
times, as the House of Commons seems to have ? 
I am for this Address, and upon this ground, that 
it offers to His Majesty a sufficient and # necesSary 
pledge of our loyalty and affection to his person 
and the constitution of the céuntry ; and to the 
peopl it speaks our firmness—for ‘Parliament will 
not be robbed of its privileges, even By its own 
children; and, we cannot, for the®sake of our: 
posterity, suffer it. We ought to give the Gov- 
erimment our assistance, when its imbecility may 
require it, to support the Constitution. A grgat 
deal has been said relative:to the volunteers. 
"There is no man that reveres, that respects them 
more than I do; their temper and moderation 
have made the greatest impression upon my mind, 
but I am not blind to their imperfections, when I 
find that theyshave gone beyond the original idea 
of their institution. If the Constitutiog is suffered 
to be infringed, I will not remain to be a witness of 
it, but leave thecountry. If the Constitution is 
° @ es 
not supported, no body of people can be happy.” 
Shortly after the letter to Grattan was written, 
Mornington proposed to play a part upgn a 
larger™ stage, and he decided to enter the English 
House of Commons, which offered greater ‘Scope 
for his abilities than the Irish House gf Lords. 
He was in 1784 nominated by the Earl of Beverley 


1797] A WARM TRIBUTE 13 


as one, of the members for the borough of Beer 
Alston, Devonshire. He made an excellent im- 
pressior’ as a speaker, but was by no means satisfied 
with his position as a private member, and was 
. desirous of securing appointment to some official 
position. ,He wanted both recognition of his 
talent and scope for its further display. 

In, November of that year he suggested to the 
Duke of Rutland® that in’ the event of Lord 
Walsingham’s appointment to India he mi$&t be 
appointed to. the Vice-Treasurership of Ireland, 
which would then be@ome vacant. The pro- 
position was warmly backed by the Duke, who 
wrote to Pitt: “We both, I am convinced, feel 
anXious on every account to see Lord Mornington 
in a situation where he may be pledgéd as am 
avowed and responsible supporter of Government 
in both countries ; and if this arrangement could 
be made in his favour, all difficulties would. be 
entirely removed. I confess I cannot help feeling 
particularly anxious to see his views gratified, 
both from tRe high opinion’which, in common with 
others, I have formed of his talents and public 
mertts, as well as from the sincer® and unequivocal 
wegard I personally bear him; and in both which 
Views of the question I am persuaded you are not 

1 Beer Alston returned two members to Parliament from 
the reign of Queen Elizabeth gintil it was disenfranchised by 
the Reform Bill 


2 Charles “Manners foyrth Duke of “Rutland (2754 -1787), 
Lord-Licutentnt of Ireland, 1784, until his death 


14 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [i760- 


behindhand with me. I must therefore, press 
this matter to your consideration as a circumstance 
which would naturally tend to the ease®of rfly 
administration, and which would add, I will 
venture to say, credit and foe to Government in 
England.”! High praise indeed for a statesgian 
to bestow upon a stripling of twenty-four. Though 
- Mornington was not given jhe Vice-Treasurer- 
ship, it seems that he was promiseé something, for, 
writif8" to Grenville? on January? 26.1785, he 
mentioned that the office of Presiadlent of the 
Council had been offered tb the Duke of Leinster, 
and said: ‘‘I consider this offer *as a distinct 
breach with me, as (at the time’it was made) my’ 
situation had not been provided for in any degree*’® 

In 1788, however, Pitt appointed him a Lord 
of the Treasury. Upon the acceptance of this 
office of profit under the crown he had to offer 
himself for ‘re-election to Parliament. ‘ Lord 
Beverley,” says Torrens, “‘ affronted with what he 
deemed neglect of his political claims, refused to 
return Mornington agaifi for Beer Alst8n, whereby 
he was driven taseek for a seat in the less com- 
pliant borough of Saltash.” * There was aconttst,; 


1 Fortescue MSS. i. 241-2. 

2 William Wyndham Grenville (1759-1834), created Baron 
Grenville 1790, had been Chieé Qecretary for Ivgland, 
1782-183, and was now joint Paymaster-General. He was 
Foreign Secretary 1791-1801, ayd the head of the''“‘eAll the 
Talents ” Ministry, 1896-1807, 

3 Fortescue MSS. i. 245. 

4 Wellesley, 67. 


1797] | BRITAIN’S TRUE MAJESTY 15 


and Mgrnington was returned by a small majority, 
only to be unseated on petition. For several 
m@nths*he was not in Parliament, and then he 
found a seat at Windsor, which constituency he 
represented until he went to India in 1706. 
Thegceforth he, took a prominent part in the 
proceedings of the House, and in the debate in 
Febryary 1787, on the Treaty of Comgnerce with 
France, rising after Burke, spoke with effect. 
“It has beer @oquently urged,” he said, “that 
whatever may be the commercial merits of the 
treaty, from a politicaP view it prostrates the 
majesty of this*country at the feet of France, and 
deposes Great Britain from the throne of Europe. 
I answer that the true majesty of Great Britain 
is her trade, and the throne of the comfnerce of 
the world is the fitting object of her ambition. I 
say that the industry and ingenuity of our 
manufactures, the opulence which “these have 
diffused through various channels, the substantial 
foundation of capital on which they have placed 
our trade—capital which has this night been well 
described as predominant and tyrant over the 
trad@ of the whole world—all th®€se, as they have 
heen our best consolation in defeat, are the most 
promising sotrces of future victory ; and that to 
Cultiv&te, to strengthen, and to augment thse, 
cannot> be’ inconsistent ewith the glory of the 
kingdom.” Mornington was agdin to the fore in 
the Regenc} question of 1788. The King was ill, 


16 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1760- 


and apparently it would soon be necessary to 
appoint a Regent. The Prince of Wales was the 
natural selection, but he was on bad terrfs with 
his mother, and openly opposed to the Govern- 
ment. Pitt and his colleagues were, therefore, 
anxious to postpone the matter as lopg as pos- 
sible, but action had td be taken after Dr. 
Warren stated, on November 26, that ,the 
“physicians could now have ne hesitation in 
pron®thcing that the actual disorder was thaf of 
lunacy ; that no man could pretend to say that 
this was or was not cutable; that he saw no 
immediate symptoms of recovery ;e and that the 
King might never recover, or, oh the other hand, 
might recover at any moment.” Fox then co- 
#licated the issue by declaring in the House of 
Commons that, “in his firm opinion, His Royal 
Highness the Prince of Wales has as clear, as 
express a right to assume the reins of government 
and exercise the powers of sovereignty during the 
continuance of the King’s illness and incapacity 
with which it has pleased God to® afflict His 
Majesty, as in the case of His Majesty having 
undergone a nataral and perfect demise.” The 
contention was insupportable, and Pitt, supported 
by Mornington, opposed it taoth and nail. In the 
endsa restricted Regency was agreed upor?, but 
before it became effectivesthe King recovered, and 
on February 26 a®bulletin annoynced ‘‘ the entire 
cessation of His Majesty’s illness.” Eéflier in the 


1797] ~-HIS POLITICAL CREED 17 


year Mornington had gorie to Ireland, there from 
dis place in the House of Lords to oppose the 
wirestiicted Regency being granted as a matter of 
right. This motion was, however, passed by the 
Irish Parliament, and a deputation to the Prince 
of Wales arrived in London—the day after the 
King’s recovery. 

Mornington was.a staynch Libeyal, and a 
stalwart supporter of the various items in the 
programme of*the party. He believed ut*Free 
Trade, and opposed any concession to Protection ; 
and he was wholeheart@dly with Wilberforce* in 
his abhorrence of the Slave Trade. He attacked 
Dundas? when in 1792 as Home Secretary he 
proposed the gradual abolition of this commerce 
in human beings, and on April 25 moVed as am 
amendment to Dundas’ motion that the Slave 
Trade should cease at the end of the year. When, 
two days later, the House of Commons went into 
committee on Dundas’ resolution, ¢ That in the 
opinion of this Committee, it shall not be lawful 
to import @ny African negroes intg any of the 
British colonies or plantations ia ships owned or 
navigated by British subjects, #t any time after 


@ 1 William Wilberforce (1759-1833), philanthropist, the 
Parliamentaryeleader of the party devoted to securing the 
abolitign of slavery. It we not until 1807 that a Bill with 
this object received the “Royal assent. = 

? Heary Dundas (1742-181), created Viscount Melville, 
1802, a friend and colleague of Pitt, wgs at this time Home 
Secretary, which offiee ge held from 1791 to 1794, in which 
year he became Secretary at War. 


pee Cc 


18 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS. [1760- 


the first day of January 1800,” he protested in a 
vigorous speech, in which he declared that, 
“Every hour that. this nefarious trafic Was 
allowed to be continued was a disgrace to Great 
Britain.” 

With the project for Parliamentary Reform 
lie was not, however, in Sympathy, and on May 
7, 1793, he addressed the Commons against a 
motion moved, by Charles Gr “ Although 
queStions of great magnitude and Mrportance have 
engaged the attention of the Howse since the 
affairs of France have betn the immediate subject 
of deliberation, the Hon. Gentlemé@n will find that 
a topic leading to such serious reflections, and 
furnishing such useful lessons, has not been so 
«soon efféced from the memory of this House or of 
the country ; the business of this day must revive 
every passage of those transactions with the most 
direct application to the present question. It 
will be pressed home to'the recollection and to the 
feeling of every, British subject that a change in 
the existing Government (the avowed object 
of this motion) was the great revolutionary 
machine, by thé working of which our enemies 
trusted to reduce this happy people to the level 
of their own miserable condition.” In later years, 

1 Tharles Grey (1764-1845), the eldest son.-of General 
Charles Grey (1729-1807), whp was created Baron*in 1801 
and Earlin 1806. ‘Carles, second Earl Grey, was a supporter 


of Parliamentary Reform. He was@ofeign Secgetary, 1806-7, 
and Prime Minister, 1831-4. . 


@;,,. Wy, Raeburn, RK. 


Ai, pinst. S. Freeman, seuipt. 


HENRY DUNDAS, IST VISCOUNT MELVILLE 


e 


1797] JOINS BOARD OF CONTROL 19 


howevtr, Mornington ‘approved and' supportea 
the Reform Bill. 

« Moriiington, who had been a member-of the 
Trish Privy ‘Council since 1785, was on June 2I, 
1793, sworn a membef of the English Privy | Council, 
Seven days later he left the Treasury to betonie a 
Commissioner of the Board of Céntrol-of the East, 
India Company’s affairs. ,Always irmterested in 
India—his maiden speech in the English House of 
Commons, had®been on Warren Hastings and the 
conduct of the Rohilla war—he -had now every 
opportunity to acquire a ‘comprehensive knowledge 
of the Indian Empire.’ “ He acquainted himself,” 
wrote Pearce, his: earliest biographer, “as far as 
possible, with the details of every fact bearing 
upon the commerce, the goverriment,; and the 
laws of the country ; and with the instinctive 
sagacity of great genius. pondered upon the future 
destiny and the possible exigencies of Hindostan.’”*! 
How thoroughly, and to what good end he devoted 
himself to the study of Indian affairs, the future 
was to show. 

Mornington spoke regularly én the House of 
Commons, and on January 21, 1794, delivered an 
eration on the subject of the war with France. 
William Windham declared that the Earl “‘ had 
recapitulated the coiiduct of France in a manner 
so mdsterly, so true,.and so alarming, as ner 
to fix the attentéog of the House and nation” 

1 Memoirs of Wellesley, i. 59. 


20 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1760- 


but it is only fair to state that Sheridan’ subse- 
quently recalled the occasion and spoke of the 
oration in a very different tone: ‘‘ Exactly to 
years ago, at the opening of the session,” he 
remarked, “‘I remember to*have seen the noble 
Lord, with the same sonorous voice, the same 
placid countenance, in the same attitude, leaning 
gracefully ypon the table, and giving an account, 
from shreds and patches of Bfissot, that ,the 
French Republic would last but*a few months 
longer.” The truth probably lay between these two 
extremes, but the generdl voice certainly praised 
Mornington. 

In spite of his appointment to the Board of 
Control, he was still far from satisfied with his 
position 2nd prospects, and thought that higher 
office was his due. His feelings are clearly ex- 
pressed in the following letter. 


THE EARL OF MORNINGTON to HENRY ADDINGTON 


May 3, 1794 

I am very much dfraid, from @ variety of 
circumstances, that Pitt has no idea of altering 
my situation thie year. I cannot tell you fow 
‘much mortified I am at that and other symptoms, 
not of unkindness, but of (what perhaps I deserve 
decided preference to others. I have sprious 
thoughts of relinquishing the whole pursuit, and 
becoming a spectator «ot a very indifferent 
one, as you may believe, either to the success 
of the war, or to Pitt’s interest and honour), 


1797] NOT SATISFIED 21 


but I cannot bear to creep on in my present 
position.’ 


In June Pitt coalesced with the Portland party, 
. and in the general shuffle of offices no higher post 
was found for Mornington. 


THE EARL OF MORNINGTON to HENRY ADDINGTON 
Brighton: July 27, 1794 
You seemed to wish to hear from me, apd I 
imagined that wish to arise chiefly from your 
kind anxietyeto know whether anything passed 
between Pitt and me befére I left town. Pitt sent 
for me the day of my departure, and told me that 
in settling this treaty [with the Duke of Portland 
anal ‘his supporters], he had positively stipulated 
that I should have the next office (to be held with 
the Privy Council) which should become vacant ; 
and he further informed me that the Duke of 
Portland entered very readily into this arrange- 
ment, and said it was but reasonable that I should 
. stand first for such a situation. This is, I own, 
more than I expected, seeing myself wholly passed 
over in the fate changes, and having received no 
explanation on the subject. . . .. However, I am 
now satisfied that I was not entirely out of Pitt’s 
mind, which was my principal apprehension.* 


Mornington, on September 4, 1796, told 
Addittgton that in cénsequence of the death of 
Lord Mansfield,*? he had written to Pitt merely to 


1 Pellew: Life of Sidmouth, i. 123. : 
*. David Mufray, secorfd Earl of Mansfield, was President of 
the Council. He died on September 1, 1796. 


22 THE. WELLESLEY PAPERS 


express his hope that an opportunity’ might now 
occur of promoting him. ‘ My wish,” he said, 
““undoabtedly would be to go to the House of 
Lords ; but I have said no more to Pitt than what 
I have mentioned above, thinking that it did not 
become me to enter into any detail with him in this 
stage of the business.” Lord Mansfield, however, 
was succeeded, not by Mornington. but by Lord 
Chatham.’ 

 Pellew: Life of Sidmouth, i. 173. 

4 John Pitt, second Earl of Chatham (1756-1835), eldest 
son of ‘“‘ The Great Commoner,’’eand brother of William Pitt ; 


Lord Privy. Seal, 1794-1796; President of the Council, 
17§6-1801 ; Master of the Ordnance, 1801-1806. 


e 
e 
nr Phillips, R.A, Bont. FS. Wright, delt, H, Meyer, sculpt. 
@ HENRY, 3RD EARL BATHURST 
e 
e 


BOOK II 


GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF INDIA 
1797-1805 


BOOK II 


GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF INDIA 
1799-1805 
CHAPTER I 
1797 


Sir John Shore resigns the office of Governor-General 
of India: ‘ord Hobart’s claims to succeed him 
ignored: Lord Cornwallig appointed for the second 
time Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief : 
Mornington is offered, and accepts, the government 
of Madras, with: the reversion of Bengal: “His 
correspondence with the Marquess of Buckingham 
concerning Lord Hobart’s claims: Lord Cornwallis 
goes to Ireland as Commander-in-Chief, and Morning- 
ton is appointed Governor-General of India: 
Created Baron Wellesley of Wellesley in the peerage 
of Great Britain: He sails for India: His marriage: 
His children: His family does not accompany him. 


IR JOHN SHORE, who in 1793 had been 
GS appointed Governor-General* of India in 
succession to Lord, Cornwallis,’ announced 

in 1796 his intention to resign that high office. It 


1 Sir John Shore (1751-1834), went tp India in 1768 asa 
Writer in the East India Company’s Service, and, showing 
industry and ability, rose to be a member of the Supreme 
Council of Beggal, 1787. In 1792 he was created Baronet, 
and in the following year was appointed Governor-General of 
India® In the year of his return to England, 1798, he was 
create@ Baron Teignmouth in the peerage of Ireland. 

2 Charles Cornwallis, first Marquess and second Earl Corn- 
wallis (1738-1805), entered the army in 1756, and served in 
the Americar? war. H® was Governor-General and Com- 
mander-in-Chief in India from 1786, and held office until 1793. 

28 


26 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1797 


had generally been assumed that Lord Hobart, 
Governor of Madras, would have been given the 
supreme government, and indeed he had been 
assured when he went to Madras that when a 
vacancy occurred he would be transferred to - 
Bengal. Shore, however,, had been selected? be- 
cause, it was said, he, as a civil servant of the 
East IndiaeCompany, had an intimate knowledge 
of the, revenue, system. Hobart” swallowed his 
disappointment and remained at Madras, feeling 
confident that when Shore retired *he could not 
be again overlooked. When this event took 
piace, however, the Directors .of the Company 
appointed Lord Cornwallis for the secqnd 
time Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief. 
Mobart, indeed, was not on good terms with the 
authorities in Leadenhall Street, and an order for 
his recall was on its way to India. Cornwallis 
was sworn in on February 1, 1797, and about 
the same time Mornington was offered the govern- 
ment of Madras, with the reversion of Bengal, an 
offer he accepted only after he had obtained the 
assurance that Hobart should receive a pension 


e 

1 Lord Hobart (1760-1816), the eldest son of the third 
Earl of Buckinghamshire, served from 1784 to 1788 as aide® 
de-camp, and from 1789-1793 as ‘Chief Secretary to the Viceroy 
of Ireland. In 1794 he went to India as Governor of Madras. 
He conducted an expedition againSt Malacca, and took part 
in the war against Tipu Sultan. After his recall in f798 he 
was created Baron Hgbart of Blickling. He succeeded to his 
father’s title in 1804. From 1812 yuntil his geath he was 
President of the Board of Control. 


1797] | LORD HOBART’S CLAIMS 27 


and should be given a peerage during his father’s 
lifetime. 


Tue MARQUESS OF BUCKINGHAM’ fo THE EARL OF 
MORNINGTON ' 

Stowe: Apnl 16, 1797 

The newspapers hawe informed me that you 
have accepted the government of Madras with the 
reversion of the Governor-General. «J am very 
glad for your sake that you haye made up your 
mind to this ‘undertaking, as I am sure thaf you 
will discharge the duties of it with credit and 
advantage to the public. When I was last in 
town, I wished to have conversed with you upon 
_ this subject, but seeing that you did not, begin 
the conversation I concluded that the whole 
matter remained where we left it when we last 
talked upon it in the last week of February, ahd 
I was the more persuaded of this by Mr. Pitt’s 
constant silence upon the points which I have 
pressed for explanation, relative to Hobart. But 
as matters now stand I cannot hut be eagerly 
anxious to know whether you are informed of 
any arrangement of the nature which I mentioned 
to you as having been entertained by Mr. Pitt, 
and which I have too much rgason to know was 
impeded (and, I believe, frustrated) by Mr. Dundas. 
If there is on this subject any secret which has 
beep entrusted to you, and which is meant to be 
kept from me, I have not the smallest right or wish 
1 George Nugent Temple Grenvjlle, first Marquess of 
Buckingham) (1753-1813), second son of George Grenville, 


succeeded” his uncle #s second Earl Temple, 1779; created 
Marquess, 1784. 


28 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1797 


to ask it ; but if not, I should feel it as a kindness 
‘if I was informed by you what you know respect- 
ing the fate of one for whom we are so°muc 

interested, and who has been so cruelly duped 
by Mr. Dundas upon the subject of the Governor- 
General; and if brought home in the way I fgar 
he will be most cruelly sacvificed by Government 
to the despicable intrigue of the India House, 
whom I-understand to be adverse to him. Still, 
I thigk Mr. Pitt will ultimately be brought to do 
what is just and right to Lord Hobart, because 
I cannot think so ill of him as to imagine that he 
will lend himself to such* a system. However, 
as he will not explain himself, I am very uneasy 
at the part which I have (from motives of officious 
friendship) taken in this matter. I do not knoW 
what day ig fixed for your departure, and my time 
is o much employed by my dear son (who was 
again worse yesterday) that I cannot come to 
town; and if so, I fear that I have little chance 
of seeing you again before you sail. If I had, I 
.should have pressed you to believe me most 
affectionately anxious for your credit and honour, 
and most earnest in wishing you evefy comfort 
and happiness. The prospect of public affairs 
is most gloomy everywhere, and perhaps the East 
has (besides its share in the general ruin which is | 
now knocking at our gate in the shape of peace) 
its particular and peculiar stogm that is gatherjng, 
and will probably be ready to burst .by the tjme 
you arrive. I know your abilities are formed to 
carry you well through your difficulties ;, and if 
the bonds of all civil society are to be broken in 


1797} BUCKINGHAM DISSATISFIED 29 


Europe it may be hoped that they may exist in 
Asia ; and at all events, it little matters how soon 
the mément of trial comes, if the abject cowardice 
or treachery of the people force upon Government 
the sort of peace which Mr. Hammond?’ is sent to 
negotiate, and which I hold to be a thousand 
times more dangerousethan the most calamitous 
war. In this moment I see but two glimmerings 
of daylight: one is in the faint hope that the 
Argh-Duke [Charles] may beat Buonapaste, the 
other in the hope which I seriously entertain that 
the Emperor [of Austria]? may have made his 
separate peace before Mr. Hammond arrives. 

Adieu, my dear Mornington. If we should got 
meet, take with you the assurances of a very 
steady and very affectionate friendship, and the 
truest wishes for all that you can hope in your 
undertaking. 


THE MARQUESS OF BUCKINGHAM fo THE EARL OF 
MoRNINGTON 
Stowe: April 23, 1797 

Very many thanks and very sincere for the 
trouble yoti have taken in writing a very long 
letter upon the subject of Lard Hobart; and 
though I do not feel that a provision promised 
for proposal in the month of May is paramount 
to the immediate arrangement of Lord Hobart’s 
congerns (as a part of Lord Cornwallis’ 

1 George Hammond (1763-1853), Under Secretary of State 
for Foreign Affairs from 1792 until 196. 

2 Emperoy Francis I. (1768-1835). 

3 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 35. 


30 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1797 


appointment) which was originally held out by Mr. 
Pitt and was afterwards negatived by Mr. Dundas ; 
still, if Lord Guilford’ and Mr. Sullivén’® dre 
satisfied : liberavit animam meam ; but in justice 
to Mr. Pitt, I must observe that the idea of calling 
our friend to the House of Peers immediately — 
and before Lord Cornwallis sailed was a measure 
which he instantly acceded to as soon as I pro- 
posed it ; and I trust that it will not be forgotten 
or put, by, nor .that Lord Hobart _will be ca}led — 
upon to consider his immediate petrage as a set- 
off for the uncertainty of the May ¢roposal, and 
for the essential differenee to his feelings in the 
mode of granting the provision, which is cer- 
tainly not given in the same palatable manner 
as that which Mr. Dundas has disapproved. I 
very mugh lament that Mr. Pitt has not been 
able, in the course of two months, to write and 
say one word to me on this matter, for it would 
have saved me much heavy pain, arising out of | 
Mr. Dundas’ letter to Mr. Sullivan, and out of 
the language.of those who are supposed to speak 
his sentiments at the House. 

As to yourself, my dear Lord, yor have done 
(as you always will) most correctly towards every- 
one ; and most wisely for yourself in your conduct 
respecting the Governorship which you have 
accepted. I have nothing to add to the chapter of” 
affectionate wishes for yoy, but much to add 

* George Augustus North, third Earl of Guilford (1757- 
1802), who had married Maria, sister of Lord Hobart. 

2 John Sullivan (1749-1839), Under Secretary at War from 


1801 to 1805, who had married Henrietta, s&ter of Lord 
Hobart. 


1797] | CORNWALLIS RESIGNS 31 


(whenever we meet) of request that you will 
not forget one whose feelings, though dead to 
every political object, are always most active to 
those whom he loves and esteems. 


Lord Cornwallis, who was nearly sixty years 
of dge, was not desirous of going to India, and 
when the situation in Ireland became desperate, 
he gladly resigned his post to accept that of Lord- 
‘Lieutenant of Jreland. It was officially announced 
in May by the India House “that various cir- 
cumstances had induced the Marquess Cornwallis 
to resign his appointments,” and that “ under 
circumstances, and for reasons of a peculfar 
nature,” Mornington had beenappointed Governor- 
General. 


THE EARL OF MORNINGTON fo THE EARL 
BATHURST 2 


Hertford Street: July 5, 1797 


_ It is now become probable that Lshall be sent 
directly to the Government of Bengal, by which 
arrangement the Governnifent of Madras will be left 
open. From some conversation which I had with 
you a good while ago, I conjectured that you 
might possibly be induced to turn your thoughts 
“to a high sjtuation in India, and I know that if 

1 fald. MSS. 37308 f. 38 | 

2 Henry Bathurst, third Earl Bathurst (1762-1834), a 
Commissioner of the Board of Control, 1793-1802. He 
subsequently held high ministerial offices. He did not accept 
the proposal fhade by Mornington in this letter. See injra, 
Mornington’s letter, July 25. 


32 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1797 


you could make up your mind to such an adven- 
ture, the Government of Madras, with the suc- 
cession to the Government-General ufon fpy 
quitting it, would be within your reach. 

Without any authority from you I have taken 
the liberty of suggesting such an arrangement 
both to Dundas and Pitt » if it should not coificide 
with your views to look to this object, I am sure 
you will pardon me for taking a step which has 
proceeded from no other motives than my good 
wishes towards you, my desire°to have your 
assistance in India, and my firm cenviction that 
the public service woulc@ derive material advan- 
tage from the exertion of your talents. 

“~The Government of Madras at present opens 
a great field for honourable ambition ; and with 
that degree of mutual confidence and cordiality 
Which must always subsist between you and me, 
you would find your situation little if at all inferior 
to the Supreme Government. The salary and 
regular emoluments at Madras amount to some- 
thing between £18,000 and £20,000 a year, and 
the expenses to about £10,000 at the outside. 
The climate is perfectly good. Perhaps you will 
‘quiz all this, and perhaps nothing could persuade 
you to quit England for such an adventure; at 
least believe that nothing but my regard and 
esteem for you would have induced, me to give 
you or any other person on your account any 
trouble in this business !* 


1 Agid. MSS. 37314 f. x, 


1797] HOBART’S ‘SOLATIUM 33 


THE MARQUESS OF BUCKINGHAM fo THE EARL OF 
MORNINGTON 


Stowe: . July 7, 1797 

Mr. Sullivan yesterday sent me a letter which 
he received from-yot upon the subject of Lord 
Hobart. I had written a very long letter to Mr. 
Pitt upon the communication: which you make in 
it from Mr. Dundas to him, and I even proposed 
to have come to town in order to have puft it myself 
into.Mr, Pitt’s hands ; but as I found it extremely 
difficult to avoid the appearance of asperity, 
though I laboured to keep every sentiment of 
that sort out of sight in*a letter of which I told 
him it would be necessary for me to send a copy 
to Hobart, I have, though I am most sensible to 
the extreme delicacy of your situation, determined 
to request you to put into. Mr. Pitt’s hands the 
copy of your letter to Mr. Sullivan, and of this 
letter, that he may be apprised of the extreme 
pain with which Lord Hobart’s friends, who have 
negotiated for his honourable, return to this 
country, have seen the conclusion of itp in a manner 
and with circumstances so -little corresponding 
with what passed from Mf. Pitt to me and from 
Mr. Dundas to Mr. Sullivan. The ground assumed 
by all parties was that Lord Hebart’s succession 
to Bengal must give way to the imperious cir- 
€umstances which made it necessary to send’ to 
that Government Lord Cornwallis, whose appoint- 
ment spoke for itself, without imputing blame to 
Lord Hobart. Mr. Pitt to mg (and I believe 
Mr. Dundas go Mr. Sullivan) admitted that for this 


disappointment our friend, who went to India 
I D 


34 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1797 


under an express promise and even an appoint- 
‘ment for Bengal (in which matter he conceived 
he had been most cruelly treated), was entitked 
to consideration ; and that for his services in the 
Ceylon business he was entitled to reward. The 
peerage, a thing in his circumstances which could 
only be considered as a mark of approbation, 
met Mr. Pitt’s ideas, and he promised to discuss 
the period for a company-pension with Mr. Dundas. 
He probably reyembers giving mé a reason why 
it might be wise to delay that arfangement from 
considerations of East India House management ; 

but the peerage was stated to be liable to no such 
difficulty, and appeared to be settled in Mr. Pitt’s 
mind for the day of Lord Cornwallis’ embarka- 
tion. Six months have rolled over, in the cousse 
of which Mr. Dundas had to Mr. Sullivan named 
t®e month of May as the period in which he would 
propose the pension, and in which he would, in 
case of refusal in Leadenhall Street, propose it 
in Parliament on Ceylon. From that moment, 
you, as well,as his other friends, considered the 
Government of Bengal open. But no step has 
been taken upon it till a few days singe, when you 
were named to it, and Lord Hobart’s appoint- 
ment revoked by your commission. 

From these fdcts then it appears that he is 
recalled, not by the temporary commission of 
Lord Cornwallis, but by a ‘permanent commission. 
of a person named to supersede him in Benfal ; 

That this is done without the smallest intima- 
tion respecting the. peerage which was to have 
been given when Lord CornWallis embarked ; 


1797] A HOSTILE SILENCE 35 


That it is done without any defined or explained 
period for the pension, though the engagement 
fay*the nfonth of May has not been kept, and though 
the chapter of Ceylon. must make part of Lord 
Malmesbury’s budget ‘at Lisle ; but the whole of 
peerage and of pension is left to a very vague assur- 
ance (of which I have*no doubt) of Mr. Pitt’s 
intention, but referring the period to the very 
uncertain description of ‘‘ when it may Be possible 
to execute them.” I say nothing-upon the other 
communication from Mr. Dundas in your letter, 
which states that he means not to write to Lord 
Hobart upon these arrangements, save that I 
fear that if Lord Hobart feels all this as strongly 
as perhaps he may, the bitterness of his disappoint- 
meat will not be soothed by a silence which appears 
very hostile to him. 

My request is, that you will show this letter in 
confidence to Mr. Pitt, feeling as I do most strongly 
the difficulty of your situation, but knowing that 
you would not forgive me if I was capable of with- 
holding from you the impressions of my mind upon 
the entire new shape in which Lord Hobart’s 
recall is presented to tht public. I have no 
difficulty in stating all this to Mr. Pitt, because I 
really am convinced that he has yniformly meant 
and done fairly by Lord Hobart, and if he has 
given ground to Mr. Sullivan and me to charge 
him with unkindness to our friend, it is because 
his attention has not lately been called to the 
subject ; and I wish to state it through you because 
your friendship to all parties relieves you from 
much of thé difficulty which would arise out of the 


36 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1797 


delicacy of your situation. I write upon no other 
matter, because I shall have time to write (and I 
hope to see you) long before the day ‘of yéyr 
pilgrimage begins. 

P.S. Mr. Pittis (I believe) aware of the commu- 
nication held with the opponents to Mr. Dundas 
in the East India Housé on the subject of’ this 
pension, with Mr. Dundas’ approbation, and of 
their assufances. 

P.S I trusteto you to let me have a copy of 
this letter if I should hereafter want one, for I 
have no time to copy it, and I shall certainly not 
use it except in sending it to Mr. Sullivan, who has 
claims upon me.” 


THE MARQUESS OF BUCKINGHAM to THE EARL, OF 
MORNINGTON 

Stowe: July 18, 1797 

I have been most anxious for a line from you, 
because you will easily see that it is most essential 
to our friend Lord Hobart’s interests that 
Mr. Pitt should be aware how much weconceive the 
ground changed, and how much he suffers by the 
disappointments conséquent to these changes. 
It is possible that you may decline engaging in 
these concerns, pr in the communication of my 
letter to you of the 7th July to Mr. Pitt; but in 
that case I am persuaded you would (from pef- 
sonal considerations both, to Lord* Hobart and 
me) inform me that you could not undertake it. 
At all events, as, I am personally committed with 
Lord Hobart’s friends upon, this rgatter, I will 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 48. 


1797} A QUESTION OF PATRONAGE 37 


beg you to let me know by the return of post 
whether you have taken any step in consequence 
gf*that*letter, and what the result of that step 
may be. And again I repeat, that if for any 
reasons you feel a disinclination to, state it to 
Mr. Pitt, I have no claim upon you that can distress 
you: all that I want is*to know your determina- 
tion, that I may either communicate through some 
other channel, or that I may take Such other 
steps as may be most expedientefor my feelings 
and for Lord Hobart’s interests. I likewise wish 
for a line to tell me your movements, for I hope 
we shall meet before your pilgrimage begins. 

P.S. I understand you were to have seen 
Mr. Sullivan last, Thursday ; I have not heard 
from him, and I dare not write till I have heard 
from you." 


THE EARL OF MORNINGTON to THE EARL BATHURST 
Hertford Street: July 25, 1797 

I felt very sensibly the kind manner in which 
you received my suggestions respecting the Govern- 
ment of Madras ; I most sincerely wish, on every 
account, that you could have reconciled the under- 
taking to your feelings, but I cannot blame the 
grounds of your refusal. .. . 

I should be very happy to attend to your] 
Tecommendation of Major Blackwell, if I had not 
thought it a point of, indispensable necessity tol 
avoid all appointments and engagements until’ 
my atrival in India. I have gbserved this rule! 
so rigorously that J do not mean to take any 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 49. 


38 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1707 


person to India with me (my servants excepted) 
but my brother Henry,’ now at Lille with Lord 
Malmesbury. If-I should find Major BlackWgll 
in India, your recommendation will render me 
anxious to show him every mark of attention and 
civility ; until my arrival at Calcutta it would be 
quite inconsistent with ‘my plan to say more. 
Whenever you come to London, you will hear 
of me in Park Lane, and a letter from you will 
bring sme to town to meet you. I mean to,sail 
the first week in September.* 


THE DUKE OF PORTLAND fo THE EARL OF 
MORNINGTON 


Whitehall : October 5, 1797 


I have the honour to acquaint your Lordship 
that I have received the King’s commands to 
order a warrant to be prepared for his Royal 
signature for creating you a Baron of Great 
Britain. I therefore desire your Lordship will 
send me, assoon as possible, the title you may fix 
upon, that I may be enabled to fulfil the gracious 
intentions of His Majesty.® 

I beg leave to congratulate your Lordship upon 
this distinguished mark of His Majesty’s favour! 

1 The Hon. Henry Wellesley went to India as Mornington(s 
private secretary. 

2 Add. MSS. 37314 f. 2. ‘a 

8 Mornington selected the title of Baron Wellesley, of 


Wellesley, Somerset. 
# Add. MSS. 37303 f. 51. 


1797] A CORDIAL FAREWELL 39 


WILLIAM WILBERFORCE fo THE EARL OF 
MORNINGTON 
Bath : October 9, 1797 
As I fear you will have set sail before my return 
to London, which will hardly be till'a very few 
days before the meeting of Parliament, I must 
now take up my pen just to bid you a cordial 
farewell. May you enjoy the guidance and pro- 
tection of Heaven in the very important station 
which you wil fill; and may you returrf with a 
good conscience, a large stock of honour, and an 
uninjured stock of health. If I can be of any 
service or comfort to you in this country, it will 
give me pleasure. Once more, all good attend you.’ 


THE MARQUESS OF BUCKINGHAM fo THE EARL OF 
MORNINGTON 

October 11, 1797 

I am sorry to find from my brother that I have 
no chance of being able to assure you personally 
before you sail for India of the affectionate interest 
I-take in your credit and happiness. I was in 
hopes that, by some chance we might have met, 
but as it is now impossible, receive, I beg you, 
my warmest wishes for your héalth and success. 
I could have wished very particularly for your 
sake that you could have carried with you, for 
the relief of the uneasy moments of your long 
voyage, more cheerful reflections on the present 
state of European politics; but it is impossible 
to speculate, and hardly possfble to hope where 


1 Add. MSS. 37805 f. 55. 


40 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1797 


every measure that has been judged expedient 
by ministers, whether of war or of negotiation, 
has failed. It is, however, matter of real tonscla- 
tion in sach a moment that the government of 
the mos: valuable part of éur dominions will be 
in hands so safe, and that we shall be relieved 
from the fear of seeing India by mismanagement 
and intrigue thrown into the throes of revolt of 
the most dangerous nature. If the war should 
_ continue, much may be done against Spain fyom 
that quarter ; on this subject you have doubtless 
thought much; but I am much tempted to believe 
that the difficulties which I have heard stated 
on that head have been very ignorantly and idly 
exaggerated, and that the facilities of a successful 
attempt to shake the Spaniard on the western 
shore of his American empire are infinitely greater 
thn on the eastern. You will get much valuable 
information on. this head from the old voyages 
of the buccaneers, and I am confident that the 
spirit of private adventure in privateers of force 
might be very usefully directed from India to the 
most important objects on the coast of Peru. 

I-am not going to solicit any jobs but I have 
been much pressed to request you to permit 
some one of your suite to take charge of the 
enclosed letter, and to recommend the lad to 
your notice. He is son to dear Warburton, and 
has been remarkably well educated in the know- 
ledge of the Persian and Hindoo languages, and 
is well spoken of. 

P.S. Many congratulations on youg peerage. * 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 57. 


1797] DOMESTIC LIFE 4i 


Mornington sailed for India on November 7, - 
1797, accompanied by his brother Henry, whom 
ké had appointed his private secretary. His. 
private life had been irregular, and so ie ,of his 
friends were much troubled about it., “I,have 
recaived from Mornington a most affectionate 
letter upon his appointment [as a Lord of the 
Treasury], Lord Buckingham wrote tp Grenville 
in August 1786, ‘‘ which has enabled me to answer. 
_ him with muck advice as to his future exertions, 
and with some advice as. to the necessity. of 
reconciling his domestic lofe to that public character 
which we both wish for him.”* He was then 
living .with Mademoiselle Hyacinthe Gabrielle 
Roland, a young ‘lady of whom jit has been 
written that she had not been particularly well. 
brought up, and that her associations were unlike 
those of her lover, but that she was possessed 
of wit and beauty.*. She bore him several 
children—-Richard,* Henry,* Gerald, Anne,° and 


1 Fortescue MSS. i. 265. 

2 Torrens: Wellesley, ror. 

3 Richard Wellesley, politician, entered Parliament in 1810. 
He held office under different Governments. ; 

4 Henry Wellesley (1791-1866), was °educated at Christ 
Church, Oxford, and in 1816 was entered at Lincoln’s Inn, but 
Subsequently abandoned his legal studies and togk holy orders. 
In 1842 he was vice-president of New Inn Hall, Oxford, and 
from 1847 Prifcipal. He was an accomplished scholar and 
a diligent archeologist. 

5 Anne Wellesley married, in 1806, Sir William Abdy (1779- 
1868), seventh and last baronet of Felix Hall, Essex. She 
was divorced ig 1816. The circumstances leading up to the 
divorce are narrated in® full in the Wellesley Papers in the 
British Museum. 


42 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [17097 


“Mary Hyacinthe'—and to those children he was 
devoted. 


THE EARL OF MORNINGTON fo LORD GRENVILLE 
Nafles: January 18, 1791 

Although I have troubled you with a gost 
unreasonably long letter So lately, I cannot delay 
my answer to your letter of the 23rd December, 
which gave me such sincere heartfelt satisfaction 
as I searcely ever received from any event inemy 
life. After so long and so intimate a friendship 
I could not be surprised at any instance of the 
goodness of your heart dr of the warmth of your 
tegard for me, but it was not possible to take any 
method of proving either which could affect me 
so deeply as your visit to my little children, For 
many obvious reasons I have never mentioned 
them to you, although I thought it my duty to 
them to name you as one of their guardians in 
my will. I have now abundant reason to know 
that you would not think that office troublesome, — 
if it shouldshappen to devolve on you. I never 
can forget either the manner or the time you have 
chosen to set my mind at ease on a stibject suffici- 
ently anxious from its own nature, and (I am sorry 
to add) rendered,much more so by the conduct of 
my brother Pole, who has never even seen three of 
my children. After the interest yoy have taken 
in their situation I ought not-to conceal frog, you 
a circumstance which makes it so much more 
1 Mary Hyacinthe®Wellesley (d. 1849) married, in 18z2; 


Edward John Littleton, of Teddersley Park *Stafford (179I- 
1864), who in 1835 was created Baron Hathertort. 


1797] MARRIAGE 43 


delicate, but I am sure you will not allow this 
communication to go any further. I leave you to 
gidge With what pain I left them in the state of 
health which forced me to leave England, when 
my brother never mentioned them to me at my 
departure ; and although I have had ‘the good 
fortune, in a great medsure, to recover my health, 
which has diminished in some degree the anxiety 
I felt on their account, it is too painful to me to 
know that he has never been near them, during 
my absence. * However you may lament a con- 
duct so unfeeling, and (let me add) so ungrateful, 
it must be a pleasure to so kind a heart as yours 
to be acquainted with the full extent of the kind- 
ness you have done; and you will easily perceive' 
that the disagreeable circumstance of the neglect 
of the person who should naturally be the pro- 
tector of these children gives additional v&lue 
to any attention from my friends. Whatever 
may have been the folly which produced these 
little children, I am sure you have too much real 
feeling not to agree with me that they are a charge 
as dear and as sacred as if they had been born under 
_ the most selemn engagement.” 


On November 29, 1794, Mernington married 
Mademoiselle Roland, and the ceremony, we are 
told, was graced by a few of his political friends. 
He thought it best under the circumstances not 
to take her with him to India, but he commended 
her and the children to the caré of his friends. 


1 Fortescue MSS. ii. 18. 


44 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1797 


THE EARL OF MORNINGTON to LorpD AUCKLAND! 


Funchal, Island of Madewa 
November 25, 1799 


I am anxious to take the earliest opportunity 
of acknowledging the several kind notes which 
I had the pleasure of receiving from you dtfring 
the hurry, or rather the agony, of my last moments 
in England. Pray believe that I am deeply 
sensible of your friendly attentions to me and to 
Lady Mornington, and that I shall “always remem- 
ber your amiable family with those sentiments of 
admiration and cordial jnterest which must be 
raised in the mind of every person who has the 
Happiness of being admitted into your society: 
Your kindness to Lady Mornington will occasipn 
no trouble to you with your good nature and 
obtiging disposition, and it’ will be invaluable to 
her and to me under her present affliction.’ 


Mornington missed her sorely, and before he had 
been in India a year wanted her to come out to 
him,’ but, if the end, wrote to Grenville: “I 
have determined not to send for Lady Morning- 
ton; the voyage,\the climate, might injure her 
health, and it & my duty not to separate her 
from her children.’ es 


1 William Eden, first Baron Auckland (1744-1814), states- 
man and diplomatist, joint Postmaster-General, 1798-1804, 
President of the Board of Trade, 1806-1807. 

2 Correspondence of Lord Auckland, iii. 384. 

3 See infra p. 81, Mornington to Grenville, November 18, 
1798. 

\ ‘i Fortescue MSS..v. 268. Morningfon to Grenyille, August 

» £799. 


CHAPTER II 
1798-1805 


‘bhe state of India : Mornington’s confidence : News 
from home : European politics : The state of England : 
Unrest in Ireland : Lord Hobart on his recall : The 
Irish disturbances : Lord Hawkesbury on the Union : 
The battle of the Nile : Mornington on his work : 
Ireland and the Union : Bathurst oneaffairs: Letéers 
from Wilberforce and Lord Auckland: England 
flourishing : The Union : Mornington and the Mysore 
Campaign : Created Marquess Wellesley : His 
mortification : Congrat@lation and sympathy 
Activity in India ° Friction with the Company : 
Pitt’s resignation : Addington’s Ministry : Prosperity 
at home : Wellesley’s policy in India : His success : 
He is urged to continue there : The treaty of Amiens: 
The Government’s appreciation of his work : Assaye: 
Wellesley’s high-handedness : War with Helkar : 
A letter from his son : He proposes to retire : The 
ignominious tyranny of Leadenhall Street : A vote 
of censure : Wellesley resigns. 


ORNINGTON arrived at the Cape of 
Good Hope in February, 1798, and 


there encountered Lord Hobart, on 
his way home, who was able to give him the 
latest news of India. He also faund there Major 
William Kirkpatrick, who had*been resident at 
Haiderabad until the previous year, when he had 
been invalided. Mornington was greatly impressed 
with”him, and took him to India as his military 
secretary, in which position he proved himself 
invaluable until 18q1, when, his health giving way, 


he had to return to England. Such information 
45 


46 THE WELLESLEY’ PAPERS  [1708- 


as was obtainable at Cape Town made it 
abundantly clear to the new Governor-General 
that he had taken the reins at a very critica? 
moment. The conquest and pacification of various 
states was the task that lay before him. He had, 
in fact, to carry further the work of his great pre- 
decessor, Warren Hastings. Possessed of illimit- 
able confxlence in himself, he spared neither 
labour, nor thoyght, and faced every difficulty 
with a calm determination to overcome it. A 
crushing defeat had in 1792 ‘been inflicted upon 
Tipu, the Sultan of Mygore, by Cornwallis. He 
was shorn of half his dominions, and mulcted of 
between three and four millions of treasure. Under 
the non-intervention policy of Shore, Tipu had 
quéckly increased his army, which he placed under 
French officers: He had been in active negotia, 
tion for the support of the French. Indeed, so 
far had he progressed in these negotiations that 
on the day- that Mornington reached Madras, 
April 26, 1798, a body of French troops landed 
at Mangalore. Again, in spite of quarfels amongst 
themselves, the Maratha States were at one in 
their desire to fid themselves of the English. 
The Nizam of Haiderdbad, too, who was bound 
by treaty to have no relation with France, had 
in 1798 not less than 14,000 troops trained by 
French officers. ghere was, further, good reason 
to believe that at the first favourable moment 
that presented itself an attack on Delhi would 


1805] AN UNPOPULAR BUDGET 47 


be made by Zaman Shah, the Afghan leader. It 
wag to these vital matters that Mornington at 
dhce addressed himself, and he began to prepare 
the ground for negotiations and, if need be, for 
Offensive operations. 

Tht records of his ruleswill be found in the well- 
known Despaiches, but a selection from his 
unofficial correspondence with his relatives and 
Yiends may here be inserted. 


THE Eart BATHURST to THE EARL OF 
MORNINGTON 
Piccadilly: January 3, 1708 

I am much obliged to you for your letter from 
Fufichal, and am very glad that you have per- 
formed what is generally reckoned the mast 
uncertain, and, therefore, the most unpleasant 
part of your voyage so successfully. 

I understood from Lady Mornington that she 
kept the newspapers in order to send them to you. 
You will, therefore, there see the accdunt of the 
measure which Pitt has brought forward, and 
which will be read the third time to-day in the 
House of Commons.* The clamoyy raised against 
it in London (the country throughout has been 


1 Pitt’s budget, which was introduced on November 24 
1797, Was very unpopular. He had a deficit of {19,000,000, 
the result of thé expenses of the war, which he proposed to 
cover ley borrowing £12,000,000, and raising £7,000,000 by 
trebling the assessed taxes. When the King and Queen went 
in state to St. Paul’s on December 19 to.give thanks for the 
naval victories won by Howe, St. Vincent, and Duncan, Pitt, 
on the way ta the city, vas hooted by the mob, and on the 
‘return journey was escorted by a troop of horse. 


48 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1798 


more quiet) was more violent and more general 
‘than any I ever knew. It was at the height the 
week when the King was to go to St. Paut’s, 
with which also everybody was angry, as ill-timed 
and absurd, so that I thought everything unplea- 
sant was to be expected on that day. But the 
extraordinary care which was taken to prevent 
disturbances by lining the streets from Bucking- 
ham House to St. Paul’s: with troops, the good 
disposition of the people at the bottom, however 
angry they might be with the tax, the almost 
miraculous fineness of the day, which was like 
one in summer, and apfeared the finer from the 
constant fogs or rain which preceded it, together 
with a famous speech of Pitt’s the day before, in 
which, with declaring his intention of modifying 
the tax, he also declared his determination at all 
hazard of persisting in it, had such an effect that 
the King was wonderfully well received, and Pitt 
had many more applauses than hisses. His 
entry at St. Paul’s was so favourable that an 
Opposition ‘man said it was too bad, and went 
away in a passion: Since that day things have 
gone on much better. J am afraid the modifica- 
tions will redyce the produce of the tax very 
materially, and if certainly will be felt too severely 

not to occasion much discontent. 
' The fortunate policy of the Duke of Dorset? 
will enable Pitt to make an arrangement by which 
Lord Auckland will be Postmaster in the room 

1 John Frederick eSackville, third Duke of Dorset (1745- 
1799), Ambassador-Extraordinary to France, 1783-1789, and 


Lord Steward of the Household ffom 1789 vutil February 
1798, when he retired. 


1805] A MEDLEY OF NEWS 49 


of Lord Chesterfield, who is to be Master of the 
Horse. Lord Westmorland succeeds the Duke of 
Dorset. 

You will know before you receive this letter 
that Lord Clive’ goes to Madras, and Frederick 
North * to Ceylon. The last appointment has 
something which looks ‘like a job, and not a good 
one for him, as the climate is not supposed to be 
good. Lord Guilford’ continues ill, alfhough all 
immediate danger is at an end, so our old friend 
Frank North® ‘has a chance of becoming an here- 
ditary Counsellor of State. 

There is a very unpleasant account received 
from Barbadoes of a dispute in which Lord 
Camelford‘ is represented. as having killed a 
saflor, and that the island is very much exasper- 
ated against him, demanding his trial. There 
are no accounts received by the family wliich 
confirm it, nor have the West India merchants 
received any letters which mention it. I am in 
hopes that the affair will appear to be very much 
exaggerated. It affects poor Lady Grenville very 
much. I dined New Year’s day with Ph. Metcalfe, 
who was greater than usual: Viperino il Grenadino 
the Veritable, a’ glass of the. twelve Apostles, a 
Boar’s Head el magnifico, Dutch fferrings, a dainty 

1 Edward Clive, second Baron Clive (1754-1839), eldest son 
of Robert, first Baron Clive, was Governor of Madras, 1798- 
1803. He wascreated Earl of Powis, 1804. 

2 Frederick North (1766-1827), younger son of Frederick, 
second Earl of Guilford, was Governor of Ceylon, 1798-1805. 
He succeeded his brother as (fifth) Earl of Guilford, 1817. 

8 Francis Nogth, fourth Earl of Gifford (1761-1817). 

4 Thomas Pitt, secon@ Baron Camelford (1775-1804), naval 
officer. 

I E 


50 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1708- 


given by Hope, and some Constantia Capitalis- 
simo. 

Lady Mornington was so good as to Tet you: 
eldest boy dine with us yesterday, and we went 
to the new harlequin farce. I never saw a better 
behaved boy, so steady, and so quick at under- 
standing what was going’on. I hope to see him 
again before he goes to school. He brought me 
Lady Mérnington’s messages that she had an 
opportunity of sending letters to India to-morfow, 
which [I have] therefore availed ‘myself of [this] 
morning by writing a very stupid letter to you. 
I shall be impatient te hear of your arrival in, 
Bengal, and that the climate there does not 
disagree with you 


Lorp AUCKLAND fo THE EARL OF MORNINGTON 
Palace Yard: April 22, 1798 

It is a formidable enterprise. I am, however, 
determined to write a long letter to you, and I 
have sent a circular to the Speaker, Mr. Pitt, 
Mr. Wilberforce, and Mr. Canning, to exhort them 
to do the same. If my summons should produce 
anything, I will send it under this cover. 

I call it a formidable enterprise, for the objects 
which present “themselves are so multitudinous, 
so large, and at the same time so unsettled, that 
IT am at a loss in what order to take them. 

First, as to the great politics of fhe European 
continent. The Jacobin Directoire is at thi hour 
apparently more powerful and more consolidated 
than when you left us in Qctobes, Switzerland 

1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 80. 


1805] ° FRENCH SUCCESSES 51 


and the papal territories have been overrun and 
revolutionised. Naples and Florence are menaced ; 
“lolland is subjugated more than ever; great 
demands of concessions both to the right and left 
of the Rhine are making at Rastadt?; immense 
preparations are making to invade both Ireland 
and Great Britain. Both the Parisians and the 
French provinces, and the new conquesjs, submit 
to the will and pleasure of their war kings without 
a murmur, ang there are no lohger complaints 
of the want of money or of the prevalence of fac- 
tions, or of any difficulty, either real or imaginary. 
On the other hand, it is most notorious that, both 
in France and in the conquered countries, there 
exists a general detestation of the pretended 
Républican Government, and an extreme impati- 
ence under the hardships and miseries which tkat 
Government has produced; and we know that 
the Courts of Vienna and Germany are at last 
awakened to the dangers which they have brought 
upon themselves, and upon the whole system of 
civilisation. We are not without hopes that every 
post may bring an account of the rupture of the 
Congress and Conferences at Rastadt, and of 
some joint declaration on the part of Austria, 
Prussia, and Russia, to abide all the consequences, 
and to oppose themselves to any French preten- 
sions tending to affect either the integrity of the 
Empire or the independence of Italy. Secret 
overtures are even made to us to know whether 


1 A congress of the European Powere assembled at Ras- 
tadt, Baden, in December, 1797, to treat of a general peace, 
and negotiatiens to this end were carried on during the follow- 
ing year. 


52 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1708- 


eventually we would give pecuniary aid in support 
of such an explosion. My belief respecting it is, 
that if it were fairly and completely to take place 
the whole colossus of the French Power would 
speedily and suddenly fall to pieces. In the mean- 
time, however, the experience which we ,have 
purchased (at no small price) decides us to rely 
on our own strength and resources, and though we 
would again draw our -purse-strings to pay for 
any effective cé-operation unequivpcally rendered, 
we are proceeding on the more certain ground of 
arming the country, blockading the French ports, 
and preparing to resist Any invasion with success, 
at the same time that our naval force may be 
expected to baffle any attempts to approach our 
coasts. Admiral Onslow? blockades Holland 4nd 
the Northern Seas. Lord Bridport ? is at the north 
of the Channel or off Brest with fourteen or sixteen 
ships. We have a small squadron actually in the 
mouth of the Seine. Lord St. Vincent covers 
the coast of Spain ; Sir Roger Curtis *® has a squad- 
ron of ten ships of the line off Cork. 

T next turn to the interior of the two kingdoms. 
With respect to this good old island, I can say with 
extreme pleasuge and confidence that I never have 
seen it so rightby disposed in any period of this 
perilous hour. The general spirit and principles 


1 Sir Richard Onslow, first baronet (17411817), Admiral, 
created baronet for his services at Camperdown, 1797. 

2 Alexander Hood, Baron Bridport* (1727-1814), Admiral, 
Commander of the Channel Fleet, 1797-1800. He was created 
Viscount Bridport, «801. 

8 Sir Roger Curtis (1746-1816), spctitred Joined the'fleet at 
Cadiz under Lord St. Vincent, 1795 ; Commander-in-Chief at 
the Cape of Good Hope, 1799... 


1803} PROSPERITY AT HOME 53 


of the people are excellent. There certainly 
exist in London, Manchester, and other places, 
tlubs ahd secret societies of men collected and 
affiliated as ‘‘ United English ” on grounds of the 
wildest and bloodiest democracy. But they are 
few jn number, and composed of the refuse of 
mankind. In other respects the country is at 
least as prosperous as when you left, it. The 
commercial] returns are higher than ever. The 
produce of the,old taxes for the year ending the 
5th April, 1798, is near £400,000 higher than for the 
year ending the 5th April, 1797. The whole 
produce of the..voluntafy contributions (which 
at present amount to about £1,350,000,. and tg 
which, by-the-bye, the East India Settlements 
ought to subscribe) is not material asa measure of 
supply, but most essentially important ag a testi- 
mony of right feelings and of national spirit. 
Mr. Pitt is this week to bring forward his new loan 
of £17,000,000 (including for Ireland), and I have 
strong reasons to believe that we shall have it at 
48 in 3 per cents., being better terms than in the 
preceding year. Money abounds, though the bank 
continues, wisely, to be precluded from paying 
in cash; and bullion still flows in from the Con- 
tinent under a rate of exchange even rather more 
favourable than when you left us. Great military 
preparations, are making in every part of the 
country, and with alacrity and universal cheerful- 
ness. I privately incline to believe that these 
preparations are superfluous, and that the French 
will never nfake the attempt, except in small 
numbers, to agitate us and to inflame our enemies. 


54 THE WELLESLEYZPAPERS  [1798- 


At all events, it is right to be most fully prepared. 
I will enclose to you the Travel Gazettes for the last 
month. From the return of that despotism thee 
newspapers are jejune and uninteresting ; how- 
ever, you will be able to collect from the perusal 
many notions beyond what I can convey. 

In our Parliament we are also doing well. I 
will send to you eight or ten of the last numbers 
of the Parliamentary Debates as published by 
Woodfall, because I do not know, with certainty 
whether you have ordered them. Mr. Fox con- 
tinues to be a seceder, and the Opposition peers 
have followed his exampte. Mr. Spencer is grown 
tired of the spade, and is come forward with a 
declaration that, reserving his claims to punish 
Ministers hereafter, he will now give to them 4&n 
unequivocal support. It is true that he accom- 
panied that declaration by immediately dividing 
the House against Government, and the division 
was in the proportion of five to 190. We have 
taken and imprisoned various batches of traitors, 
and they will be brought to trial. O’Connor and 
Co. are to be tried on the 31st, at Maidstone, and 
it is confidently supposed. that some of them will 
be convicted.* .I ought not to close the account 
of this country ewithout adding that the King 
is in perfect health and in cheerful, steady spirits. 

1 Arthur O’Connor, a priest named O’Coighly, and three 
others were arrested at Margate while on their way to France. 
O’Coighly was convicted and hanged, but O’Connor ahd the 
others were acquitted. Fox, Sheridan, and others bore 
witness to O’Connows character and principles. O’Connor 


was subsequently arrested on anqther clifarge, and gave 
evidence as to the conspiracy. See infra p. 65. ® 


1805] THE GAY METROPOLIS 55 


Mr. Pitt is also particularly well. I see him con- 
stantly, either in Downing Street or at Holwood. 
eYdu kriow that (excepting perhaps during the 
naval mutiny) he never has inclined to despondency 
or even to serious discouragement. At present 
he entertains strong hopes that all will somehow 
end Well., Our pecuniary resources are grievously 
stretched. There is no other part of our position 
that materially alarms me, for if we can” maintain 
the, contest France must give way; and she «cannot 
now give way by halves ; there remains no com- 
promise for her. I should add one word as to 
this great Metropolis: i is good-humoured and 
gay ; the theatres are all more brilliant and more 
crowded than ever, and there are great balls and 
suppers for 300 or 400 almost every night in the 
week. 

So much for England! I wish that’ I could 
speak in a similar way with respect to Ireland.’ 
The situation there has been infinitely more 
critical than when you left it. And at one period 
we were (privately) apprehensive that every post 
might bring to us accounts of some general 
insurrection and massacre. In the midst of 


4 Treland, in the spring of 1797, was in a turbulent state, 
and Ulster was in almost open revolt. It is a curious contrast 
with Ulster’s present protest against H8me Rule that, as Mr. 
T. D’Arcy McGee says in his History of Ireland, ‘‘ the Presby- 
terian body were in the beginning all but unanimous for a 
republican reVolution ’”’ as an alternative to the threatened 
Union with England. The Government took strong measures, 
and crushed the conspiracy in Ulster. Later in the year the 
news that Napoleon was preparing “the army of England ”’ 
fomented the spirit of rebellion. In M&rch, 1798, a plan was 
made to seize Dublin Castle, whereupon the city was placed 
under martial law. 


56 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1708- 


that crisis Sir Ralph Abercromby! published a 
wretched military order calculated (unintention- 
ally) to disgust the army and to give spirit to thee 
insurgents. The animadversions on his conduct 
obliged him to resign, but, the storm thickening 
before his resignation could be accepted, bitter 
proclamations were issued’ and he is now actively 
employed in disarming the Irish. I will enclose 
his last ‘proclamation. It is ill-written, with 
truisme, platitudes, and a disregard of the gram- 
matical rules of reference proximo aniecedentt, but 
the sense and meaning are good, and in the mean- 
time his new system isematerially aided by the 
arrival of our fleet off Cork, which dispirits the in- 
surgents, who have positive assurances from France 
that a French army shall land before the end vf 
the present month. I knowthat Lady Mornington 
will have sent to you Lord Clare’s speech. It 
was a notable performance, and is well worth your 
perusal, even at so great a distance both of time 
and space. The Orange Boys, as they are called 
in Ireland, are growing numerous (above 32,000), 
and are most inveterate against the United Irish. 
They are a dangerous species of ally ; however, to 
a certain degree it is necessary to use them. I 


1 Sir Ralph Abercgomby (1734-1801), General, appointed 
Commander-in-Chief of the Forces in Ireland, December, 1797. 
On February 26, 1798, he issued a general order that the 
militia, owing to their want of discipline, were far more 
dangerous to their friends than to their enemies. 

2 John Fitzgibbon, Earl of Clare (1749-1802), appoirrted in 
1789 Lord Chancellor of Ireland. The speech to which 
reference is made was that delivered by him (and subsequently 
printed) on February 19, 1798, in the House of Lords in reply 
to Lord Moira’s attack on the Government foreits coercive 
policy in Ireland. 


1805] IRISH DISTURBANCES 57 


enclose to you their last handbill, which will show 
their spirit and principles. I received to-day the 
account of the Irish Assizes, in the course of which 
near I0o persons have been sentenced to death, 
and must be executed for assassinations, treason- 
able oaths, etc., etc., etc. ; among the rest twelve 
men’ for the murder cf Colonel St. George. I 
wish that I could have given to you a less gloomy 
account of Ireland. 

In speaking of France I ought todave added that 
her position with respect to the American States 
approaches very nearly toa state of war, and the 
American vessels now go avowedly under British 
convoy. Hamburg has been bullied into a loan 
of 4,000,000 livres. The ships of Denmark and 
SWeden are taken by the French privateers ; ; In 
short, it is become a system of general rapine and 
piracy, resisted only by the firmness and energy 
and resources of this kingdom. 

I think that our plea for the additional assessed 
taxes was in considerable preparation before you 
left TS~-Féayas materially injured by the exceptions 
and modifications which Mr. Pitt thought it 
prudent to admit, and I greatly doubt whether 
it will produce more than four or five millions 
a year (we assessed it to produce seven millions). 
You had also heard some discussions of the Land 
Tax project. I have no doubt that we shall 
carry it into effect, and that it will gradually 
become important as a measure of finance. I 
enclose the last amended copy of the resolutions. 

With respect tg the small” consideration of 
offices and general politics, I do not recollect that 


58 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1708- 


‘anything has occurred since your departure, 
except the arrangement which sent me to the 
Post Office in consequence of putting Lord We&t- 
morland to the Privy Seal, and Lord Chesterfield 
to the Mastership of the Horse. The Duke of 
Dorset continues entirely without understudies, 
and must, I suppose, at ‘ast be. removed. “The 
Cabinet, so far as I can learn, acts together “at 
present”’ With sufficient cheerfulness and cordiality. 
Mr. Wickham,! as Under-Secretary of State, was 
a great addition to the Duke of Portland’s office. 
That office has ample employment in watching 
the police of the countrys the conspiring societies, 
and the Jacobin clubs. 

I had the pleasure of seeing Lady Mornington in 
‘good health yesterday ; “she was at the balcofty 
with all the children when we drove through Park 
Larft this morning’ (Friday), and to-day your 
son Richard has dined with us, and passed the 
evening with my two Etonians. 

Lady Auckland and my daughter desire to be 
most kindly mentioned to you. 

I have now written one complete hour and a 
half by candlelight. Neither my eyes nor my 
fingers are equal to the writing more, though 
subjects in abtdance present themselves. I 
have some fear that my scrawl, which has been 
rapid, will be nearly illegible, but I will not abuse 
it ; you must decipher it if so disposed. 

I understood from Lady Mornington that The 

1 William Wickham (1761-1840), Under Secretary for the 


Home Department, 1798-1802; Chief Secretary for Ireland, 
1802-1804. 


WILLIAM EDEN, IST BARON AUCKLAND 
From an engraving 


1805] | EUROPE AT ITS CRISIS 59 


Anti-Jacobin is regularly forwarded to you. It 
is very good, and vives acquirit eundo. The sale 
is now not less than 2,300 a week. 

P:S. My circular letter has not been unpro- 
ductive. I am enabled to give some weight and 
value to my packet by the enclosed letters 
from*Mr. Pitt, the Speaker, Lord Carrington, and. 
Mr. Gerald Wellesley. I understood, too, from 
your son Richard, that .in addition fo ‘Lady 
Mornington’s journal you will . have « missives 
from all.the cfiildren, and three pagés on long 
paper from him. Such arrivals at such a dis- 
tance must be a great luxary. 

I hope to find: means to write again in about a 
month. Europe seems to be at its crisis. I havé 
given to you vaguely and generally my reasons 
for thinking that the dénouement of this long and 
tragical drama will not be unfavourablé. Still, 
we must expect in any event to be subject to 
agitations, and to the big rolling of the waves after 
the most severe hurricane that the moral world 
has evs dergone. 

So once more with all possible good wishes I 
heartily bid you farewell.? 


LorD AUCKLAND to THE EARL OF MORNINGTON’ 
Eden Farm: July 19, 1798 

I write a few lines on the small and thin paper 
to which I am restricted, and with doubts at the 
same time whether Lady Mornington will have 
it in her power to forward my letter by one of the 
overland conveyances. At present I shall touch 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 132. 


60 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1708- 


superficially on all the great points which most 
interest you. I understand that Lady Mornington 
and your children are all in perfect health. FP 
have recently seen Lady Mornington, Dowager, 
and Lady Anne, and your brother Gerald, and Mr. 
Pole is in Ireland serving with great energy, and 
distinguished credit. The King is in the most 
perfect health. Mr. Pitt has been much indisposed, 

and I was discouraged from writing to you in the 
lattereend of May, for really at that periad I 
thought him in a most precarious ‘state of health. 

‘I saw more of him, I believe, than anybody. I 
also saw his physician, Str William Farquhar, who 
is accustomed to talk in confidence with me ; and 
in short I saw and heard more than enough to 
give me very serious alarm for him. His powers 
of digestion were gone ; he had a sort of habitual 
sickfiess "and retching, and a loss of appetite. 

Fortunately he felt fully the critical nature of his 
own situation. Farquhar found him very tractable. 
He retired from Parliamentary business, fixed him- 
self to frequent light and regular powetifnent, 
avoided all bustle, and by degrees is so much 
recovered, Sir William now looks with confidence 
to his being soon in better health than he ever 
had. I have dwelt on this point as being most 
essential both to your personal affections and to 
your public anxieties. 

Next as to this good old island. Her loyalty, 
steadiness, and general energy are even greater 
and more conspicuous than at the period of your 
departure. The session was the most remarkable 
for great, difficult, and important measures that I 


1805] NO PROSPECT OF PEACE 61 


ever remember. The commerce and revenue are 
more flourishing. The latter, for the quarter- 
«redit the fifth of this month, was £5,380,000 and 
the services were £5,390,000. 

I wish I could speak in the same way of Ireland. 
I can only say that ae the scenes of desolation 
there have been terrible, the rebellion may be 
considered as subdued. It is, however, only put 
down by force. Ruffianism, ferocity, and Jacob- 
inism in all its worst forms are still prevalent, 
though kept déwn; and what we are to do, or 
what we can do, that will do good, I really can- 
not say, but the subject is occupying much serious 
attention. 

The French Republic is as wicked as ever’, 
though not quite so bloody. There is no apparent 
prospect of pacification; on the contrary, the 
Directoire is revolutionising everywhere, axfd if 
Buonaparte’s expedition [to Egypt] has not been 
marred by Nelson (which we hope every day to 
hear) he is before this time on his road from 
Alexandria to Suez, and hopes at last to return 
your compliments at Calcutta. -You will see in 
No. 34 of The Anti-Jacobin a most excellent letter 
from him in ridicule of his wild expedition. It 
was written by Lord Frederick*Eden (as were 
some others of the best papers), and we are all 
rendering full justice to Lord Frederick’s talents. ? 


LorD AUCKLAND to THE EARL OF MORNINGTON 
Eden Farm: August 8, 1798 
According to the last accounts from Germany, 

1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 154. 


62 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [r798- 


the conferences at Rastadt were entirely broken 
off, the French agents were gone back to Paris, 
and, the Comte de Courzel to Vienna ; and it was 
supposed that the latter would be sent immediately 
to his old station at Petersburg, leaving Metternich 
in the repossession of the Austrian Government. 
The ostensible cause of the Rastadt separation was 
the refusal of the Court of Vienna to give any 
satisfaction for the pretended insult to Bernadotte} 
but it is understood to be the policy of both parties, 
on adverse reasonings, to suspend the pacification 
without renewing the war. In the meantime the 
Austrian armies are forming into great strength, 
and a negotiation is going forward between the 
‘Emperor and the King of Prussia towards estab- 
lishing a concert against France, but the wretched 
and selfish politics of Berlin still prevail to the 
detfiment of everything. Still, however, the French 
are kept in an [active] state upon all the frontiers 
of Germany and also in Switzerland. In Pied- 
mont they are paramount, and they are revolu- 
tionising Turin. The Emperor of Rugsia sequesters 
French property and shipping, and has furnished 
us' with a squadron which is of some utility towards 
our system of European blockade ; but in other 
respects he does nothing towards the common 
cause, and the Courts of Denmark and Stockholm 
continue in a state of nullity. The North American 
States are as nearly as may be in a state of hostility 
with the French Republic, and have passed some 
very dignified and vigorous resolutions, and their 


4 Jean Baptiste Jules Bernadotte (1764-1844), afterwards, 
Charles XIV Pot Sweden. i a 


1805] NAVAL SUPREMACY 63 


communications with us are very friendly. Spain 
remains blockaded, and Portugal in her helpless 
avay is steady. 

Our naval history is more brilliant than ever. 
The blockade of the whole of the opposite coasts 
from Hamburg to Gibraltar is kept ‘up; when 
any small vessel of the enemy puts out to sea 
it is soon taken. Our mercantile shipping suffers 
no losses. All our fleets arrive in full safety, 
and, both the commercial and internal prosperity 
are greater than ever, and the revenue is this year 
very high. 

I do not know what to say with regard to France, 
The Directoire has not given the smallest intima- 
tion of a desire to talk about peace with us. The 
temper of the war is less furious than it was, and 
they have behaved with humanity to the officers 
and men made prisoners in the affair of Ostend 
All pretences to invade us are discontinued, and 
in the meantime this country is multiplying volun- 
teer corps, fencibles, gun boats, etc., etc. At 
this moment we are waiting with extreme impati- 
ence for news from the Mediterranean ; we know 
nothing with certainty except that Nelson’s 
squadron arrived off Malta about three days after 
Buonaparte’s force had sailed easterly, and Nelson 
pursued, with a fleet fully competent to a victory, 
if he can find the enemy. We have no knowledge 
of the French destination, or of the object of their 

1 In May, on hearing that transports for bringing French 
troops to England were to be sent by caygal from Flushing to 
Ostend, a British force of 1,200 men was sent to destroy the 


Bruges canal. This work was carried out successfully, but 
the invaders were taken prisoners. 


64 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


measures. The various conjectures are well known 
to you, and few of them appear to me to have 
sense or probability to support them. 

In the meantime we have been undisturbed 
in the exertions which became necessary for 
subduing the Irish revolt, and certainly it may 
be considered as subdued. But something more 
must be done towards rendering that country a 
benefit*and not a burthen to us; and yet it is 
infinitely difficult to say what can be done or ought 
to be done, as the hatred between the Protestants 
and Papists is far more inveterate than ever. 
Lady Mornington will have forwarded to you Dr. 
Duigenan’s letter to Grattan*: pray read it. The 
former shaves with a'rough razor, but he shaves 
close, and Grattan has suffered under the operation 
to a degree that he will never recover. You will 
see in the newspapers that Lord Cornwallis and 
Lord Clare are disagreeing, but I have reason to 
believe that there is no truth in the report ; on 
the contrary, that they are acting together most 
cordially. 

Mr. Pitt has gone to Walmer fér three weeks. 
He has regained in some measure his health and 
strength, but, his constitution is very delicate, 
and will requirg continued care. I do not believe 
that he will ever again be able to bear the fatigues 
of repeated and long debates. In other respects 
I am able to assure you that he is in excellent 
spirits, for I see much of him at Holwood. 

A scurrilous atfack on Grattan’s whole life and policy 


that was extremely popular at the time. See Lecky’s History 
of England in the Eighteenth Century, viii. 256.« 


1805] THE MAIDSTONE TRIALS 65 


A curious incident is occurring in Ireland and 
will soon, I hope, be ripe enough to become public. 
Zhe O’Connors and others, in order to save their 
lives, have acknowledged their guilt and have 
offered to make great discoveries. If these dis- 
coverjes do not fall short of our expectations, .we 
shall have excellent matter towards overbearing 
the honourable and right honourable gentlemen 
who declared at the Maidstone trials that they had 
the same principles as the O’Connors.' 

Our mencuiete: the [illegible] of the land tax 
will be put immediately into execution, and I 
have now no doubt that it will have effects even 
beyond our best and most sanguine speculations 
when we brought it forward. In the result it’ 
will prove a cordial to the public credit, by 
multiplying the purchasers of stock which will 
not burst into the market. Mr. Pitt is forward in 
his preparations for the next year’s supplies, and 
I am confident that we can raise them on terms 
even better than last year; provided only that 
we have no great and unforeseen calamity in the 
interval.® 


Lorp Hopart to THE EARL OF MORNINGTON 
August 10, 1798 

Having this moment been apprised of an oppor- 
tunity of wsiting to India, the first since my 
return to England, I avail myself of it to acknow- 
ledge the receipt of your letters of March, July, 
and September, 1797—not having them with 


1 See noie, p. 54. 
2 Add. MSS. 37308 £. 158. 


66 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


me, I may be mistaken in the dates—and for the 
packets you left for me with Lord Macartney and 
Governor Brooke. Were I to admit that I agreed 
in'that part of your reasoning which might have 
been intended to satisfy me that my recall from 
India was necessary to the public service, I should 
not act by you with thaf sincerity which ha$ ever 
actuated my conduct towards you. 

Witl*respect to the points of difference that may 
exist, between us upon the measures of my govern- 
ment, as you have not stated them I can only 
say that if you had informed me of your senti- 
ments I should have adopted them, if I had been 
convinced by your arguments, and should most 
cordially have thanked you for the communication. 

The real reason of its having been deemed 
expedient that I should not go to the supreme 
GoY¥eriiment is yet unknown to me. 

In August 1796, long after Mr. Dundas was 
acquainted with my differing with the Nabob and 
Sir John Shore, he urged me in the most pressing 
manner, for my own sake and that of the public 
service, to remain in India. On the*13th of March 
1797 he expressly stated that my differences with 
the Nabob, the Rajah of Tanjore, and the Gover- 
nor-General nfade it expedient to withdraw me 
from India. 

On the 22nd of the same month he reappointed 
me to succeed to the Supreme Government after 
Lord Cornwallis’ sailing for Europe. On the 
13th of the following May he received my answer 
to his letter of August 1796, assuring him of my 
continuance in India whether Sir John Shore 


1805] LORD HOBART’S GRIEVANCE 67 


determined to remain or not. In September 
he annulled Sir John Shore’s appointment and 
superseded mine, and about the same time de- 
clared the usurpation of Ameer Sing, the Rajah 
of Tanjore, ordering Sarboji, with whom I cer- 
tainly had no difference, to be placed on the 
[throne] as the rightful heir. 

The candour with which you have written to me 
has called upon me to state these facts, but I shall 
make no comment upon them, and shall onky add 
that I think I fave ample reason to be highly dis- 
satisfied with the whole arrangement, and unless 
you wish it shall never more enter upon the subject. 

It may be proper that you should know that 
Mr. Dundas had pledged himself to my friends 
that I should have a pension of £2,000 per annum, 
but his influence, which in other instances had 

so much operated to my disadvantage, could“only 
procure £1,500. 

The resolution for the grant which I enclose, 
and which I presume was settled with him, was 
as unhandsome by me as his whole conduct has 
been inexplic@ble. I shall now resume the same 
style of correspondence with you as if nothing 
had happened to obstruct it, and its continuance 
will, I expect, depend upon yourself. You will 
be glad to hear that, my opinion perfectly corre- 
sponding with your advice, I met Mr. Pitt with the 
same cordiality that I should have done had every- 
thing been as satisfactory as it was otherwise 
with respect to India. 

Indeed, without exactly the same feelings, I 
did not express a word of grievance to Mr. Dundas, 


68 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1708- 


though I fear I shall be under the necessity of 
complaining of his aggravating his own adherence 
to his engagement with regard to the pension by 
the unhandsome manner of wording the resolution. 

I have letters from Ireland which give me strong 
ground to believe that the rebellion has been 
completely quelled, and - my own opinion is that 
the country will get into a state of real tranquillity 
much sooner than is expected. 

Some clamour has arisen upon the subject of an 
amnesty proclaimed by Lord Cornwallis upon 
certain conditions—those who disapprove of it 
considering it to be a premature act of severity 
that will tend only to smother a flame which will 
soon break out again with redoubled violence ; 
but I hope those who adopt this reasoning are 
mistaken, because I know that Lord Clare, and 
Lord Kilwarden (late Wolfe),’ besides others of 
less consequence, entirely agree in the wisdom of 
the measure. 

In a few days I propose setting out for Ireland to 
qualify for the office in the Exchequer that has 
devolved upon me by Lord Clorfmell’s? death. 
It will suffer in its receipts by the late troubles, 
but, I should conceive, will produce enough to 
make me comiqrtable in my circumstances. 

Peace is not even talked of and we are all anxiety 
for news from the Mediterranean, where it is 
hoped Nelson will fall in with Buonaparte and 

1 Arthur Wolfe, first Baron Kilwasden (1739-1803), Lord 
ra Justice of Irelgnd from 1798. He was created Viscount; 
r500 


2 John Scott, Earl of Clonmell (1739°1798), Chief Justice _. 
of the King’s Bench in Ireland from 1784. 


1805] THE IRISH REBELLION 69 


stop his expedition—which, whether intended 
against Egypt for the purpose of establishing 
himself there, against Constantinople, Poland, 
or India, by Suez, the Euphrates, or the Black 
Sea, is now matter entirely of speculation, but 
the prevailing opinion is India. 

I had the pleasure of seeing Lady Mornington 
not many days ago, looking very well,.and of 
hearing from her that my godson was in good 
health. ; 


THE Hon. WILLIAM WELLESLEY-POLE to THE 
EARL OF MORNINGTON 


August 24, 1798 

From the first of June, the day on which I 
closed No. 4, to this moment I have been so 
thoroughly employed in the rebellion in drgland 
that it has not been possible for me to think of 
writing to you. I Have just returned from my 
campaign, having left Ireland, I hope and believe, 
in a state of quiet which promises fair to give 
security once.more to the lives and properties 
of its inhabitants. The history of the progress 
and suppression of the rebellion you will naturally 
find regularly detailed in the public accounts, 
which you, of course, see, and yeu will also have 
better information on that subject from Ministers 
than I can epretend to give; but nevertheless, 
you will expect, of course, to hear something 
from me relative to a business in which I have 
been so much engaged and am so deeply interested. 
When I arrived in Dublin, where I landed on 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 £. 162. 


70 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS ~ [1798- 


the 4th of June, I found every man in the city a 
soldier, the Courts of Law shut, and ail matters 
of trade at an end, the castle barricaded with guns,” 
and lighted matches at the gates, and expresses 
every moment arriving with accounts of the 
rebels and the army. I+ found the communica- 
tion between the Cork and Limerick roads and 
Dublin had been stopped by the rebels for several 
days and was just opened, and matters seemed to 
wear 4’ serious aspect. Wexford, Lown, and most 
of the county were in the possession of the rebels, 
and also the greatest part of the county of Wick- 
low; little known of”* the county of Kildare, 
excepting that a large body of rebels who had been 
allowed to disperse by General Dundas now sup- 
posed to have again taken arms. The Parliament 
outragaous against General Dundas, and prevented 
with great difficulty from impeaching him; and 
an account just arrived of the death and defeat 
of Colonel Walpole (Lambert Walpole), who had 
been sent upon a favourite separate command 
in the county of Wexford, and, by, his own mis- 
conduct, lost his life, his guns (two field pieces), 
and had 400 men defeated with great slaughter. 
Lord Edward £itzgerald died in prison on the 
3rd of June of a*fever and inflammation, brought 
on, I believe, partly by his wounds and partly 
by vexation, and the rebels were 30,000 strong 
at least in the county of Wexford. I pushed 
for my own county as soon as I could and joined 
my corps of Yeomen on the 5th, who were doing 
duty at Mountmellick. I found the Queen’s 
County in a very alarming state. -It was known 


1805] A RISING FORESTALLED 71 


that 11,500 there had been sworn U[nited] I[rish] in 
it, and by flogging, etc., such information had been 
gained as toenable the officers and magistrates of the 
county to get possession of many of the captains, 
and to break in upon their organisation ; but the 
spirit of insurrection ang treason appeared mani- 
festly through the whole county, and it was 
evident that the people only waited fog orders 
from the rebel chiefs, and a fair opportunity, to 
rise with the sgme views as their brethren fn the 
county of Wexford had done. Thank God! by 
activity and perseverance we have prevented 
them from effecting theif purpose; and at the 
moment I am writing there is scarce an acre in 
the Queen’s County ora house in it which has 
not suffered by the depredations either of rebels 
or the King’s soldiers, and almost all the leaders 
have been hanged or transported. 

Lord Camden took every means in his power 
to suppress the rebellion. He found, I believe, 
two main obstacles to effecting it either as speedily 
or as happey as he could have wished. His 
generals were for the most part incapable, and his 
counsellors were so violent that nothing short of 
extermination would satisfy them. Add to 
this the undisciplined state of his army, which 
was so split into divisions that no regiment had 
the fair adyantage of being together under its 
own commanding officer, and the inadequacy of 
his numbers to resist at once such a torrent as 
poured in on all sides towards Dublin, and at the 
same time check the disposition to rise which 
manifests ftself all over Ireland. Lord Camden 


72 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [r798- 


felt the difficulties he had to encounter, and, I 
believe, begged quite as hard to be relieved by Lord 
Cornwallis as he did for troops from England toe 
save the country. 

The rebels in Wexford very fortunately chose 
to post themselves on a place called Vinegar Hill, 
near the town of Wexford, in preference to 
travelling through the county and overrunning 
all the south of Ireland, as they undoubtedly 
might have done; or of marching immediately 
after Walpole’s defeat to Dublin, which, with the 
assistance of their Dublin, Meath, and Kildare 
friends, it is supposed *they must have carfied. 
They formed an entrenched camp of about 3,000 
men, and had the complaisance to wait about a 
fortnight before they were attacked. An attack 
was at last made upon them, commanded by 
Genéfal Lake; but most completely bungled, 
by some mistake either of Lake’s or Needham’s.? 
Needham’s column was not at the place intended 
for an hour after the appointed time ; Lake would 
not wait for him, and the consequence was that 
one avenue to the hill, and that the“most material 
towards the town of Wexford, was left open, 
and through this the rebels fled, and they were 
not pursued. Thg generals, of whom twelve were 

1 General Gerard Lake (1744-1808), Commander-in-Chief 
of the Forces in Ireland from April 25 until June 20, 1798. In 
1800 he went to India as Commander-in-Cfief. He was 
raised to the peerage in 1804, and created Viscount Lake of 
Delhi in 1807. 

? Captain Francis Jack Needham (1748-1832), who greatly 
distinguished himself at the battle “of Arklow, 1798. He 


succeeded as (twelfth) Viscount Kilmorey in 1878, and four 
years later was created Earl of Kilmorey. 


1805] VINEGAR HILL 73 


on the ground at Vinegar Hill, I am told, were 
amusing themselves after the action with shaking 
hands upon the hill and congratulating each other 
on the victory, and they did not think a pursuit 
necessary, as they conceived themselves sure of 
the rebels in the town of Wexford next morning. 
However, they were a little out of their calcu- 
lations here. General Moore,’ who is'an excellent 
officer, gallantly pushed into Wexford éarly in 
the morning, but those rebels who were in it ran 
out at one end’of the town as he entered at the 
other ; the rest of the rebel army had more sense 
than to go into Wexford from Vinegar Hill. 
Finding they were not pursued some of them 
dispersed, and two columns marched with great 
expedition and judgment, one of some thousands, 
into the county of Wicklow towards Hackets- 
town and Blessington, which they burnt; aff the 
other, consisting at its first setting out of 10,000 
men and ten pieces of cannon, through Sculloge 
Gap into the county of Carlow bound for the 
Queen’s County. They were not followed, and 
the consequenwes, at least of the last column, 
come very near being fatal to the south of Ireland, 
as you see by a narrative I enclose, which will 
illustrate the ability and spirit, of our general. 
At the same time it will give some idea of what 
would have happened to the Queen’s County, 

1 General John Moore, being invalided home from the West 
Indies, joined Abercromby in Ireland in December 1798, and 
took an active part in suppressing the Irish rebellion. He 
remained in Ireland until June 1799, when he was ordered 


to Holland. He was knighted in 1804, and was killed at 
Coruiia, 1809.° 


74 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS . [1708- 


Tipperary, etc., etc., had the rebels not been 
checked in their career. 

Lord Cornwallis arrived just before the affair 
at Vinegar Hill, and about the same time the 
English Militia Regiments, who had offered their 
services, some Fencibles, and about 2,000 Guards, 
landed ; these circumstances, and the amazing 
fatigue,the rebels had undergone, and the immense 
losses of all kinds they hadsuffered, gave a new 
turn to affairs. After the action at Vinegar Hill, 
in which the rebels did not lose more than 600 or 
7oo men, most of the leaders, such as Bognall, 
Harvey, Keogh, Grogafi, etc., etc., were taken at 
Wexford, in a sort of infatuation, neither keeping 
with their army nor making any resistance. At 
our action at Kilconnel Hill we took all their 
cannon, and killed about 1,400 of them; the rest 
of the column, which had been reduced before 
the action by one means or other from 10,000 to 
6,000, dispersed or joined the Wicklow column, 
and they crossed the road between Naas and 
Johnstown, and marched into Meath, West Meath, 
and Louth. They were harass€d beyond all 
example, having undergone every species of hard- 
ship that can be conceived. They had no 
covering ; theye had neither bread, salt, nor 
spirits, but lived upon the sheep and bullocks they 
plundered, eaten generally half raw, and dressed 
in such a savage manner that it was a common 
thing to see a bullock lying with his skin on, his 
entrails not remaved, though half the carcass had 
been cut away and eaten.” The people in the 
counties they marched into refused to’ join them, 


1805] A WISE CLEMENCY 78 


as they saw the cause was desperate, and they 
were cut to pieces in detail, and all their leaders 
taken separately and executed. While this Wex- 
ford army was winding up in this manner, a man 
named Aylmer, who had a considerable force in 
the county of Kildare, -offered to lay down his 
arms on terms, and in short the rebels everywhere 
grew weary of the business, and, despairing of fresh 
assistance, willingly accepted the offer of mercy 
which Lord Coxgnwallis most judiciously held out 
to them, and which bids fair, I think, to re- 
establish us in something like security. You who 
know the temper of Irish’ gentlemen, when they 
are carrying all before them, can easily conceive 
the sort of clamour there was at first against Lord 
Cornwallis’ offer of pardon to such men as 
deserted their leaders and gave up their gms: 
they were for putting every leader to death, even 
every officer. In this horrible rebellion the King’s 
troops never gave quarter to the rebels ; hundreds 
and thousands of wretches were butchered while 
unarmed on their knees begging mercy, and it is 
difficult to say whether soldiers, Yeomen, or 
Militia-men took most delight in this bloody work. 

Numbers of innocent persons weye also put to 
death. In the action I was concerned in, the 
rebels in their flight took shelter in the houses of 
the county as they found them, and the soldiers 
(with scarcely any exception) followed the 
wretches, and killed every man in the houses they 
went into—frequently the man ef the house, who 
had taken no part in the dispute; nay, there 
were some cursed Germans under the command of 


76 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS. [1798- 


Count Humbert! who killed several women ; and 
this they practised in almost every action during 
the rebellion. The number of the rebels and 
inhabitants killed by these means is, by the 
lowest calculation, computed at 23,000, and Lord 
Cornwallis wisely and justly felt that if he suffered 
the war to go on it could only end in the depopu- 
lation gf the country. The success which attended 
the offer of pardon, and the unlooked-for rapidity 
withewhich tranquillity was restored, had made a 
very visible change in the opinions of the gentlemen 
of Dublin before I left it, and they are every day 
more and more satisfiéd that merciful policy is 
now the wisest. The measure which has met with 
the greatest opposition from the Beresfords and 
other violent men in Ireland, is the accepting an 
offer made by the State prisoners in Kilmainham 
and Newgate (near seventy in number) to trans- 
port themselves for life, and submit to its being 
felony without benefit of clergy for any of them 
to be ever found in the King’s dominions hereafter ; 
and, if this indulgence was granted them, they 
promised to give complete infofMation of the 
whole plot. This was proposed by them to save 
them from the,risks of trials. 

The trials of the Sheares, Byrne, McCann and 
Bond,? all of whom had been found guilty and 

1 J. J. Amable Humbert, French Genera#, who landed 
with a body of French troops in Ireland in August 1798. He 
was attacked by Lake and Comwallis on September g at 
Ballinamuck, when he and his men were captured. 

? Henry and Johi® Sheares, Michael Byrne, and McCann, 


prominent United Irishmen, were“tried for sedition, and 
hanged. Oliver Bond died in prison. 


1805] KING’S EVIDENCE 7 


condemned to die without hesitation, and all of 
whom, except Bond, have suffered, struck such 
a damp.on the traitors in the jails, that they, one 
and all, with the exception of one or two old, 
obscure men, were eager to save their lives by 
acknowledging their guilt and offering. to give 
information of the state of the plot; and Lord 
Cornwallis has permitted them to do so, by, which 
he has certainly rendered an essential service to 
the country. Had he tried all these peopleeit is 
by no means certain they could every one have 
been convicted, and supposing they had all been 
hanged, it would not have had half the salutary 
effect that a complete development of the plot 
must have. 

Lord Cornwallis assured me that he should be 
able, by saving the lives of Bond and the other 
prisoners, to show the whole world the ginit of 
the conspirators. His expression was “‘ The most 
impudent dog in England who may wish to hold 
up any of these people will be forced to admit their 
guilt,’’ and he also thinks it certain that the whole 
connection between the Irish rebels and the Irish 
Government will be exposed in such a manner as 
to render it impossible it should not be entirely 
broken through from this time forward. All these 
things are not yet finally settled; the secret 
committees of both Houses of the Trish Parliament 
are now sitting, and their reports will be the first 
official communication to the world on the subject. 

In the meantime, tranquillity is effectually 
restored through the whole of Ireland. The 
Yeomen art put off permanent duty, by which 


78 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1708- 


an expense of £60,000 a week is saved to Govern- 
ment. Some English regiments who were on the 
point of coming over have been stopped. The 
harvest is getting in by the peasantry, who have 
returned to their occupations, and Lord Corn- 
wallis has begun his endeavours to organise the 
army, which is in so wretched a state that he told 
me he was of opinion the loyal inhabitants of 
Ireland would have had as much ‘to fear from the 
King’s forces as from the rebels, had the rebellion 
gone on six weeks longer. Theré never was such 
a scene of indiscriminate rapine and plunder, and 
so insufficient and expensive a staff. What think 
you of forty-seven general officers in the Irish 
“establishment ?—Needhams, Eustaces, Argyles, 
Meyricks, etc., etc. Lord Cornwallis, I fancy, in 
a quiet way means to get rid of some of these 
wortities. There is not the least foundation in the 
report that Lord Cornwallis and the Chancellor 
have differed in opinion about the measures 
necessary to extinguish the rebellion. Lord Corn- 
wallis told me they never had had a single dis- 
agreement, and he begged of mw to say so if I 
heard the matter talked of in England. He added 
that the Chancellor was one of the wisest and best 
men he had ever met with ; that he was the best 
and truest friend of the connection between 
England and Ireland that could be; that people 
who thought him violent or sanguinary in his 
councils were much mistaken ; that nobody could 
be more humane or temperate; and that every 
part of the measures of pardon had met with his 
most hearty concurrence and approbation. 


1805] A CONTEMPTIBLE FIGURE 79 


There is no person belonging to Ireland who has 
made so contemptible a figure during the rebellion 
as Mr. Grattan. He is, as you know, out of 
Parliament, and he has been living all the summer 
in retirement at Llanrwst in Wales.? 


Lorp HAWKESBURY ?” to THE EARL OF MORNINGTON 
Walmer : September 23; 1798 


I am quite ashamed of myself for having delayed 
so long writing to you, but I concluded you would 
learn what was passing here much better from 
others, and the constant state of anxiety in which 
I own my mind is kept by the events that are 
daily occurring is apt to make me put off many 
duties in a way which may appear unpardonable 
to those who do not feel as strongly as myself on 
the present state of the world. 

I congratulate you most sincerely ori the 
suppression of the rebellion in Ireland. It is 
impossible to praise too much the vigour and 
prudence of the Irish Government ; the confessions 
of O’Connor and his associates are a complete 
justification of adi that the supporters of Govern- 
ment in both countries have been saying and 
doing for the last six years ; but it is singular that 
we should have it in the handwriting of these very 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 167. 

2 Robert Banks Jenkinson (1770-1828), known by the 
courtesy title of*Lord Hawkesbury from 1796, when his father 
was created Earl of Liverpool, was appointed by Pitt a member 
of the India Board. He became Master of the Mint in 1799. 
He was Foreign Secretary, 1801-1803, and in the latter year 
was created Baron Hawkesbury. He sucteeded his father as 
(second) Earl of Liverpool in 1808. He held many high 
offices, and wa§ Prime Minister, 1812-1827. 


80 ' THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1798- 


persons that in their opinion the people of Ireland 
care not a jot for Parliamentary reform or Catholic 
. Emancipation, and that the object of the conspira- 
tors has long been to create Ireland into a demo- 
cratic republic independent of Great Britain. If 
ever there was a moment to attempt a union it is 
certainly the present, and measures are taking for 
that purpose. There are many prejudices cer- 
tainly to be conquered, but Ido not despair of 
gettmg the better of ‘them. I ~uave seen the 
‘outline of Pitt’s plan, in every part of which I 
entirely agree .with-him. He proposes ‘to give 
Ireland one hundred membeis in the House of 
.Commions and, thirty in the House of Lords; _to 
' give the Catholics‘ (if possible) the little that 
remains to be given them to establish an equality 
of trade in all respects between the two countries, 
and to find some substitute for tithes on potatoes, 
as I believe it the greatest, practical grievance in 
the country. 

The Irish Chancellor is to come over here 
immediately. I understood his opinion is decidedly 
in favour of a union. There are Soubts about the 
Speaker, but he must be convinced, as he certainly 
is the most important person in that country. 

You will have: heard about ‘ Buonaparte’s 
expedition. It is entirely to be regretted that 
Nelson should have been so unfortunate as not to 
have met with him, though we do not know 
accurately what has happened since his arrival 
at Alicante. It is certain that he has met with 
considerable resistance from the Arabs, and as we 
have the command of the Mediterrarfean and the 


F. Thompson, sculpt. 
Wivelt, cet, 


: "ERPOOL 
(D> EARL OF LIVE 
ROBERT BANKS JENKINSON, 2ND EARL. 


1805) | BATTLE OF THE NILE 81 


Turks and Russians. are making vigorous pre- 
parations for war,, I have no’ doubt, he will have. 
cause to repent. of his rashness, We have just 
seen in the Paris papers an account of an ‘action’ 
between Nelson and the French fleet on its return 
from Alexandria, by which it appears that we 
have gained a most decided: victory [the Battle 
of the Nile]; the account-is.in the Rédacteur, 
which, you, know, is the official paper, and it 
states the intelligence as ‘certain. We wait’ most 
anxiously for the confirmation. There is every 
reason to believe that war will recommence on 
the continent. The great Powers, at least’ some 
of them, begin ‘to perceive that nothing else can 
save them from destruction. God grant that their 
eyes may be’ open ‘to all their past errors, and 
that, laying’ aside their mutual animosities and 
jealousies, they may unite: cordially, effectually, 
and honestly in resisting the common enemy of 
the human race. . 

I was happy to see Lady Mornington in good 
health before I left town to join my regiment. I 
had the pleasure’of seeing your eldest son when he 
was at home, and was.glad to find he was making 
so much progress in his education. , Lady Hawkes- 
bury desires her best compliments to’ you. 

P.S. I hope to hear that the climate of Calcutta 
agrees with you. 

THE EArt OF MorNINGTON fo LORD GRENVILLE 
- Fort William : November 18, 1798 
My health has been much better on the whole 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 185. 
ag G 


82 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


since I have been here than I ever remember it to 
have been for so long a period in Europe. This I 
attribute to the great regularity of my life, and to 
the continual exertion of my mind, relieved by the 
great variety of the business of this vast empire. 
There is also something to be attributed to the 
constant sense of good intentions, accompanied by 
very large powers of putting them into execution. 
To these considerations I think I may add the 
complete success of whatever I have attempted, 
and the prospect of the approbation and applause 
of every man at home who understands the 
interests of India, and is attached to those of 
Great Britain. Lastly, although my household is 
magnificent, and my table open to every respect- 
able person in the settlement, and to all new- 
comers, I find my savings far greater than I 
expected. Under these circumstances I think it 
hot impossible that your dream of Clifden may be 
realised ; it so happens that it is a favourite castle 
in thé air of my own. You will observe that our 
joint castle of governing the world is no longer a 
baseless fabric; and when you have read the 
papers annexed to this, you will perhaps not 
think me a sleeping partner of your throne. 

But all this vision will vanish unless you send 
Lady Mornington out to me by the next ship. 
There is now no objection to her appearance, as 
my authority and character are perfectly estab- 
lished ; and I believe you know enoug’. of her 
character to b* satisfied that no ‘part of her 
conduct will ever be injurious to me. Her society 
here is absolutely necessary to my comfort ; and, 


1805] THE DAILY ROUND 83 


without her, I fear, I shall not have fortitude to 
remain here long enough to accomplish all my 
grand financial, political, military, naval,.‘com- 
mercial, architectural, judicial, political reforms, 
and to make up as large a:treasure as Aboulcassem 
of Bassora’s. All this might be effected within 
five or six years from the day of my. embarcation 
at Cowes. But I leave you to judge, of the 
necessity of her society while I give you'some idea 
of my private life. 

I rise early and go out before breakfast, which is 
always over between eight and nine. From that 
hour until four (in the Kot weather) I remain at 
work, unless I go to Council, or to church of 
Sundays; at five I dine, and drive out-in the 
evening. At present I drive out at five, and dine 
a little after six. No constitution here can bear 
the sun in the middle of the day at any ‘season of 
the year, nor the labour of business in the evening- 
After dinner, therefore, nobody attempts to write 
or read, and, in general, it is thought necessary to 
avoid even meetings on subjects of business at 
that time ; for*in this climate good or ill health 

‘depends upon a minute attention to circumstances 
apparently the most trivial. Thus, in the evening 
I have no alternative but the society of my 
subjects, or solitude. Thé former is so vulgar, 
ignorant, rude, familiar, and stupid as ,to be 
disgusting and intolerable ; especially the ladies, 
not one of whom, by-the-bye, is even decently 
good-looking. The greatest in¢onvenience, how- 
ever, arises from the ill-bred familiarity of the 
general manners. . . . The effect of this state of 


84 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1708- 


things on my conduct has been to compel me to 
entrench myself within forms and ceremonies, to 
introduce much state into the whole appearance 
of my establishments and household, to expel all 
approaches to familiarity, and to exercise my 
authority with a degree of vigour and strictness 
nearly amounting to severity. At the same time 
‘I‘endeavour, as much as is compatible with the 
-duties imposed on me by: the remissness of Sir 
John Shore, to render my table pleasant to those 
whom I admit to it, and to be easy of access to 
everybody. Jam resolved to encounter the task 
of effecting a thorough teform in private manners 
here, without which the time is not distant when 
the Europeans settled at Calcutta will control the 
Government, if they do not overturn it. My 
temper and character are now perfectly under- 
stood, and while I remain, no man will venture 
miscere vocem who has not made up his mind to 
' grapple instantly with the whole force of govern- 
ment. But it required some unpleasant efforts 
to place matters on this footing, and you must 
perceive that I am forced to fly io solitude for a 
large portion of the twenty-four hours, lest I 
should weaken my means of performing my public 
duty.” 


THe Hon. WILLIAM WELLESLEY-POLE fo THE 
EARL OF MORNINGTON 
Hanover Square: March 14, 1799 
. .«. It is out of my power to describe what I 
think of the state of Ireland. In a former letter 
? Fortescue MSS. iv. 381. 


1805] THE UNION 85 


I gave you shortly my opinion about the Union, 
both as to the measure itself, and the manner in 
which it was likely to be received. I did not 
imagine it would have been prepared after the 
temper of the Irish had been shewn upon it, but 
I believe Mr. Pitt was deceived as to the numbers 
in Parliament by Lord Castlereagh. Ministry 
here talked openly of carrying the measure in the 
Irish House of Commons by a majority of fifty at 
least on the very day the account came of their 
defeat ; and so little did Lord Castlereagh know 
of the temper of the House, that after the debate 
had lasted twenty hours, ‘and he was walking out 
to divide, he clapped W. Skeffington on the 
shoulder (he thought Skeffington would vote with 
him), and said he should carry the division by 
forty-five. The measure now sleeps in Ireland, 
but Ministry here are so strongly prejudiced in 
favour of it that I believe they will dissolve the 
Parliament, and try it again the next session. The 
ferment caused by the agitation of the measure in 
Ireland, added to the strange misconduct of Lord 
Cornwallis’ govefnment, has brought the country 
into the most deplorable state. The rebels have 
been secretly working during the.whole winter ; 
all Ireland is more full of concealed arms than ever, 
and most of the counties in a complete state of 
organisation. The ruffians who are in jail under 
the treaty which Lord Cornwallis entered into 
with them have been allowed all kinds of access 
to each other, and it is believed that regular 
committees, etc., etc., have been constantly held 
in Kilmainham jail. O’Connor’s letter to Lord 


86 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1708- 


Castlereagh, which was published in Dublin just 
after one of the manuscript copies of it had 
been taken by him, is a masterpiece of treason 
and insolence; it has caused him to be put in 
close confinement, but it ought to have been 
the means of his immediate trial and execu- 
tion. At length Lord Cornwallis has seen the 
situaticn to which his lenity has reduced the 
country, and an act is now passing which grants 
him as much power as ever Nero possessed. He 
is to be allowed to put any part of the kingdom he 
chooses under martial law, and when he does so 
the whole of the Civil Power is to be suspended. 
The necessity for this measure was so evident, that 
it met with scarcely any opposition—a pretty 
strong proof of the impolicy of the former lenity 
of the Government. A more severe censure could 
not be passed upon Lord Cornwallis’ measures 

than this very Bill, and I hope it will open Mr. 
' Pitt’s eyes ; and I am also sure that it is a strong 
additional argument against a ‘union of the 
legislatures, for I would ask any candid man 
whether he thinks it possible for’a united Parlia- 
ment, sitting in Westminster, to have borne the 
idea of passing an act empowering the Lord- 
Lieutenant for the time being to put all Ireland 
under martial law at his pleasure. They never 
could do it, for this plain reason, that they are too 
remote from the danger to feel the necessity of so 
desperate a remedy ; whereas-the Parliament of 
Dublin, being actually on the spot, with the pikes 
at their throats, are nearly unanimous on the . 
measure, as the only hope of saving themselves 


1805] CRUEL LENIENCE 87 


from instant destruction. The Queen’s County 
remains quite quiet, and if it continues so I shall 
not visit it till June. Lord Cornwallis, that he 
might leave no means untried to induce the rebels 
to continue their preparations, has issued a public 
order, which you will see in all the newspapers, 
desiring all his generals to call all commanding 
officers to their regiments, as it is now certain the 
French are fitting out a larger force than ever 
against Ireland. Here the rebels have the 
authority of the Castle for believing their friends 
the French are coming, and, accordingly, they will 
use every exertion to be ready to receive them. I 
could tell you a thousand stories of the impolitic 
and cruelly lenient measures of Lord Cornwallis ;. 
but I forbear, and I hope we shall still escape if 
the French do not make good a landing in Ireland." 


THE EARL BATHURST to THE EARL OF MORNINGTON 
April 20, 1799 

J am very much obliged to you for your letter 
dated the zoth of November, particularly as it 
gave me so favourable an account of your health, 
which I find confirmed by all the letters which you 
have written by the last conveyance. I have not 
been much in London this year, and I delayed 
writing until I came to town, as the country does 
not afford. good materials for a letter to the East 
Indies. 

You are very good in thinking of showing your 
protection towards Mr. R. Bathurst, who, I hope, 
will answer the good opinion you entertain of him. 

"4 Add. MSS. 37308 £. 206. 


88 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1708- 


Not having been for any time in town, your dispute 
with Mr. Webbe is new to me, and you forgot to 
enclose the list of papers to which you said in your 
lettér you would refer me. But I must say the 
success which has attended the expedition to the 
Nizam is very highly spoken of here, both by the 
few who understand what they commend, and by 
the many who do not. It is certainly a fortunate 
thing for you to have begun your government 
with so much éclat. As to the transactions at 
home, the prospect is certainly flattering. The 
newspapers will inform you of the Austrian suc- 
. cesses, which were not expected at the beginning, as 
it was to be supposed that the French were prepared 
better than they have proved to have been. 

It seems to be believed that the whole army of 
France does not at present amount to more than 
330,000 men, above 30,000 of which are with 
Buonaparte in Egypt, 100,000 in Italy, very much 
divided, another 100,000 compose the different 
armies under Jourdan’s command on the Rhine, 
and the remainder are in the interior, consisting 
chiefly of the new-raised troops. This is the 
account which the late Minister of War gave in to 
the Directory on his quitting that situation for the 
command in Italy, where he has been just beaten. 

Government are in great hopes of raising a 
Swiss force in Switzerland. It is thought by most 
that.this project was adopted too late, when the 
spirit of that nation was broken, and the most 
active had. perished ; but the later successes in 
that part of the world will, it is to be hoped, be the 
means of collecting a good body of mei. 


1805] IRELAND REJECTS UNION 89 


Your letters from hence must long before this 
have informed you of all the circumstances 
respecting the proposed union with Ireland, its 
failure in the Irish House of Commons, the 
violence and popularity of the Irish Speaker, and 
his subsequent defeat. After that he has been 
endeavouring to explain his conduct as having 
been understood to have been more hostile than 
he intended; but having some reason to believe 
that the Government were determined to turr out 
his son, he has just now taken an opportunity of 
a Bill respecting the Regency to make a very 
violent attack. It is, however, generally believed 
that the idea of a union is much less unpopular 
in Ireland than it was, and that in autumn session* 
it will be carried. You will, of course, have all 
the speeches sent you which have been published 
on the subject. 

What think you of Sir George Yonge?’ being 
appointed Governor of the Cape of Good Hope ? 
It seems to promise very ill. What is amusing in 
it is that Lord Macartney considers the appoint- 
ment of such a sucéessor as injurioustohim. Lord 


* George Macartney, first Earl Macartney (1736-1807), was 
appointed Governor of the Cape of Good Hope in May 1797, 
and resigned in November 1798. Lieutenant-General Sir 
Francis Dundas acted as Governor until“the arrival of Sir 
George Yonge, fifth baronet (1731-1812). Yonge (or Young, 
as his name is,sometimes spelt) gave great offence to the 
people by closing the public gardens at Cape Town and putting 
a tax on billiard-tables and on game licences. He also 
appointed his private secretary to be “‘ wine-taster,”’ and tried 
to grant lands against the terms of the capitulations. He was 
recalled by a despatch dated January 14, 1801, and ordered 
to give up the government to General Dundas and return at 
once. 


go THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1708- 


Camelford has brought Sir George into Parliament. 
He could not before that go beyond the precincts 
of:the palace for fear of being arrested. Lord 
Hawkesbury succeeds him in the Mint, with a 
fixed salary of £3,000. It was to have been only 
£2,500, and as such was offered to Steele and 
Ryder,’ who both thought the difference not worth 
the trouble of changing. Lord Hawkesbury 
accepted it as such, and then old Liverpool 
showed him in every respect whatsoever it would 
be better to have it amount to £3,000; and so it 
ended favourably enough to the House of Hawkes- 
bury. All this change”you will see was made for 
Canning, who is gone to the India Board. 

You will, of course, know from all quarters that 
Pitt’s health is decidedly improved. He is re- 
covering his strength in a way to make one look 
to a lasting improvement ; and with it his nerves, 
which were during the summer shattered in a 
more alarming manner than was generally known, 
are getting to be as good as ever. Lady Morning- 
ton tells me she sent you the first part, and is now 
sending you the second, of Buonaparte’s inter- 
cepted letters. They are very popular here, but I 
believe you will agree with me in thinking that the 
style of the notes is not good, and that more is 
made of the discontent and geographical mistakes 
than the letters seem to call for. When a battalion 

* Dudley Ryder (1762-1847), Paymaster of Forces and 
Vice-President of the Board of Trade, 1791, Treasurer of the 
Navy, 1801. He succeeded his- father as (second) Baron 
Harrowby, 1803. He was Foreign Minister under Pitt, 1804, 


and held other high ministerial and diplomatic posts. He 
was created Earl of Harrowby, 1809. ‘ 


1805] LADY MORNINGTON ox 


of the Guards were quartered a year and a half ago 
at Winchester, I believe the letters of the officers, 
if they had been intercepted, would have expressed 
more strongly their discontent and not much less 
ignorance of the geograpliy of Hampshire. 

Your eldest boy is very much grown, and I hear 
great accounts of his quickness and application. I 
have spoken to Grenville on the subject of that 
part of your letter which relates to Lady Morning- 
ton. I think it was a very hard trial for you when 
you left her behind; and it was certainly very 
prudently done in not taking her with you. There 
are not certainly the same objections to her follow- 
ing you now you will have been some time settled 
there ; and from what I hear, I think you will 
receive letters by this conveyance which will lead 
you to expect Lady Mornington next year at Fort 
William. If nothing should be settled before the 
ship which carries this letter sails, I will take care 
to suggest that you should not be kept in suspense 
a moment longer than is necessary. I was 
delighted to hear of your being so well by the 
gentleman (I have forgotten his name) who 
brought me your despatches. The success with 
which you have begun your government must 
contribute to your health. You will see that Lord 
Hobart succeeded, after one failure, in his pension. 
He has not succeeded as yet in getting a wife, 
Miss Saunders, the sister of the lady Dundas’ 
son married, having declined. She had a good 
fortune? 

1 Add, MSS. 37308 f. 234. 


92 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1798- 


WILLIAM WILBERFORCE fo THE EARL OF 
MORNINGTON 

Broomfield, Clapham Common 
April 20, 1799 
Were you ever unfortunate enough to have 
put yourself into the power of that “ foul fiend ” 
procrastination? If so, you will not hesitate to 
compere its tyrannical hold to the firm grasp of 
that cow-like old fellow who bestrode poor Sindbad 
the Sailor in the Arabian Nights, and could not 
be shaken off by his utmost efforts. Again and 
again I have resolved to write to you and (let me 
fairly say it, for it is truth) to do justice to the 
interest I felt for you, which made you often 
present to my mind. “ But I cannot, after so 
Jong a delay, send a short, shabby letterling. I 
have not now time to write a long one.” So with 
this soliloquy ; it has ended in a memorandum ; 
and week has rolled on after week, till I really feel 
ashamed to take up my pen at all. But I am 
determined at length to break through this servile 
bondage, and instead of offering justifications, at 
least exceeding, and apologies (for really I could 
urge some pretty satisfactory ones), let me 
suppose myself forgiven. I seem to be making 
myself of more consequence in all this than in 
truth I am; but yet I flatter myself, my dear 
Mornington, that at such a distance from your 
friends it will be acceptable to hear through many 
different channels how matters are going on. I 
will, therefore, having once begun, continue to 
write to you from time to time, and if my letters 
answer ho other end, they will at least prove to 


Russell, RA, pinxt 7. Blood, sculpt. 
WILLIAM WILBERFORCE 


1805]: A BAD CORRESPONDENT 93 


you my wish to contribute towards lessening the 
unpleasant feelings of what, with all its honour 
and utility, is still a banishment to one who, like 
you, has left behind his dearest connections and 
habitual associates. 

When I began what I have already written, I 
had no immediate prospect of sending it ; I was, 
therefore, the more easily induced to lay down 
my pen on the pressure of some urgent business, 
and I am ashamed to say how many weeks it “has 
now reposed in my writing-box from the difficulty 
of prevailing on myself to finish a letter without 
any definite time or mode of conveying it to your 
hands. I am roused from this disgraceful, and 
really to me painful, lethargy, by hearing that an op- 
portunity offers of writing to Calcutta. The charm 
is broken and (I dare not be too sanguine, but) 
I trust I shall never again be subject to its power. 
I say again that I feel in all this egotism I am 
making myself of too much consequence, but 
indeed, my dear Lord Mornington, I feel hurt, 
because I must have exhibited the appearance of 
neglect and unfriéndly inattention. I hope you 
will forgive me, but I cannot become directly in 
good humour with myself. And now where shall 
I begin ?—“ the world being all befere me where to 
choose,” etc. If you will assign to me any 
particular set of topics I will endeavour, in the 
best way I am able, to meet your wishes. But 
presuming that you are abundantly informed by 
others of all political matters, which are out of the 
cognisance of the public prints, I seem to myself 
to be likely to consume your time to no purpose, 


94 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1798- 


and waste my own if I were to enter on any 
recitals of our political transactions. But from 
my particular predicament, I may have a different 
view of things from some of your most intelligent 
correspondents—those, I mean, who are most 
busied in the events of which they speak. I 
repeat it, therefore: prescribe to me, if you can, 
my task, and rely on me for the desire of executing 
it well, and, of course, for all that secrecy (I am 
suie I need not claim it in return) where such a 
free intercourse requires. Indeed, what we say of 
anyone to other friends we often like that he should 
not hear from a third person, though we should 
have been ready to tell it to himself directly.’ I 
do not recollect to have. heard your sentiments 
concerning a union with Ireland, but from what 
I know of your faculties, as applied to all the 
circumstances and considerations which are the 
grounds of men’s judgments on that great question, 
TI have little doubt of your being friendly to the 
measure in general, though perhaps doubts might 
be entertained as to the time and mode in which 
it has come forward. I was. myself too long 
doubtful, but more mature reflection rendered me 
decidedly favourable. It is held among our 
friends that the opposition to it in Ireland is 
wearing away. In what degree they may be 
right in this conjecture I cannot say with certainty, 
but somewhat must be allowed to the natural 
relaxation which follows in those who have carried 
their point. Perhaps if the- measure were again to 
be brought forward there might be nearly the 
same force of activity in resisting it. I must say 


1803] OPPOSITION TO THE- UNION 95 


that, considering the importance of the measure, I 
never remember one opposed so vehemently, as 
far as warmth and violence could go, with so little 
of definite argument and reasoning. Foster, I 
understand, is irritated in the extreme, and in 
truth our friend directed more of his artillery 
against Mr. Spaker than was to be wished. But 
I confess my strongest (not my only) objection, to 
this attack, was that it raised him into too great 
consequence, and, therefore, was likely to produce 
the very effect which has, in fact, followed (or 
rather to aggravate the force of it, for in a degree 
it would have otherwise existed), that, I mean, of 
elevating him into the hero of the party, and 
almost of investing him with the veneration and 
interest-exciting character of a martyr. Yet I 
see one practical good effect from publicly con- 
sidering the opposition to the measure as con- 
densed and substantiated in the person of ove man, 
which is that he, from any cause, ceasing to be an 
opponent, the force of the hostility to the measure 
is probably broken for ever. But I did not 
intend to detain You on a subject on which you 
must have heard most copiously from many 
others, nor will I say anything on our last foreign 
intelligence, except congratulating you most 
cordially on its acceptable tenor. Isaw a private 
letter wherein it was mentioned that in the 
Archduke’s grand action with Jourdan, the army 
of the former, one of his wings being routed, was 
thrown into disorder; a paniq seemed to be 
diffusing itself, and all in the road to ruin, 
when he formed two columns of Infantry, and 


96 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1798- 


putting himself at their head, marched against the 
enemy, and broke through them like a wedge. 
You must remember Fox’s story of the popular 
and unpopular French generals of the old régime, 
founded on a mere difference of person in the verb 
they used—the one being accustomed to address 
his men before a charge with “‘ Allons,” the other 
with “‘ Allez, mes enfants.” But I must not forget 
that I am writing to the Governor-General, who 
has no time to waste; and indeed I am in this 
respect a good deal in his situation, and I must 
send my letter to town that it may not be too late 
for the packet in which I have secured it a place. 
I will, therefore, only once more assure you, my 
dear Lord Mornington, that you will gratify me 
by pointing out any way whereby I can contribute 
in the smallest degree to your comfort or con- 
venience. Do not trouble yourself to write to 
me when it may not be convenient. I will from 
time to time send you a sheet full of my scrawl, 
which you may run over at any moment of leisure. 
I ought not, however, to conclude without men- 
tioning one circumstance in which it is in my 
power to give you solid pleasure. I really think 
Pitt’s health extremely improved within the last 
few months. “He was worse than we, any of us, 
could almost persuade ourselves to think him, but 
the amendment is, I trust, unquestionable, and 
the alteration of his habits (you know how 
determined he is when he is really in earnest) 
holds out a comfortable and encouraging pros- 
pect for the future; yet, With my views, I 
cannot look on him, neither direct my eye 


1805] PITT’S HEALTH 97 


“forward to the future in general, without fearful 
apprehensions. 

Let me also add that I have heard (I need not 
say I heard with real satisfaction) from persons 
quite unconnected with you, but possessing the 
means of information, high encomiums passed on 
ithe vigour of your outset, and indeed on some other 
particulars of your conduct, both here before you 
went and in Bengal. May it please God to crown 
with success your counsels and undertakings, and 
render you thus a fresh exhibition and illustration 
of that phenomenon, never known to. the world 
till the period of the British Constitution, of an 
immense kingdom at the distance of half the 
globe, governed with a disinterested regard for the 
happiness of the subjects,.and, though ina quarter 
of the world where slavery seemed to be fixed 
in unassailable security, yet ruled over with a 
firmness and a moderation and an enlarged and 

' benignant policy which imparts to the bulk of the 
people more than they ever before tasted of the 
blessings of rational and practical liberty. I 
assure you that at*this moment I can contemplate 
with a mixture of astonishment and pleasure the 
image my mind has conjured up, and if you will 
place yourself in idea 3,000 or 4,000 miles from the 
scene in which you are acting, you too will be no 
less struck with it. But I will detain you no 
longer. Only let me again wish you all you can 
wish for yourself.’ 


Napoleon with a large fleet and 40,000 troops 


1 Add MSS. 37308 f. 228. 
I H 


98 | THE WELLESLEY PAPERS {[1708- 


set out in May 1708, with the intention of conquer- 
ing Egypt. En route he took Malta, and on July 
2x defeated the Mamelukes at the Battle of the 
Pyramids, and Lower Egypt became his; but 
Nelson’s victory at the Battle of the Nile changed 
the aspect of the campaign. Napoleon’s triumphal 
progress was stopped at Acre, which was defended 
by Djezzar Pacha, until Sir Sidney Smith arrived 
and took command. He resisted twelve attempts 
to take the place between March 16 and May 20, 
1799, when Napoleon retreated. These reverses, 
coupled with the necessity for his presence at 
home, caused him secretly to embark for France, 
leaving his army in the command of General 
Kléber. 


SYLVESTER DouGLas?! to THE EARL. OF 
MORNINGTON 


Pheasantry: July 29, 1799 


I wrote to you by an overland packet which left 
London about ten days ago, ard then proposed 
by an early opportunity to trouble you again at 
more length. A variety of occupations will make 
that, however, impossible on the present occasion, 
which I regret, because you will probably be still 
too much engaged when this arrives to have much 
spare time for perusing previous letters. You 
will have observed that the good fortune of Great 
Britain and of Mr. Pitt brought us the news of 


1 Sylvester Douglas (1743-1823), first Baron Glenbervie; 
was a member of the Board of Control. 


1805] ACRE 99 


the defeat of Macdonald on the Trebbia? which 
is, in truth, the annihilation of the French in Italy, 
the day before the closing of the session. — Since 
then we have learned that Buonaparte has: been 
totally overthrown before. Acre and there is 
every reason to suppose that he is by this time 
either a prisoner with Sir S. Smith, or put to 
death by the Turks. This will have'ended that 
extravagant and absurd expedition, extravagant 
and absurd, although it seems to have been the 
result of plans, enquiries, and deliberation collected 
and formed during a long course of years both by 
the old and the late Guvernments of France. 

We have never been so apt as the French 
to mistake what is in reality only gigantic 
and wild, for magnanimous and achievable. Ut 
pueris placeant et declamatio fiat might, I believe, 
. with great truth have been conjectured to be the 
principal motives of Buonaparte and his band of 
heroes and philosophers when they embarked ; 
but their enterprise will now scarcely be rewarded 
with that sort of fame. The new revolution at 
Paris has produced a chaos of accusation, reproach, 
and recrimination among the ex-directors and 
ex-ministers, in which nobody is sorry to see my 
old acquaintance, the apostate Talleyrand, taking 
a chief share. In short, the prospect of entirely 
crushing the revolutionary monster has never been 
so fair. The French are [no]better than driven home 
from Italy ; they are pushed to the left banks of 
the Rhine from the Grisons to Strasburg. The 


1 Suvoroff inflicted a crushing defeat on Macdonald on the 
Trebbia on June ro. 


100 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1708- 


secret expedition now ready will probably force 
them back through Holland and Flanders within 
their northern frontier. At home they are all 
anarchy, bankruptcy, discontent, ‘and dismay, and 
Lord St. Vincent or Lord Meath is at this moment 
in pursuit, or, as we hope, has by this time 
overtaken and defeated the best French fleet 
which will probably for many years venture to 
navigate the ocean in a hostile manner. 

It would require a more than common store of 
moderation and sobriety of temper not to give way 
to sanguine hopes and feelings on such a state of 
things. Still, however, we are in the power of 
fortune. The combined fleets may have outrun 
the British squadron ; they may escape to Cadiz, 
Ferrol, or Brest; they may even reach Ireland, 
and by landing a large army, which they are said 
to have on board, rekindle the rebellion in that 
country. Such an event might stop the expedition 
to the Continent, or disappoint its success. This 
is all possible, but far less to be apprehended than 
the use the continental part of the present coalition 
may make of their successes. All coalitions are 
composed of elements in their nature discordant, 
and we have too much knowledge of the selfish 
and blind policy which has hitherto guided the 
counsels of some of the members of the present 
Grand Alliance, not to tremble a little amidst our 
hopes that their own experience and the com- 
manding genius of this nation and Government 
may compel them to act on those many principles 
which will alone make them and us to reap and 
secure the fruits of so much blood, treasure, and 


1805] | AN OLD FRIENDSHIP 101 


victory. It seems of the first importance, in this 
state of things, that we should have able men 
abroad, especially with those Governments whose 
politics are now of more importance than their 
armies ; and this, one is happy to think, is being 
much the case. Whether it is Sir C. Whitworth? 
or any other agent who influences’ the Court of 
Petersburg, nothing can be so right as the spirited 
and cordial co-operation there. Mr. Grenville’s 
sense and prudence will no doubt make as much 
of the strange and mysterious Cabinet of Berlin 
as sense and prudence in conjunction with the 
dictates of their own true interest and their honour 
can. Wickham has proved himself a judicious 
and conciliating Minister, and is returned to 
Switzerland, and I have great hopes from Lord 
Minto? at Vienna, because I know him to be a man 
of the most cultivated and refined understanding, 
of calm and sedate manners, of the soundest 
principles and the strictest honour. I own his 
appointment has given me much pleasure, added 
to the anxiety of an old and disinterested friend- 
ship and intimacy of above thirty years. It isa 
natural and [I trust a liberal and pure sentiment 
which renders the interest you feel in these great 
public transactions, in which the happiness and 
glory of one’s country are involved, more lively 

1 Sir Charles Whitworth (1752-1825), Envoy-Extraor- 
dinary to the Court of St. Petersburg, 1789-1800. Created 
Baron, 1800, Viscount, 1813, and Earl Whitworth, 1815. 

2 Sir Gilbert Elliot (1751-1814), created Baron Minto of 
Minto, 1798, was Minister-Plenipotentiary at Vienna, 1799. 
He became President of the Board of Control, 1806, and held 


the office of Governor-General of India from 1807 until 1813. 
He was promoted Earl of Minto, 1813. 


102 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


and pregnant when connected with the reputation 
and fortunes of a private friend. There is 
certainly, besides personal ambition, an ambition 
for one’s country, and a third sort which holds a 
middle place, as ambition for one’s friend. Ihave 
little right and less opportunity or prospect of 
gratifying the first ; I hope I possess the second as 
strongly as becomes a person who has the happiness 
of being born and living under this constitution, 
and I own I like to indulge the last. I have known 
my friend Lord Minto’s genius, I have known his 
statesmanlike acquirements and turn of mind; 
so have several other better judges. But circum- 
stances long prevented those qualities from emerg- 
ing out of private life, and society is never quite 
sure, before trial, whether partiality or affection 
may not exaggerate the talents and overlook some 
latent defects belonging to those of whom we have 
conceived a high opinion. J am not sure, my dear 
Lord, whether I have had the good fortune to be 
long enough or sufficiently intimate with you to 
justify me. in troubling you with those effusions 
of my private affections, but if they are natural 
and liberal, as I feel them to be, I think you will 
see them with indulgence and pardon this trespass 
upon your time. Since our acquaintance com- 
menced I have experienced sufficient kindness 
from you to encourage that sort of indiscretion, and 
I have the good fortune to be connected with a 
family whose early impressions of friendship with 
you remain uneffaced and whose frequent and 
affectionate recollection of you almost persuade me 
to believe myself a much older and more intimate 


1805] THE IMPORTANCE OF CEYLON 103 


acquaintance of yours than my own knowledge 
and memory would justify. After what I have 
said you must, permit me to add that I feel a 
personal interest similar to what I have described 
in regard to Lord Minto for the event of the great 
objects which you are now pursuing. [I have little 
fear for their success and that harvest of honour 
and fame which I am sure you will consider as the 
highest reward, next to the consciousness of having 
meant to do good and the certainty of having 
done it. 

The ships lately arrived have brought us letters 
of the 5th of March trom Ceylon. Frederick 
was then happy in the thoughts of seeing you in 
a week or two. According to his accounts and 
those of Major Robertson, whom he has sent 
over, there is a good prospect of a considerable 
revenue from his island. Mr. Robertson says 
nine lacs of pagodas, or, after paying seven lacs 
for the civil and military establishment, a surplus 
of two lacs, which is, I believe, about £80,000. 
The support of so many civil and military subjects 
of this country alone, exclusive of the surplus, is 
surely a national advantage, and the great 
importance of Trincomalé to the safety of our 
Indian shipping, trade, and fortunes, if it is such 
as I have always understood it to be, will, I dare 
say, make you very unwilling to give your consent 
or opinion in favour of the cession of Ceylon on a 
peace. I am persuaded that, before this time, 
events have happened under your direction which 
will have rendered any claim of that sort equally 
inadmissible and absurd. I find North is much 


104 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1708- 


embarrassed as to the administration of justice, 
civil, military, and naval, but that you and Sir 
J. Anstruther? have recommended a gentleman to 
him from whom he expects to derive very useful 
assistance. I should suppose civil and criminal 
justice will be necessarily in an awkward, unsettled 
state till a peace and a certainty as to the retention 
of the island. There are, I believe, always nice 
and knotty points relative to jurisdiction in your 
Indian territories, connected with the remaining 
vestiges of nominal sovereignty in the Mogul. 
Perhaps it has been wise still to leave those 
vestiges, though they were scarcely traceable in 
Lord Cornwallis’ judicial and legislative regula- 
tions. But as to military laws, is there any 
reason why the Government of Ceylon should not 
be authorised to hold or appoint courts martial ? 
Though I ask this question, I daresay long before 
now the matter has been arranged in consequence 
of his communications with you, and your decision 
or correspondence on the subjects. I find the new 
court of the Recorder at Madras proves to be an 
awkward machine, whether from’ the principle of 
its construction, or the qualities and circumstances 
belonging to some of its component parts. I sus- 
pect from both.. You remember a grand new 
charter of justice, which had occupied years and 
years of discussion and consideration, and seemed 
at last, just before I came to the India Board, 
almost ripe for the great seal? Suddenly this 
charter vanished out of sight, and one on the 


1 Sir John Anstruther, Bart. (1753-1811), Chief Justice of 
Bengal, 1797-1806. 


1805] AN AWKWARD ARRANGEMENT 105 


reduced scale of the statute of 37 G.3. took its 
place, and was perhaps hurried through a little 
too hastily. J say this confidentially, for I had 
bestowed much time and labour to understand 
the subject (having been encouraged so to do), and 
when I was prepared to communicate any result 
of my labour, which might have been useful, or 
to give any assistance which industry could have 
afforded, the papers were sent for rather abruptly, 
and the first I heard of the new charter and act was 
when the latter was introduced into the House of 
Commons. I do not think this was at all owing 
to Dundas, nor do I call it the fault of anybody. 
I think it was the impatience, and perhaps too 
precipitate judgment, of some friends of my own 
and yours; but I believe it has produced a sort 
of half-measure which will not stand, and that it 
will be necessary yet to resort back to the principles 
which had arisen out of the former discussions, 
or, at least, alter and modify very much what has 
been established. JI have received and seen a long 
correspondence on the subject. You will, being 
on the spot, notwithstanding other greater objects, 
be bound, I should think, to attend to it, and I 
shall probably see what you may write to Dundas 
or the Company upon it, and rece.ve information 
and correction of mistakes I may be under in 
that way. Or perhaps you may mention it to 
myself. I have by Dundas’ desire sent him the 
other day some observations on what has already 
been written from Madras upon it. 

Lord Clive writes to his relations and friends in 
the strongest and most cordial terms in regard to 


106 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1708- 


you and your behaviour to him. I am glad you 
have such reason to be pleased with him. It was 
to, be expected that Lady Clive would not find 
much to amuse her, and I think I have heard that 
Lord Clive’s health has not been very good, from 
both which circumstances perhaps he may long 
for London and Oakley Park. I have not, how- 
ever, heard any rumour of that sort. 

I intend to wait upon Lady Mornington before 
I close this letter, which Lubell has promised to 
send by the first overland opportunity. Sir H. 
Cottrell has desired me to mention again to you. 
Mr. Marriott, the son’ of Mr. Randle Marriott, of 
_ Thirsk, who was long in India, and who interpreted, 
it seems, for Lord Teignmouth,’ at Lucknow, and 
is desirous of being employed in that way. Another 
person I wish to mention to you is a Mr. Elphin- 
stone? nephew to Lord Keith} and for this 
reason: I received lately a letter from Lord Keith 
expressing very kind intentions towards a nephew 
of my own, who is a midshipman in his fleet, 
and adding a request that I would recommend 
Mr. Elphinstone to your attention. He is in the 
Civil Service, and, Lord Keith says, has not met 
with the promotion he might have expected. ° 

Our friend, Sir J. Anstruther, has sent Dundas 
and myself the particulars of the reform he has 


* Sir John Shore (see ante, p. 25), was created Baron 
Teignmouth in 1798. 

* Probably Mountstuart Elphinstone (1779-1859), who 
entered the Bengal Civil Service in 1796. He was Governor 
of Bombay, 1819-4827, when he was offered the post of 
Governor-General of India, which he declined. 

8 George Keith Elphinstone, Viscount Keith (1746-1823); 
Admiral. 


1805] AN INTELLIGENT JUDGE 107 


commenced, and I am glad to find his proceedings 
have been approved of and confirmed by the 
Government. I daresay he will prove a strict 
and intelligent judge. You learned his abilities 
and other qualities so well before that I am 
persuaded he will derive great benefit and assist- 
ance from your personal acquaintance and regard. 
You see, Lord Cornwallis’ speech and the King’s 
announce perseverance in the measure of union. 
Lord Castlereagh says the prospect improves in 
and out of Parliament. I am sorry to find your 
brother, Mr. Pole, is against,it. Our parish priest, 
your other brother, who is very popular in society, 
and also in the pulpit, is now in Ireland. If Dr. 
Ewart has sent over an impeachment of Fred 
North, I presume you know the circumstances. 
He must, I think, be mad 


Lorp AUCKLAND TO THE EARL OF MORNINGTON 
Eden Farm: September 15, 1799 

Mr. Willis having informed me that the second 
division of Indiamen may probably sail from 
Portsmouth in three or four days, I avail myself 
of the occasion to write a few lines immediately, 
and shall probably risk a further packet to 
Portsmouth in the course of next’ week. In the 
great outcome of politics, the French Directory 
continues to show no disposition towards a 
pacification ; and, thank God, this country begins 
at Jast to understand that a peace with such a 
Government would probably bé worse than a 
continuance.of the war. The same sentiment 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 245. 


108 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1708- 


seems to be making way, though late, into the 
Cabinets of Europe. The Emperor of Russia has 
furnished us with one squadron, which is of some 
little use in the protection of the Channel, and a 
further squadron is expected. He is also proposing 
to send a large squadron into the Mediterranean, 
if the Porte will consent to its passing pro hic 
vice through the Dardanelles, The Porte professes 
the greatest alarm and indignation at the proposed 
division of Egypt by Buonaparte. The Emperor 
of Germany is tacitly strengthening and disciplin-- 
ing his army in the hope of finding some favourable 
moment to drive the French out of Italy. The 
conferences at Rastadt never suspended, and the 
French threaten an immediate renewal of the war. 
I can say nothing good yet of Prussia. The people 
of Italy are showing themselves impatient under 
the French yoke, and the French troops’ are 
frequently assassinated. The Swiss are not less 
impatient. The Dutch are more than ever in the 
hands of France, and are supposed to have ten or 
twelve ships of the line in readiness; only they 
have not sailors for half of that number. At 
Brest there are about sixteen ships of the line, and 
seven or eight apparently in complete readiness. 
There are reports that Richez, with a small 
squadron, stole out some weeks or months ago, 
and went toward the Isles de France, with the 
intention to meet Buonaparte in the Red Sea ; but 
so far as I can learn there is-no ground whatever 
to credit these-ingenious suppositions. At this 
hour we know nothing relative to Buonaparte 
except a Constantinople letter, which says that 


1805] ENGLAND’S PROSPERITY 109 


he took possession of Alexandria on the 8th July 
(clearly as a proceeding of hostility and without 
any preparation of magazines, etc.). We also 
know that on the 22nd of July Nelson was off 
Syracuse, after a long and fruitless search of 
Buonaparte, in the course of which he called off 
Alexandria. In all this there is such wonderful 
ill-luck that one is tempted to ascribe it to the 
immediate interference and directing Hand of 
Providence. 

This story. was a grievous disappointment to us. 

I now come to our own good island. She is as 
right-minded as ever, and ¥ery prosperous. The 
old taxes will be more productive this year than 
in any year since 1792. The last loan, though 
made on terms much more favourable to the public 
than the loan of the former year, is now at six and 
a half premium. We are preparing the plan of 
supplies for the next year, which will consist 
chiefly in generalising and enforcing the con- 
tribution of one-tenth upon all incomes whatever, 
except those under {60 a year, and in a more 
moderate scale of contribution from £60 to £200 
a year. We have great hopes that we can put 
this pressure at last into a practicable shape, and 
that we may state it at seven or eight millions a 
year. The three per cents. are now at fifty, and 
we have no doubt but that our Land Tax Measure 
will in a few weeks raise that higher, notwith- 
standing the expected pressure of the next loan. 

As to Ireland, I will say little. I send you the 
report of the Secret Committee, which is drawn 
with great ability (by Lord Clare). You will be 


IIo THE WELLESLEY PAPERS — [1798- 


amused by the figure which Grattan makes in it, 
and will be more amused by the letter which the 
Duke of Portland must soon, I presume, write 
to dismiss such a Privy Counsellor. 

My other enclosure gives you the catastrophe 
of the Irish invasion. The newspapers will best 
give you all the preceding details. I confess that 
I was beginning to think it a drama of somewhat 
more than five acts, but though it is mortifying 
that the landing of 1,000 French should create such 
a bustle during nineteen days, the result cannot 
fail to discourage further attempts of the same 
kind, and to lessen ard destroy the hopes which 
the French and the rebels were disposed to place 
ineach other. In the course of Lake’s action about 
500 of the rebels were killed, and the leaders 
mentioned by Lake (who had deserted from Lake) 
were shot after the battle. The Longford Militia- 
men at Castlebar were cut to pieces by our troops 
on being found with arms in the French service. 
It is now to be considered what can be done with 
regard to Ireland. Lord Clare is coming over to us. 
Union is talked of, and many. papers upon the 
subject are on my table. But so far as 1 can judge 
it is a measure replete with difficulties, and likely 
to be strongly resisted in this country, even if it 
should be practicable as to Ireland. 

I saw Mr. Pitt yesterday at Holwood, in ee 
health (though still subject to strict diet and 
regimen), and in excellent spirits. He is now 
going for a few days to Walmer. It may be 
practicable to go on without meeting Parliament 
till the middle of November. The Speaker is 


1805] THE STATE OF EUROPE III 


well at Woodley. Lord Carrington is in York- 
shire. Lady Auckland and I dined a few days ago 
with Wilberforce at Clapham, and found him very 
happy as a married man with an increasing family. 
His child is really a very fine and stout boy. 

. The King continues in perfect health and is at 
Weymouth. Twelve thousand of the English 
militia are now serving in Ireland. Lady Auck- 
land and my daughters desire me to add their 
kindest compliments to you 


Lorp AUCKLAND to THE EARL OF MORNINGTON 
Eden Farm: October 30, 1799 

I must say something respecting the state of 
Europe and of the war, though I cannot say 
anything adequate to your own inferences from 
the perusal which you will give to the various 
truths and falsehoods accumulated in our news- 
papers. I never thought our prospects so decidedly 
good as they were generally supposed to be in the 
first week of last month, nor can I think them so 
much changed for the worse, as it is the fashion to 
believe in the last week of this month. It was in 
August not unreasonable to believe that before 
this time there would not be a Frenchman remain- 
ing either in Italy or in Switzerland or on the right 
side of the Rhine; and at present it is not 
absolutely certain that the campaign may not 
close with an army of French in Piedmont, with 
another army of French in Switzerland, and a 
third in Suabia, etc. I am still willing to believe 
that this will not be the case; much, if not the 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 £. 249. 


112 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


whole, will depend on the struggle which the Arch- 
duke and Suvéroff are now making against Massena. 
In the meantime the premium of our last loan, 
which was at twenty-one, has fallen -to three. 

"The national feelings have been deeply affected 
by the unexpected close of the Dutch business. 
There were many who at the outset of that 
enterprise thought it bad policy to expose our- 
selves to a reverse at a moment when the preval- 
ence of public. opinion gave great embarrassment 
to the Parisian pandemonium. There were others 
who thought at the time, upon our. acquisition of 
the Dutch fleet, that it’ would be wise to close the 
enterprise, and merely to keep the enemy in 
suspense as to when the next blow might fall. 
Again there were many who highly disapproved 
the sending Princes of the Blood and Presidents of 
the Council upon an expedition of severe and 
dangerous attack, in a narrow and difficult scene 
of action, and in the wet and windy approach of 
winter. Still, however, it was evident that he led 
a strong body of friends in Holland. It was 
doubtful whether the pressure against France in 
so many other parts would allow him to send an 
army ; it was now hoped that the King of Prussia, 
who had assembled troops, would at last co-operate 
with us ; and, at last, the expectations of success 
were so general and so high, that the kingdom was 
ill prepared to learn that it was become advisable 
to purchase our retreat by the surrender of 8,000 
prisoners. It is in some measure true that our 
retreat might have been less exposed to loss by 
inundating a part of North Holland; but many will 


«1805] A GLORIOUS CAMPAIGN 113 


think that such a severity would have been 
preferable to any conception that may either 
humiliate our feelings or exalt those of the enemy. 
In other respects the conduct of the Duke of York, 
of the generals under him, and of the whole army, 
has been admirable, and we gained decidedly the 
victory in those very severe engagements under 
great disadvantages of position. 

Still, although the last forty days have produced 
a great reverse in our prospects, we have made 
upon the whole a most glorious campaign, even 
without including init your superb successesin India. 
Italy has been liberated ; we have taken the valuable 
colony of Surinam and the whole Dutch fleet. 

At present the Cabinet is occupied in a measure 
to ascertain what may be expected from the 
Courts of Vienna, Berlin, and Petersburg towards 
another campaign. It is daily within possibility 
that the Directory may make offers of peace which 
the Austrian Ministers may accept. It is within 
probability that the Emperor of Russia, who 
hitherto has acted magnanimously and on the 
great scale of conceptions and exertions, may stop 
short under the influence of the passionate and 
capricious feelings which evidently predominate 
in his character; and lastly, with-respect to the 
Court of Berlin, it seems at last to be understood 
that no good is to be expected. Mr. Grenville is 
accordingly returned to England, and Mr. Garlike? 
remains chargé d'affaires. 

+ Benjamin Garlike, an early patron of Cobbett, was in the 


diplomatic service. He subsequently became Envoy at 
Constantinople, and died at an early age in 1815. 


I I 


1144 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


At any rate, the ‘period for another Budget is 
approaching. Some little aid (perhaps three or 
four millions sterling) may be obtained as a loan 
without interest for the renewal of the Bank 
Charter ; for the other part of the loan there will 
be no insuperable difficulty, nor for the taxes. 
Our revenue is more flourishing than ever, though 
commerce receives a considerable check from the 
distresses of the Continent. 

We have had a bad harvest, and the price of 
bread is rising. One word more on the subject of 
the war; it is nowaday too much a predica- 
ment in which we can make neither war nor peace. 
But, thank God, I see no change in the national 
mind, which continues as right and as firm as ever, 
and the King retains the most perfect health. 

We are at present much occupied in preparatory 
discussions for the Irish Union ; the meetings for 
the purpose have during four weeks been frequent 
and long at this place, at Holwood, and at Bul- 
strode, and we have had the assistance of Lord 
Clare and Lord Castlereagh (who is really possessed 
of excellent talents), Lord Hobart, Mr. Pellew, 
Mr. Corry,’ Mr. Cooke,? and Mr. Douglas. The 
business is now in great forwardness under the 
several heads of Representation, Commerce, and 
Contribution. 

Under the first we propose two members for 


1 Isaac Corry (1755-1813), a supporter of the Union, 
fought a duel with Grattan, 1806: He was Chancellor of the 
Irish Exchequer, 1798-1804, and Surveyor of Irish Crown 
Lands, 1799-1813. 

* Edward Cooke (1755-1820), also a supporter of the Union, 
Under Secretary for War, 1807, and for Foreign Affairs, 
1812-1817. 


1805] A CURIOUS DESERTION II5 


each county :. two for Cork, two for Dublin, and 
one for each of thirty-two principal places. Total, 
100. The franchise of the others to be indemnified 
at the rate of about £15,000 to each place. And 
for the other House, twenty-eight lay peers to be 
chosen for life, and four spiritual lords to serve by 
rotation. 

The commerce has given a good deal of trouble 
in order to reconcile its freedom to the safety of 
the revenue. The contribution to be in the 
proportion of one to six for the peace establish- 
ment, and of one to nine for the war expenditure, 
to the first period of revision, which is proposed to 
be at the end of twenty years, according to rules 
and principles which willbe stated. But experience 
has shown how much such enterprises are liable 
to delays and disappointments. If the Union 
were well carried, I really believe that it would be 
the happiest and most important event that the 
British Empire has ever known. 

At present it is meant that the Irish session 
should commence about the roth of next January, 
and the British about the 2oth. 

Among the odd events of the time, Buonaparte’s 
escape from Egypt? is curious enough. He seems 
to be the first instance of a general deserting, 
unless Lafayette’s on the smaller scale may be so 
considered ; but I believe that Liickner then 
commanded. 

2 He handed over the command of the army to Klébet and 
embarked August 23, landing at Fréjus gn October 9. Joining 


the opponents of the Directory, he caused its overthrow, 
November 9 end 10, and in December became First Consul. 


116 THE ,.WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1708- 


No moré at ‘present. My head and hand are 
tired 


While events were thus stirring’ in Europe, 
Mornington had not been idle in India. He had’ 
in September 1798 negotiated a treaty with’ the 
Nizam of Haiderabad, by which that ‘ruler dis- 
missed his French officers and received in place 
of them Sepoys under the command of British 
officers. In return it was indicated that he would 
be protected against possible foes, and in October 
1800 this was confirmed by a definite guarantee of 
the Nizam’s dominions. Matters were not, how- 
ever, so easily settled with Tipu, whose territory 
was a rallying ground for all those who objected 
to the British in India. Every preparation was 
made for war, and the command was entrusted 
to General Harris who, on March 5, 1799, 
entered Mysore, and on April 4 captured Seringa- 
patam, Tipu being killed in the assault. 

This was, of course, a great achievement, and 
Mornington was by no means inclined to minimise 
its importance, or to put at too low a figure the 
return that he expected for it. It is clear from 
his correspondence with Grenville that he thought 
a dukedom a fitting reward for his services. 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 263. 

2 George Harris (1746-1829), who in 1815 was raised to the 
peerage of the Unite1 Kingdom as Baron Harris of Seringa- 
patam and Mysore. 


TIPU SULTAN 
From an engraving by W. Ridley 


1805} FALL OF SERINGAPATAM 117 


THE EARL OF MORNINGTON fo LorD GRENVILLE 
Fort St. George: May 12, 1799 


To you I shall use no disguise, but inform you 
plainly that the manner in which I have conducted 
this war has been received with exultation, and 
even with the most unqualified admiration in 
India; and (to talk like Lord Abercorn) you will 
gain much credit by conferring some high and 
brilliant honour upon me immediately. -The 
Garter would be much more acceptable to me than 
any additional title, nor would any title be an 
object which should not raise me to the same rank 
which was given to Lord Cornwallis. Tipu Sultan 
fought better and had a much more efficient army 
than in the last war, yet the British army entered 
Mysore on the 5th March, and took Seringa- 
patam on the 4th May. Inmy conscience I believe 
the army fitted out under my eye, and commanded 
by General Harris, to be as fine as any in the world. 
I trust to you not to suffer me to be neglected. If 
my. success at Haiderabad and at Seringapatam, 
accomplished within less than twelve months, be 
not merit, I know not what the public service is, 
and I cannot return to my happy indolence at 
home too soon.* 


THE EArt OF MORNINGTON fo LORD GRENVILLE 

Private Fort St. George 

August 9, 1799 

For an account of my operations and views I 

must refer you to the despatches 4nd to the printed 

Papers, and to my brother Henry, whom I have 
1 Fortescue MSS. v. 40. 


118 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


persuaded myself to send to Dundas on the 
occasion of this important crisis. Henry is the 
only man in India, excepting myself, who is 
thoroughly master of the whole subject; and 
although it is dreadful to me to be’separated from 
him, and left here absolutely alone (Arthur being 
stationed at Seringapatam), I sacrificed my private 
comfort to my views of the public service, and 
resolved to despatch him to Europe with the 
Partition Treaty of Mysore, and the Subsidiary 
Treaty of Seringapatam—now a British garrison. 
I anticipate the satisfaction you will feel in the 
magnitude of the services which I have been able 
to render within so short a time. If they are 
estimated: and felt in Europe as ‘they are in 
India, I shall have nothing to desire in point of ' 
character... 7 


_THE EARL OF MORNINGTON to LORD GRENVILLE 
Fort William : November 29, 1799 


You seem surprised at the earnestness with’ 
which I spoke of honours, and you tell me I must 
ultimately look to English effect. But I must 
look to English effect through Indian effeg, and 
I feel every hour that, for the latter, the highest rank 
and honour are iiidispensable. This isso much my 
conscientious opinion with regard to this Govern- 
ment that (if I am deemed unworthy of such 
distinctions) my decided judgment is that some 
person should be sent here who either actually 
possesses them, or may receive them soon after his 
arrival. . . . Theopinionofthe publichete is indeed 


1 Fortescue MSS. v. 267. 


1805] | ENTHUSIASM AT HOME 119 


an honour to me such as I can never receive in the 
shape of title ;’ unless inasmuch as that form shall 
express to me the approbation of my friends and 
country. But the public opinion here will be 
affected by any coldness in England—and am I 
to expect to see my claims undervalued at home ? 
or can I bear, without the most poignant regret, 
the idea that more justice is done to me here than 
by those whom I quitted with so much grief ?* 


The news of the conquest of Mysore was received 
with enthusiasm at Leadenhall Street, and, on 
November 13, 1799, the Court of Proprietors 
passed unanimously a vote of thanks to the 
Governor-General “for the wisdom, energy, and 
decision displayed by him in the discharge of his 
arduous duty from the period of his arrival in India 
until the glorious and happy termination of the 
late war by which the power of the Sultan of 
' Mysore and the influence of the French in India 
have been crushed, events, which promise to 
establish on a “firm basis the Beene ane ; 
security of the British dominions in India.” A 
more material reward was a pension of fs 000 a 
year, granted for twenty years—a return for 
Mornington’s having declined to take his share of 
the prize-money collected at Seringapatam. “I 
understand,” he had written to Dundas, “‘ that if 
the reserved part or the prize taken at Seringa- 
patam, consisting of prize-money and ordnance, 


1 Fortescue MSS. vi. 49. 


120 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1708- 


should come into the possession of the Company, it 
is their intention to grant the whole to the army, 
reserving £100,000 to be afterwards granted to me. 
I am satisfied upon reflection you will perceive 
that the accepting such a grant would place me 
in a very humiliating situation with respect to 
the army; and, independent of any question of 
character, or of the dignity and vigour of govern- 
ment, I should be miserable if I could ever feel 
that I had been enriched at the expense of those 
who must ever be the object of my affection, 
admiration, and gratitude, and who are justly 
entitled to the exclusive possession of all that a 
munificent King and an admiring country can 
bestow. Even if the independence of my family 
were at stake, which I thank God it is not, I never 
could consent to establish it on an arrangement 
injurious to the conquerors of Mysore.’’? 

The British Government, too, desired to honour 
Mornington, and Pitt’s proposal that the Governor- 
General should be advanced to the dignity of a 
Marquess in the Irish peerage was approved by 
the King. The honour was gazetted in December, 
and Wellesley (aS he must henceforth be called) 
received the news towards the end of April (1800). 
“I cannot describe my anguish of mind in feeling 
myself bound by every sense of duty and honour 
to declare my bitter disappointment at the 
reception which the King has given to my services, 

1 Pearce: Wellesley, i. 337. 


1803] BITTER DISAPPOINTMENT raz 


and at thé ostensible mark of favour that he has 
conferred upon me,” he wrote at once to Pitt. 
“In England, as in India, the disproportion 
between the service and the reward would be 
imputed to some opinion existing ‘in the King’s 
mind of my being disqualified by some personal 
incapacity to receive the reward of my conduct. I 
leave you to judge what the effect of such.an 
impression is likely to be on the minds of those 
whom he is appointed to govern, and with what 
Spirit or hope of success he can attempt to take 
that lead among the allies which it must now be 
the policy of the British Government to assume 
in India. I will confess openly that as I was 
confident there had been nothing I7tsh or pinch- 
beck in my conduct or in its result, I felt an equal 
confidence that I should find nothing Irish or 
pinchbeck in my reward. My health must 
necessarily suffer with my spirits, and the mortify- 
ing situation in which I am placed will soon become 
intolerable to me. You must therefore expect 
either to hear of some calamity happening to me 
or to see me in England, where [ shall arrive in 
perfectly good spirits, in the most cordial good 
temper with all my friends, and in the most firm 
resolution to pass the remainder of my life in the 
country, endeavouring to forget what has been 
inflicted upon me.” The letter is signed, ‘‘ Morn- 
ington (not. having yet received my double-gilt 
potato).” 


122 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1708- 


A step in the Irish peerage was, indeed, a poor 
reward, but it is noteworthy that not his protests 
at this time, nor his subsequent services, ever 
resulted in Wellesley securing higher rank, though, 
to the end of his days, he ardently desired a 
dukedom. 


.THE EARL OF LIVERPOOL to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 


London: February 14, 1800 


I beg leave to offer to your Lordship my 
sincerest congratulations on the capture of Seringa- 
patam, and of all the dominions of Tipu Sultan, 
and on the great honour and reputation, which 
your Lordship has acquired by your conduct in 
every part of this business. I do assure your 
Lordship that the public here are unanimous in 
their approbation of it. 

We are still under the necessity of continuing 
the war against France. Your Lordship will read 
in the public papers an account of the revolution 
which took place in the Government of France on 
the goth of last November [the overthrow of the 
Directory]. All the republican principles which 
the politicians’ and philosophers of that country 
have endeavoured to propagate for the last ten 
years are now abandoned and rejected by the 
avowal of the members afid supporters of the 
present French Government. That Government 
is no longer a republic, but a military despotism, 
under the direction of Buonaparte. Your Lord- 
ship will also see by the printed papers in what 


1805] RUSSIAN TROOPS 123 


manner HiS Majesty has been advised to reject the 
propositions for peace made by Buonaparte. The 
two Houses of Parliament have approved of this 
advice, and, in truth, the administration of the 
country was never more firmly established, nor 
more popular and triumphant, than it is at present. 
Our connections with foreign powers are still 
subject to great uncertainty and embarrassment. 
Though the Emperor of Russia is cordially con- 
nected with Great Britain in all that relates to the 
war, he does not agree, nor can he be made to 
agree, with his brother, the Emperor of Germany. 
The Emperor of Russia pursues the war on the 
simple principle of restoring the Government of 
France, as well as all ancient Governments. The 
Court of Vienna look to nothing else but the 
agerandisement of the power of the House of 
Austria, and will not adopt any ancient principle, 
Or support any former system, except so far as it 
does not interfere with their ambitious views, 
which are to them a more favourite object. It has 
been found, also, that though the Russian common 
soldiers are the bravest in the world, their troops 
in general, from the defect of their regimental 
officers, are not so good as there was reason to 
expect; and as these troops canno?, therefore, act 
alone with a prospect of success, it is impossible, 
on the other hand, to induce the Austrians to act 
with them. Suvéroff, who is a sort of savage with 
great talents and vigour of mind, acknowledges 
himself that he can do nothing without the 
assistance of an Austrian Etat-Major and Austrian 
artillery, and the Government of Vienna will not 


124 THE’ WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1798- 


suffer him to avail himself of their co-operation in 
this respect. Under these difficulties, we have 
been forced to relinquish the assistance we 
expected to receive from the Russian army in 
Germany. The whole, or at least the greatest 
part, of it will march back into their own country. 
The subsidy we paid on this account will cease, 
and we shall employ our money in hiring German 
treops to act in conjunction with the Austrian 
army in Germany. 

The Austrian troops in this quarter will be very 
numerous—100,000 men at the least, and they will 
be supported by a large body of other German 
troops, which Great Britain will take into her pay. 
The Austrian army in Italy will also amount to 
100,000 men, and they will be assisted in the 
north of Italy by a body of Piedmontese troops. 
After this latter army has made itself master of 
Genoa, one-half of it are to endeavour to make 
their way into Dauphiné, while the remainder 
defends the passes by which the French might 
descend from Switzerland into Italy. A large 
body, however, of Russian troops will be employed 
in the southern parts of Italy, where the King of 
Naples is prevented from returning to his Italian 
dominions by the tumults and insurrections which 
still prevail among his subjects in those parts; 
and a part of these will probably be employed in 
endeavouring to get posséssion of Malta. You 
will see, from the Egyptian intercepted corre- 
spondence (a copy of which I have no doubt will be 
sent to you), the state of the French army in 
Egypt, where they will certainly perish if we can 


1805] PLANS OF CAMPAIGN 125 


prevent sutcour being sent them, and if the 
undisciplined Turks can be induced to act so as 
only to endeavour to intercept their communi- 
cation by land, and not suffer themselves to be 
drawn into a general engagement, in which they 
will always be beat. I could wish that a sufficient 
number of the Company’s troops, which are under 
your Lordship’s command, could be employed to 
take firm possession of some strong post that 
could command the straits of Babelmandeb, for 
Commodore Blankett? writes me word that the 
passage up the Red Sea, and the communication 
by land to Alexandria, is much more practicable 
than has been commonly imagined. We have 
15,000 Russian troops in our pay, now stationed in 
Guernsey and Jersey, where we are endeavouring 
to bring them into a more correct state of discipline. 
They are ready to make impressions on the French 
coast, and to assist any insurrections that may 
happen. They will at least have the effect of 
occupying the attention of a great number of 
French troops, and creating a very considerable 
diversion. We have, besides, in this country 
50,000 disposable troops to be employed in any 
expedition which it may be thought advisable to 
undertake, and we expect many insurrections in 
different parts of France in the beginning of the 
summer. 

At the time I write the great contest is going on 
at Dublin in the Irish House of Commons, with 

2 Commodore, afterwards Rear-Admiral, John Blankett 


(died 1801) served as Commander of the British fleet in the 
&yptian operations. 


126 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1798- 


respect to a Legislative Union. I thitik it will be 
carried, though the resistance that is made to it 
is powerful, very angry, and very tumultuous. I 
have thus taken the liberty of giving your Lord- 
ship a short picture of the state of things in 
Europe.’ 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo LORD GRENVILLE 
Fort Wiliam: May 1, 1800 

Pitt, Dundas, and Bernard will tell you how I 
have been distressed by my Irish honours, and 
what their effect is likely to be here ; they will tell 
you that I must come home, if I am to continue 
an Irish Lord, and to receive no higher marks of 
tne King’s sense of my services. But I shall 
return in perfect good-humour with myself and 
my friends, and exactly in a disposition to become 
a Buckinghamshire or Berkshire freeholder, and 
to remain a country gentleman to the end of my 
days, talking over Indian politics with Major 
Massacre, and Mrs. Hastings, and the Major 
Majorum, not forgetting Major Aprorum, Rennell ; 
and with your speech, and the votes of both 
‘Houses, framed, over my parlour chimney. 

With respect to grants of money, I cannot 
accept any grant which shall be, or shall appear to 
me, a deduction from the prize-money of the 
army. Dundas has been most kind in the pains 
he has taken on the subject. 

I am tolerably well, but in bad spirits, and 
annoyed by fetlings of mortification and disap- 
pointment, which I shall soon forget when I have 

1 Add. MSS.°37308 £. 279. 


1805] “MY NEW BROGUES” 127 


shuffled offthis mortal coil, and arrived on English, 
not Breetish, nor Ivish, ground. 

Despatch the overland express, and, for God’s 
sake, bring me home, home, home; home first, 
home last, home midst. 

No official letter has reached me'respecting my 
new brogues, and it would not be correct to put 
them on before I get them, by Jasus} 


THE Eart BatTHuRST to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
Cirencester: May 28, 1800 
I never was much acquainted with your brother ® 
before he went to India: since his return I have 
made a point of seeing a good deal of him, and like 
him very much, for many reasons, but particularly 
for the great interest he seems to take in all your 
wishes and pursuits, about which he took several 
opportunities of speaking to me. I told him what 
I had told Lady Wellesley, that I thought in the 
way in which titles had been for some time 
distributed, the making you a Marquess was not by 
any means an adequate reward for your services. 
T heartily wish there had been no engagement to 
prevent you having immediately a Blue Ribbon, 
which, from being a personal distinction, would 
have been particularly desirable to you. He 
seemed exceedingly anxious upon other points 
about which he knew you to be, and we had much 
conversation respecting all the difficulties which 
® Fortescue MSS. vi. 209. 


* The Hon. Henry Wellesley was sent home with despatches 
Concerning the conquest of Mysore. 


128 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1708- 


attended them. I intended to have ‘nad a con- 
versation with Pitt, but I have not forthe last two 
months been in the way of seeing him, and I am 
at last obliged to leave London last Friday without 
having done so. The Speaker, however, told me 
that Pitt would certainly seeand converse with your 
brother before he went, and would write a letter to 
you, which, of course, would be more satisfactory 
to you. Iam afraid there will be great difficulties 
in getting a title for your son. If it could be done 
at all the way would be by a direct creation, and 
not by descent, and that would be better managed 
after your return (when he and his mother would 
be older) than just now. His talents, and his 
manners, which are without exception the best I 
ever saw any boy possessed of, together with the 
fortune which you will be enabled to settle upon’ 
him if you continue in India your five years, 
and should have no more children, which Lady 
Wellesley’s age, you will recollect, does not make 
it by any means impossible on your return: all 
these circumstances, I say, will make his situation 
in life so advantageous that his prospects must be 
satisfactory to you, even if you were not to succeed 
in this object. Nothing, I hope, will induce you 
to return before the expiration of the five years, 
not only on account of the difference it must make 
in your pecuniary concerns, but in what I am sure 
affects you much more than that or any con- 
sideration of rewards. I mean, your credit as a 
public character, which would certainly not stand 
in the very high light your friends have the 
satisfaction of finding itZdoes at present. I can 


1805] NOTABLE INVALIDS 129 


speak of this the more confidently from the kind 
of observations which were made upon the report 
of your coming home a few months ago, and which, 
whenever I heard them, I contradicted. 

Pitt’s health has not been for these last two 
months as good as we could wish, and any exertion 
seems always to affect him, which you know used 
not to be the case. But this has only been the case 
the last two or three months, for in the wintey I 
think he was looking better than he has done for 
a long while. 

Dundas is by no means strong, and requires 
great care and attentior? to keep himself well. 
You will see by the newspapers that there has 
been a great division about a Divorce Bill, partly 
from difference of opinion respecting the Bill 
itself, but partly from a sort of wish in many in the 
House of Lords to take an opportunity of running 
at Grenville ; and the Duke of Clarence is certainly 
desirous of establishing a sort of princely influence 
in the House, which I think will in time become 
troublesome. 

A great deal of, all this, however, certainly 
proceeds from there being no regular Opposition. 
The secession dissolved what did exist, and the 
principal members of it have quagrelled too much 
to unite without some immediate prospect of 
success. The Prince of Wales has been during the 
whole winter looking so ill that it was not thought 
he would survive the year, but he is now much 
better, and his physician, Sir William Farquhar, 
says he is well, if he could but “think himself so, 
and his friends take great pains to declare this 

I K 


130 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1798- 


everywhere; but he is still subject-to violent 
spasms, for which he takes a great quantity of 
Jaudanum: this can hardly be imagination. He 
dines with everybody. What think you of his 
making Tom Tyrwhitt! give him a dinner in order 
to meet William Jackson; and that not for the 
purpose of making him drunk, for Jackson com- 
plained afterwards he had not had wine enough. 

our brother will tell you all the news, etc. I 
do not know whether you have not some intention 
of making some purchase in the country ; the sea 
generally agrees with you so well that you will 
probably wish to settle near it, but, if not, it 
strikes me that Park Place, which Lord Malmes- 
bury * bought, would suit you on account of the 
distance from London and the beauty of the 
place. Lord Malmesbury has made the house a 
very good one, I understand, and now wishes to 
part with it, as he always gets tired of any place, 
and his son does not like it because there is no good 
shooting, which I think would not be an objection 
to you ®. 


THE MARQUESS OF BUCKINGHAM to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 


Chelmsford : August 25, 1800 
T have just learnt that your brother leaves town 


1 Thomas Tyrwhitt, an intimate of the Prince of Wales. 
He was subsequently knighted, and acted as Black Rod. 

3 James Harris, first Earl of Malmesbury (1746-1820), 
diplomatist. He had negotiated the marriage between the 
Prince of Wales and Princess Caroline of Brunswick. His 
Diaries were published in 1844. 

3 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 290. 


1805] UNEXPECTED REVERSES = 131 


to-morrow for India, and I cannot suffer him to 
see you without reminding you of the unabated 
interest I take in all I hear about you. The 
public approbation of your conduct seems still 
as high as ever, and has not been lessened by the 
envy which has arisen in consequence of the 
remunerations given to you, which are in every 
point exactly what I wished for you. I have put 
into my brother’s hands two days ago a proposal 
(which we both thought in many points highly 
eligible for you) for the purchase of Burke’s house 
down at Beaconsfield. This is (peculiarly to you) 
truly classic ground, but it is close to Dropmore, 
and not far from Stowe; and your nearest 
neighbour is our friend Lord Carrington,’ who has 
established himself with great alterations at Lord 
Lansdowne’s at High Wycombe. I have not heard 
for the last two days the result of my brother’s 
enquiries, but if he and your friends approve this 
purchase it would make me very happy. 

The most unexpected reverse of everything that 
was hoped for on the continent has so entirely 
routed every speculation founded on former 
history either of war or of policy, that I have 
closed my book of speculation and am content to 
take the events as they arise. But it seems to me 
most clear that Vienna will make her peace with 
France, because it is most clear that Buonaparte 
must give her good terms, in order that he may 
secure his existence, which depends wholly on 
peace. And the next fear I entertain is that he 


1 Robert Smith, first Baron Carrington (1752-1838), a 
supporter of Pitt, who raised him to the peerage in 1796. 


132 THE WELLESLEY’ PAPERS _ [1798- 


will offer to England, from the same metives, such 
terms’ as Mr. Pitt dare not refuse, and yet such as 
in my mind will give us up to the very increased 
power of France. I understand that his situation 
is very critical, and that, if he fails in his Austrian 
peace, the Jacobins will overthrow him. He is 
now urging upon our backs a Northern armed 
neutrality, with whom we have actually grappled 
by- the detention of this Danish frigate. My 
brother is sanguine in his hopes that Lord Whit- 
worth’s negotiation, backed by Admiral Dickson, 
who was off Elsinor with nine ships and four bomb- 
ketches on the 11th, will settle this dispute. But 
I own that I do not agree with him on this subject, 
for I cannot persuade myself but that this matter 
had been previously settled by Russia. If, how- 
ever, it is true that Paul is reconciling himself to 
Austria, it is possible that he will leave the Dane 
to settle his own quarrel with us. I do not, how- 
ever, know why I trouble you with this nonsense ; 
for, interested as your Government is in the 
chapter of Danish hostility, or amity, you will 
have had the best materials for’ deciding upon this . 
question. 
I trust that you will not be sorry to see my 
son’s name’ to-the despatches from the Board of 
1 Richard Temple Nugent Brydges Chandos Grenville 
(1776-1839), elder son of the Marquess of Buckingham, entered 
arliament in z797. He accepted the office of a Commissioner 
of the Board of Control on July 2, 1800, but resigned in the 
following March. He succeeded his father as (second) 
Marquess in 1813, ai.d nine years later was created Duke of 


Buckingham and Chandos. His Private Diary was published 
in 1862. 


1805] | A YOUNG GRENVILLE 133 


Control. *He is named a Supernumerary Com- 
missioner and without pay, a situation that 
exactly meets his wishes; and I trust that he is 
fairly embarked in those habits of business which 
are necessary to the existence of a Grenville. In 
truth he is a very discerning young man, and jf he 
continues to look to public business his talents will 
not disgrace him. It is no small part of my 
gratification that you will be able to assist his 
career by your information and opinions in that 
department. But I sincerely hope that the reports 
which I have heard of, your anxiety for your 
immediate return to England are unfounded, for 
although I should be very happy to see you once 
more safely landed, in every sense of the word, yet 
I am confident that you would severely repent any 
precipitation on this subject. The natural period 
of your return will not prolong your absence very 
much, and the difference of a year may decide 
very much upon the pride and comfort of the many 
years that I trust are in store for you, with all the 
enjoyment of what you have added to your fame, 
character, and sitfiation. You will, I know, excuse 
all I say and all I feel on these subjects, for you 
know how much I love and esteem you. 

Adieu, dear Wellesley. God give you health ! 
All the rest you have made for yourself. 

I have been very ill this spring with a fever that 
nearly carried me off. It ended by a violent 
erysipelas in my left leg, which, having been 
broken four years ago, is now so weak that I can 
hardly walk ; but I am in good health, and I am 
now (though only fit for invalid duty) with my 


134 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


regiment at Chelmsford, and on my way to Gosfield, 
where I pass the remainder of the summer. 

P.S. Could you procure for me a small pignon 
of one of the turrets or columns of Tipu’s palace ? 
My brother and I both settled that you ought to 
bring one over for yourself to be put on the summit 
of an Indian column at your Mysore, which must 
be the name of your house wherever you choose 
that part of the East India Company’s £100,000 
shall be vested 


It is needless to say that the reward merely of a 
“ double-gilt potato” did not undermine Wellesley’s 
health, albeit he was highly indignant. He 
redoubled his energies, and continued strenuously 
to put his house in order. He became the 
supreme .power in the Carnatic in 1801, and in the 
same year entered into a treaty with Oudh, by 
which the Nawab ceded a considerable territory 
in return for protection against his foes. Wellesley 
appointed his brother, Henry, to govern the new 
district. For this he was attacked by the Directors 
of the East India Company, who regarded the 
appointment as an encroachment upon their 
rights of patronage. When the Governor-General 
received letters to this effect from Leadenhall 
Street, he at once announced his intention to 
return to England as soon as his successor was 
appointed." 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 294. 
® See the letters of Addington, Wellesley-Pole, etc., in 
September 1802. 


180s] PITT’S RESIGNATION 135 


THE MARQUESS OF BUCKINGHAM to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 

February 10, 1801 

Though you will have heard from my brother 
the details of all that has happened here, yet he 
will not say to you what is necessary for you to 
know, vtz., that amongst those who quit the 
King’s service there are many who doubt the 
propriety of the resolution taken by Lord Grenville 
and Mr. Pitt of lending themselves to the King’s 
views to enable him to fight the game which they 
conceive so hazardous to,the country as to justify 
them, under all the existing circumstances of 
danger and difficulty, in resigning their situations. 
It is clear to me that the King had ‘no resource 
if Addington had not been rash enough to under- 
take the government, and it is equally clear to me 
that if the King had so found himself checkmate 
he would ultimately have given way in the religious 
scruple of his oath, which did not interfere with 
the repeal of the Irish Test Act in'1782 for the 
Dissenters, or with the Catholic relaxation in 1795. 
But these scruples have now been suggested .to 
him, and the step adopted by Mr. Pitt will give 
strength to this High Church cry. In short, this 
system is too refined for common comprehension, 
and a political line that is intended for the com- 
prehension of the people at large must be plain and 
direct. You will see that the newspapers treat 
all this as a juggle and trick that is to end in the 
restoration of Mr. Pitt, and >this is the inter- 
pretation so universally given to it that the 
stocks have hardly fallen. Judge then what the 


136, THE WELLESLEY PAPERS 1708- 


impression will be on the. public mindewhen ‘they 
find that they are abandoned to a Ministry of such. 
vapid. dregs, The details of it you will learn (as 
far“as they are known) from others. No War. 
Minister can be found, and no man hardy enough 
to go to Ireland either as Lord-Lieutenant or-as 
Commander-in-Chief. Lord Hawkesbury takes my 
brother’s office. The Duke of Portland and Lord 
Westmorland remain. Lord St. Vincent will 
possibly accept the Admiralty. Lord «Spencer 
has acted most handsomely, and has spoken to the 
King and to all who come near him in the manner 
I could wish ; so has Windham. ‘ Dundas speaks 
the same language as Pitt, and directs his nephew 
to retain his office. Lord Gower and his brother 
resign, so does Canning, Long, my son, and some 
others, but the general impression amongst the. 
office people is to gratify Mr. Pitt by retaining 
their situations. Ryder refused the seals, but 
acts as a Minister. Lord Carlisle? refused the 
Admiralty, Lord Macartney the India Board, and 
Pelham? the War Department. Cum multis aliis. 

Such, my dearest friend, is the exact state of 
this moment; on our foreign politics, on our 
internal dissensions, on our projects in Ireland and 
the long list of etzeteras, I say not a word, for you 
will have them from other hands, but Bernard. 
is waiting to close this packet 


1 Frederick Howard, fifth Earl of Carlisle (1748-1825), the 
friend of Fox and George Selwyn. 

* Thomas Pelham (1756-1826), Irish Secretary, 1795-1798. 
He was Home Secretary under Addington. He succeeded his 
father as (second) Earl of Chichester, 1805. 

3 Add. MSS, 37308 f. 321. 


WILLIAM PITTI 


1805] “VAPID DREGS” 137 


Pitt resigned the office of Prime Minister in 
March 1801, owing to the King’s refusal to consent 
to Catholic Emancipation, a measure which the 
Minister thought essential to the pacification of 
Ireland. With him retired the entire Cabinet, 
except the Duke of Portland, Lord Westmorland, 
and Lord Chatham, who retained in the new 
administration their posts of Home Secretary, 
Lord Privy Seal, and Lord President. Under 
Addington, Hawkesbury became Foreign Minister 
and Hobart War Minister. Eldon was Lord 
Chancellor, St. Vincent went to the Admiralty, 
and Lewisham to the Board of Control. 


Lorp AUCKLAND to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 


Quite private Eden Farm: ‘April 4, 1801 


You will have learnt through other channels, 
beforé you can receive this letter, that the strong 
administration of our friends is felo dese. Why it 
should have been so, is an enigma to many, and to 
none more thanto me. I was provoked to express 

this sentiment inadvertently in debate a few days 
ago, and I enclose a statement of my expressions, 
which are (I believe) very faithfully given. I 
have long been known to have a decided opinion 
on the Catholic question, and I supposed it to be 
the opinion also of those who have now taken so 
fatal a step in support of the opposite opinion. I 
lament personally that individuais whom I love 
and respect should have placed themselves in a 
predicament which will load them with the whole 


138 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


discredit, if the war should end unhappily, and 
which will give to others the whole credit of the 
result, if that result should be better than we now 
expect. J lament from more contracted motives 
that what has so strangely happened must 
necessarily separate friends from friends. I lament 
in a larger sense that the Empire has lost the only 
Government which had strength of mind and 
Public confidence in any degree adequate to the 
difficulties which are pressing upon us. I feel 
both esteem. and affection for some of the new 
Ministers, but I am not blind to the confusion 
.which forces itself upon my observation and on 
the conviction of all mankind. 

In short, my dear Lord, I wish that I could 
write a cheerfuller letter to you. Perhaps I see 
the whole history with a jaundiced eye, for I feel 
myself to a certain degree, and for a certain 
interval at least, inevitably separated both from 
those who are in and from those who have put 
themselves out. 

In the hope of avoiding all political reflections 
I am come with my family for two or three weeks 
to this place. 

The present objects of public anxiety are: 

i. The Knig’s health, which, notwithstanding 
the announced recovery, continues to be seriously 
and alarmingly shaken ; 

2. The negotiations for peace which must be 
sought by the new Government to the utmost 
verge of concession not essentially unsafe and 
dishonourable ; 

3- The Egyptian Expedition, which has loitered 


1805] SERVICES AND REWARDS 1339 


so long one the road that our expectations 
droop ; . 

4. The Baltic Expedition, which sailed with 
sanguine hopes of getting possession of the Danish 
Fleet ; those hopes are now less confident. 

I will write again soon; and I am willing to 
hope that I see matters worse than I ought to do. 

I can at least inform you that your sons are 
doing as well as possible.’ 


SCROPE BERNARD fo HENRY ADDINGTON 

Abingdon Street: May 4, 1801 

I hope you will allow me to call to your mind 
the conversations you permitted me to have with 
you on the subject of the honours granted to Lord 
Wellesley, which you are aware fall very short of 
the expectations he had entertained. The subse- 
quent successes in India and the advantageous 
treaties concluded by his Lordship, and the 
important services performed by him in every 
part of his administration, may perhaps suggest 
the propriety of recommending His Majesty to 
confer some further honour upon his Lordship. 
In that case an opportunity will be given to efface 
the disagreeable impressions which the grant of an 
Irish marquisate excited in his mind, by advanc- 
ing him from that rank to a marquisate of the 
United Kingdom. As he is already above all 
the existing earls no umbrage could be given to 
any one by such a measure; and how much his 
mind dwells upon it, and how esSeatial he considers 
it to his honour, reputation, and consideration in 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 327- 


140 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1708- 


India, and even to his peace of mind, may be seen 
by an enclosed extract of a letter which I take the 
liberty of communicating to you in explanation of 
his feelings on this subject. It is possible that 
the grant of new honours to the heroes of Copen- 
hagen may give a convenient opportunity of 
doing justice to Lord Wellesley’s claims, by 
advancing him to the title of Marquess Wellesley 
of the county of Somerset, in reward of his 
eminent services in the East subsequent to the 
date of the honours conferred upon him before. 
And considering the extent of his grief and 
disappointment, I know nothing that could be 
more gratifying to him and his friends than such 
a measure, if circumstances should enable you to 
recommend it to His Majesty? 


THe Hon. WILLIAM WELLESLEY-POLE fo THE 
MARQUESS WELLESLEY 


Hanover Square: July 3, 1801 


I do not attempt to write you any news. Your 
other correspondents are better able to do that 
than I am. I think Addington’s Government 
goes on very well. There is, in fact, less opposition 
than there was when Pitt went out, though the 
Government undoubtedly rests upon Pitt’s sup- 
port. However, I think it does so much more 
now than it will in another session. Addington is 
said to be improving as a speaker. I think by 
what I hear, and by the newspaper reports, that 
he is too candid on his legs. This,,I hope, will 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 339. 


1805] PITT IDLE 141 


mend. The ,Session is over and all the business 
has gone off very well. 

Ireland is perfectly tranquil, and will continue 
so, unless the French land. 

It would surprise you to see Pitt lounging 
through the streets in a morning, generally by 
himself, and seeming not to have anything to do. 
His friends cry him up more than ever, and so 
he never was in better spirits. He is dreadfully 
distressed in his circumstances, and Holwood is 
to be sold. It is surprising how little sensation his 
going out has made in the country: nobody 
speaks of him ; no addressés, no subscriptions, no 
stir of any kind anywhere. His particular friends 
have frequently said the City of London meant to 
come forward and pay his debts; but not the 
slightest appearance of such a thing has there 
been eastward of Temple Bar. Is not all this 
wonderful? From all I can learn, Addington 
and Pitt are as firm friends as ever they were. 

Dudley Ryder is dying... He has had a fever 
which ended in an abscess in his side that is killing 
him. Bragge will~be his successor as Treasurer 
of the Navy. 

Addington told me yesterday he would im- 
mediately write to you. He has been so harassed 
since he came in that he has not been able 
hitherto to do it. He seems mortified at your 
not having taken any notice of him for a twelve- 
month.® 


1 He lived for another forty-six years. 
2 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 344. 


142. THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


Lord AUCKLAND to THE Marquess WELLESLEY 
Private Eden Farm: August 28, 1801 


Mr. Pitt is apparently much more robust than 

he was when you left England. He must suffer 
in his private reflections from the untoward turn 
and unpromising state of the continental war, but 
he looks well, and speaks brave words at the 
breach. 
’ The Speaker, Lord Carrington, the Master of the 
Rolls, Mr. Wilberforce, Mr. Canning, etc., are all 
well, and as you left them, except that the last is 
Paymaster, and has married a pretty woman with 
a large fortune and of very pleasing manners. 
Lord Carrington resides much at his new estate 
near Wycombe, and is building there. 

Lord Castlereagh, who is a young man of 
excellent character and certainly of first-rate 
talents, is at present in England; and we are 
looking forward to the meeting of the United 
Parliament.* It is impossible to look without 
uneasiness to an amalgamation with 140 new 
legislators. The process is subject to some risk and 
uncertainty, and may be liable to fermentations, 
if not to explosions. In other respects, the more 


1 Canning married on July 8, 1800, Joan, daughter of 
Major-General John Scott, of Balcomie, in the county of Fife, 
who had a dot of {100,000. Mrs. Canning’s eldest sister, 
Henrietta, had married in 1795 William Henry Cavendish 
Bentinck, the eldest son of the third Duke of Portland. 

2 The Union of Great Britain and Ireland was proposed in 
the Irish Parliament, January 22, 1799, and was rejected in 
the Irish House of Commons. Re-introduced in February, 
after the measure~had been approved by the English 
Parliament, it was carried by substantial majorities. The 
Act of legislative union became operative on January 1, 1807. 


1805] | NAPOLEON’S SUCCESSOR 143 


I reflect on the measure of union the more I am 
convinced of its gigantic importance, and of its 
tendency to double the strength and resources of 
our Empire. 

It is more than ever desirable that the effect of 
the Union should be such as to add to,our means 
and powers; for we can no longer conceal from 
ourselves that the war is likely to end without any 
settlement of the independence of Europe, and 
with great accessions to the continental domination 
and resources of France. I do not*even think’ 
that the sudden disappearance of Buonaparte 
from the.scene of action would give any essential 
turn to affairs. _He would probably be succeeded 
by Berthier, Moreau, Massena, or some other 
“Dux, Imperator, and Consul” would take. the 
reins. In short, strange and unforeseen turns 
may take place; but, I must confess, we see 
nothing within the line of fair calculation and 
probability that tends to enable us either to push 
the war with effect, or to make a peace with safety. 
At present our,countrymen in general are well 
aware of the dilemma, and having provided for 
the expenses of the year are well contented to 
take the chapter of accidents and events. But 
the equinox is approaching, and the.demands for 
another year are coming within view, and the 
income tax is already mortgaged as far as 1808. 
Buonaparte, who, in spite of some bad and 
detestable points in his history, certainly possesses 
great qualities both in council and in the field, is 
busied in intriguing against us at the several 
Courts of Europe, by cajoleries, money, and 


144 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


negotiation, and he is proposing to renew our 
alarms respecting Ireland and Portugal. 

Our Royal Master (who, thank God, continues 
to preserve the most perfect health): stands stout 
and unshaken. His Ministers in general are also 
stout, and there may even be one or two among 
them who still talk of protecting the old French 
monarchy. Thesupport of Parliament is alsosteady. 

As to the rest, I can only say: “ Enjin, nous 
verrons.” That same battle of Marengo! was a 
most unexpected calamity of the first magnitude. 
The mildest remark that can be made upon it 
is that the Austrians were, wretched ‘dupes in 
suffering their whole attention to be turned towards 
Genoa, whilst the French army of reserve was 
breaking into Italy through a line of march which 
might have been thwarted by a corps of I,000 men. 

We have had at least one providential inter- 
ference in'our favour this year, by eleven weeks of 
the finest weather for the hay and corn that I can 
remember to have seen in any country. We 
accordingly have an early and abundant harvest, 
sufficient to have reduced the loaf already from 
184d. to 13$d., and it may be expected to be 
lowered soon to r1d. or 10d. ‘I am not so sanguine 
as many: who believe that we-shall soon see it 
again at 7d. A late and unfavourable harvest 
would have placed ‘us absolutely in a state of 
famine, for the difficulty was already great, and 

1 At the battle of Marengo, June 14, 1800, Napoleon en- 
gaged the Austrians under Melas. The French were at one 
time driven back, “and in the aftémoon the Austrians were 


masters of the field,’ but’ the arrival of Desaix tured the 
scale, and at nightfall the French were victors. 


180] | THE PRICE OF BREAD 145 


the supply in many districts was become pre- 
carious, although we had imported wheat to the 
amount of about six millions sterling, and though 
there had been a great and general reduction in 
the consumption, partly from good will and partly 
from the effect of price. The people bore the 
difficulty well,.and now that the alarm is in a 
great degree removed, they are beginning to talk 
nonsense about regrettors, forestallers, etc., and 
to persuade themselves that all the high prices 
have been fictitious ; .and these idle ideas are too 
much encouraged by some respectable magistrates 
and by many foolish Members of Parliament. 

On your return you will find thé peers of the 
United Kingdom” assembled in the Court of 
Requests, which is fitting up to receive them. 
Lord Liverpool will find it cold in every respect. 
whatsoever.. St. Stephen’s Chapel is preserved; 
and I am glad of it’; but some alterations are 
making in Solomon’sPorch,in the galleries and seats. 

And now, having written over eight pages of 
colloquial commerce, I recollect that.I, can tell 
you nothing that you will not learn better and 
more completely from your brother, and so with 
. possible kind remembrances from this house- 

old...) 


WILLIAM WILBERFORCE fo THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
Yoxall Lodge, near Lichfield 
September 3, 1801 
It may be, safely laid down as a géneral rule 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 347: 
I L, 


146 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1708- 


that we never behave ill to another without an 
injury to ourselves. The situation in which I 
now find myself is an illustration of this truth ; for 
whilst I may appear to have been inattentive to 
you, I can honestly declare that I have been 
unjust to myself, in not contributing to your 
comfort whilst abroad, according to my measure, 
by writing to you from time to time as I conceived 
anything had arisen which was worth com- 
municating to you. I could make many and no 
bad excuses, but the honest, plain matter of fact 
is this—that from various causes having delayed 
writing for some time I was ashamed to take up 
the pen. Procrastination was thus submitted to 
on principle, and now my wonder rather is, how 
I am able to break the spell, the fatal force of 
which I have so long experienced. But having a 
little leisure in the midst of a forest, I find myself 
powerfully impelled to renew my correspondence 
with you, and to express some of the sentiments and 
emotions which I have long felt. For, indeed, my 
dear Lord Wellesley, I can truly assure you (and, 
’ therefore, I repeat it, I have been highly unjust to 
myself) that though I have maintained so long - 
a silence, I have participated in the satisfaction 
which your friends must have indulged, on account 
of the wisdom and spirit which in very difficult 
and critical circumstances were so eminently 
displayed in your whole conduct, and the extra- 
ordinary success with which it pleased God to 
‘bless your measures. I must-also pay my tribute 
of acknowledgment to you for that recognition of 
the over-ruling Hand of Providence which you 


1805] AN IMPARTIAL SPECTATOR = 147 


exhibited, and in which, I will say, you showed 
that you understood the character you had 
assumed of the head and earthly representative of 
a great Empire. Olim hoc meminisse juvabii— 
the day will come when your conduct in this 
respect, as well as in others, will be looked back to 
as exhibiting the marks of sound policy as well as 
rational piety. But I know how little time you 
must have at your command, and, therefore, 
though I am willing to believe that you will not 
grudge the trouble of reading this letter, I must 
not forget that brevity is a quality highly becoming 
to those who would expect their letters to be read 
by a Governor-General of Bengal. If I were to 
begin to say anything to you of matters at home, 
when could I stop? I could almost adopt, though 
I hope with very different feelings and meaning, 
part of. Tiberius’ famous exclamation: What 
changes have taken place within the last few 
months! You have doubtless heard from others 
all that could properly be communicated by letter. 
I will, however, say two things, because I may 
consider myself a3 an impartial spectator, and 
what I say may, therefore, be less suspected of 
proceeding from any bias; first, that it was not 
possible aé last for Pitt to avoid zetiring ; and, 
secondly, that, much as you and I have been used 
on former occasions to admire his magnanimity, 
the greatness of mind with which he acted on the 
late trying occasion was such as to surprise as 
well as to delight me. And yet there seemed no 
straining, no effort ; all was natural and easy—in 
such a degree as to render you insensible to the 


148 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


extraordinary magnanimity of his conduct, until 
you recollected yourself and called in reflection to 
your aid. It is only justice to Addington to say 
that he has acted in that honourable way which 
you, I know, would have expected from him. It 
was the fashion at first to say that it would not 
do, etc. The phrase will be to you sufficiently 
intelligible, but I always maintained the contrary, 
and the event has justified my expectations. You 
would smile at Sheridan’s similes—that the state 
of the old Ministry, after Pitt, Grenville, and 
Dundas had left their colleagues, reminded him of 
what was called knocking out the brains of a 
committee ; and that it surely was a Hibernian 
way of cleaning ship, to throw the great guns 
overboard. But Addington has done very res- 
pectably in the House, and with a support like 
Pitt’s, given with what a learned friend of ours 
calls so much bonafideship, nothing is to be 
apprehended. 

I am trespassing against the resolution I made 
not to detain you long, but before I conclude I 
must vindicate myself from the charge of negli- 
gence in another particular, I mean in not having - 
waited on Lady Wellesley more frequently. The 
honest truth is that I found I talked French so 
miserably that I could not make anything out, and 
we too readily admit the attacks of procrastination 
when she is able to assault us at advantage by 
suggestions less substantial of their kind than this. 
I must break off. but not without assuring you of 

. my best wishes. I cannot express mv hopes that 
you may conquer new Tipus. Happily you have 


1805] THE MARATHAS 149 


left nothing. of that sort to do. I will only wish 
that it may please God still to render you the 
instrument of good to India, and to bestow on 
you the highest of all honours, that of being His 
agent in promoting the happiness of the many 
millions over whom you are placed, I do not 
believe that you are of a temper to forget your old 
friends, and, therefore, I take my share in your 
honours. ? 


British prestige steadily increased under the 
rule of Wellesley, who pursued his policy of enter- 
ing into treaties with the minor states, to whom he 
lent British troops, the cost of which was defrayed 
by the borrowers. The Marathas, however, were 
for some time a stumbling-block. The con- 
federacy had many heads, and what one would 
consent to the other would not. Jealousy was rife 
in every quarter, and it seemed impossible to come 
to any arrangement that would satisfy alike the 
Peshwa, Baji R4o, and Nana Farnavis, the Prime 
Minister at Poona, and the families of Sindhia, 
Bhonala, and Holkar. Nana Farnavis died, and 
one enemy of Britain had gone ; yet the situation 
was not materially simplified. The rest were still 
divided among themselves, and some of the great 
houses were at war with one another. Holkar, in 
October 1802, defeated the Peshwa and Sindhia at 
Poona, and set a pretender on the throne. Shortly 
afterwards, *he Peshwa, who had sought refuge 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 350. 


150 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


with the British, entered with his hosts into a 
compact at Bassein, agreeing to make treaties 
only, in accordance with British advice, and to 
employ, and pay for, a large British force. 


HENRY ADDINGTON to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Downing Street : September 9, 1802 


_l have to acknowledge your Lordship’s letter 
of the month of October by the Georgiana packet, 
and your subsequent communications by Colonel 
Harcourt and Colonel Monson.’ It is my intention 
to write to you fully by Colonel Harcourt in. the 
course of the ensuing week. In the meantime I 
think it material to avail myself of the overland 
despatch now preparing at the India House, for 
the purpose of expressing my earnest and anxious 
hope that at least you will not embark for Europe 
till you have received that full communication to 
which I have adverted. ‘It is necessary that you 
should be distinctly and explicitly informed of the 
sentiments of His Majesty’s confidential servants, 
and of the dispositions of the-Court of Directors. 
These will be fully ascertained in the course of 
seven or eight days, and I trust they will prove 
to be such as will enable you to remain, during the 
ensuing year, with comfort and with honour, in a 
situation where your services have been most 
splendid and important, and where they will be 
peculiarly wanted under the circumstances that will 
arise in consequence of the restoration of peace. 


+ William Monson (1760-1807), son of John, second Baron 
Monson, saw much service in India, and was engaged 
prominently in the Maratha war. 


1805] THANKS' AND COMPLIMENTS - 151 


I will only add that I am highly gratified by 
the kindness and confidence which you have 
manifested towards me in all your letters.? 


HENRY ADDINGTON to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 


Private Downing Street 
Sepiember 27, 1802 


The substance of the communication which you 
will receive from the Court of Directors, in conse- 
quence of your letters to me of the roth of January 
and the 13th of March, 1802, will, I trust, fully 
meet your wishes. I Have great pleasure in 
accompanying it by an assurance, that His 
Majesty’s confidential servants entertain a high 
sense of the magnitude and importance of your 
Lordship’s services, and that nothing has come to 
their knowledge which will prevent them from 
giving their utmost support, both in and out of 
Parliament, to the measures of your Government, 
and to those which have been conducted by your 
directors at Fort St: George. Under these cir- 
cumstances, they earnestly hope that you will be 
induced to remain in India till the end of the 
ensuing year, as they are thoroughly convinced 
that the government of that cowntry cannot be 
administered, during that period, by any person 
whatever with so much authority and advantage 
as by yourself.* 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 367. 
2 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 373. 


1§2 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


HENRY ADDINGTON to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Secret Downing Street 
September 28, 1802 

The disposition of Government, and of the 
Court of Directors, as it is manifested by the 
despatches which will be sent by Colonel Harcourt, 
will, I hope, remove all the impediments to your 
continuance in India another year, to which 

everyone with whom I have conversed attaches 
the greatest , importance. Lord Castlereagh will, 
I am’ persuadéd,” be soon on such a footing with 
the Court of Directors as, cannot fail to produce 
the best effects both in India and at home. I 
have the-greatest satisfaction in thinking that you 
will, experience them during the remaining neriod 
of your. government. 

You will learn from various quarters that an 
attack on some of your measures, and particularly 
(and, as I believe, exclusively) on the transactions 
in the Carnatic, is to be expected very early in the 
ensuing session ; but, though considerable industry 
has been exerted to excite prejudices, no appre- 
hension ought to be entertained of its ultimate 
effects. It will be repelled in the House of Lords 
by the members of Government in that House, 
by Lord Cornwzllis, and, I need not add, by Lord 
Grenville, who, however, I must say, proposed to 
me, in the handsomest manner, that we should 
invent together the course that it would be most 
advisable to pursue. In the House of Commons,- 
it is equally unnecessary for me~to tell you, you 
will have the cordial and strenuous support of 
Pitt co-operating with that of Government. 


c 
‘MESON Srith, dete, Re Fe Larne, AeReckey lithogs 
HENRY ADDINGTON, IST VISCOUYT SIDMOUTH 


« 


1805] NEWS OF HIS FAMILY 153 


Let me now thank you for the confidence and 
kindness which pervade all your letters, as far as 
I am personally concerned. Be assured that I 
shall be invariably actuated by reciprocal senti- 
ments, and that I shall connect your honour and 
happiness with my own. 

On the state of your family I heartily con- 
gratulate you; your eldest son’ is everything in | 
person, manners, disposition, and acquirements that. 
it is possible. for you to wish; and when I saw 
Gerald, which was in January last, his great object 
seemed to be to follow his brother’s example. I 
am Sorry to mention so remote a period as the. 
month of January, but you will readily believe 
that I have had little or no leisure during that 
interval. You will, I am sure, be glad to receive 
a good account of Mrs. Addington and my children. 
Harry has just left Winchester, where he has 
acquitted himself with great credit. Hilery desires 
to be most kindly remembered to you. He has 
beena greater comfort to me during the last eigh- 
teen months than it is possible for me to describe. 

Of all your other friends I am enabled to give a 
favourable account. I cannot express to you the 
satisfaction afforded to Lord Hobart, as well as to 
myself, on finding that he was ineluded in the 
number. Pitt’s health and spirits had been long 
improving, and at last appeared to be quite 
re-established, when he had a very severe attack . 
of illness. He is, however, completely recovered, 
and has determined to go to Bath during the 


present autumn. In all other respects he is 
qualis ab incepio. 


134 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1708- 


I cannot conclude without adverting to the 
situation of Colonel Harcourt, the peculiarity and 
awkwardness of which you will learn from other 
quarters. It is, however, incumbent upon me to 
assure you that no practical inconvenience has 
resulted from it, as Lord Castlereagh and I had an 
opportunity of conversing with him before he 
went to Boulogne. I feel particularly anxious 
that he should not suffer in your opinion, as I do 
not know a more zealous and honourable man. 

On public matters there is nothing to be com- 
municated but what is satisfactory. The new 
Parliament will meet under the advantages of 
peace, and of a revenue and a harvest abundant 
beyond example. Before I close my letter, I must 
congratulate you on your financial prospects in 
India, which are favourable and encouraging to 
the greatest degree.’ 


THe Hon. WILLIAM WELLESLEY-POLE to THE 
MARQUESS WELLESLEY 


Hanover Square : September 28, 1802 


I am just come from Addington, with whom I 
have had a long conversation, and who is as 
desirous of forwarding all your wishes as possible. 
He was in the act of writing to you when I called 
upon him, and he showed me the part of his letter 
which was finished, and also a draft of the public 
letter he had written you with the full approbation 
of the Cabinet. They are both everything you 
could desire. Addington informed me that the 
moment he had read your despatches which 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 375. 


1805] GOVERNMENT’S SUPPORT 155 


Harcourt breught, he sent them to Lord Castle- 
reagh, who he heard was at Lord Cornwallis’. 
This he did that Lord Castlereagh might discuss 
them with Lord Cornwallis, as he knew how much 
such a proceeding would please you. The result 
justified the goodness of his judgment and his 
kindness to you, for Lord Cornwallis urged most 
strongly the necetsity of your remaining in India, 
and the most unqualified approbation of all your 
measures. Lord Castlereagh is equally strenuous 
for you, and, of course, Lord Cornwallis’ opinion 
was very comfortable to Addington, and the 
knowledge of its being taken in the manner it was, 
I am certain, will be extremely gratifying to you. 
Addington informed me that everything was 
arranged with the Court of Directors about you 
entirely to his satisfaction, and they have given 
way upon all the points you required. Lord 
Castlereagh, he says, you may depend upon as 
your fast friend. It seems the Carnatic business 
is to be brought forward early in the session by 
Sheridan, but you will be strongly defended by all 
the members of adininistration, who, I believe, in 
Cabinet have pledged themselveg to take the most 
active part. Lord Grenville and Lord Cornwallis 
will back them in the House of Lords, and Pitt and 
Dundas in the House of Commons. I heard with 
Surprise from Addington that the Prince of Wales 
was violent against you, and said he would speak 
upon the subject of the Carnatic in the House of 
Lords. If he does Lord Ellenborough says he 
must take neighbour’s fare, for he shall not spare 
him, His oracle, Tom Tyrwhitt, was violent for 


156 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [(1798- 


you last winter, and assured me a hundred times 
that the Prince highly approved of your conduct. 
Possibly my voting against His Royal High- 
ness’ right to the revenues of the Duchy of 
Cornwall may have changed him. 

I showed Addington the whole of your letter to 
me, and he was as kind and as friendly about it as 
I could desire. You may rest satisfied that he 
kas an eager wish to gratify you, and to raise your 
character in India, and I have no doubt but your 
suggestions as to further honours will be attended 
to in a manner most satisfactory to you. If you 
will allow me to advise, you will not say anything 
further on the subject to anybody, but wait, and 
let whatever may be done come spontaneously 
from the Crown. The Carnatic question must end 
most creditably for you, and when it is over any 
favour from the Crown will come with a much 
better grace and be more honourable than it could 
be at present. I hope you agree with me, and 
that you will not show any impatience or feel any 
disappointment at nothing being done at present. 

Colonel Harcourt has beeh under the most 
unpleasant embarrassment ever since his arrival, 
in consequence of the villainy of an agent, which 
he could not Lave foreseen. He has been obliged 
to fly to Boulogne. However, he has met 
Addington and Lord Castlereagh at Eastbourne, 
and neither the service nor your interest has 
suffered by his misfortune. Addington assured 
me that he never saw a man more zealous, or more 
unhappy lest you should suppose he had neglected 
your business, or could have fancied himself 


1805] HIS RETURN DEPRECATED _ 157 


liable to what has happened when he undertook 
his expedition. He offered to remain in England 
at all hazards if Addington or Lord Castlereagh 
thought it necessary. Addington talks in the 
highest terms of him. He will be the bearer of 
this letter, as he goes overland back to you to- 
night ; and I thought I owed it to him to explain 
that Ministers were perfectly satisfied with his 
conduct, and that your affairs had not suffered 
through his misfortunes. In fact, I am the only 
sufferer (except himself) by them, for I have never 
been able to see him. However, I flatter myself 
I have attended as much to the essential objects 
stated in your letter to me as I could have done 
had I been fortunate enough to have seen Colonel 
Harcourt. Addington seemed a little appre- 
hensive that Lord Grenville would endeavour to 
induce you to come home. I, however, ventured 
to assure him you would not attend to any 
Suggestion of his. You would be mad if you did 
So. The mode in which the Cabinet have now 
espoused your cause, the temper of Government 
towards you, the present conduct of the Court of 
Directors, the flourishing state into which you 
have brought the finances of India, the support 
you are certain of on the subject of-the Carnatic, 
and the credit which must result to you from 
Temaining where you are till all your plans are 
matured and have taken full effect, renders it 
certain that you have only to rest as you are to 
ensure your being one of the most powerful and 
most respected men in this country when you 
return to it. You might lose all, and can gain 


158 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1708- 


nothing by coming away; you risk scarcely 
anything, and lay a just claim on your country 
for everything by remaining. The Grenvilles are 
despised, and Pitt is as firmly with Addington as 
possible ; they must go hand in hand. My letter 
is already too long for an overland despatch. All 
is well here." 


LORD Hopart to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private and secret Roehampton 
November 14, 1802 

You will probably be surprised that the official 
despatch which this letter accompanies should 
convey to you so early a decision to countermand 
the late orders for delaying the restitution.of the 
French and Dutch settlements,? and I will 
endeavour to explain to you the reasons which 
have led to so sudden an alteration in the senti- 
ments of the King’s confidential servants. When 
the determination was formed to make a repre- 
sentation to the French Government upon the 
subject of Switzerland it was conceived that the 
people of that unfortunate country might have 

} Add. MSS. 37308 f. 379. 

2 The Peace of Amiens had been signed on October 1, 
1801, and had been ratified on March 27, 1802. By it, as Lord 
Grenville said, ‘“‘ England gave up everything and France 
nothing.” In Asia she was to have Pondicherry, Cochen, 
Negapatam, and the Spice Islands; in Africa the Cape of 
Good Hope and Senegal ; in the West Indies Martinique, St. 
Lucia, Guadaloupe, Tobago, Curacoa, and St. Domingo; 
in America she was to keep Surinam, Demerara, Berbice, 
and Essequibo, and St. Pierre amd Miquelon were to be 
restored to her. The Treaty was never fully carried out, as 


there was soon again trouble between Britain and France, and 
war between them was declared in May 1803. 


1805] THE TREATY OF AMIENS 159 


found the means of resisting the outrageous 
attempt of Buonaparte to render the Swiss 
subservient to his power, and it was not thought 
improbable that they might be aided in any 
efforts they might be disposed to make for that 
\purpose by the Emperor of Germany, who, just 
at that time, was manifesting a strong tendency 
to maintain by force the possession he had taken 
of Passau, and to withhold his acquiescence to the 
plan of indemnities which France, Russia, and 
Prussia were imposing upon -the Empire. In such 
a situation of things it was thought not improbable 
that*the interference of this country might have 
been brought forward with effect in order to 
afford some control upon the views of the Chief 
Consul upon the Continent, and it was resolved 
to have made the attempt, even at the hazard of 
a renewal of hostilities ; and whilst that question 
was at issue it was judged advisable to retain such 
of the possessions as had not been restored in 
conformity to the Treaty of Amiens, in our hands. 
The subsequent submission of the Swiss, and the 
Emperor’s concurrehce in the arrangement for 
the German indemnities with some trifling modi- 
fication in favour of the Grand Duke, would 
sufficiently have disappointed all expectation of 
a continental effort to have rendered the policy 
of our further interference extremely questionable, 
even if another vicious truce had not occurred 
which forcibly suggested the expediency of avoid- 
ing the adoption of any measures, that were likely 
to lead to an immediate rupture with the French 
Government. 


160 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


The public prints will have informed you of the 
change of administration in Russia, and you will 
have read a variety of conjectures as to the effect 
it might be calculated to produce upon the 
councils of the Court of Petersburg. Upon that 
subject I can venture to assure you that there is 
the strongest reason to expect that the effect will 
be most favourable to the best interests of the 
“european world, but as the system in contem- 
plation cannot yet be developed without hazarding 
its ultimate success, and as nothing would be more 
likely to defeat it than a premature renewal of the 
war between this country and France, that circum- 
stance, in addition to the other reasons which I 
have stated, has had a considerable influence upon 
the line of conduct we are now pursuing. 

Having now given you a hasty sketch of the 
motives which have actuated the King’s Ministers 
in the orders for the immediate restitution of the 
Dutch and French settlements, it remains for me 
to inform you that we have received intelligence 
from an authority which we believe is to be 
depended upon, that Buonaparte is extremely 
anxious to obtain possession of Goa, and that 
nothing is more probable than his endeavouring 
to intimidate the Court of Lisbon into a surrender 
of it to the French Government. He has already 
threatened the Portuguese with the full weight of 
his displeasure if Monsieur D’Almeida is not 
dismissed from his situation of Minister for Foreign 
Affairs, upon no better ground than because he 
granted a passport to General Lannes to return to 
France after a fifth application, alleging that he 


1805] THE COUNTRY PACIFIC 161 


would not have granted it at all if he had not been 
inclined to foment differences between the two 
Governments. To the peremptory demand of 
D’Almeida’s dismissal an evasive answer has been 
given, and as Buonaparte has declared his deter- 
mination not to ¢vansigey upon the subject, I 
‘$hould not be surprised if a sacrifice in territory 
was substituted for that of the Minister. 

In the event, however, of Portugal being 
involved in hostilities, she will claim and probably 
receive support from this country. 

Parliament meets on the 16th, but the King will 
not make his speech until the 23rd. The country 
is decidedly pacific, but some of the ablest men in 
both Houses, it is said, will charge Government 
with not having taken the necessary measures for 
preventing the aggrandisement of France. This, 
however, I am persuaded will show the expediency 
of the line we have pursued ; and I am perfectly 
certain that, unless the ground of war should be 
unquestionable, the country need not be brought 
to fear its renewal. 

Lord Castlereagh will send you information upon 
all points respecting matters connected with the 
Government of India, and I trust will apprise you 
of his intentions with respect to Webbe. I have 
had several conversations with him upon that 
subject, and shall be most disappointed if. both 
you and Webbe have not reason to be satisfied. 

I have written until I am nearly asleep, it being 
very late, and Eleanor, desiring to be kindly re- 
membered to you, suggests the idea of bringing 
my letter to a close. 

I M 


162 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS ‘ (1798- 


P.S. Mr. Addington, to whom I mentioned my 
having written to you, desires me~to say you 
would hear from him, but he really has not time.’ 


HENRY ADDINGTON to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Downing Street: March 18, 1803 


I cannot forbear sending you a few lines by 
Colonel Monson, though my hopes of being able to 
write to you at length have been unavoidably 
disappointed. 

We are at present in a state that is uncertain, 
and critical as to the result. The temper and 
disposition of the country are, however, perfectly 
good. The wish for peace is not accompanied by 
a dread of war, and the French Government has 
hitherto received no encouragement from any 
sentiments publicly expressed either in or out of 
Parliament. The newspapers will have conveyed 
to you the account of the King’s message, and of 
the debates, or rather the descriptions, which 
followed it. Lord Hobart and Lord Castlereagh 
have, I understand, given letters for you to Colonel 
Monson. I will only add that your friends are all 
well. Pitt has been materially otherwise, but is 
recovered. He is, however, still at Walmer, and 
means to revisit Bath in the course of next month. 

It is not possible for me to pay all the attentions 
I wish to Lady Wellesley and your family ; you 
will, I am sure, pardon omissions, under circum- 
etances which almost entirely exclude me from 
the society of those with whom I am living under 
the same roof. “I congratulate you on the state 


1 Add. MSS. 37308 f. 385. 


1805) A CRITICAL PERIOD 163 


and prospects of India. They were clearly and 
ably [stated] by Lord Castlereagh on Monday in 
the House of Commons, and he renders you ample 
justice. Of Sheridan’s promised motion we have 
heard nothing for some months. Adieu !? 


Lorp Hopart to THE Marquess WELLESLEY 


Private Downing Street 
March 18, 1803 


Colonel Monson’s sudden departure at a time 
when there is an unusual press of business must 
be my excuse for a very hasty letter, but I could 
not “suffer him to leave England at so critical a 
period without sending you a few lines. The 
measures we are now taking have been the result 
of a thorough conviction that they afford the only 
chance of preserving peace, unless we could make 
up our minds to place this country in the same 
state of humiliation to the will of the Chief Consul 
as all the powers upon the Continent, except 
Russia; and you will require to know that, 
notwithstanding the eagerness with which peace 
was universally deinanded, there exists at this 
moment as great and as cordial a disposition to 
support Government in a war, if it should be 
judged necessary, as ever has been manifested 
upon any former occasion. Buonaparte, having 
reckoned upon a very different disposition both 
in the administration and the people, is in a state 
of great mortification and disappointment, and 
being considerably under the influence of passion 
and vanity has not been able to conceal his feelings, 


1 Add. MSS. 37309 f. 3. 


164 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1798- 


as you will be able to learn more particularly from 
the extract which'I enclose of a letter from a Swiss 
gentleman ‘at Paris, who has resided many years 
in England. His account is.so accurately con- 
firmed by official authority that you may depend 
on its authenticity. 

Whether our dissensions with the French Gov- 
ernment are to end.in war or not, it is very 
difficult to form a ,satisfactory opinion; but, 
although a maritime’ war would appear decidedly 
against the. real interest of France, circumstanced 
as she is with respect to her navy and her colonies, 
there does not seem to be much hope that pace 
can be continued. 

All speculations upon what such a man as 
Buonaparte will do under any circumstances must 
be too liable to error for us to trust to common 
reasoning upon any subject in which he is con-' 
cerned. His intentions are warlike, his interest, 
in the view most people take of it, pacific: but 
as he is notoriously influenced by the utmost 
rancour and hatred of England, aggravated by 
the publications in our newspapers, which he has 
in vain called upon the Government to suppress, 
the only safe line for us to take is to be prepared 
for hostilities,‘and, indeed, I can see little expecta- 
tion at present of their being avoided—unless 
the prevailing sentiment in France, which un- 
questionably is for the maintenance of peace, 
should be declared in a way that may alarm him 
for the safety of his own person and Government. 

Webbe’s business, which you may be afraid I 
am insufficiently pressing, is still before the Court 


1805] ASSAYE 165 


of Directors, but Lord Castlereagh tells me that it: 
will be decided before the departure of Lord’ 
William Bentinck, though in what manner I 
cannot venture to anticipate. 


In May 1803 the Peshwa was restored, the 
Britjsh force being under the command of General 
Arthur Wellesley. The Mardtha -war was 
vigorously pursued, and was practically brought 
to a close by General Wellesley’s great -victory 
at Assaye, September 23, 1803. To Generals 
Wellesley and Lake the greatest credit was due 
for the splendid conduct of the military operations ; 
but it must not be forgotten, as too often it is 
forgotten, that the controlling and directing 
influence was that of the Governor-General. He 
demanded implicit obedience. When Major 
Malcolm’ protested against some order on the 
grounds that it might impair British credit for 
good faith, ‘‘ Major Malcolm’s business,’ said 
Wellesley regally, “is to obey my orders and 
enforce my instructions. J will look after the 
public interest.” 


1 Add. MSS. 373009 f. 6. 

2 John Malcolm (1769-1833), entered the East- India 
Company’s service in 1782. Wellesley sent him as envoy to 
Persia, 1799-1801, and on his return from that mission made 
him his private secretary, 1801-1802. He was political agent 
to General Wellesley during the Maratha war. He was 
knighted in 1815, and returned to England seven years later. 
His principal publications were the Political History of India, 
1811, and a History of Persia, 1818. 


166 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS © [1798- 


HENRY ADDINGTON fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Secret Downing Street 
September 9, 1803 

[ look back with regret and shame upon the 
interval which has passed since I last addressed 
you ; and with the more, as-you have not afforded 
the example of suspending ‘your communications 
to your friends on account of the pressure of 
public’ business. . That the interval has been, one 
of continued, exertion ‘and anxiety it cannot be 
necessary for. me to-assure you'; of the’ circum- 
stances which have readered the greatest part of 
it peculiarly painful, ‘from personal as well as 
public considerations, ' you. ‘will ‘have heard with 
heartfelt concern. J shall. forbear from entering 
into them, nor shall I say moré of the feelings which 
they have excited in my friend than that they 
would be intolerable if the slightest sensation of 
self-reproach made a part of them. 

Lord Castlereagh has written fully and un- 
reservedly to your Lordship on a subject. of great 
and urgent importance, and Mr.'H. Wellesley will 
convey to you such information as may be material 
in forming your judgment upon the point of your 
continuance in- India beyond the time proposed 
for your departure, or the accomplishment of your 
intention, conceived and declared under very 
different circumstances, of quitting the Govern- 
ment in the month of January 1804. There are 
few persons, I am convinced, who, under the 
present circumstances, would wish to see that 
government in any hands but your own; there 
are no circumstances which I can suppose to be 


1805] CORDIAL: SUPPORT 167 


possible unger which I should not feel extreme 
anxiety at seeing it transferred to any other 
person whatever ; and this I say with. sentiments 
of genuine respect for the talents and character of 
the individual who is likely to succeed you. 
These are the opinions of Lord Castlereagh; and, 
as I firmly believe, of every member’ of the 
Government. If, therefore, it- should be your 
determination to remain in India till a changevis 
likely to “be less inconvenient and: hazardous to 
the public interests, I trust it-cannot be necessary 
to assure you of our cordial and strenuous’support. 

f am concerned ‘to think that the life which I 
have led for upwards of two years-has precluded 
those attentions which it was my..earnest wish to 
pay to Lady Wellesley and your children. The 
accounts which you ‘have received of them must 
have been gratifying to you in the greatest. 
degree. 

For a considerable time there was rather a large 
share of illness in my family, but of late, thank 
God, all have been in perfect health. My son 
goes to Christ Church in October. Hilery is 
quite as well as usual, and has resumed a military 
character, as the commander of a Volunteer Corps 
of 1,000 men, called the Mendip Legion. 

It is impossible to convey to you an adequate 
idea of the spirit which universally animates the 
country. The number of Regulars, Militia, and 
army of Reserve in Great Britain will amount by 
the end of this month (when, the latter will be 
completed) to 140,000 men, and of volunteers, 
whose services have been accepted, to upwards of 


168 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS © [1708- 


300,000; and they might be increased to any 
amount.! 


Lorp HoBART to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private Downing Sireet 
December 12, 1803 


Although I do not consider an overland con- 
veyance under present circumstances as a very 
safe mode of communication, having this moment 
received an intimation that a despatch for India 
will be sent on to-morrow; I cannot forego the 
opportunity of writing , a few lines. 

Our situation is ‘one. certainly of great anxiety, 
but I cannot say of apprehension.? Buonaparte 
is so pledged to make an attack upon this country 
or Ireland, and indeed both, that I do not well see 
how he can avoid it without falling into a degree 
of disgrace that may be very inconvenient to him. 
On the other hand, he knows that which is 
apparent to the whole world, that we never were 
in such a state to receive him. The means placed 
by Parliament in the hands of Government, and 
the exertions which have been made by all ranks 
and descriptions of people, have provided a power 
of resistance that is not to be surmounted by any 
power that can be expected to land in this country ; 
and with respect to Ireland, the novel precautions 
taken both on her own coast and that of France 
are such as to encourage the expectation that no 

1 Add. MSS. 373009 f. rz. 

2 War had been declered between Great Britain and France 
on May 18, 1803. The outlook was far from hopeful for this 


country, Napoleon seeming to be impregnable everywhere in 
Europe, except in Russia. 


1805] IRISH DISTURBANCES 169 


considerable ,expedition can escape them; and 
even if it should, the regular force stationed there, 
supported by a large and respectable body of 
Yeomanry, furnish the ‘means of opposing the 
enemy, that I am persuaded will be fully equal 
to the contest, succoured as they will be in a very 
short time from England and Scotland. 

The interior of Ireland can never be con- 
templated with satisfaction; but however we 
must always lament that the.late insurrection was 
attended by the murder of Lord Kilwarden; the 
consequences produced by, it may certainly be 
deemed fortunate. The declarations of the leaders 
who were executed, the support given to Govern- 
ment by every man who had property, and the 
limited extent to which the conspirators had been 
able to carry out their plans, must operate benefici- 
ally in future, and will at least have the effect of 
preventing the rebels from having that reliance on 
their own numerical strength which has hitherto 
afforded them much encouragement—for separa- 
tion from Great Britain is, I am afraid, a sentiment 
which has prevailed’ very far in Ireland, but the 
substitution of French connection is not popular. 
I am inclined to credit the reports we receive from 
France of Buonaparte’s situation “being rather 
precarious, and they assert that symptoms of 
dissatisfaction have shown themselves in the only 
quarter where they can be of importance, the 

1 Arthur Wolfe, first Viscount Kilwarden (1739-1803), Lord 
Chief Justice of Ireland from 1798. Driving from his country 
house to Dublin Castle on the night of the Emmet insurrection, 
July 23, 1803, he was murdered in his carriage by some 


insurgents. 


170 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


army. The invasion of England is pot so popular 
as might have been expected from the hope of 
pillage and plunder that has been held out to 
them, and it is said that at this season of the year 
they do not anticipate the probability of being 
drowned without sensations that are not quite 
comfortable. 

The Chief Consul has no reason to be satisfied 
‘with appearances in the north, particularly at 
Petersburg, but I do not venture, after all the 
disappointments that this country has met with, 
to hazard a speculation on foreign politics. The 
power and intrigue of France have so baffled all 
calculations, that, although we must always look 
to a combination of the great Powers upon the 
Continent as calculated to be productive of the 
most salutary consequences, my mind is not 
sufficiently sanguine to reckon upon such an event 
until I see it absolutely accomplished. 

You will see an extraordinary publication in the 
newspapers, a correspondence between the King, 
Prince of Wales, Duke of York, and Mr. Addington 
upon the subject of the Prince’s serving in the 
army ; and when you read it you will recollect 
that the Prince has instructed his friends to say 
that he is not privy to the publication. I spoke 
to the Duke of York on the receipt of your letter 
respecting Mr. Briscoe, and was informed that he 
was already a captain, but his brother, Arthur, 
whose conduct cannot be too strongly commended, 
is ‘placed on the staff in India. Pole’s official 
ability is spoken of in the highest terms. The 
Ordnance department have not been without their 


1805] | BRILLIANT SUCCESSES 171 


share of labgur for the last six months. The 
situation of the French in St. Domingo (if they were 
not French) I should say was deplorable. Their 
continuance there was out of the question when 
the last accounts came away. 


Holkar was now the strongest enemy with which 
the British had to contend, and in April 1804 Lake 
and Arthur Wellesley were directed to proceed 
against him. Rampura was captured on May 16, 
but the defeat of Colonel Monson was a great 
blow, and encouraged the enemy, who had rarely 
routed their foe. Holkar seized Hindustan, but 
the capital, Indore, was soon taken by Colonel 
Murray, and Holkar withdrew, laying waste the 
country round. Holkar was defeated at Dig by 
General Frazer on November 12, and again three 
days later at Farrukhabad by Lake. 


THE HON. GERALD WELLESLEY to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 


Henrietta Street: May 24, 1804 


I cannot resist writing you five lines to con- 
gratulate you on your great and brilliant successes, 
and to assure you that nothing can have made a 
greater sensation than they have done here. I am 
sorry to say that I am afraid you must be satisfied 
with your great reputation, for as to those 
scoundrels, the Directors, ever doing you justice, 
you must not expect it. Pole, who writes to you 


1 Add. MSS. 37309 f. 15. 


172. THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


by this messenger, will give you a much better 
account than I can do of what passed at the India 
House on Tuesday, but it will give you satisfaction 
to know that the conduct of the Company towards 
you is universally reprobated. 

I saw Lord Dartmouth’ yesterday, who desired 
me to inform you that he had received your letter 
and obeyed your commands, and that the King 
nad received your Gazettes most graciously. He 
also desired me to congratulate you for him on 
your success. Poor Henry is so ill that he is 
incapable of writing, which he meant to have done 
by this messenger. His complaint is rheumatic, 
and although he is very much reduced and still 
suffers a great deal of pain, yet the physicians say 
he is recovering and’ is in no danger. He is 
appointed one of the Lords of the Treasury. I 
cannot conclude my letter, my dear Wellesley, 
without again thanking you for the handsome 
present you sent me by Henry, and assuring you of 
my gratitude for it. I am going on in the old 
parsonic way, that is, have a wife and one child, 
and am in daily expectatioa of another; am 
intolerably poor, but, that excepted, as happy as 
possible. I long to introduce Lady Emily to you, 
and cannot help flattering myself you will like 
her. Henry desires me to tell you that Lord 
Castlereagh is to call on him before the despatch 
goes, and that if he does he will endeavour to 

1 George Legge (1755-1810), known by the courtesy title of 
Lord Lewisham during the lifetime of his father, was President 
of the Board of Control, 1801, in which year he succeeded as 


(third) Earl of Dartmouth. He was Lord Chamberlain, 
1804. 


1805] HIS SON’S PROGRESS 173 


write you a few lines. God bless you, my dear 
Wellesley. 


RICHARD WELLESLEY to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
London: June t0, 1804 

Iam now making a stay in London of a few days,. 
for a reason which I am sure will not displease you. 
The Arabian horses, which you have had the 
goodness to send to me, have arrived safely in 
London, and I was so impatient to obtain a sight 
of them, that my mother granted me a remission 
of a ‘few days from severe Studies, to gratify my 
impatience. Everything which comes from India 
brings with it a peculiar interest and recom- 
mendation to me; but, independent of this 
consideration, these animals have in themselves 
sufficient qualities to raise my admiration and to 
engage my affections. They are by far the most 
beautiful of their kind, in my opinion, and appear 
to possess very gentle and tractable dispositions, ~ 
though as yet they have not been ridden by 
anyone, their play being too rough for English 
grooms, They shall have all proper care paid to 
them, and, as I hope, will survive the arrival of 
the donor of this princely present “to his native 
country. 

I was principally induced to seize the oppor- 
tunity of writing to you. by some ships which are 
waiting for a favourable wind, because I desired 
very much to inform you that I am at length 
promoted to the sixth form, and expect to make 


1 Add. MSS. 37345 f. 27. 


174 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS’ [1798- 


my first appearance on the oratorical boards in a 
fortnight. This promotion has taken place much 
later, I believe, than you expected, but as you are 
perfectly acquainted with the system pursued at 
Eton, I need not acquaint you with the causes. of 
its retardment. The prospect is discouraging in 
the extreme, but you know that if a few block- 
heads choose to become fixtures, as it were, in the 
College, they effectually prevent the advancement 
of those who have the misfortune to be inferior in 
age and place. Having, however, once toiled to 
the summit, I must beg your advice with respect 
to the studies which ‘you wish me to follow sore 
particularly, and which are necessary to qualify 
me for a student at Christ Church, and eventually 
for the character which I am to sustain in life. I 
have consulted with Lord Grenville with regard 
to the period of my removal to Oxford, and he is 
of opinion that I must quit Eton about next 
Christmas, when a studentship may be procured, 
since I cannot stay so long in the sixth form as you 
wished, on account of the advanced age at which I 
enter it. I shall, however, turn the little time I 
have to the best possible account, more particularly 
as J am thoroughly convinced of its importance. 
I have been sent up for good once more since my 
last letter to you, and have likewise made my first 
essay in Greek poetry. Of the latter, you must 
know, I am rather vainglorious ; it was a voluntary 
attempt, and gained me great commendations 
from Goodall; as for the other masters, I hold 
their praise or indifference of very little value. You 
shall have both the exercises by the very next 


1805] A YOUTHFUL CRITIC 175 


ship. Lord Grenville has selected a speech for me 
at election from the peroration of the Milo. I like 
it very much and have no doubt that it will meet 
with your approbation likewise, as will the letter 
of Lord Grenville, of which I send you a copy. 
It was written to me on the occasion of his making 
me a present of Lord Chatham’s Letters, which he 
has lately published. My private opinion is, that 
the preface is much the most valuable part of the 
work, and that the generality of the letters are 
not sufficiently important for the Press; some, 
however, are certainly not unworthy of Lord 
Chatham, as you will find on perusing them. I 
could not have traced a plan more suitable to my 
wishes than that which accompanied your last 
letter ; particularly with respect to travelling in 
the long vacation. I agree with you in thinking 
it necessary that a man should see something of 
his own country before he visits foreign parts. 
Part of this plan I shall put into execution next 
summer. I am going to Somerford in Stafford- 
shire, the house of Mr. Monckton; from thence I 
go into Yorkshire and Derbyshire to visit some 
Eton friends. My horses will accompany me, so 
that I shall pass over nothing worth seeing. Do 
not be surprised if you hear of a new publication 
forthcoming entitled A Tour through Oxfordshire, 
Staffordshire, etc., made during the course of last 
summer, with topographical, explanatory, extra- 
ordinary charts! and actual surveys of all the 
beautiful spots which struck the fancy of the 
author ! 

The notes on the Maratha war which you sent 


176 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1798- 


to Europe, and which have been lately published, 
have effected a great and sudden change in the 
public opinion. I used to hear the justice and 
policy of it attacked from all quarters, but now 
its' bitterest enemies are silent, and universal 
approbation is the order of the day. That it was 
conducted wisely and successfully none could ever 
deny ; but the doubt seemed whether there were 
sufficient grounds for beginning it. The clear 
manner in which you have stated those grounds, 
in which you have represented the danger hanging 
over the British possessions, and the only means 
which could avert it, must convince. the most 
obstinate, and confirm the doubtful. Colonel 
Sims has also ‘written an excellent pamphlet on 
the subject. I have begun to make Indian 
affairs more than formerly my study, that I may 
be able to converse with you on your return with 
some’reason and information on the measures 
’ which have raised and established your reputation, 
and on their probable consequences assuring 
security -and peace to the British interests. 
Recommend to me any books which you think 
can give me the best and most extensive knowledge 
of the Indies in general and of the rise and increase 
of the British power and dominion. I am at 
present reading Orme’s History. The changes of 
Ministry are so quick, and such persons are 
raised to the offices of state, that I think it not 
improbable I may become myself in the course of 
things a Premier, and direct the helm of this 


1 Addington retired in May 1804, and Pitt became Prime 
Minister. 


1805] | IGNOMINIOUS TYRANNY 177 


‘Empire. Premier or Dernier, I shall still be your 
affectionate son... 

My brother Gerald is inscribed an Etonian. 
He has been placed in the remove, but having 
passed through a trial with great success, expects 
daily to be in the fifth? 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to VISCOUNT 
CASTLEREAGH 
June 19, 1804 
Your Lordship may be assured that I entertain 
a just sense of the sentiments of public and 
private honour from which your conduct towards 
me has proceeded, and that I rely with the utmost 
confidence upon your Lordship’s justice and 
public spirit to frustrate the vindictive profligacy 
of the Court of Directors, and to expose to the 
view of my Sovereign and my country, in the most 
distinct and perspicuous manner, the motives, 
principles, conduct, and result of every branch 
of my administration in India. My sincere and 
anxious hope is, that every point of difference 
between me and the Court of Directors may be 
fully explained to Parliament and to the public. 
Nor can your Lordship and Mr. Addington, by 
any act of friendship, afford me a protection so 
grateful to my feelings, or so advantageous to my 
character, as by a full disclosure to Parliament of 
every act of my administration, and of every 
proceeding of the Court of Directors, since I have 
had the misfortune to be subjected to, the 
ignominious tyranny of Leadenhall Street. I am 
1 Add. Mss. 37315 f. 29. 
5 N 


178 THE WELLESLEY .PAPERS  [1798- 


induced to hope that J shall be eflabled to relinquish 
the service of my honourable entployers in the 
month’ of January or February next. Your 
Lordship, however, may be assured, that as no 
symptoms of tardy remorse’ displayed by the. 
Honourable Court in consequence of my recent 
success in India will vary my present estimation 
of the faith and honour of my worthy and 
approved good masters, or protract my con- 
tinuance in India for one hour beyond the limits 
prescribed by the public interests, so no additional 
outrage, injury, or insult which can issue from the 
most loathsome den. of the India Hous:2, will 
accelerate my departure ‘while the public safety 
shall appear to require my aid in this arduous 
station.) 


Lorp CAMDEN to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Arlington Street : November 29, 1804 

I have informed your Lordship in my separate 
and public dispatch of the probability of a rupture 
with the Court of Madrid, and I think it very 
likely that, if the letters which are to be sent to 
you by this conveyance shall not be ready by 
to-morrow, when they are ordered to be sent to 
the India House, the delay of a few days may 
bring your, Lordship the actual conclusion of the 
negotiation which has been carrying on at Madrid. 
From all the circumstances which have come to 
the knowledge of the King’s Ministers, as well as 
from the probable policy of the French Govern- 
ment, it seems almost certain that Spain will be- 

1 Pearce: Wellesley, ii. 361. 


F. Hopp 


hes 
% Rel. Pint 
G, Adcock, sculpt. 


JOHN 
: JEFFREY 
JEFFREYS PRATT, IST MARQUESS CAMDEN 


1805] THE DIRECTORS“ANGRY - 1979 


obliged to enter into the war; and as Admiral 
Cochrane has communicated to the Admiralty 
the report of Mr. Frere’s' having left Madrid, 
which he was ordéfed to do, in case of his not 
receiving a favourable answer to his represen- 
tations, it appears probable that many days will 
not elapse before I shall be able to inform you of: 
actual hostilities having commenced. 

As it will be interesting to you to be informed 
of the circumstances which have led to this 
rupture, I have enclosed to you, in the original of 
this letter which goes by the sea conveyance, a 
statement of the whole case from the commence- 
ment of the war with France, which will apprise 
your Lordship of all the circumstances of this case 
to the present period; and I request you to 
consider this communication as entirely and 
strictly confidential.? 


It will be seen from Gerald Wellesley’s letter 
of May 24, 1804, that the Governor-General of 
India was not in high favour with the Directors 
at Leadenhall Street. Indeed, the controlling 
Spirits were at once frightened and angry. They 
were angry because Wellesley made appointments 
“ for merit,” irrespective of the wishes of the India 
House, which cherished its patronage. They were 
frightened because Wellesley was regarding India 
from the Imperial rather a the commercial 

2 John Hookham Frere (1769-1846), Envoy-Extraordinary 


at Madrid, 1802-1804. 
3 Add. MSS. 37309 f. 2r. 


180 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS 


point of view, and, by extending the British 
possessions in the peninsula, was vastly increasing 
their obligations and responsibilities. The tension 
was considerable, and Wellesley remained at his 
post only owing to the urgent solicitations of 
the Government. Early in 1805 the Court of 
Directors censured Wellesley for (i) Disobedience 
of the Court’s orders, and acting in the greatest 
affairs without the sanction of the Government at 
home ; (ii) legal appointments, and evasions of 
law; and (iii) Profuse expenditure of the public 
money. On receipt of this despatch, Wellesley 
at once resigned his post, and sailed for. England 
on August 15, “ with his work still incomplete,” 
says that great authority on Indian affairs, the 
Rev. W. H. Hutton, “ but having accomplished 
more than any of his predecessors, and established 
throughout India the ascendancy of the British 
power.” 


BOOK III 


RETURN TO ENGLAND 
1806-1808 


BOOK III 


RETURN TO ENGLAND. 1806-1808 


Wellesley sails from India : His whole-hearted 
devotion to his duty : His autocratic nature : The 
difference between a Governor-General in office 
and in retirement : His arrival in England : His 
reception on landing : His mother greets him : A 
letter from Pitt welcoming him : He visits Pitt at 
Putney : The impeachment of Lord Melville : The 
death of Pitt : Letter to William Wilberforce : Sir 
Arthur Wellesley appointed Colonel of the 33rd 
Regiment : Sir W. Sidney Smith : Wellesley’s indig- 
nation when he learns that his policy is to be attacked 
in the House of Commons: J::mes Paull : Wilberforce 
on Indian affairs : The charges against Wellesley 
printed by order of the House of Commons : The 
death of Fox : Grenville endeavours to induce 
Canning to join the ministry : Letters of Canning, 
Grenville, and Wellesley : The Duke of Portland 
becomes Prime Minister : He invites Wellesley to 
take the Foreign Office : The offer declined : The 
motion impugning his conduct negatived by an over- 
whelming majority : A counter-resolution approving 
his conduct carried «Letters from the Marquess’ of 
Buckingham, Lord Castlereagh, and the Duke of 
Portland : The battle of Vimiera. 


TY ELLESLEY sailed from India on August 

5, 1805, and arrived in England early 

in the following January. He had 

gone out eight years earlier a man of seven-and- 
thirty, promoted from a minor position to the 
high office of Governor-General], He had gone 
out, eager to conquer fame for himself, and no 


less eager to render, so far as it lay in his power, 
183 


184 THE WELLESLEY P/.PERS  [1806- 


yeoman’s service to his country., During the 
years of absence from his native land he had 
devoted himself wholeheartedly to his duties, 
and had made the power of England as widely 
realised in India as it had been during the rule of 
the most famous of his predecessors. In that 
period, too, unfortunately for himself, he had 
vecome almost intolerably arbitrary. No dog 
must bark when he spoke; all men must abide 
by his decision. To differ from his opinion was 
in his eyes the cardinal sin. ‘Lord Wellesley 
was spoken of by His Majesty as having consider- 
able merit in the conduct of affairs in India, but 
as inflated with pride, and with his own conse- 
quence ; assuming to himself the exclusive merit 
of all that had been done in the East, and 
demanding ceremonious respect much beyond 
what was due to his station. That when he had 
more than once been reminded that he was 
‘exacting from those around him more than the 
King did, his Lordship replied, ‘Then the King 
is wrong; but that is no reason why I should 
nn properly relax also.’ His Majesty added, 

‘When he returns, his head will be quite turned, 
and there will be no enduring him.’’’? Nowadays, 
the Viceroy, a’ man at the end_of a telegraph wire, 
can to some extent be kept within bounds by the 
Home Government. When Wellesley was in India 
it was a year before he could get a reply to a 

1 George Rose: Diaries, ii. 165. 


1808] RATURN FROM INDIA 185 


despatch, and events moved too quickly to await 

instructions. - The Governor-General in those days 

was, of necessity, an autocrat. He had to act 

on his own initiative ; he had to settle things for 

himself. He was not indeed the final court of. 
appeal : application could be made to Leadenhall’ 
Street, but in small matters it was absurd to 
appeal, and in larger matters more often than 
not, when the Directors’ pronouncement arrived, 

it could not be made effective. A war could not 
be undone, a treaty could not be broken. 

A retired pro-consul is always a sad figure, 
and the pathos of his situation was borne in upon 
Wellesley on his arrival. ‘‘ Lady Wellesley and 
her children awaited him on landing, and several 
private friends pressed round him with kind 
welcomes,” Torrens has written. ‘The Port 
Admiral was also there, and certain military 
officials eager to see the little man of whom they 
had heard so much, and of being able to say . 
that he had shaken them by the hand, a familiarity. 
the thought of which had never occurred to him. 
There was, in short, no lack of fuss and even of 
affection ; enough to content any ordinary general 
or envoy returning home. But he: was neither. 
He had been playing king until the rarefied 
atmosphere of kingship had become so habitual 
that the murk of commonplace in the best 
room of the best inn in a half-lighted seaport 
town almost stifled him. Had the successor of 


186 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS §[1806- 


Aurangzib come to this? There he was, with 
wife and children, and two or three‘friends from 
town, after all his impersonation of paramount 
power and impersonation of Oriental magnificence, 
made much of by vulgar waiters just like any 
other Irish marquess on his travels, He did 
his best to look pleased and be gracious, but his 
mortification was unspeakable; and ere dinner- 
time was half over he broke out into expletives 
of impatience that made the circle stare. Hya- 
cinthe (his wife), forgetting all that had changed 
their lot in life since the time when as a youthful 
and hardly known official he had sat at her feet 
adoringly, said, with an unlucky laugh: ‘Ah, 
you must not think you are in India still, where 
everybody ran to obey you. They mind nobody 
here.’ The disenchantment was complete. He 
rose early from table and withdrew, saying he 
was ill and must be left alone; nor could any 
subsequent explanation or expostulation mend 
the matter. It was the foretaste of a long course 
of disappointment and vexation, wholly unanti- 
cipated, that was in store for him.”’* 


LADY MorNINGTON? to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Hampton Court Palace: January 9, 1806 

Welcome, my dearest Wellesley, to England! 

I trust you arecome in health and spirits. I think 
it would be a sortvof indiscretion to interrupt the 


1 Torrens: Wellesley, 300. 
2 Wellesley’s mother. 


1808] GRIEVOUS CHANGES 187 


delight you must feel in seeing your charming 
family—else P should, the moment I heard the 
Howe was coming into port, have put myself into 
a post-chaise and set off for Portsmouth; but 
I trust we shall soon meet. A few lines to let me 
know how you are will oblige me much. If you 
go to London before Tuesday next, you must 
pass very near this palace, and might as well 
change horses here as at Kingston. If you would: 
let me know I would have breakfast or some 
refreshment ready for you.” 


Lori AUCKLAND fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Park Place: January 10, 1806 


I rejoice with Lady Auckland in the news of 
your return, and we hope that you arrive with 
unimpaired health and even with an improved . 
constitution. I further rejoice in your coming, 
because you left India in an auspicious moment, 
when the energies and wisdom of your govern- 
ment had accomplished the system which you had 
8reatly planned and gloriously pursued. 

In some other points of view your return to 
England is not a subject of congratulation. You 
will find many grievous changes ; several of your 
More intimate friends are by a discordancy of 
Opinion and other circumstances irrevocably sepa- 
rated from each other. We are engaged in a war 
of boundless expense, some peril, and incalculable 
duration. Our continental influence and interests 
are lost and undone, and with this unpromising 
state of affairs, and under a pressure of other 
obvious difficulties, the session seems likely to 

1 Add, MSS. 37315 f. 38. 


188 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1806- 


bring forward a conflict of parties beyond what has 
happened in our times. 

I write from Lord Malmesbury’s, where we are 
passing a couple of days on our return from 
Blenheim to Eden Farm. We shall not settle 
in town before February, but I will take the first 
opportunity of waiting on you, whenever I can 
learn that more urgent business will allow you to 
see me without inconvenience. 

I learn from every quarter that your eldest son 
is a young man of the very first-rate description 
and character. He has carried with him through 
Eton and Oxford that progressive superiority of 
talent which Mr. Roberts, of Mitcham, saw and 
announced at a very early period? 


“Wititam Pitr to THE Marourss WELLESLEY 
Putney Hill: January 12, 1806 

On my arrival here last night I received with 
inexpressible pleasure your most friendly and 
affectionate letter. If I was not strongly advised 
to keep out of London till I kave regained a little 
more strength, I would have come up immediately 
for the purpose of seeing you at the first possible 
moment. As it is, I am afraid I must trust to 
your goodness to give me the satisfaction of seeing 
you here the first hour you can spare for that 
purpose. If you can without inconvenience make 
it about the middle of the day (in English style, 
between two and, four) it would suit me rather 
better than any other time; but none can be™ 


1 Add. MSS. 37309 f. 38. 


1808] PITT’S LAST ILLNESS 189 


inconvenient.’ I am recovering rather slowly from 
a series of stdmach complaints followed by severe 
attacks of gout, but I believe I am now in the way 
of realamendment* 


VISCOUNT MELVILLE’ to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
48, Conduit Sireet: January 21, 1806 


William Dundas has just informed me of your 
Lordship’s kind intention of calling upon me. I 
have come purposely from Bath (where Lady 
Melville is) to appear to-morrow in the House of 
Lords, and I shall return again on Thursday. I 
shall be at home till pretty late in the forenoon 
to-morrow. If I went anywhere I would certainly 
call upon your Lordship, but for thesemany months 
past I have rather made it a rule to avoid the 
Society of peers. You will not misconstrue my 
motives. On your return you will have already 
witnessed many changes certainly unlooked for 
when you left us. I hope Heaven will guard and 
restore to us our friend at Putney [William Pitt]. 
There is scarcely anything to which a determined 
fortitude of mind is not equal, but for such a loss 
to his country and his friends the spirits can 
devise no species of consolation.‘ — 

1 Shortly after the receipt of this letter Wellesley visited Pitt 
at Putney. Pitt died on January 23. 

2 Add. MSS. 37309 f. 48. 

3 Melville, who had been First Lord of the Admiralty, 
resigned his office in April 1805, on being charged with mal- 
versation. He was impeached, and the proceedings com- 
menced on April 29, 1806. On the following June 12 the peers 


acquitted him on all charges. 
* Add. MSS. 37309 f. 63. 


190 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1806- 


Tue MarQuess WELLESLEY fo EARL BATHURST 
J anuary 22, 1806 
“I received last night’ the afflicting intelligence? 
which: you, deplore, and it was confirmed to me 
this morning by Lord Melville and Farquhar. 
Since I received your note I have an account from 
Farquhar’as late as four this evening, which brings 
no hope. Yau have relieved me from the embar- 
rassment of writing an excuse-to you for to-morrow; 
I know: not how we can ever meet again but with 
sorrow and pain. Lord Melville’s affliction to-day 
is not tobe described, and I never beheld anv man 
more overwhelmed with grief than’ Grenville, 
‘who this morning desired to see me, but could 
scarcely speak to me ; his heart is full of grief? 


For Pitt, Wellesley had both a great admiration 
and respect, and in later years he yielded to an 
urgent request’ to indite, in the form of a private. 
‘letter, a character sketch of his friend, which was 
‘ingerted by Croker im his essay on Wraxall’s 
Posthumous Memoirs ® : 


In attempting to convey to you my recollec- 
tion of Mr, Pitt’s character in private society, 
I cannot separate ‘those qualities which raised 
him to the highest public eminence from those 
which rendered him a most amiable companion. 
Both proceeded from the same origin, and both 

! The intelligence cf the-approaching end of William Pitt, 
who died the next day. 


2 Add. MSS. 373%4.f. Io. 
v/*® Quarterly Review, lviii. 


1808] COMMANDING GENIUS IQI 


were happily Blended in the noble structure of 
his temper and disposition. 

Mr. Pitt’s mind was naturally inaccessible to 
any. approach of dark or low or ignoble passion. 
His commanding genius and magnanimous spirit 
were destined to move in a region far above the 
reach of those jealousies,and suspicions and 
animosities which disturb the course of ordinary 
life. Under the eye of his illustrious father-he 
had received that “‘ complete and generous educa- 
tion which fits a man to perform justly, skilfully, 
and magnanimously all the offices, both private 
andspublic, of peace and, war.” 

Such .an education, acting on sucn a natural 
disposition, not only qualified him.to adorn the 
most elevated station in the counsels of his country, 
but furnished him with abundant -resources to 
Sustain the tranquillity and cheerfulness -of ‘his 
mind. 

He had received regular and systematic instruc- 
tion in the principles of the Christian religion, and 
in the doctrine and discipline. of the Church of 
England, and.in every branch of general ecclesi- 
astical history. His knowledge in those subjects 
was accurate and extensive. He was completely 
armed against all sceptical assau:ts, as well as 
against all fanatical illusion; and, in truth, he 
was not merely a faithful and dutiful, but a learned 
member of our Established-Church, to which he 
was most sincerely attached, with the most 
charitable indulgence for all dissenting sects. 

No-doubt can exist in any rational mind that 
this early and firm settlement of, his religious 


192 THE WELLESLEY P/.PERS _ [1806- 


opinions and principles was a main cause of that 
cheerful equanimity which formed the great 
characteristic of his social intercourse, and which 
was never affected by adversities nor troubles. 

He was perfectly accomplished in classical 
literature, both Latin and Greek. The accuracy 
and strength of his memory surpassed every 
example which I have observed ; but the intrinsic 
‘vigour of his understanding carried him far beyond 
the mere recollection of the great models of 
antiquity in oratory, poetry, history, and philo- 
sophy : he had drawn their essence into his own 
thoughts and languége, and, with astonishing 
facility, he applied the whole spirit of ancient 
learning to his daily use. 

These studies were his constant delight and 
resort ; at Holwood in Kent (his favourite resi- 
dence), and at Walmer Castle, his apartments 
were strewed with Latin and Greek classics ; 
his conversation with those friends who delighted 
in similar studies frequently turned on that most 
attractive branch of literature; but he was so 
averse to pedantry or affectation of superior 
knowledge, that he carefully abstained from such 
topics in the presence of those who could not 
take pleasure: in them. In these pursuits his 
constant and congenial companion was Lord 
Grenville, who has often declared to me that 
‘Mr. Pitt was the best Greek scholar he ever con- 
versed with. Mr. Pitt was also as complete a 
master of all English literature as he was un- 
doubtedly of the English language. I have dwelt 
.on this branch of Mr. Pitt’s accomplishments 


1808] PIT’S EQUANIMITY 193 


because I know Sot any source from which more 
salutary assistance can be derived to chase from 
the spirits those clouds and vapours which infest 
vacant minds, and, by self-weariness, render 
retirement melancholy and intolerable. 

But Mr. Pitt possessed every resource which 
could enliven retirement. No person had a more 
exquisite sense of the beauties of the country. 
He took the greatest delight in his residence at ' 
Holwood, which he enlarged and improved (it 
may be truly said) with his own hands. Often 
have I seen him working in his woods and gardens 
with cis labourers for whole°days together, under- 
going considerable bodily fatigue, and with so 
much eagerness and assiduity, that you would 
suppose the cultivation of his villa to be the 
principal occupation of his life. 

He was very fond of exercise on horseback, and 
when in the country frequently joined the hounds 
of his neighbourhood, both at Holwood and 
Walmer Castle. 

At the latter place he lived most hospitably, 
entertaining all his meighbours, as well as the 
officers of the neighbouring garrisons and of ‘the 
ships in the Downs ; and he was most attentive 
to his duties of Lord Warden of the-Cinque Ports, 
which called him frequentiy to Dover, and some- 
times to other places. 

But in all places, and at all times, his constant 
delight was society. There he shone with a 
degree of calm and steady lustre which often 
astounded me more than his most splendid efforts 
in Parliament. His manners were perfectly plain, 


I Oo 


I94 THE WELLESLEY P.PERS  [1806- 


without any affectation. Not only was he without 
presumption or arrogance, or any aiz of authority, 
but he seemed utterly unconscious of his own 
superiority, and much more disposed to listen 
than to talk. He never betrayed any symptom 
of anxiety to usurp the lead or to display his own 
powers, but rather inclined to draw forth others, 
and to take merely an equal share in the general 
conversation. Then he plunged heedlessly into 
the mirth of the hour, with no other care than to 
promote the general good humour and happiness 
of the company. His wit was quick and ready ; 
but it was rather lively than sharp, and never 
envenomed with the least taint of malignity ; 
so that, instead of exciting admiration or terror, 
it was an additional ingredient in the common 
enjoyment. He was endowed, beyond any man 
of his time whom I knew, with a gay heart and a 
social spirit. With these qualities he was the life 
and soul of his own society. His appearance dis- 
pelled all care: his brow was never clouded, even 
in the severest public trials, and joy and hope and 
confidence beamed from his countenance in every 
crisis of difficulty and danger. __ 

He was a most affectionate, indulgent, and 
benevolent friend, and so easy of access that all 
his acquaintances, in any embarrassment, would 
rather resort to him for advice than to any person 
who might be supposed to have more leisure. 
His heart was always at leisure to receive the 
communications of his friends, and always open 
to give the best advice in the most gentle and 
pleasant manner. 


1808] A CLEAR CONSCIENCE 195 


It is a melancholy but a grateful task to pay this 
tribute to the memory of my departed friend. 
Aut me amor negotit suscepti fallit—or the character 
which I have endeavoured to draw is not less 
just and true than it is amiable and excellent ; 
and I cannot resist the conclusion that a pure and 
clear conscience must have been the original 
source of uniform cheerfulness and gaiety of spirit. 
The truth which I have asserted I possess ample 
means of knowing. From the year 1783 to 1797 
I lived in habits of the most confidential friendship 
with Mr. Pitt. ; 

In ‘the year 1797 I was appointed Governor- 
General of India, and in the month of September 
in that year I went to Walmer Castle to meet 
Mr. Pitt and Mr. Dundas, and to receive my last 
instructions. I found Mr. Pitt in the highest 
spirits, entertaining officers and country gentle- 
men with his usual hospitality. Amongst. others, 
Admiral Duncan was his constant and favourite 
guest. His fleet was then in the Downs, preparing 
for the memorable victory of Camperdown. The 
Admiral was a lively and jovial companion, and 
seemed to be quite delighted with Mr. Pitt’s 
society. I embarked for India early in the month’ 
of November 1797, and I returned to England 
in January 1806. 

Not wishing to state anything beyond my 
own personal knowledge, I will not attempt to 
relate the history of Mr. Pitt’s social habits during 
the period of my absence; but & cannot believe 
tat, during that time, the whole frame of his 
magnificent mind had been so broken and 


196 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1806- 


disjointed that he could not endure the temporary 
loss of power, not reconcile himself ‘to that retire- 
ment and to those recreations which were his relief 
from, the labour of official business, and his con- 
solation in the hour of ‘political solicitude and care. 
But I know that the first summer after his resigna- 
tion was passed with Mr. Addington at Wimbledon, 
and that soon. afterwards Mr. Pitt was closely 
occupied at Walmer: Castle in forming a corps of 
volunteer cavalry, living' with his officers, and pass- 
ing the: greater part of his time on horseback,: 
under the firm expectation of a French invasion. 
This does not well agree with the story which 
represents him wrapped in utter seclusion, sunk 
in despondency, shunning all society, and yet 
unable to relieve the gloom of solitude by any 
mental resource. 

On my arrival in England, in January 1806,. 
Mr. Pitt was at Bath. I wrote to him and received 
from him a very kind invitation to meet him at 
Putney Hill. . . . I met him accordingly, in the 
second week in January, and I was received by 
him with his usual kindness and good humour. 
His spirits appeared to be as high as I had ever 
seen them, and his understanding quite as vigorous 
and clear. 

Amongst other topics, he told me with great 
kindness and feeling that, since he had seen me, 
he had been happy to become acquainted with 
my brother Arthur, of whom he spoke in the 
warmest terms of commendation. He said, “I 
never met any military officer with whom it wus 
so easy to converse: he states every difficulty 


1808] | GRENVILLE’S EMOTION 197 


before he unaertakes any service, but. none after 
he has undertaken it.” 

But notwithstanding Mr. Pitt’s- kindness and 
cheerfulness, I saw that the hand of death was fixed 
upon him. This melancholy truth was not known 
nor believed by either his friends or’ opponents. 
In the number of thé latter, to my. deep affliction, 
I found my highly-respected and esteemed friend, 
Lord Grenville, and I-collécted that’ measures of’ 
the utmost hostility to Mr. Pitt were to be pro- 
posed in both Houses at the meeting of-Parliament. 

I warned Lord Grenville of Mr. Pitt’s approach- 
ing death. He received the fatal intelligence with 
the utmost feeling, in an agony of tears, and 
immediately determined that all hostility in 
Parliament should be suspended. Mr. Pitt’s death 
soon followed. 

If any additional evidence were required of the 
excellence of his social character, it would be 
found abundantly in the deep sorrow of a most 
numerous class of independent, honest, and sin- 
cerely attached friends, who wept over the loss 
of his benevolent and affectionate temper and 
disposition with a degree of heartfelt grief which 
no political sentiment could produce. Many of 
these were assembled at the sad ceremony of his 
funeral. With them I paid the last offices to his 
honoured memory. We attended him to West- 
minster Abbey ; there the grave of his illustrious 
father was opened to receive him, and we saw his 
remains deposited on the coffin.of his venerated 
parent.. What grave contains such a father and 
such a son? What sepulchre embosoms the 


198 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1806- 


remains of so much human excellence and 
glory ? 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to LoRD GRENVILLE? 
Park Lane: January 23, 1806 


In the present state of public affairs, I think it 
necessary to apprise you, at the earliest moment, 
of my determination to co-operate with you in 
the great work of endeavouring to surmount the 
difficulties and dangers which surround the country. 
It will be sufficient to explain that, in my judgment, 
no administration cain prove equal to the pxesent 
exigency, which shall exclude any description 
of persons distinguished by public talents or 
virtues from His Majesty’s councils, and that I 
will not lend my aid to any administration formed 
upon such a principle of exclusion. 

Understanding that some persons now acting 
with you have manifested a disposition to investi- 
gate the state of that branch of the Empire which 
was lately entrusted to my charge, I assure you 
that I shall never object to any examination of 
that subject which may be deemed advantageous 
to the national interests or honour. On the other 
hand, it is proper to apprise you of my resolution 
to maintain and assert in every situation the 
principles which directed my conduct in the 
government of India? 

2 William Wyndham Grenville, Baron Grenville (1759- 


1834), the head of ‘‘ All the Talents ” Ministry, 1806-1807. 
2 Add. MSS. 37295°f. 75. 


1808] AN OLD FRIENDSHIP 199 


Tue Marguress WELLESLEY fo WILLIAM 
WILBERFORCE 
Park Lane: January 24, 1806 

I have been so distressed for some days by the 
dreadful calamity which has fallen upon us [the 
death of Pitt] that I have not had spirits sufficient 
to enable me either to call upon you or to write to 
you. But I am sincerely and warmly sensible of 
your kindness, and of the particular cordiality ol 
your very friendly and affectionate note, to which, 
perhaps, I could scarcely plead a claim after so long 
an apparent neglect of the kind letters which ] 
recéived from you in India. I trusted, however, 
much to your candour and justice, expecting that 
you would make great allowances for the extreme 
labour of my public situation, which, for the last 
three years, scarcely left me time even to write tc 
my family, and obliged me to renounce all private 
correspondence. 

I am extremely anxious to have the pleasure 
of seeing you, and of renewing our old friendship 
which I assure you I have retained in full force 
When we meet we'shall have many melancholy 
events to deplore, and many dear friends to regret. 
But we must endeavour to discharge our duty 
towards our country with fortitude and persever- 
ance, and to remedy what we could not prevent. 
I know nothing of public arrangements, and all 
the reports in the newspapers respecting myseli 
are utterly groundless. To you I think it my duty 
to declare that the memory °of my ever-to-be- 

“Jameiited friend will always be the primary object 
of my veneration and attachment in public life 


200 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1806- 


but that I will never lend my‘hand to sustain 
any system of administration evidently inadequate 
to the difficulties and dangers of the crisis. I 
shall be most happy to labour in any way which 
may promise advantage to the public service ; 
but having no personal object of pursuit, I shall 
not easily be deluded from the solemn conviction 
of my mind, that our recent loss cannot be repaired, 
nor our imminent perils be averted, otherwise 
than by a union of the approved talents and 
highest character of the nation. 

I hope you will appoint an hour for meeting me, 
either at your own house or here, when I shail be 
most happy to obey your commands. ' 


Wellesley was a great Governor-General of 
India, and in many respects a great man. He 
could not, however, be made to realise, at least 
for a long time, that the British people, and even 
the majority of British politicians, were in those 
days almost entirely uninterested in India, of 
which land indeed they knew little or nothing. . 
except the name. No man meant deliberately. 
to slight him, but unconsciously everything was | 
construed as a,slight by him, who demanded, and, 
of course, demanded in--vain, the same subservi- 
ence from his Parliamentary associates as from 
his subordinates in India. Certainly he regarded 
as a mere trivial compliment the dinner given in his 
honour at Almack’s on March. 22, 1806, when 
General Harris, the captor of Seringapatara, was 

1 Pearce: Wellesley, ii. 389. 


1808] A MISERABLE ATTACK 201 


in the chair, and the company included many of 
the leading statesmen of the day. 

Wellesley expected a discussion in Parliament 
on his Indian administration, and was prepared 
to welcome it; but he was terribly angry and 
upset when he learnt that an attack on his policy 
in connection with Oudh was to be made in the 
House of Commons. His indignation, indeed, was 
tremendous, and his disgust not less. 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to LorD GRENVILLE 
Park Lane: January 25, 1806 

My anxious desire to see you arises from this 
circumstance. A man of the name of Paull? (whose 
character you probably know) rose yesterday 
in the House of Commons, and gave notice of a 
motion for Monday, when he says he proposes to 
move for papers with a view to founding charges 
against Lord Wellesley. It is said that he is 
supported by Francis, even by Windham, and that 
the Prince of Wales has also ordered all his friends 
to attend for the purpose of countenancing the 
miserable .attack of this obscure and low man. 
Certainly this is not the mode in which I expected 
to be treated. If any person honestly wishes to 
examine the affairs of India, let him first receive 
from me all the information I can afford, and if 
that should not satisfy him, or should convince 
him I have been wrong, and that a change of 
system is requisite, let him then proceed in Parlia- 
riient, ~But to aid the vindictive design of such a 


1 See infra, p. 203. 


202 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _[1806- 


person as Mr. Paull is not worthy of any character 
with whom I can ever attempt.to act. I am 
informed that the main object of the design is to 
cast a shade over my reputation in this critical 
moment for the express purpose of excluding me 
from public affairs. On this occasion I trust that 
you will come’to a full explanation with Mr. Fox 
and his friends. You must see the necessity of 
doing so very early, for if the plan to be pursued 
be not: fully arranged before Monday, the shaft 
may be shot, and I may be separated from you 
by absolute necessity. You must see the impossi- 
bility of my acting ‘with Mr. Fox and his friends 
while they are employed in co-operating with such 
a man as Paull to disturb the repose which I am 
entitled to enjoy, after such arduous and successful 
labour in the public service. 

. On the other hand, I am totally ignorant of 
the designs of the Ministry, with whom I have 
had no intercourse whatever on this subject. My 
intention is without delay to require Lord Castle- 
reagh to take some direct line with relation to this 
attack, and in the course of to-morrow I shall 
ascertain his views. 

But I must rely on you to obtain for me a dis- 
tinct view of the intentions of your friends, and 
I therefore earnestly éi:treat you to come to town 
for that purpose, as well as for the purpose of 
advising me with regard to the conduct which I 
ought to pursue on this occasion? 


1 Fortescue MSS. vii 336. 


1808} JAMES PAULL 203 


THE MARQUESS ‘WELLESLEY to LoRD GRENVILLE 
Park Lane: January 25 [26 ?}, 1806 
Upon thinking over what passed between us 
to-day I think it very desirable that I should be 
in your Cabinet at all events, whether with or 
without office. The last office I should wish is 
the Board of Control. You will understand, how- 
ever, that the whole of this statement is subject 
to the same reservations which I have already 
mentioned, namely, that I shall aid you with the 
utmost zeal in every way, whatever may be my 
situation. 


The principal promoter of the attack on Welles- 
ley was James Paull. Of obscure origin, Paull went 
out to India as a Writer when he was eighteen 
(1788), and, being possessed of commercial talents, 
in the course of a few years had established a lucra- 
tive business in Lucknow. He made the acquaint- 
ance of the Governor-General when he was sent 
to Fort William as one of the trade-delegates from 
Lucknow, and was-kindly received. In 1804, 
however, Faull quarrelled with the local authorities, 
who, in the end, were backed by Wellesley. 
Thereupon Paull disposed of his business, and 
returned to England. His grievance was hence- 
forth to be the business of his life, and, with the 
object of forwarding it, he, at no little expense, 
secured his election in June, 1805, for Newtown, 
tsle of Wight. In the following month he moved 

1 Fortescue MSS. vii. 341. 


204 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [r806- 


for papers relative to the dealings of Wellesley 
with the Nawab of Oudh. The Prince of Wales 
and the Whigs, it is said, encouraged him, and 
certainly Fox and Windham were among his sup- 
porters. When the Ministry of ‘‘ All the Talents ” 
was formed, it was clearly impossible, Fox and 
Windham being members thereof, for him to 
succeed, and he was begged to let the matter drop. 
However, he refused to do so, and throughout 
the session moved from time to time for further 
papers. Wellesley, with this attack hanging over 
him, clearly could not take office. Moreover, 
he declined haughtily even to take his seat in the 
House of Lords, and, as a matter of fact, did not 
make his maiden speech in that assembly until 
February 8, 1808, when in an admirable oration: 
he supported the Government in the debate on 
the seizure of the Danish fleet by Admiral Gambier 
and General Lord Cathcart in the previous 
September. 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo H.R.H. THE DUKE 
OF YORK? 

Park. Lane: January 30, 1806? 

I have the honour to acknowledge, with the 

highest sense of gratitude, your Royal Highness’ 

most gracious condescension in having been 

1 Frederick Augusfus, Duke of York (1763-1827), cen 
mander-in-Chief, second son of George III 


2 On this day Sir Arthur Wellesley succeeded Lord Corn- 
wallis as Colonel of the 33rd Regiment. 


1808] “OUR TURBAN’D FRIENDS” 205 


pleased to inforn? me of the distinguished favour 
which His Majesty has conferred on Sir Arthur 
Wellesley. I hope to have an opportunity of 
submitting to His Majesty by your Royal High- 
ness’ favour my most dutiful thanks for this 
signal act of goodness and justice, which is not 
more acceptable to the warmest feelings of my 
heart than it will prove to the sentiments of the 
33rd Regiment, and of the whole army of India. 


ADMIRAL SIR W. SIDNEY SMITH? fo THE 
MARQUESS WELLESLEY 


Plymouth: February 3, 1806 


I cannot leave England for the Mediterranean, 
the intermediate station between the two extremes 
of our Empire, without again offering my services 
in the conveyance of anything for your Lordship 
through my African and Asiatic friends which you 
may rather wish to convey by water through 
Europe than by land in these times. I wish also 
to call your Lordship’s attention to the necessity 
of cultivating our turban’d intermediate friends 
more than we do, to bedance the unceasing intrigues 
of a man who knows perfectly well how to cajole 
mankind, and particularly how-to address. the 
uncultivated minds of the Mahometan part of 
them ad captandum. My brother Spencer,? who 


1 Add. MSS. 373009 f. 83. 

2 Sir William Sidney Smith (1764-1840), the hero of St. 
Jean d’Acre, was in November 1805 promoted Rear-Admiral, 
and in the following January hoisted his flag on the Pompée for 
service in the Mediterranean, where Lord Collingwood gave 
him a command on the coast of Naples. 


® Charles Spencer Smith, sometime Ambassador to the 
orte. 


206 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1806- 


will have the honour of delivering this letter to 
your lordship, will be able to show you the danger 
of leaving Turkey a prey to French machinations. 
The Porte is obliged to look to Russia alone as 
less to be feared than France just now, but her 
exclusive influence arises only from our exercising 
none. ‘This is not fair to our ally, who looks to 
us as arbitrator in her affairs, sensible that we 
can have no interest other than the integrity of that 
Empire, while others may be suspected of inter- 
ested advice. At this moment Russia is negotiat- 
ing the renewal of her treaty of alliance, and we 
shall be called on to accede thereto wher. it is 
entirely concluded; and although we may then 
find many articles we could have wished otherwise,’ 
it will be too late to amend them, as we could now 
were our Minister at Constantinople a party or 
even privy to what is going on. 

Lines of battle-ships alone have weight in the 
minds of the inhabitants of the seraglio, and the 
nearest will ever be obeyed. I look to your 
Lordship going to India again some time or other, 
and as Sir Edward Pellew* bas written to his wife 
here that he cannot bear the climate, and that tlie 
command, divided as it is between two, is not 
worth anybody’s acceptance, it is probable other 
arrangements may be niiade there ; in which case, 
as I stand as fair as any other candidate to succeed 
the flag-officer now there that will remain there 

? Rear-Admiral Sir Edward Pellew (1757-1833) was ap- 
pointed in April, 1804,-Commander-in-Chief in the East Indies. 


In 1814 he was raised to the peerage as Baron Exmouth +f 
Canonteign, and in the same year became Admiral of the Blue. 


1808] PAULL’S ATTACK 207 


(Thomas Troubridge’), whose standing on the 
captain’s list is, the same as mine, 1782, I may 
have the honour of conveying your Lordship, 
which I should be happy to obtain.? 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to WILLIAM 
WILBERFORCE 


Park Lane: April 15, 1806 


I wish you would give a portion of your atten- 
tion to the attack which has been made upon me 
in the House of Commons by Mr. Paull. If you 
are disposed to attend to it, I will furnish you 
with papers which will explain my conduct and 
motives.’ 


WILLIAM WILBERFORCE to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 


House of Commons: April 22, 1806 


I have been day after day fretted, and that in 
no small degree, by the reflection that I have 
returned no answer whatever to your last friendly 
letter. I can truly, however, assure you that it 
has not been from my not having it in my thoughts. 
But 11st] has for many years been a standing 
grievance with me, that the time which I should 
willingly allot to subjects of extended operation 

1 Rear-Admiral Sir Thomas Troubridge, first Baronet 
(1758-1807). He entered the Navy in 1773, and saw much 
active service. He held a command at the battle of St. 


Vincent, and was with Nelson at Naples and Malta. He was 
appointed a Lord of the Admiralty in 1801, and was created 
Reon 1804, " 

2 “Add. MSS. 37309 f. 

3 Pearce : Wellesley, nae: 


208 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1806- 


and national importance is continually withdrawn 
from them by a variety of matters which from 
my parliamentary situation have a right to my 
attention. These, with the large correspondence 
they bring on me, consume all my mornings (and 
I use morning here in the most extended sense), 
and the afternoons and evenings are engaged by 
the House of Commons. Hence it has happened 
that I have been for some time earnestly wishing 
to go into a full investigation of East Indian 
affairs, but I have been always kept from the 
execution of my purpose. I have approached 
the subject, I own, with considerable embarrass- 
ment, from my feeling of personal regard for you, 
who must of course be so much implicated in the 
judgment to be formed on it on the one hand, and 
‘from my sense of public duty on the other. Still, 
I have approached, but I have not yet been able 
to do more than make a beginning, and I have 
studiously abstained from reading any papers 
which contain rather conclusions than the ground 
on which they are formed, and might rather bias 
than inform me. On thés principle, though I 
have had some time in my possession the latter 
from the twenty-three directors to which you 
allude, I have never once Jooked into it. I owe 
it, however; to Mr. Grant? to say, that not only 
it was not given to me by him, but that he never 
mentioned to me @ single particular of it; but 
without my asking it was sent to me. After 
1 Charles Grant 41746-1823), Chairman of the Court of 


Directors of the East India Company from 1805, who oppused 
the policy of Wellesley, and supported the attack on him. 


1808] AN ANOMALOUS SYSTEM 209 


stating to your Lordship thus my real situation, I 
have only to aad that I shall be happy to receive 
from you any information which can tend to 
elucidate any of the transactions of your govern- 
ment. If I have the power of doing it, I will make 
use of them. I am sure I need not say that I 
‘know (for I would use no less ambiguous term) 
‘with what public-spirited and patriotic views you 
originally went out to India, and that I should 
therefore be slow to admit of any conclusions 
to your disadvantage. I am now writing at a 
Committee table, whither I am duly summoned 
at twelve o’clock, and kept till near four on the 
Woollen Manufactory, and as I am obliged to 
keep my ear open listening to evidence while 
my hand and mind are employed in writing, I 
must beg you to allow for a letter written under 
such circumstances. 

P.S. I do not know what the newspapers may 
have made me say last night in the House, but 
I stated most distinctly and repeatedly that in 
voting for the production of the Directors’ letter 
I should act on general principle, disavowing all 
releveReaiee Lord Wellesley, thinking that Parlia- 
ment ought to receive such information as the 
Directors could give, and that we should have it, 
if at all, stated to us correctly and authoritatively, 
and not in the state in which a paper printed as 
that in question would come before us. But in 
confidence, my dear Lord, let me own that I heard 
so much from several members of the strange 
anomalous system of our Indian Government, 
that I thought it necessary to state the grand 

I ‘2 


‘210 +~=9THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1806- 


objects. which it was necessary- to have in view 
in constituting a Government for India, and the 
difficulties which arose out of them. I allude 
particularly to the separation of the patronage 
from the political power and executive Govern- 
ment.! 


Paull formulated his charges against Wellesley 
on May 22, 1806, and six days later the House of 
Commons ordered that they should be printed ; 
but in spite of the. efforts of Wellesley’s friends 
to force the matter to an issue, it was still unwar- 
rantably delayed. 

The death of Fox on September 13, 1806, made 
it necessary for Grenville to find a new Secretary 
of State for Foreign Affairs, and he approached 
Canning, with whom, indeed, he had earlier 
opened negotiations with the object of inducing 
him to join the Cabinet. Canning took Wellesley 
into his confidence, and submitted to him the 
draft of a letter addressed to Lord Lowther, upon 
which Wellesley commented. 


GEORGE CANNING to ViscouNT LOWTHER 
South Hill: September 26, 1806 
I have not hitherto troubled your Lordship 
upon the subjects on which we conversed before 
you left town, because there has been no period, 
till the present,-at which I have had anything 
precise to communicate ; and I have not, thought 

1 Add. MSS. 37309 f. r12. 


2 


te Heck 


et, Pine. 


¥. Young, sculpt. 
CHARLES Jays ae 


ot 


1808] | OVERTURES TO CANNING — arr 


myself at liberty to réport, without a distinct 
object;, what lias passed between Lord Grenville 
and myself, since that communication which I 
mentioned to your Lordship and to others in’ 
July. 

Since that time Lord Grenville has expressed, . 
more than once,' through | the same confidential 
channel, his wish for thie renewal of the connection 
which formerly subsisted. between him, and me, 
and his readiriess to find the means of making such 
an opening for me in ‘ office as - ‘would certainly 
have left to me personally, in that respect, nothing 
to desire. 

Knowing, as you do, my sentiments towards 
Lord Grenville, you will readily judge in what way 
my inclination wauld have led me to meet such a 
disposition on his part, had I acted on the impulse 
of those sentiments alone, without reference to 
other considerations. 

But I declined listening to any separate over- 
ture. And Lord Grenville was not prepared, at 
that time, to give to such an overture any farther 
extension than that of some law arrangement, 
whitu Jota comprehend (but exactly in what 
manner was not explained) Perceval and the Master 
of the Rolls. 

In this state things continued till the day before 
Mr. Fox’s death. It had, indeed, been mutually 
agreed that any farther discussion should be 
deferred till after the decision of the two important 
events then depending—that of Mr. Fox’s recovery 
and the question of peace with France. 

Mr. Fox’s death, happening before the 


212 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1806- 


negotiation had terminated, was of itself a source 
of new difficulty. On the one hana, it was hardly 
to be expected that any man would enter at hazard 
into connection with the Government while the 
nature and result of so important (and in the view 
of those out of office so questionable) a measure 
were yet unascertained. And on the other hand 
this event appears to have made it necessary for. 
Lord Grenville to proceed to the making of. his 
arrangements without delay. 

Upon that occasion, it is but justice to Lord 
Grenville to say that I believe he did seniously 
turn his thoughts to the possibility of compréhend- 
ing a larger proportion of Mr. Pitt’s friends than 
he had hitherto had in contemplation. But he 
uniformly avowed the determination of not dis- 
placing for that purpose any one of the persons 
who had come into office with him. 

Upon comparing the number of openings which 
Lord Grenville could have to offer, consistently 
with this determination, with the number of persons 
acting with us, who had not put themselves out of 
question as to office, and with what I had been 
able to collect of the pretensions <r2 vapecta- 
tions of some of them, and particularly of some 
of those whom I met at your house in July, it 
was obvious that any proposal which could be 
founded on so narrow a basis would be insufficient 
for its purpose. 

And as the whole of Lord Grenville’s communica- 
tions with me 2n this subject were professedly 
directed to the single object of ascertaining my 
opinion as to the probable success of any such 


1808] NEGOTIATIONS 213 


overture as he nfight find himself enabled to make 
~—with the intention (if I should encourage him to 
believe that it was likely to be accepted) of sub- 
mitting it to the approbation of his colleagues 
in office, previously to its being communicated 
by me to those with whom I was acting, as a 
distinct, a formal proposal—I felt myself bound, 
in fairness to Lord Grenville, not to give him an 
opinion more encouraging than I really had reason 
to entertain. 

The discussion, therefore, terminated without 
ever having assumed the shape of a regular nego- 
tiatiGn, but with the expression of a strong wish 
on my part, that if Lord Grenville should think 
fit to make any proposal of the sort which he 
appeared to have had in contemplation, he would 
do it rather through somebody less personally 
interested in it than myself ; and I took the liberty 
of naming the Duke of Portland as the person who, 
I thought, would be considered by all parties as 
the most unexceptionable channel for such a 
communication. 

I have thus given" your Lordship an account 
ot’ trencaction, the result of which I know you 
will regret. 

It is, indeed, a mortifying circumstance (in our 
view of the situation of the Government and of 
the country) that Lord Grenville should, from 
whatever sense of his actual engagements and 
obligations, have lost so favourable an opportunity 
of obtaining that ascendancy to his own power 
and principles, in the administration, which we 
have all along lamented that he has not appeared 


214 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1806- 


to possess, and which a connection with Mr. Pitt’s 
friends would have secured to him. 

But while I regret this result, I really cannot 
accuse myself of having in any degree contributed 
to it, by omitting anything on my ,part which 
could have led to a general or comprehensive 
arrangement.! 


WELLESLEY’s Observations on CANNING’S 
Letter to Viscount LOWTHER 
October 2, 1806 
It would appear to be necessary to remark that 
the communications made on the part of ‘Lord 
Grenville were never of a formal or positive 
description, nor of the nature of direct proposals 
or offers: it was stated that the substance of 
them must be discussed with those persons who at 
that time were acting confidentially with him, 
before any direct proposal could be made either 
to Mr. Canning or his friends, and it was mentioned 
that no such discussion had yet taken place 
between Lord Grenville and his friends. On the 
other hand, it was always supposed that Mr. 
Canning, previously to any determincticn,"wotid’ 
have taken the advice of those with whom he was 
connected. The communications from Lord Gren- 
ville were declared to be directed to the object 
of ascertaining from Mr. Canning in a confidential 
and amicable manner the prospect of success in 
the events which might have admitted a more 
formal and distinct proposal. ~ 
(1) The first communication was confinzd to the 


4 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 77. 


1808] NU BHXCLUSLUN 215 


idea of establishing a connection with Mr. Canning 
and of making arrangements for Mr. Perceval ; 
it should be observed, however, that a similar dis- 
position was expressed respecting Sir William 
Grant, the Master of the Rolls. No principle of 
exclusion was then stated. 

(2) The discussion of any branch of the question 
in any view was deferred by mutual understanding 
in the expectation that two points of great import- 
ance must speedily be decided, namely, the prob- 
ability of Mr. Fox’s recovery, and the prospect 
of early peace. The decision of one, if not of 
both; these points was mutually deemed to be 
essential to the possibility of proceeding to any 
regular consideration of Lord Grenville’s wishes. 
And although Lord Grenville’s enquiries may have 
been more distinctly directed to the means of 
comprehending a larger proportion of the present 
opposition within the Government at the period 
of time named (about the time of Mr. Fox’s. 
death) than at any earlier moment, it must be 
observed that those enquiries originated in the 
suggestions which had been made to him about 
‘nat time of the probability of effecting such an 
arrangement upon principles of justice and equity 
towards all parties. Lord Grenville’s disposition 
was always the same, but nis views of the question 
necessarily varied with the hopes which he enter- 
tained of finding means to form a more compre- 
hensive system, without injury to his own honour 
and to the just claims of those who acted with 
hii. The word “ offer” is here used; it has 
already been observed that no communication 


216 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1806- 


was made which could strictly be termed an 
“ offer.”” The same observation applies to much 
of the subsequent statement, which perhaps might 
be qualified by some explanation of the nature 
of the communication which took place. 

(3) It would be proper to explain that any ques- 
tions concerning Windham originated entirely 
with Mr. Canning ; no idea ever was stated of any 
change with regard to Windham, and it seems 
sufficient merely to advert to Lord Grenville’s 
general determination respecting the members 
of his Government. It is very desirable to omit 
the mention of particular names in the relation 
of a communication of so general] a nature, other- 
wise what has passed (certainly with amicable 
views in every quarter) may tend to open sources 
of fresh animosity. This remark particularly 
applies to what is stated regarding Lord Melville : 
it would certainly be more conciliatory to avoid 
any mention of iis name which did not come into 
question in any material part of the discussion. 
It may be proper to state Mr. Canning’s own dis- 
position towards both Windham and Lord Mel- 
ville, and his intentions respecting hoth, if tite 
transaction had ultimately assumed a more regular 
form ; but the expressions here used may create 
much ill-will, My dispositions towards Lord 
Melville have always been so different from unkind 
or unjust that I should grieve to be the reporter 
of the existence of any such sentiments in the mind 
of any friend of mjne, and I am therefore anxious 
that this point should not be stated with such 
strength. Indeed, I should not deem it to be just 


1808] WELLESLEY’S COMMENTS 217 


to Lord Grenville to describe his sentiments so 
strongly ; perhaps in a case of such delicacy it 
would be necessary to obtain from Lord Grenville 
a much more detailed explanation of his opinions 
and disposition with regard to Lord Melville, 
before I could fairly say in what terms those 
opinions and disposition could be correctly des- 
cribed. 

But I really perceive no necessity for such 
description,- and I should imagine that every 
important purpose would be answered by remark- 
ing that the situation of Lord Melville and his 
connections must have formed a material branch 
of any final discussion with Lord Grenville. 

Upon the whole, I wish it were possible to make 
a shorter statement of the communication which 
passed; the substance of it was certainly of a 
conciliatory nature, but I apprehend some danger 
from the details, especially those which relate to 
individual pretensions and situations. 

You will excuse the freedom of these remarks, 
as you know that my views throughout the whole 
transaction have been amicable to all my friends." 


GEORGE CANNING fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
South Hill: October 3, 1806 


How can you have thought it necessary to make 
any apology for what you call the freedom of 
your remarks upon my proposed letter to Lord 
Lowther? I sent it to you for no other purpose 
than that you should comment upon it with as 
much freedom as possible. 

1 Add. MSS. 37295 f, 8z. 


218 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [r806- 


Undoubtedly it would have saved us both some 
trouble to have considered all that has passed 
as nul and non avenu, and to have said absolutely 
nothing about it. 

But how could that be in justice to Lord 
Grenville? He cannot but conjecture (and I am 
well aware) that no small stimulus will be given 
to the spirit of party politics in the next session of 
Parliament by the notion that the opportunity 
which (it will be said) was afforded to Lord 
Grenville by Fox’s death, to retrieve what (in the 
language of party) is called a false step in the 
original formation of his Government, hasebeen 
thrown away. This will be considered a deliberate 
preference of the Foxite party, or (what is not 
better liked, perhaps) of Lord Sidmouth’s, to 
the friends of Mr. Pitt. This is no fancy of mine. 

It happens, by an odd coincidence, that the 
same post which has brought me back my letter 
with your observations, brings me a letter from the 
person to whom mine is addressed, written pre- 
cisely in this strain. In such a case what ought ] 
to do? To suffer the mistake to remain uncon- 
tradicted ? That surely would be unfair to Loru 
Grenville. To say generally that something has 
passed, but of a nature not to be reported ? That 
would be only to invite questions, and to excite 
suspicions much more unfavourable to the pos- 
sibility of a good understanding hereafter than 
the truth. What other course remains but tc 
state correctly the substance of what has passed 
with no more particularity than is necessary” for 
making the statement intelligible ? 


1808] SUGGESTIONS ADOPTED 219 


For this purpose I am very glad to avail myself 
of your remarks, to correct whatever may have 
appeared to you inaccurate, and to supply what- 
ever omission has struck you as material. 

Your first general observations relate to the 
too great formality and distinctness of shape 
under which you think the communications to 
me were represented. I have endeavoured to 
conform the representation to your ideas, by 
striking out, wherever they occurred, the words 
“ offer,” ‘‘ proposal,” and the like, and substituting 
expressions of a more indeterminate nature. 

I have also (though not on any suggestion of 
yours) considerably abridged the first part, which 
relates to myself alone, upon which I have no 
desire to dwell for any other purpose than that 
of expressing what have invariably been my 
sentiments towards Lord Grenville. 

My alterations are made throughout in red ink, 
and the passages underlined with red ink are 
designed to be omitted. 

Your first speczfic remark (No. 1) applies to the 
statement of the pruposed legal arrangement. 
xy‘ou notice the omission of the Master of the Rolls. 
I omitted him because I thought that in beating 
out that idea together I had shown you that it was 
not worth much in the way of temptation. Sir 
William Grant, I believe, could not consider 
anything but the Great Seal as above his present 
situation. In fact, his rank is already above that 
of the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and a 
Peerage, which alone could make the latter 
situation the higher of the two, might possibly 


220 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1806 


have suggested the suspicion of 2 wish to remove 
him from the House of Commons, quite as readily 
as that of a beneficial promotion. Such was my 
view of this point, as I stated it to you more than 
once, I think—but particularly on the Thursday 
night, when the question of the separate overture 
was finally settled. That view may be mistaken. 
I do not think it is so. But it is from that view 
only that I thought the mention of the Master 
of the Rolls not only unimportant, but better 
avoided. However, as it seems to be thought 
otherwise, I now-add his name to Perceval’s. 

I change at the same time in this paragraph 
the expression to which you appear to refer, when 
you say that “no principle of exclusion was then 
stated.” 

The next remark (No. 2) is important, as it 
shows that a sense which I had no intention of 
conveying might be affixed, and what was said of 
the time when Lord Grenville first took into 
consideration the possibility of finding means for 
a wider arrangement. If I meant anything more 
than simply to mark the date, it was certainly not 
(as you seem to have understood) ta throw any 
blame on Lord Grenville. But since the passage. 
appears to be liable to such a construction it must 
be altered. And I cannot do better than copy, as 
nearly as possible, your words. I flatter myself 
that, so far as I have gone, the changes which I 
propose will have satisfied all your objections. 
What remains is, 4 confess, mucli more difficult. 

It is unquestionably true that the limitation 
in point of number of offices would not, of itself, 


1808] WINDHAM’S REMOVAL 221 


have been decisive in my opinion. And I do 
not give a true impression of the grounds of that 
opinion, unless I mention the negative as well as 
the positive circumstances on which it was 
formed. 

I thought I had been particularly cautious ot 
to imply that the idea of removing Windham had 
been entertained by Lord Grenville. I state it 
expressly, as that which I had found reason to 
believe was not in Lord Grenville’s contemplation. 
I state this, to be sure, without much introduction 
or circumlocution, because it,is an idea so familiar 
to the public at large, to everybody (I believe) out 
of the Government, and to very many in it, that 
I suppose Lord Grenville himself is the only person 
who has all along felt quite sure that, happen what 
might besides, Windham would meet Parliament 
again in his present office. I am_ perfectly 
persuaded that if his name is ot mentioned 
expressly, the very contrary of the truth will be 
taken for granted; or that the “ general deter- 
mination” of Lord Grenville ‘respecting the 
members of his Government ”’ will not be thought 
to have precluded the idea of an amicable transfer 
of Windham from his present to some other 
situation of more dignity and leisure. Never- 
theless, if any importance is attached to the 
suppression of his name, I underscore him with 
red, without much remorse ; though it cost me at 
the same time the statement of the notion of a 
compromise upon some of the military points, to 
which I attach, beyond the present moment, much 
importance—but which perhaps it is of more 


222 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [r806- 


importance to have stated to you than to Lord 
Grenville. 

I do not part with Lord Melville with the same 
indifference. It is true that nothing distinct, in 
the way of proposal and rejection, passed respect- 
ing Lord Melville, but I cannot help fearing that 
what I stated (surely in a very guarded manner). 
is at the same time very true—that I did “ collect 
enough to lead me to apprehend that there exists 
with respect to him no conciliatory disposition.” 

“‘ Kindness ”’ no man has a right to claim. It 
is optional to show, it or not; and its being 
withholden is no ground of complaint. But the 
determination to retain on the Journals of the 
House of Commons the Resolutions which have 
been negatived both as to the Law and the Facts 
—as to the Law by the opinions of the Judges, 
and as to the Facts by the solemn decision of the 
competent Tribunal, I hold to be in strictness 
unjust ;- and if the doing justice in this respect - 
were matter of difficulty (which it ought not to be) 
still the not restoring Lord Melville to the Privy 
Council} from which those Resolutions, now so 
falsified, procured his expulsion, appcars to me to 
be, not a want of favour or of kindness, but plain, 
substantial injustice. You cannot suppose me 
here to speak of what I suppose to be your senti- 
ments or even Lord Grenville’s individually, but 
those of the Government. 7 

Still, however, though I think this a most 


1 Melville's name was removed from the roll of Privy 
Councillors when the charge of malversation wes brought 
against him. It was erased on May 9, 1805, and restored on 
April 8, 1807. 


1808] MELVILLE’S TREATMENT 223 


important part cf the statement, it isnot one that 
is essential to it. Nothing could be more contrary 
to my wishes than to excite any one unpleasant 
feeling which does not now exist, or to aggra- 
vate any which may unfortunately have been 
excited. ... 

The expedient of saying what “I would have 
done” upon this subject, “if the transaction had 
assumed a more regular form,” would, I think, be 
dangerous (if there be danger, as you seem to 
think, in the subject), as that would naturally lead 
to the question, “What did vou collect to be the 
dispocition in respect to Lord Melville ? ” to which 
I am afraid I could still give but an unsatisfactory 
answer. I give up all that relates to Lord Melville 
therefore, altogether. 

Thus curtailed and amended, I imagine you 
will find nothing in the statement but what is 
strictly conformable to your view of the trans- 
actions between us. If anything fresh should 
strike you upon a review of it, I shall be equally 
ready to endeavour to satisfy your objections. 
But I cannot help Wishing that it might be 
convenient te you, in that case, to come and state 
your objections here, or, in the better alternative 
of your being satisfied, to find some leisure day to 
come here and express your satisfaction: 

Again and again I entreat you to be assured 
that I can retain no impression of your part in this 
transaction, nor of Lord Grenville’s either (so far 
as I am personally concerned) best what is of the 
most gratifying and satisfactory nature. I hope 
you do not think that I can have been insensible 


224 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1806- 


either to his disposition to renew old friendship, or 
to your unwearied kindness in tke endeavour to 
bring about that renewal. I trust, too, that you 
do me the same justice, and that, if we are vexed 
(as for my part I am heartily) with the result of 
our communications, we lay the blame only on 
the circumstances and the persons, that for the 
present make what we all equally desire im- 
practicable. _ 

.P.S. One should have thought that I had done, 
but on looking over my returned letter, I see one 
pencil-mark which has not any observation an- 
nexed to it. It is over the words “‘ could rake ” 
in the fourth page of the first sheet. What does it 
imply? Did you doubt the meaning of the 
expression ? or only object to the ¢ense of the verb, 
as too positive ? I have inserted an alteration by 
guess, which seems to me to meet both this doubt 
and this objection, and I can think of no other. 
Yet another thing had escaped me. You speak 
of Lord Grenville’s intention to have consulted his 
colleagues before any divect proposal could have 
been made. I will cértainly mention this if you 
think it material. But I doubt (for Lord Gren- 
ville) what good the mention of it can do. Will it 
not rather suggest the ideas first of Lord Grenville 
being Jess master of his Government, etc., etc. ; 
and secondly, that obvious one, that to consult a 
Government, pretty full already, upon the means 
of making room, would probably be to ensure a 
negative upon the experiment ?? 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 85. 


1808] GRENVILLE’S GOOD-WILL 225 


GEORGE CANNING fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
South Hill: October 9, 1806 

The inclination of my opinion is that, though 
not absolutely necessary, it would, if proper (of 
which you may perhaps be a better judge than I) 
be very desivable that Lord Grenville should see 
what has. lately passed between us. I return the 
amended letter, therefore ; and I return also those 
observations of yours, in conformity to which the 
amendments have been made. And I beg that 
you will do what upon consideration you shall 
think best. I have not kept,any copy of my last 
letter”’to you which accompanied the amended 
letter, and explained the views upon which those 
parts which appeared to you to require alteration 
had been framed ; but this appears to me to be a 
necessary accompaniment of any communication 
to Lord Grenville. 

I am glad that in its present shape the paper 
appears’ to you to be unexceptionable. It is, 
however, still’ open to any further observations 
which your reference to Lord Grenville may 
suggest—as, having beén obliged to answer Lord 
Lowther’s let*er, and to account for the delay of 
the communication which I had to make to him, 
the further interval of a day or two is of no great 
importance. 


Lorp GRENVILLE fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Downing Street : October 16, 1806 
I return you the papers you sent me, They 
afford’ ample proofs of the fairness of the intention 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 93. 
I 


226 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [r806- 


with which Canning’s letter has, been drawn, and 
it is impossible for me not to feel highly gratified 
by his expressions of personal kindness towards 
imyself, which indeed I never doubted, and which 
are met on my part by feelings perfectly reciprocal. 
I also concur entirely with him in the propriety 
for his sake, as well as for my own, of our being 
able to make to our respective friends some 
statement on this subject. I have indeed already 
had occasion to say something on the subject to 
the very person to whom Canning’s letter is 
addressed. In answer to some observations of 
his I felt myself at liberty to say that I hid had 
the means of ascertaining that the persons with 
whom, he wished to see me connected had deter- 
mined not to treat for that purpose but asa body, 
and to maintain pretensions which (whether 
reasonable or not in themselves) were inconsistent 
with what I felt I owed as a man of honour 
towards those whom I myself had so recently 
recommended to the stations they now hold in 
Government. 

This is the substance, aud I believe not far from 
the words, which I used, and I confess I think it 
is. only ini some such short statement of the leading 
facts that the respective parties to such a trans- 
action can ever be brought to concert. I cannot 
but agree with you that the draft of Canning’s 
letter, even as now amended, is much too long and 
too detailed for such a purpose. In a narrative 
of that length and particularity, no man can avoid 
that species of colouring which every one na.urally 
gives in telling his own story, and which would be 


1808] AN IMPARTIAL STATEMENT 227 


found to be perfectly different in two such repre- 
sentations of facts precisely the same. The 
slightest change of the turn of an expression will, 
as you well know, lead to different inferences in 
matters of so much delicacy ; and in guarding the 
impression of my conduct, as I endeavoured to 
guard my conduct itself, against the two extremes 
of which I am liable to be suspected by different 
persons, of too great or too little facility on this 
occasion, I never could concur in and adopt a 
representation of the details drawn by a person who 
probably does not feel exactly as I do, as to all the 
motives which regulated my decision. In such a 
case I cannot but think that the leading facts are 
those which can alone be stated by the common 
consent of both parties; and that the rest must 
be left to the fairness and mutual good faith of 
persons honourably and kindly disposed to each 
other, and who certainly have no intention to 
misrepresent the particulars. 

In this view I think our joint statement might 
be shortly thus : 

That nothing passed* on either side but with 
reference to qommunications to be subsequently 
made to the respective friends of each as the 
Proper foundation of any distinct and regular 
discussion or treaty. 

That Lord Grenville and Mr. Canning mutually 
expressed a desire that circumstances might lead 
to a renewal of their former connection. 

That Mr. Canning described himself as bound by 
engagements which prevented him from acting 
otherwise than in concurrence with the body of the 


228 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [x806- 


Opposition, whom he also described as bound by 
similar engagements to each other. 

And that it appeared almost immediately that 
the pretensions of that body were such as could 
not be satisfied by such facilities as Lord Grenville 
was likely to find himself enabled to furnish from 
actual or probable openings, but would require a 
departure from the determination he uniformly 
avowed, of not forcibly displacing for that purpose 
any of the persons who had come into office with 
him ; and that on this ground the whole terminated 
without ever having assumed the shape of a 
regular negotiation. 

This, of course (if anything like it be adopted 
for a joint statement) will not preclude either 
Canning or myself from stating our own views 
and impressions as to minuter details ; but these 
will be stated as our own, and consequently by 
just and reasoning minds will be received as such. 

Had a more particular statement by common 
consent appeared to me necessary or proper, I 
should have had to thank you much for your 
observations, in all which I concur, thinking some 
of them also extremely materiz]—particularly 
those which relate to Windham and Lord Melville. 
I should indeed be sorry to be thought to have 
admitted a discussion of which Windham’s removal 
formed a part ; nor could I acknowledge what was 
said about Lord Melville to be in any degree a just 
representation of my sentiments. Nothing, of 
course, can now be said as to future intentions ; 
but speaking of the past, even up to this very 
moment, I must say that if there be one individual 


1808] “ALL THE TALENTS ” 220 


in this country to:;whom I conceive myself to have 
shewn the greatest kindness, and that too with 
much embarrassment and difficulty to myself, 
that individual is Lord Melville. 

I also think it most essential that all that passed 
on my part should be clearly stated 'as having had 
reference to future communication and concert 
with my friends before it could assume a binding 
form. I have no pretensions to be (as is stated) 
the master of the Government I act with. The 
station I do hold was, as you know, forced upon 
me by them against my wishes, and I have no 
desire*to carry its pretensions at all higher than 
necessity requires: much less could I think of 
acting in such a matter as this without full 
communication with them and a determination, 
not only to ask their advice, but to abide by it 
as far as a man can honestly sacrifice his own 
judgment to that of others. 


Canning declining to join the ‘ All the Talents ”’ 
administration, Lord Howick was taken from the 
Admiralty and given*the Foreign Office, and 
Thomas Grenville succeeded him at the Admiralty. 
In March 1807 a disagreement with the King on 
the Catholic question, on ,which he would not_ 
yield in the slightest degree, brought about the 
resignation of the Ministry, and the Duke of 
Portland was invited to form an administration. 
One of the Duke’s first acts. was to offer Wellesley 
the Foreigr Office. 

1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 95- 


230 THE WELLESLEY. PAPERS  (1806- 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY #o GEORGE CANNING 
Private Oxford Street 
March 22, 1807 

I contrived at length to see Lord Grenville this 
evening at five o’clock ; you will perceive by the 
enclosed note that I have used every effort to 
prevent delay. 

With real pain I decline the very kind and 
flattering proposition which you were so good as 
to convey to me. I have not delayed my answer 
one moment. beyond the time that it was possible 
to send it. 

I have nothing to add but my warmest senti- 
ments of gratitude towards you, and all who act 
with you, and my deep sense of the gracious favour 
which the King has manifested towards me. 

It is my determination to have no concern in any 
opposition which may be forming against the new - 
Ministry, and on all occasions I shall be. most 
happy to be of any service to you and to them. 

I obtained Lord Grenville’s assurance that 
what has passed respecting me shall not transpire 
through him; and from me no person what- 
ever shall, learn this transaction without your 
permission." 


THE DUKE OF. PORTLAND fo THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 


Burlington House: March 24, 1807 
It is with infinite satisfaction that I obey the 
commands which I have this moment reteived 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 107. 


Sir 
F. as 
~ Re 
"yitol 
fs old: 
V TUL TAA oO 
AM { 
HE 
ENR 
Y 
CAV 
AVEN 
ENDIS 
SI 
{ BENTIN 
NCK 
» 3RD 
DUK 
EO 
of F. Murph 
oe rphy 
“ste awa 
4 ipt. 


© 


1808] AN OFFER DECLINEL 231 


from the Kinge to convey to you without 4 
moment’s loss of time ‘“‘ His Majesty’s earnest 
desire that you will undertake the office of 
Secretary of State for the Foreign Department, in 
which His Majesty will be glad to avail himself of 
your Lordship’s virtues and talents.” It would 
be impertinent in me to add a word.more to the 
extract which I have given. your Lordship in His 
Majesty’s own words, except to assure you that ] 
never felt a higher gratification than in fulfilling 
His Majesty’s commands in the present instance. 

The King will be in town, at. five this evening, 
wher? he expresses his hope that I shall be enabled 
to bring him your Lordship’s answer. 


This offer must have been gratifying tc 
Wellesley’s haughty soul, but he would not accept 
office with the charges against him still undisposec 
of. Canning became Foreign Secretary. Welles. 
ley’s family, partly perhaps as a compliment tc 
him, was, however, well represented in the Govern- 
ment, Sir Arthur Wellesley being appointed. Chie! 
Secretary t0 the Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, 
Wellesley-Pole Secretary of the Admiralty, 
and Henry Wellesley a Secretary of the 
Treasury. Wellesley now was able to face the 
charges with more of spirit and less of disgust. 
“He has at length got the better of the effect 
which these base attacks had made upon his 
mind,” Sir Arthur Wellesley wrote to Malcolm, 


1 Add. MSS. 37309 f. 170. 


232 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1806- 


February 25, 1808. ‘“* He has lately made a most 
distinguished speech in the House of Lords, and 
I have no doubt he will come forward frequently 
in the same way. I hope that we shall be able to 
bring the House of Commons to a vote on the 
Oudh case in the course of the next week. Not, I 
think, that it signifies essentially whether we do or 
not, as time has had its usual effect wpon the sense 
or folly of the public, and has convinced them that 
the man they have been in the habit of abusing 
was the best governor for India. It is desirable, 
however, to come to a vote on this question, as 
several of Lord Wellesley’s Indian friends are 
anxious about it, as well as others who have more 
respect than I have for what passes in Parliament.” 
It was not, however, until March 8, 1808, that the 
charges were brought definitely before [the House 
of Commons, and then the motion was negatived 
by 182 to 3r votes. A subsequent resolution 
approving of Wellesley’s conduct was moved by 
Sir John Anstruther, and carried. The matter 
was once more revived in the folowing May, 
when Sir Thomas Turton moved for the impeach- 
ment of Wellesley on the grounds of his conduct 
towards the Nawab of the Carnatic, but this was 
negatived without a division ; and when Wallace 
moved a vote expressing approval of Wellesley’s 
conduct in this matter, there were but nineteen 
dissentients. 


1808] A JUSTIFICATION 233 


Tue Marquess; WELLESLEY fo THe DUKE OF 
PORTLAND 
Private and confidential Camelford House 
April 21, 1807 

According to the wish expressed by your Grace 
that I should commit to paper the general state- 
ment of my personal situation, which I had the 
honour of laying before you yesterday, I now 
address this letter to your Grace, and I take the 
liberty of adding my request, that the unexampled 
nature of the injuries which I have suffered may 
be humbly submitted to His Majesty’s gracious. 
consideration. 

Your Grace is fully acquainted with the general 
tenor of my administration of the affairs of that 
important branch of the British Empire ,which 
was entrusted to my charge for nearly eight years. 
In every stage of the progress of my conduct the 
motives, success, and ultimate result of the 
measures pursued had been sanctioned by the most 
decided approbation of His Majesty’s Government 
and of Parliament ; and I deemed myself to be 
fully entitled to expect, from the nature and extent 
of my public'services, as well as from the manner 
in which they have been accepted by His Majesty’s 
Ministers during the whole period of my con- 
tinuance in India, those honourable distinctions 
and that public reception which constitute the 
natural and just objects of ambition to every loyal 
subject of the Crown serving His Majesty and the 
country in arduous stations of public trust, and 
more espevially in distant and unhealthy climates, 
under circumstances of great labour and difficulty. 


234 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1806- 


Although untoward accidents, had occasioned 
differences between me and the Court of Directors, 
in all material points the sentiments of His 
Majesty’s Government had confirmed my pro- 
ceedings, and at the close of my administration, 
when the late Mr. Pitt notified to me his intention 
of availing himself of my long expressed wish to 
be released from the government of India, he 
accompanied that notification by a declaration of 
“his earnest wish that I should not leave India 
without receiving some additional public mark of 
the cordial sense entertained of my services,’”’ and 
he added that he was “‘ most anxious to obcain ”’ 
for me, from His Majesty’s gracious favour, the 
Order of the Garter, as a just remuneration for 
the advantages acquired for the Empire under my 
administration. 

At the time of my arrival in England, Mr. Pitt, 
and the Ministers under whom I had served, 
continued to entertain the same favourable 
opinions of my services and of their result. The 
calamitous event of Mr. Pitt’s death took place 
within a few days after I reached London, but not 
before I had received, in writing and verbally from 
that lamented friend, the most cordial testimonies 
of his unaltered esteem and confidence. 

In the events which ensued, although Lord 
Grenville’s favourable sentiments of my services 
remained unchanged and the long friendship 
suffered no diminution, the frame of the Govern- 
ment precluded me from submitting to His 
Majesty any representation of my situation. 

From that period of time, notwithstanding the 


1808] A DELICATE SITUATION 238 


unabated kindness of Lord Grenville, the conduct 
of affairs in tha House of Commons has subjected 
me to a species of persecution, perhaps unparalleled 
in the modern history of England, for I have been 
unable to obtain the advantage even of con- 
demnation by the House of Commons, and have 
been offered no alternative but a perpetual and 
indefinite state of accusation without any distinct 
ground of charge, or a dismission of the whole 
case from the bar of the House of Commons under 
an equivocal and ambiguous vote, which would 
leave the merits of the case in utter uncertainty. 
In ¢his situation it has evidently been the desire 
of a certain description of persons to detain me, 
for purposes which are sufficiently obvious ; nor 
have those whose views are always just and 
honourable been able to frustrate the design. 
Under such circumstances the recent crisis called 
upon me to decide a painful question between my 
private friendship for Lord Grenville, my personal 
interests, as far as they were concerned in the issue 
of affairs in the House of Commons, and the high 
considerations of duty“towards His Majesty, which 
have been iavolved in the late discussions in 
Parliament. Although the peculiar delicacy of 
my situation rendered me unable to serve His 
Majesty to the full extent of my most anxious 
wishes, your Grace has done me the justice to 
observe that I have afforded every support within 
my power to the cause of His Majesty’s present 
Government. The part which have taken was 
intended .by me and was understood by your 
Grace, and by the world, to amount to a complete 


236 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [r806- 


declaration and pledge of my resolution to adhere 
to the Government which His. Majesty has 
recently appointed; and whatever may be the 
result, I am satisfied that I have acted according 
to my duty; nor shall I depart from the deter- 
mination which I have expressed to your Grace. 

With these sentiments I submit to your Grace 
the justice of my hope that His Majesty may be 
graciously pleased to consider with indulgence the 
services rendered under my administration in 
India; the estimation in which those services 
were held by the late Mr. Pitt and all those 
Ministers under whom I was employed ; >and, 
lastly, the cruel and unjust return which I have 
received since my arrival; the attempts which 
have been made to convert services (for which I 
have received the thanks of the executive and 
legislative power) into crimes, and to preclude me 
from the benefit of those acts of His Majesty’s 
grace and favour which have been conferred on 
my predecessors in similar circumstances, and 
even on persons employed under my command. 
His Majesty’s justice and‘goodness will not, I 
trust, permit that I should remain undefended, 
unrewarded, and unhonoured merely because the 
whole tenor of my public service has been marked 
by an uniform attachment to His Majesty’s person 
and Government, to the honour and interests of 
his crown, and to the civil and religious establish- 
ments of the country. I rely upon His Majesty’s 
benevolence, that: the executive power will take 
the lead in my cause, and that, if mv services 
should receive the same estimation which the late 


1808] TARDY JUSTICE 237 


Mr. Pitt never denied to them, even in the last 
moments of his life, His Majesty will condescend 
to manifest a public sense of his favourable opinion 
by some mark of his royal notice. 

In concluding this letter, it may not be im- 
proper to apprise your Grace that the con- 
siderations which induced me to solicit His 
Majesty’s indulgence with regard to the immediate 
acceptance of active employment in his service 
have ceased to operate in my mind. The nature 
of the opposition which has been arrayed against 
the King’s Government, and the entire separation 
which the course of recent évents has necessarily 
eccasioned between those who attack and those 
who propose to defend the Church and State as 
now constituted by law, have rendered the public 
service a matter of positive duty to me, if His 
Majesty should think fit to employ me either at 
home or abroad. Your Grace, however, will be 
pleased to consider this intimation to be made 
merely for your convenience, without any view of 
affecting arrangements already established, and 
without any reference to the nature or extent of 
my future suport. 


THE MARQUESS OF BUCKINGHAM to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 


Buckingham House: March 17, 1808 


You will believe me, my dear Lord Wellesley, 
very sincerely happy at the justice, though tardy 
and ‘inadequate, that has been done to your 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. ror. 


238 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1806- 


character and services by the vote of Monday 
night ;' and personally gratified by the opportunity 
given to my son to mark his public gratitude 
td one for whom I have felt so warmly. If he has 
been fortunate enough to bear that testimony in 
terms satisfactory to you, and to pursue the course 
of his support, and of his arguments, without 
injury to the cause he wished to hold up to the 
gratitude and respect of the public, every wish 
that he could: form on this subject will have been 
fully satisfied. He will, therefore, read with very 
particular pleasure your letter, which I shall 
immediately send to him; and indeed ho had 
already. mentioned to me the very kind and strong 
terms in which Mr. Pole and my friend Arthur’ 
expressed themselves to him immediately after he 
had spoken. 

He does ‘not appear to apprehend any real anid 
substantial attempt~to renew further questions on 
the Oudh subject; if, however, he should be 
deceived in that opinion, his exertions will be 
anxiously directed to support the opinion which he 
has, after the fullest reflections and application to 
the question, invariably entertained respecting it. 

After stating this, I know not how to add 
anything from myself on this subject. I cannot 
and will not congratulate you on what I feel to be 
a tardy and meagre act of justice ; but I may add 
that I feel unaffected and cordial pleasure in the 
vote that relieves your mind and your health from 

1 A resolution approving of Wellesley’s policy in connection 


with Oudh. 
2 Sir Arthur Wellesley. 


1808] VIMIERA 239 


the constant and feverish irritation necessarily 
created by such an attack. 


VISCOUNT CASTLEREAGH? to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 


Private Downing Street 
September 2, 1808 


Mr. Cooke in my absence has fulfilled my wishes 
in transmitting to you without a moment’s loss 
of time the glorious achievements of your brother. 
It is truly gratifying to me that he has had this 
proud, occasion, before the command passed into 
other hands, of confirming before the best troops 
of France the exalted reputation with which he has 
always served. Such a début for the British army 
portends, I trust, many splendid victories in the 
course of the war, if the Contirient, like Spain, shall 
summon resolution to face the tyrant. 

We have in the Madrid Gazette a letter from 
Palacios dated the 13th. He was again attacked 
on the 12th and compelled once more the French to 
retire with great loss both of men and artillery. 
On the 14th he was reinforced, and proceeding in 
pursuit of the enemy.' 

1 Add. MSS. 37309 f. 226. 

2 Robert Stewart, Viscount+ Castlereagh (1769-1822), 
Secretary of State for War, succeeded as second Marquess 
of Londonderry, 1821. It was Castlereagh who had specially 
nominated Wellesley to his command in Portugal. 

3 Sir Arthur Wellesley won the battle of Vimiera, August 


2r, 1808. 
‘ Add. MSS. 37309 f. 239. 


240 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1806- 


THE DUKE OF PORTLAND fo THE MARQUESS 
"WELLESLEY 

Private and confidential Burlington House 
Sepiember 7, 1808 

Considering the expectations I encouraged you 
to entertain I must lose no time in accounting to 
you for my having abstained from endeavouring to 
fulfil them. On my arrival at the Queen’s palace 
I acquainted my colleagues with my intention 
of moving the King to confer the honour of the 
peerage on Sir Arthur Wellesley in the manner 
which I had submitted to your Lordship, and which 
had had the good fortune to have received your 
sanction. They all approved my intention in its 
fullest extent, but all those who had had con- 
ferences in the closet represented the moment as 
very inauspicious, and strongly cautioned me 
against the attempt. Upon reflection, however, 
I thought I would feel the ground without 
committing any of the parties, and preserve 
‘the measure . . . I mean as res integra, and 
‘accordingly when I went into the closet I began 
upon the subject of the 'two splendid victories 
{Roliga and Vimiera], and the rewards which those 
to whom they were due must be thought to be 
entitled. To the merit of the first the assent was 
as unlimited and as Satisfactory as I could have 
wished it, but with respect to the latter it was 
observed that it would be right to wait to see to 
whom, those rewards should be given, and it was 
said with a considerable degree of emphasis: 
“I am always ready to reward merit. but I will 
not withhold blame where it shall be proved to 


1808] THE CINTRA CONVENTION = 241 


have been incurred.” With this declaration the 
conversation upon that subject closed, and I am 
willing to hope that your Lordship will be of 
opinion that it was advisable to leave it there, and 
wait for the next arrival from Portugal, which I 
cannot allow myself to suppose will not justify 
me in resuming the subject, and making you such 
a report as will be perfectly satisfactory to you 
and all Sir Arthur’s friends.’ 


THE MARQUESS OF BUCKINGHAM to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 


‘Stowe: September 25, 1808 


y have every reason for thinking that Sir H. 
Dalrymple, Sir Kk. Burrard® and your brother 
are recalled to answer for the conventions signed in 
Portugal. Whilst this was doubtful there were 
many reasons why I did not think it right towards 
you to write to you one word upon that chapter ; 
but under the conviction that.this step is taken 
towards Sir Arthur, I do-not lose a moment in- 
requesting you to belicve that I cannot hesitate 
in offering to his family, for him, every assurance 
of the most cordial attachment to his fair fame 
and interests. Those feelings of affection and of 
confidence are not to be skaken by the political 
contests of the day; and fully believing, as a . 
public man, that he is not responsible for that most 

1 Sir Arthur Wellesley was created Viscount Wellington 
of Talavera, September 4, 1809, after the victories of Oporto 
and Tal.vera. 

2 General Sir Hew Whitefoord Dalrymple; Bart. (1750-1830). 

3 General Sir Harry Burrard (1755-1813). 

I R 


242 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS 


disgraceful and most atrocious instrument, I 
request that I may be considered, not only on the 
ground of public justice, but upon every principle 
of very old, very steady, and very unalterable 
friendship, anxious to know how I can, most 
usefully to him, act upon these impressions.’ 


1 Add. MSS. 37309 f. 251. 


BOOK IV 


AMBASSADOR-EXTRAORDINARY 
TO SPAIN. 1809 


BOOK IV 


AMBASSADOR-EXTRAORDINARY 
TO SPAIN. 1809 


Dissensions in the Cabinet : Wellesley’s appoint- 
ment : Sir Arthur Wellesley’s command : A super- 
fluity of commanders : The Convention of Cintra : 
Indignation in England : A ministerial crisis : Re- 
signation of the Duke of Portland, Canning, and 
Castlereagh : Canning’s “ treachery” : Wellesley 
and the Premiership : Perceval’s difficult task : 
Negotiations : Duel between Castlereagh and 
Canning : Wellesley offered the post of Foreign 
Secretary : His acseptance : Perceval’s account of 
the resignations : Canning’s account : Wellesley on 
Canning’s conduct : Wellesley desires a Garter : 
Perceval’s acquiescence : Wellesley’s thanks : His 
impatience. 


HE charges brought against him in con- 
nection’ with his conduct as Governor- 

General of India having been satis- 

factorily disposed of, Wellesley was quite willing 
to take office. ‘In the Easter recess (1809) Canning, 
then Foreign Minister, told the Duke of Portland 
that he should resign unless, Castlereagh, who was 
Secretary of State for War, gave up the seals of 
office; but for the time being nothing was done. 
In the event of the retirement of Castlereagh, it 
was the intention of Canning to use his influence 
to have Wellesley appointed to the War Depart- 


ment. In the meantime, however, Wellesley 
245 


246 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1809 


was invited to go as Ambassador-Extraordinary 
to Spain, there to arrange with the Junta for the 
efficient carrying on of the war against Napoleon. 

In the summer of 1808 Castlereagh had decided 
to make Spain the headquarters of the British 
army abroad, and he desired to place the forces 
under the command of Sir Arthur Wellesley, who 
had so highly distinguished himself in India. 
The Commander-in-Chief, the Duke of York, and 
some of his advisers, however, opposed this 
intention, and though Wellesley had sailed in 
July, shortly after he landed he found himself 
superseded by Sir Hew Dalrymple and Sir Harry 
Burrard. He placed his troops at Vimiera, where 
they were on August 21 attacked by a French 
army under Junot. The French were routed, 
but Burrard, landing at the critical moment, 
forbade a pursuit, and Junot was able to retreat 
upon Lisbon. On the following day Dalrymple 
arrived and took command, and at once received 
proposals from Junot, offering to evacuate Portugal 
under a convention. There was something to be 
said for accepting the terms, as then the British 
forces, could devote themselves entirely to Spain ; 
but Dalrymple conceded all that Junot demanded. 
The Convention of Cintra was signed on August 
30, but when the news reached England there was 
an outcry of disgust. The three generals were 
recalled and brought before a committee of enquiry. 
Dalrymple and Burrard were never again employed 


1809} WELLESLEY’S FORESIGHT 247 


on active service, and Wellesley, who had clearly 
been blameless ,in the matter, was sent back in 
supreme command. 

The difficulties that confronted Wellesley are 
recorded in every account of the Peninsula war. 
The Spaniards were anxious enough to have the 
British forces to fight for them, but they showed 
a consistent lack of desire to assist them in any 
way. Promises, indeed, they made in plenty, but 
invariably failed to do what they had promised. 
It was only after Talavera, when Wellesley 
threatened to withdraw the army into Portugal, 
that matters became better. The Marquess 
worked hard to bring the negotiations with the 
Junta to a successful issue! ‘‘ After indulging 
his bad taste in a few silly bravadoes,”’ Lord 
Holland has written, “he showed in essentials 
much foresight, and took a more accurate and 
comprehensive view of the policy of the country 
to which he was accredited than is usual in an 
English diplomatist, and than could have been 
expected in sm short a residence.”’ ? 

In the meantime ministerial affairs at home 
were approaching a crisis.. Though the Cabinet 
supported Canning against Castlereagh, the dis- 
sensions ended in breaking up the Government. 


1 See The Despatches and Correspondence of the Marquess | 
Wellesley, K.G., during his Lordship’s Mission to Spain as 
Ambasscdor-Extraordinary to the Supreme Junia in 1809. 
Edited by Mentgomery Martin. 1838. 

2 Holland: Further Memoirs, 47. 


248 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS: [1809 


The Duke of Portland resigned on September 5, 
and Canning retired with him. Castlereagh, who 
had been kept in ignorance of Canning’s demand 
for his dismissal, now learnt of this, and followed 
suit, indignant at what he regardéd as the under- 
hand treatment to which he had been subjected. 

Spencer Perceval, who had been Chancellor of 
the Exchequer under Portland, was entrusted by 
the King with the task of forming an administra- 
tion. This he succeeded in doing after con- 
siderable negotiation, the course of which is made 
clear by the following correspondence. 


B. SYDENHAM ¢o THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Admiralty : “September 16, 1809 

Although Mr. Pole determined from motives 
of delicacy not to write to your Lordship, the 
question has now assumed so serious a shape, that 
he feels himself bound, by every sentiment of 
affection and of anxiety for your interests, to 
communicate to you his opinion with regard to 
the actual state of circumstances in this country, 
in ‘urder that you may possess the fullest informa- 
tion before you decide upon this difficult and 
important subject. 

The Duke of Portland, Lord Castlereagh, and 
Mr. Canning have all resigned. Lord Castlereagh 
complains with great justice of the treatment 
which he has experienced, and is extremely 
indignant. Indeed, it must be admitted that if 
such treatment be tolerated, no man can “be safe 
for a moment. Canning has resigned because 


Sir WW. Reechey, RA, pinxt. 


SPENCER PERCEVAL 
By permission of Messrs. Hurst & Blackett 


rs 


1809] CANNING’S PRESUMPTION 249 


he is not made Prime Minister. He has declared 
this in writing, and if his principle be correct, 
that. the First Minister of. this country must be 
in the House of Conimons, it must operate to the 
exclusion of your .claims, as well as. those of all 
‘the nobility. I am informed that until he dis- 
covered that you were indifferent on’ the point 
‘ of your being at the head of the Treasury, no person 
was so adverse as he was to your entrance into 
the Cabinet. This I believe to be a fact that can 
admit of proof. The result of the whole, however, 
is that the King is very angry with Canning’s 
conduct, and that the rest of the Cabinet (not 
izcluding the Duke of Portland and Castlereagh, 
who are out of office) are determined to make any 
sacrifice rather than submit to him. They mean, 
if they can, to get official strength from their own 
friends, and to offer you either the Foreign or 
War Department; but if they cannot succeed 
by this arrangement they will then endeavour 
to gain strength from the Opposition. In short, 
they are resolved to do anything rather than sur- 
render the King to Canning, and the King is 
determined to make any sacrifice in order to sup- 
port them in this resolution. But under the 
difficulties which now affect Mr. Perceval’s friends, 
under the impossibility ef their forming a new 
Government without calling in the aid of some of 
the Opposition, the consequent necessity of filling 
up every office immediately, the uncertainty of 
your Lordship’s sentiments and of your engage- 
ments*with Canning, and the impression which 
some persons are endeavouring to give of your 


250 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1809 


being in concert with that gentleman, it will be 
impossible for them, with the Strongest desire 
to avail themselves of your services, and the 
highest estimation of your public character and 
qualifications, to keep open any office for your 
acceptance. They are now reduced to the neces- 
sity of retiring altogether, or of forming smmedi- 
ately a strong Government on a permanent basis, 
which can only be done by.an early and judicious 
distribution of the efficient offices of the Govern- 
ment among those who are on the spot, and at 
the head of the different parties. But Iam desired, 
both by Pole (who has taken the most auxious 
interest in your welfare, and whose decided ard 
manly conduct on this occasion has secured for 
chim the gratitude and respect of Perceval and 
all his friends) and by Arbuthnot, who is one of 
your sincere and steady friends, to assure you that 
Mr. Perceval and all his friends (particularly 
Lord Mulgrave) feel towards you the strongest 
sentiments of respect and kindness, and that their 
cordial wish is to frame their arrangements in such 
a manner with the Opposition that they may have 
the benefit of your assistance in the Government, 
if you should be disposed to take a part with the 
new administration which it is proposed to form 
from the friends of Perceval and Lords Grey and 
Grenville. Your absence is most unfortunate, but 
they are not to blame for it; and therefore it 
appears to me that it is impossible for persons to 
act more honourably than they have done, and are 
disposed to do, in whatever concerns your interests. 

You will, of course, receive very full statements 


1809] CANNING’S “TREACHERY” = 251 


from Canning. It is my duty, however, to state 
to you what I heat on the other side of the question. 
I have no desire to say anything disrespectful 
of Mr. Canning, but it would be very improper 
in me to conceal from you anything that may 
tend to assist your Lordship’ s judgment in this 
delicate and interesting crisis. 

J hear from Lord Castlereagh’s friends that there 
has been a great deal of treachery in Canning’s 
conduct ; indeed, one of his confidential friends 
told me this day that he had even been negotiat- 
ing with Lord Sidmouth ; that Lord Castlereagh, 
however, had ample proofs of his treachery, and 
that they would be immediately given to the 
public in a way that would inevitably destroy 
Canning’s character, and render it impossible 
for any person to act with him again in a public 
situation. All this may be exaggerated, but I 
only mention it to show you that the question 
which you are now called upon to decide is perhaps 
the most important, as far as your interests are 
concerned, that has ever been presented to you. 

I hope you will write fully to me by the first 
opportunity after you may receive this letter, 
and that you will state to me all that you wish 
should be done by me. Pole has taken his line, 
and adheres to the present, Government (I mean 
Perceval and his friends), but if his existence had 
depended upon your being in office, it would have 
been impossible for him to have manifested more 
affection for you, and more zea] for your honour 
and iriterests than he has done. He will write 
to you. His conduct to Perceval and his party 


252 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1809 


will entitle him to anything he may choose to 
have. In writing to you, therefore, he can have 
no other motive than your fame’and prosperity. 
Henry,* I believe, is with Canning. He was to 
have gone to Lisbon in the room of Mr. Villiers,. 
who has resigned. 

* I am doubtful about this. I have not seen 
Henry [Wellesley]. Canning has courted him.} 


B. SYDENHAM fo THE MarguEss WELLESLEY 
Admiralty : September 19, 1809 


Since I wrote to your Lordship on Saturday, 
matters have taken a more decided turn with 
regard to the formation of a new Government. 
I have already stated to you that Canning declared 
in writing to Perceval the impossibility of his 
serving under Perceval in the House of Commons, 
and his consequent expectation of filling the office 
of First Lord of the Treasury and Chancellor of 
the Exchequer.? To this proposition Perceval 
refused his assent, but also stated in writing his 
readiness to put Lord Wellésley at the head of the 
Government. To this, however, Canning also 
objected, and has since resigned, taking with him 

1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 112. 

2 Canning’s words in hig ietters to Perceval are “ that in 
the event of the Duke of Portland’s resignation there must be 
a Minister ; that Minister must be in the House of Commons. 
It cannot be disguised that if our party remain in, that 
Minister must be you or me; and I will fairly own that I 
never can submit to vour filling the office of Prime Minister, 
and I have too high an opinion of youto suppdse shat you 


would submit to my being in that situation.” This is the 
substance.—Sydenham’s note. 


1809] THE NEW ADMINISTRATION 253 


Charles Long? Huskisson,? and Sturges-Bourne$ 
There is a suspicion also that he has got the 
Scotchmen, and indeed he feels himself so confi- 
dent that he has declared he can form a new 
Government if the King should wish it. 

Under this state of circumstances the remaining 
Ministers have sent Perceval to the King, who has 
carried to His Majesty a paper to the following 
effect. 

They have stated to His Majesty that, consider- 
ing the desertion of Lord Castlereagh (who is just 
as indignant with this Government as with 
Canning) of Canning, Huskisson, etc., they do not 
. think that they are likely to form a permanent 
administration without looking for strength in 
other quarters ; that they therefore propose it to 
His Majesty, if he should be inclined to wish 
them to continue in the administration, instead 
of resorting to Mr. Canning, whom they understood 
to be ready to undertake the Government alone, 
to have His Majesty’s permission to propose it to 


2 Charles Long (1761-1834), entered Parliament in 1789. 
He was Joint Secretary to the Treasury, 1791-1801, and in 
1804 was appointed by his friend’s patron, Pitt, as Lord cf the 
Treasury. In 1806 he became Chief Secretary for Ireland. 
From 1810 to 1826 he was Paymaster-General, and on his 
retirement was created Baron Farnborough. 

2 William Huskisson (1770-1330), entered Parliament in 
1796, and was Secretary to the Treasury, 1804-1805 and 
1807-1809. He was President of the Board of Trade under 
Liverpool, 1823-1827, and Colonial Secretary, and Leader of 
the House of Commons, 1827-1828. 

3 William Sturges-Bourne (1769-1845), was in Parliament 
from 179g until 1831. He was a Lord of the Treasury, 1807- 
1809. He was Home Secretary under Canning from April 
to July 1827. 


254 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1809 


Lord Grey and Lord Grenville to take a part in 
the Governmert, the basis of the treaty to be 
that each party shall have a moiety of the offices ; 
that if this offer should be accepted, they hope to 
be enabled to form a very strong Government ; if 
it should not, they are determined, with His 
Majesty’s approbation, to carry on the Government 
alone, or with such strength as they can acquire. 

That they are of opinion that ¢hey cannot carry 
on the Government with the assistance of their 
own friends, and must therefore look for strength 
in other quariers, but that they understand that 
Mr. Canning is ready to undertake the Government 
with the assistance of his own friends. That under 
these circumstances they request His Majesty 
to send for Mr. Canning if he wishes to put the 
Government in his hands; but that if he desires 
to give the preference to them they beg that he 
will send for Lords Grenville and Grey, and form, 
with the assistance of these noblemen and their 
friends, a new Government of which half the offices 
shall be at the disposal of Mr. Perceval and his 
friends, and the remainder to be divided among 
Lore Grenville’s and Lord Grey’s party. 

Mr. Perceval is now with the King at Windsor 
engaged in this business. 

It was the anxious wish of Mr. Perceval to have 
offered to your Lordship, or rather to have kept 
open for your acceptance, the Foreign Department.’ 

1 The present Government, one,and all, think it would 
be of the greatest importance to them to have Lord Wellesley 
in their Cabinet ; and if they were certain that he was with 


them would unquestionably offer him either thé Foreign or 
War Department. As it has not been possible for anybody 


1809] WELLESLEY’S POSITION 255 


There is some reason to believe that Canning 
has been at work to strengthen himself, but I 
should not think that anything that he can do 
will induce them to yield to his pretensions. 

As far as I recollect, you assured him that if he 
resigned because the Government was not sirength- 
ened you would support him; and also that you 
had no objection to accept a Cabinet office under 
him as Prime Minister. 

I know that you always thought his principles 
regarding the necessity of the Prime Minister 
being in the House of Commons to be absurd and 
incorrest, and that you also did not think that he 
was the fittest man to be at the head of the 
Government. But I imagine you never could have 
contemplated the present case, or imagined that 
you could be called upon to support him in 
Opposition, because he could not be made Prime 
Minister. I have told Pole that if you should 
accept any office, I should think, from conversa- 
tion which I have had with you, that it would be 
the Foreign Office. 

I conclude that at all events you will come away 
from Spain as soon as you can. The people here 
are become indifferent to that country, and the 
to pledge Lord Wellesley upon the subject, they have felt 
great difficulty in keeping open the Féreign or War Department 
for him. They feel that they cannot appoint him to either, 
because they are not certain that he will accept. Were a 
proposal to Lord Grey and Lord Grenville to be rejected and 
an administration to be arranged from Perceval’s party, the 
first step in the arrangement would be to nominate Lord 
Wellesley teone of theseoffices and to send him notice thereof. 


The King’s feelings towards Lord Wellesley are very favour- 
able ; of this there is not any doubt.—Sydenham’s note. 


256 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [x809 


sudder. change in our domestic situation will 
naturally absorb every portion of the public 
attention, and render the people still more callous 
than they are naturally disposed to be on every- 
thing connected with the state of foreign affairs, 
and especially of Spain, 


B. SYDENHAM to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Admiralty: September 21, 1809 

Some extraordinary circumstances have occurred 
since my letter of the 19th. Lord Castlereagh 
has called out Canning, and they this day met and 
fought at Wimbledon. After exchanging two 
shots Canning received a wound in the thigh whirh, 
though not dangerous at present, is likely to 
confine him for a.month.? , 

Canning’s resignation has been accepted, and 
he is to give up the seals next Wednesday. The 
- proposition which I communicated to you in 
my letter of the 19th, relative to treating with 
Lords Grey and Grenville,* was submitted to the 
King, who desired time to consider tt. 

It appears that about 18th July you wrote a 
ietcer to Canning in which you advert to the 
probability of his resigning. In this you say 
that the circumstance of the probability of his 
resignation comes kafore you in such a shape 

1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 120. 

2 This duel was -the outcome of the dissensions in the 
Cabinet. Castlereagh was of opinion that Canning had been 
guilty of duplicity in not stating that he had told Portland 
that he would not continue to serve with Castlereagh. As 4 
matter of fact, Canning had desired Portland ut once to 


inform Castlereagh. 
% See The Windham Papers, ii. 356-365. 


1809] CANNING’S DUEL 257 


as to render it necessary to consider yeur own 
situation seriously with referencesto that event, 
which you have not done before. You must 
therefore positively know whether he intends to 
resign or not ; that you trust in God he will not ; 
that if Canning resigns he knows you have post- 
tively determined not to be in the Cabinet, as you 
do not think the Government could carry on affairs 
without him ; that it will therefore be necessary 
for you to know whether Canning is or is not to 
resign, and if he is to resign, you must know who 
is to be his successor, lest somebody should be ap- 
pointed who might give you instructions opposite 
ta those which you have received ; that in case of 
his resignation you must have your letters of 
recall, and that, should he resign during your 
absence, you must still be at liberty to return 
home, and have letters of recall. You conclude 
by giving him permission to show that letter to 
the Cabinet. This he never did, and they of course 
never knew that you went out under such an 
engagement. 

I should tell you that Canning applied to Henry 
[Wellesley] to be his friend. This Henry decliaed, 
not only on account of Castlereagh’s genera] 
civility to him, but also on account of his recent 
kindliness towards [Sir] Archur [Wellesley]. He 
offered, however, to be of any use to Canning short 
of going out as his friend against Castlereagh, 
and accordingly brought up Charles Ellis, who 


1 Charles Rose Ellis (1771-1845), Menber of Parliament, 
and “ the Acknowledged head of what was known as the West 
Indian interesv.’’ Hewas raised to the peerage as Baron 
Seaford in 1826. 

I 


258 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1809 


was Ca'nning’s second. After the duel Canning 
sent this letter. to Pole, who has communicated 
to me the substance as above as far as he can 
recollect it. The communication to Pole must 
have been made in order that the present Govern- 
ment might suppose that you were engaged to 
Canning; for, at the same time, without com- 
municating to them at all on the subject, he has sent 
you letters of recall which they only discovered 
through another channel. This circumstance has 
thrown them into the greatest embarrassment ; 
they know not how to write to you privately, and 
officially no person can write to you excypting 
Canning, who still has the seals. Lord Liverpoul 
went to Canning’s office and saw the letter allow- 
ing ‘you to return, and he immediately desired 
Bagot? to go to Canning’s and insist in the name 
of the Cabinet that it should be accompanied by 
an expression of the anxious wish of the Cabinet 
that you should not leave Spain until the public 
service would permit you to do so without danger 
or inconvenience. Bagot supposes Canning will 
not consent to this ; the letter, however, is to go 
to-night, and I can only therefore say as much as 
I have done, not being able to guess what may be 
the effect of this interposition. In the meanwhile 
Perceval has written che enclosed letter to Pole, 
who has given it to me for you, as he still feels 

1 Sir Charles Bagot (1781-1843) entered the House of 
Commons in 1807, in which year he became Parliamentary 
Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs. He was Ambassador 
to Spain, 1814, to the United States, 1825, to St. Petersburg, 


1820, and to the Hague, 1824. He was appoir.ted Governor 
General of Canada, 1841. 


1809] PERCEVAL’S EMBARRASSMENT 259 


a great delicacy in doing anything which may 
have the appearance of interposing in your 
affairs. He sent to Bathurst, who had left town. 
The effect of Canning’s letter has been to incline 
Bathurst and Mulgrave, who had both written 
to you fully, to withdraw their letters under a 
feeling that you are pledged to Canning, and that 
it would be indelicate in them to write to you 
under such circumstances. But that Jetter referred 
evidently to Canning’s resignation on the ground 
of their refusing to strengthen the Government... 
I am convinced you never contemplated the pre- 
sent case, which rests on different grounds entirely. 
Canning resigns because they will not make him 
First Minister, not because they refused to make the 
arrangement in which you agreed to support him. 
That arrangement was actually completed, and 
then Canning resigns. You may have said: “I 
have no objection to serve under you as First 
Minister, if they choose to elect you,’ but 
I never recollect your engaging to support him 
in an attempt to force himself upon them and the 
King as First Minister.’ 

This is a most strange state of affairs, and ‘will 
require your serious attention. In the meanwhile 
the Government is at a stand, until the King has 
signified his pleasure with tégard to the proposed 
Negotiation with the Opposition.. There is still 
the same disposition of kindness towards you. 
But this letter of Canning’s has embarrassed them, 
and although I have stated my interpretation 
of it to Pole, it was impossible for me to interfere 
in a case of such nice delicacy, and in which only 
the principals can be relied upon. I have there- 


260 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1809 


fore kept clear from all parties, but I am most 
anxious to receive full instructions from you, after 
you may have received Canning’s and my letters. 
There seems to be a great doubt whether the 
Scotchmen are with Canning. Robert Dundas’ 
is come to town and he says that he shall not take 
part in any Government unless it is formed upon 
an extended principle ; and whether it is so formed 
by Canning, or by Perceval, he shall, either in or 
out of office, support the King. I write this in the 
greatest haste, as the despatch is now going off. 


In the new administration Perceval heh the 
office of Chancellor of the Exchequer, Ryder* 
went to the Home Office, and Liverpool became 
Secretary of State for War and the Colonies, 
Camden being Lordi President, and Eldon Lord 
Chancellor. Wellesley was offered the office of Sec- 
retary of State for Foreign Affairs, Bathurst holding 
the post until Wellesley’s reply could be received. 


LorD MULGRAVE‘ to THE‘MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Admiralty : Qctober 5, 1809 
Though I know you will be overwhelmed with 


1 Robert Saunders Dundas (1771-1851), the son of Henry 
Dundas, first Viscount Melville, entered Parliament in 1794. 
He was President of the Board of Control, 1807, and again 
in 1828, and First Lord of the Admiralty, 1812-1827, and 
1828-1830. He succeeded as (second) Viscount Melville in 1811. 

2 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 118. ~ 

3 Richard Ryder (2766-1832), a younger brother of Dudley 
Ryder, Earl of Harrowby. 

4 Sir Henry Phipps, third Baron Mulgrave (1755-1831); 
First Lord of the Admiralty, 1807-1810. He was created 
Eail of Mulgrave, 1812. 


1809] PERCEVAL’S OFFER 261 


letters I cannot let Sydenham go without saying 
a few words to‘you. I suffer an,incalculable loss, 
by the removal of Pole to the administration of 
the Bally-Bog-Tyn-Mary-bog-borough kingdom. ? 
I know not how that loss can be in any way com- 
pensated but by having the double advantage 
of your powers and you. I am in the Cabinet. 
I hope there may be no obstacle ; I do not trouble 
you with any part of a long story, of which you 
will, have the whole written. I think Pole will be 
a la hauteur de sa famille in administering Ireland. 
We shall both enjoy his success as brothers, whether 
we partake it as colleagues or not.? 


SPENCER PERCEVAL fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private Downing Street 
October 5, 1809 

In the absolute staté of uncertainty in which 

I await what your Lordship’s determination may 
be upon the very distasteful circumstances which 
have taken place amongst us in the administration 
since your Lordship left England, I have thought 
that it would be the most satisfactory mode of 
communicating with your Lordship to send ,a 
person whom ‘I know to have your Lordship’s 
confidence, and who, from having been on the spot 
and having had the means of learning the facts 
of these transactions, may at once put your 
Lordship in possession of my feelings and those of 
your other friends who remain in office, with, 
regard to your Lordship, and also furnish you with 
1 Wellusley-Pole wus Chief Secretary for Ireland from 1809 


till 1812. 
2 Add. MSS. 37309 f. 299. 


262 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1809 


the best account of the facts on which your Lord- 
ship’s judgment will have to be formed. 

Mr. Sydenham, therefore, who will be the bearer 
of this letter, will inform your Lordship that if 
it had not been for some reasons which induced 
me to apprehend that you might feel some slight 
objection to accepting an office in the Cabinet 
in an administration which His Majesty has, upon 
the Duke of Portland retiring and upon the 
resignation of Lord Castlereagh and Mr. Canning, 
entrusted me to form, I should, without further 
ceremony, have followed my own inclination, and 
at the same time but discharged my duty ta His 
Majesty and to the interest of his service, by offer-. 
ing to your Lordship the office which Mr. Canning 
so unhappily has determined to relinquish. What 
the reasons are, Mr. Sydenham will be able to 
explain to your Lordship. He will also explain 
the temporary arrangement which I have His 
Majesty’s authority to make, with the view to 
affording your Lordship an opportunity of coming 
into the office as Secretary of State for Foreign 
Affairs, if your Lordship would, fortunately for 
uc and for the country, be disposed to accept 
that important office. Lord Bathurst has agreed 
to accept it ad interim, with the view of relinquish- 
ing it upon your Lordship’s arrival. 

With regard to the circumstance which has led 
to Mr. Canning’s retiring upon the Duke of Port- 
land’s resignation, undoubtedly it is connected 
with my situation particularly. With a view to 
your Lordship’s being as fully in‘possession of the 
facts which have led to it as possible, I have 


1809] GRENVILLE’S POSITION 263 


furnished Mr. Sydenham with a copy of such part 
of the correspondence which has, passed. between 
the Duke of Portland, Mr. Canning, and myself 
upon that subject as I am in possession of, and 
also a copy of the correspondence between Lords 
Grey and Grenville and myself, in which you will 
perceive that Lord Grenville especially puts his 
objection upon the ground of the principles of 
our Government, which can have no other inter- 
pretation than by reference to that question 
concerning the Roman Catholics, from which 
we had hoped to furnish his Lordship his best 
retreat by giving him this opportunity of forming 
A united administration with ourselves. 

I hope all these materials will, with Mr: Syden- 
ham’s assistance? enable your Lordship to take a 
Correct view of the situation and of the question 
which has separated us from Mr. Canning.’ 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo THE Hon. 
WILLIAM WELLESLEY-POLE 
Private and confidential Seville 
October 8, 1809 

I have received your kind note of the 18th 
September, with Sydenham’s notes, written under 
your directions, and Mr. Perceval’s letter of the 
20th September addressed-to you. 

The enclosed papers will give you a complete 
View of my situation, principles, and intentions, 
as far as they relate to the actual crisis of affairs 
in England. I cannot imagine by what perversion 
of idea I have been drawn into a connection with 

1 Add. MSS. 37296 f. 135. 


264 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1809 


proceedings wholly unauthorised by me in every 
stage of their course, and in mosi points directly 
adverse to my interests and honour. It is not 
difficult to perceive the distinction between a 
disposition to serve with a Minister and an engage- 
ment to act under him either in or out of office, 
for the purpose of forcing him into any particular 
station against the wishes of his colleagues, of his 
party, of his Sovereign, and even against the 
opinions of all in my own favour. This, indeed, 
would be.a fantastic example of self-devotion 
to the personal views of another without any 
benefit to the public service, or perhaps t¢ the 
real interests of the aspiring party. The papers 
enclosed seem to leave nothing for me to add, 
excepting the expression of my sincere gratitude 
towards Mr. Perceval and others, friends of his 
and mine, for the very honourable and disinterested 
testimony which they have afforded of their con- 
fidence and good opinion. The recollection of 
their conduct will always be a matter of satis- 
faction and honourable pride to me, far more 
valuable than the highest, distinction of rank 
or.the most extensive attainment of power; and 
I shall derive great encouragement in every branch 
of public duty, as well as solid happiness in 
private life, from the knowledge of their senti- 
ments, expressed in such a crisis, at such a dis- 
tance from all communication with me, and under 
ouch strange circumstances of ambiguity and 
mystery with regard to my engagements, senti- 
ments, and intentions. I anxiously desiré that 
you will communicate these feelings to Mr. Perceval 


1809] NOT PLEDGED TO CANNING 265 


in the most respectful manner, with the assur- 
ance of the sincére esteem which J entertain for 
his character and talent. 

I am persuaded that Canning himself has no 
idea of my being subject to any pledge which 
can involve me in his present pursuit ; and although 
some points in his personal conduct with reference 
to my pretensions seem to require further light, 
I cannot persuade myself that he has ever intended 
to iniure me or the public service. I sincerely 
wish to see him again united with his friends, and 
acting in a capacity acceptable to himself, to them, 
and tothe King. His means of public service are 
very considerable, and I have always regarded 
him with great personal respect and affection. 

I am very anxious that the King should be 
correctly informed of my sentiments, conduct, 
and views, and for that purpose I wish you would 
convey to His Majesty’s knowledge such: of the 
enclosed papers as may be necessary. 

Mr. Perceval will learn my situation and inten- 
tions with regard to my continuance in Spain by 
my despatches. I hope: to be able to return to 
England very soon, according to my original 
plan, but I must do Canning the justice to observe 
that the leave of absence which he has sent me 
is conditional, subject to the same considerations 
which Mr. Perceval has suggested. Even without 
any suggestion or condition, I nsver would have 
quitted my post with evident danger to the public 
Service. ! 

4’ Add. MSS. 37295 f. 137. 


266 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1809 


THE Hon. HENRY WELLESLEY to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
Private September 27, 1809 


The letters you will have received from Syden- 
ham and others will have put you in possession 
of the very singular state of politics in this 
country. You will probably have heard of its 
having been Canning’s intention that I should 
succeed John Villiers? at Lisbon ; indeed he had 
actually proposed me to the King for that appoint- 
ment, who had approved my nomination, and I 
had come to town from Ramsgate to make pre- 
parations for my departure, when I learht that 
Canning had submitted to the King his desire'to 
resign. 

I was partly apprised of your determination 
not to continue in Spain in the event of Canning’s 
resignation, and besides feeling that there would 
be a great awkwardness in my proceeding upon a 
mission to Lisbon at the very moment when you 
perhaps might be returning from Spain in con- 
sequence of the change in the Foreign Department, 
I was of opinion that I could not with propricty 
‘accept an appointment from a man who had 
actually sent in his resignation, and who, in all 
probability, would oppose the measures of the 
person whose instructions it would be my duty 
to obey. I also felt that it would not be fair to 
saddle me upon”Canning’s successor, who would 
probably have a friend of his own he might wish 


1 The Hon. Vohie Charles Villiers (#757-1838), <\mbassador 
to Portugal, 1808-1810. He succeeded his brother as (third) 
Earl of Clarendon in 1824. 


1809] A DIVIDED HOUSE 267 


to employ. Upon hearing, therefore, that Can- 
ning had sent in his resignation, I desired that my 
appointment might not take place. The letter, 
of which I enclose a copy, and which Canning put 
into my hands the night before his duel with 
Castlereagh, convinced me that I had judged 
rightly. The situation of Minister at Lisbon 
at this period cannot, like other diplomatic 
appointments, be considered as wholly uncon- 
nected with politics at home, and I should have 
felt great concern if I had taken a line directly 
the reverse of what would appear by the enclosed 
letter ¢0 be your intentions under the circum- 
stances which have actually occurred. I have, 
however, desired that nothing may be inferred 
with respect to your political sentiments from my 
declining, the appointment to Lisbon, and have 
distinctly stated to Canning and to my personal 
friends on the other side that I beg to be con- 
Sidered as belonging to no party whatever, and 
that I am determined to await your arrival 
in England, being at present entirely ignorant 
of the line you may think fit to take. 

I have adopted this course from the dread of 
the family being split into parties, which indeed 
has already happened in the cases of Pole and 
Charles Bagot, one of wiem continues at the 
Admiralty with Mulgrave, while the other retires 
with Canning. It is difficult sto conceive the 
Violence which prevails on each side of the question, 
greater than I ever before remember. Perceval, 
I think, will not be able to form an administration 
without taking in the Grenvilles and Foxites ; it 


268 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1809 


is said; indeed, that Lord Grenville and Lord Grey 
have been sent to If they came in, I fear 
there is an end of Pitt’s friends, for the division 
of offices and of power will be the partage du lion. 
I believe the accounts which have hitherto been 
sent to you are all on one side of the question, and 
as I wish’ to put you in possession of the argu- 
ments on both sides, I enclose a copy of a letter 
from MHuskisson to Robert Dundas, which is 
. admitted by Canning to be the best statement 
~ of all that -has occurred. 

I suppose Canning has apprised you that, in 
consequence of the authority you left with him, 
he has submitted to the King your desire to be 
recalled, assuring the King at the same time that 
he might be satisfied you would not avail yourself 
of it to the prejudice of the public service. 


Wellesley accepted the Foreign Office in the 
Perceval administration, and remained in Spain 
only until the arrival of his brother Henry, who 
was appointed to succeed him as Ambassador- 
Extraordinary. 


GEORGE CANNING fo THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 

Private and confidential Claremont 

October 28, 1809 

I have to acknowledge your letters of the 7th 
inst. 

I am deeply sensible of all the kindness which 

you express towards me, but I°cannot find words 


* Add. MSS. 37295 f. 131. 


Nee, Pemxt, G. Cook, scnuipt. 


RICHARD COLLEY, MARQUESS WELLESLEY o 


~ 


1809] AN UNFOUNDED -RUMOUR 269 


to eftpress ‘the astonishment which has, been 
created in my mind by the view which appears 
to have been presented to you of the late trans- 
actions so far as regards yourself. 

As you do not mention the particulars of what 
has been reported to you, J am at a loss to under- 
stand it precisely. But I collect your impression 
to be that your pretensions to the situation of 
First Minister were put forward by Perceval, 
recognised by the rest of the Cabinet, sanctioned 
by the King, and rejected by me alone. — 

I cannot help wishing that before you had given 
credit to such a statement you had paused a 
maqment to consider its absurdity. What possible 
power of rejection could I have that should defeat 
& proposition so supported and so approved ? — 

If the Cabinet had advised the King, and the 
King had approved the advice, to make you First 
Minister, in God’s name why are you not so? 

If my single opposition was, as it’ appears’ to 
have been represented to you, the sole impedi- 
Ment to this nomination, that impediment was 
Temoved by my resignation. 

4t cannot have been imagined that my resigna- 
tion would prevent your accepting office at all 
because an offer has been made to you of the office 
which I resigned. And how can it have been 
Supposed ‘that my resignation should operate tc 
cover your ‘pretensions, either, in the King’s s 
estimation or in your own ? 

I gave in my resignation throygh the Duke of 
Portland,’on Wednesday the 6th of September, 
in consequence of the information which I received 


270 “HE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1809 


from his Grace on that day of the new and anex- 
pected difficulties which would attend the execu- 
tion of the promised change in the War Depart- 
ment: difficulties of such a nature as determined 
me not to claim that execution, but determined 
me at the same time to execute the alternative 
which I had always resolved upon executing in 
such a case—that of my own retirement. 

From that day forth I continued to discharge 
the duties of my office only till my successor should 
be named. I never for a moment either retracted 
or qualified my resignation. 

The letter of the rath September (of which I 
sent you a copy) was not an original proposition 
then brought forward by me. It was written 
for the purpose of enabling the Duke of Portland 
to lay before the King those opinions which in 
the former week Perceval had extorted from me 
in confidence, which I never had intended to go 
beyond himself; which at his solicitation I gave 
him permission to communicate (for a specified 
object) to three persons whom he named—Lord 
Harrowby, Lord Liverpocl, and his brother Lord 
Arden; and which he had afterwards, certainly 
against my intention, but I doubt not with the 
best intentions on his part, communicated gener- 
ally to our colleagues. 

But my resignation was totally independent of 
these opinions, and would have taken place 
equally on the ground on which it did take place, 
if Perceval and J, had never exchanged a word on 
the subject of the succession to che Duke of Port- 
land. 


1809] A COMPLETE DENIAL 27t 


As*to the opinions themselves, I am little 
anxious about them. I think them true. They 
may be false or exaggerated. But if they are so, 
why has the Cabinet acted upon them ? 

Perceval is First Lord of the Treasury. Why is 
this so? and why is it proposed to you to be only 
a Secretary of State? If I alone contended for 
the expediency of a First Minister in the House 
of Commons, and if Perceval, and the rest of the 
Cabinet, with the sanction of the King, were for 
making you First Lord of the Treasury, surely 
when I was once out of the way this arrangement 
was open and easy to them. 

But, in truth, no such proposition as that which 
you appear to believe me to have rejected was 
ever, to my knowledge or belief, seriously in 
agitation. I will not take it upon me to say that 
your name was not mentioned, and by different 
Persons, among half a dozen others, as one of 
the natural candidates for the Duke of Portland’s 
Office. Undoubtedly it must have been so, un- 
doubtedly it was so—but never, to my knowledge 
or helief, by any authority. Undoubtedly, too, 
Perceval said to me more than once that he wished 
I would propose somebody or anybody for that 
Office, and expressed a hope that, with some 
explanation as to his own reiavive situation to that 
person, whoever he might be, he should be able to 
Soon. But that I had anything like the assurance, 
which you seem to suppose, of the general consent 
of our colleagues to your nominaticn, or still more 
of the sanction of the King, I utterly deny. I will 
add that I entirely disbeligve such a proposal 


272 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1809 


coming from me would have been so sanctioned. 
I may be wrong in this impression; I hope I 
am so. But if so, the proof of the sincerity of 
those who have told you what they would have 
advised, or to what they would have agreed, is 
easy to be had. Have they advised it? Has 
the King called upon you to undertake the 
Government ? 

If no such offer has been made, if all that you 
have been called upon to undertake is my vacant 
office under Perceval, Prime Minister, I. claim of 
your fairness and of our friendship that you shall 
not believe, but shall reject, as I would do.in your 
case, as an unworthy attempt to set us at variance 
with each other, the insinuation that it is to any 
indisposition of mine that you are to attribute 
your not being called to the head of the Govern- 
ment. 

But I do not stop here. I will give you, on my. 
part, an irrefragable proof of my sincere good 
disposition towards you. 

If the King calls upon you to undertake the 
Government, and if you:do undertake it, and_if, 
‘having undertaken it, you are desirous of asking 
my assistance, I am ready to listen to any proposal 
which you may think fit to make to me, and to 
discuss it fairly with you. Do not misunderstand 
me. I do not wish to return to office, but I will 
prove to you that I am not the bar to your 
supremacy in the Government if it is otherwise 
(which, however, I do not believe) within your 
reach. And upon this issue I'am ready to leave 
the question. 


1809] THE RESIGNATIONS 273 


This is what is most material in your letters. 
There are many,’ many other points upon which 
you appear to have been misinformed, but there 
is only one upon which I think it worth while 
at present to trouble you with any observation. 
You imagine that Lord Castlereagh’s resignation 
preceded mine. Nosuchthing. It followed mine, 
it grew out of mine, and but for mine I am intim- 
ately and confidently persuaded it never would 
have taken place at all. 

I gave.in mine, as I have told you, through the 
Duke of Portland, on Wednesday, the 6th Sep- 
tembea On Thursday I declined attending the 
Cabinet on the ground that I considered my resig- 
nation as being in His Majesty’s hands, and could 
not therefore properly enter upon any new 
questions in Council. My non-attendafice at the 
Cabinet produced (as I understand) an enquiry 
on the part of Lord Castlereagh which led to the 
disclosure to him by Lord Camden of all that 
Lord Camden ought to have told him months 
before. And in consequence of this communica- 
tion Lord Castlereagh resigned. 

PS. Upon looking over your letters and. the- 
enclosure in the second of them again, I see there 
is one other point of great importance upon which 
you have been so grossly deceived, that I ought 
not to lose any time in undeceiving you, especially 
as much of your reasoning is built upon the false 
notion which you have received of this point. 
You seem to imagine that the Duke of Portland’s 
resignation happening to take place when it did, 
I on that occasion voluntarily gave up all thoughts 

I T 


274 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1809 


of the arrangement which had been in conterapla- 
tion, and claimed the Duke’s »office for myself. 
You remind me how often you pressed me to be 
prepared for the events of the Duke’s resignation, 
and how essential it would have been to strengthen 
the Government before it. 

I do assure you, you cannot have been more 
sensible to the importance of these objects than 
I was. But it was for the very purpose of defeat- 
ing them that the Duke of Portland’s resignation 
was precipitated when I least expected it. Perceval, 
on the 28th of August, seeing the time approaching 
when I should claim the execution of the promise 
respecting the War Department, began the corre- 
spondence which led to a confession of my opinions 
upon the arrangement most advisable to be made 
whenever the Duke of Portland should retire. 
Of that retirement there was then no question. 
On the 2nd of September I wrote to the Duke of 
Portland, reminding him that the time was come 
for writing to you. On the 4th Perceval, having 
heard of my letter, wrote to the Duke urging him 
to resign, for the avowed purpose of covering 
Castlereagh’s retreat in a general arrangement ; 
but with the further object, if one may judge from 
the use which has been made of it, of being enabled 
to attribute my resignation—which would obviously 
be the immediate result of the Duke’s communi- 
cations to me respecting the difficulties of the 
promised arrangement—to the cause to which, 
by the representutions sent to you. I find you have 
been led to attribute it. 

I resigned, and I should have resigned if the 


1809] HE ACCEPTS “OFFICE 275 


Duke of Portland had continued in office, on 
finding faith broken with me in respect of the War 
Department. 

By bringing on the Duke of Portland’s resigna- 
tion contemporaneously with his disclosure to 
me of the manner in which I had been trifled with, 
it was hoped that they should so confound the 
motives of my resignation as to deceive the world, 
but I did not think they would have succeeded 
to such an extent and with you. 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to LoRD MULGRAVE 
Private Seville: October 30, 1809 
*T have received your friendly and affectionate 
letters of the 22nd September and 5th October 
with the most cordial sentiments of gratitude 
and satisfaction. You will know from Mr. Per- 
ceval that I have obeyed the summons of my 
Sovereign and of my friends, and that I shall 
enter the King’s councils with a firm intention 
of devoting my exertions to His Majesty’s cause. 
I assure you that the consideration of acting with 
ary is very material to my confidence and comfort, 
and I hope we may yet be able to effect much good’ 
Nothing can be more grateful to me than the 
continuance of your good opinion and friendship, 
if we were not acquainted before. The voyage on 
which we are now embarked together will probably 
afford some opportunities of muvual acquaintance._ 
T really feel for your loss in my brother William. 

You will find it very difficult to Yeplace him.’ 

2 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 141. 
3 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 153. 


276 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1809 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo EARL BATHURST 
Private Seville : “October 30, 1809 


In answer to your very kind letters of the 22nd 
September and 5th October, I am happy to be 
able to state that I have accepted the seals of the 
Foreign Office, and that I mean to return to 
England early in the next week, expecting to- 
morrow or next day to receive my brother Arthur 
at Seville. It would be superfluous in this letter 
to explain all the motives of my conduct ;* you 
will learn them from Pole if you choose to enquire ; 
but as you already: have expressed what you 
wished, and as I have done it, I know that you 
must think it consistent with my interests and 
honour and with the prosperity of ithe public 
service. 

I feel most deeply your kindness in having 
submitted to the inconvenience and embarrass- 
ment of holding the seals forme. I am as eager 
to return as you can be to receive me. As for 
abuse, I am so accustomed to that diet that it 
has now become necessary to my constitution.’ 


‘THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo THE Hon. HENRY 
WELLESLEY 

Private Seville: October 30, 1809 

I have received your kind letter of the 22nd of 
September, and Sydenham’s arrival here on the 
27th of October ‘has made me fully acquainted 
with every circumstance relating to your conduct 
in the late difficult and extraordinary crisis. 
You have behaved with the greatest judgment, 

1 Add. MOS. 37295 f. 157. 


1809] CANNING’S MOTIVES 277 


honour, and affection towards me, and if it were 
possible to augment my good opinion or love for 
you, the experience of the last month would have 
raised you to the highest point in my heart and 
understanding. I shall say no more at present 
than that I have accepted the Foreign Office, and 
that I shall return to England early in next week. 
I advise you not to decide your own situation 
(unless you should be particularly desirous of 
going to Lisbon) until my arrival. 

You may rely on my using every effort to place 
you in a situation worthy of you and acceptable 
to you. 

» Pole can tell you the motives of my conduct. 
Is Canning insane, or determined from the first 
to join Oppositidh ? I cannot understand any 
part of his conduct, excepting his jealousy of 
my pretensions.’ 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to SPENCER PERCEVAL 
Private Seville: October 30, 1809 
eerensmentse 


Mr. Sydenham arrived at this place on the 27th 
Anst, in the evening and delivered to me your 
obliging letter of the 5th, together with the paper’ 
to which it refers. I return you many thanks 
for your very kind attention in employing Mr. 
Sydenham as the channe? df communication on 
this interesting and important occasion. The 
papers, which he has fully explained to me by 
reference to every circumstance of the late extra- 
ordinary events in England, conibined with such 
information as had already reached me, leave no 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 £. 163. 


278 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1809 


doubt in my mind with regard to ithe principles 
both of public ,and private duty which should 
govern my conduct in the present crisis and in 
the actual situation of His Majesty’s service. 

I therefore accept without hesitation the office 
of Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs; and I 
shal]l return to England with all practicable expedi- 
tion for the purpose of discharging the duties of 
that important station with the zeal and attention 
which His Majesty may justly claim from a person 
so deeply indebted to his gracious favour, and 
which he may expect from the whole tenor of my 
public life and services. 

I am particularly flattered by His Majesty’s' 
indulgent consideration and by the kindness which 
you and my friends in office have manifested in 
the temporary appointment of a person whom. 
I value so highly and affectionately as Lord 
Bathurst ; this arrangement is the strongest proof 
which could be afforded of His Majesty’s conde- 
scending goodness, as well as of the confidence and 
goodwill of those with whom I am to act in His 
Majesty’s service. 

« You will probably have known from my brother 
William that as early as the 7th of this month 
my sentiments upon the whole course of the recent 
transactions in England were completely fixed, 
and you may rest assured that I shall enter His 
Majesty’s councils’ with a firm determination to 
exert every effort within my power for the main- 
tenance of His*Majesty’s Government on the 
basis which he has been pleased to approve, 
and for the despatch ef the public business, and 


1809] A PROTEST 279 


the prosperity of the public interests, in the hands 
to which hé has,been pleased to commit them. 

It will be pecaliarly satisfactory to me to share 
this trust with persons to many of whom I have 
been closely united in friendship and affection for’ 
the greater part of my life, and for all of whom 
I entertain a high respect and esteem. 


GEORGE CANNING to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private and confidential Gloucester Lodge 
November 4, 1809 

In confirmation of what I wrote to you on the 
28th October I send you the copy of a letter which 
A addressed to Perceval on the same day, and of 
the answer which I have received from him. 

Perhaps I shal? now have some right to ask of 
you from what source that intelligence was derived 
on which you founded your letter to me of the 
zth October ? 

If, however, you think yourself under obligation 
not to mention your authority, or if it would be 
painful to you to do so, I do not press for the 
disclosure. 

But I do most earnestly entreat and insist (with 
the freedom aiid the right of friendship) that that 
same authority shall never be received and acted 
upon again in anythingcrelating to yourself and 
me—without suspicion and without due notice and 
enquiry. 

I willonly add that to the list of names mention~d 
in Perceval’s letter might be added those of Lord 
Lonsdaie, the Duke of Richmond, Lord Titchfield, 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 167. 


280 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1809 


and even of Lord Grenville and Lord Grey, as 
having been proposed either by kim or by others, 
exactly as much as yours ; with cxactly as much 
concert on the part of the Cabinet, and exactly 
as much approbation on the part of the King 
—and with exactly the same right to each 
of them that your informér led you: to suppose 
yourself to have, to say that J alone opposed and 
defeated his appointment to the Premiership. 

But, in truth, it is unnecessary for me to say any- 
thing after Perceval’s letter, which I hpe will 
set your mind at rest upon the subject. 


SPENCER PERCEVAL to THE KING, relative to 
THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY’S Garier 

November 30, 1809 

Mr. Perceval humbly acquaints Your Majesty 
that, previous to the arrival of Lord Wellesley 
in this country, Mr. Perceval thought it advisable 
in order to avoid any possible misunderstanding 
with the Duke of Richmond upon the subject of 
the late Duke of Portland’s? Ribbon, to prevail 
upon Lord Bathurst to represent the exact stzte 
of the law with regard to that Ribbon as connected 
with the application which the Duke of Portland 
had made to Your Majesty on behalf of Lord 
Wellesley, and of Lord’ Wellesley’s anxiety upon 
the subject of it. Mr. Perceval also ventured to 
mention that after*the subject had been so opened 
tu his Grace by -Lord Bathurst, Mr. Perceval 
wrote to him himéelf, and did not withhold from 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 177. 
3 The Duke of Portland-died on October 29, 1809. 


1809] THE GARTER 281 


him «the Knowledge of the gracious manner in 
which Your Majesty had spoken to Mr. Perceval 
of his Grace upon the subject of this vacant 
ribbon, but he stated that he thought it necessary 
to take no steps with regard to it till Lord Wellesley 
came home; and Mr. Perceval has the ‘satisfac- 
tion to acquaint Your Majesty that his Grace the 
Duke of Richmond, in expressing his most grateful 
sense of your Majesty’s kindness toward him, has 
in the most handsome manner desired that Mr. 
Percevalsshould understand that if it should be 
found at all desirable for the benefit of Your 
Majesty’s service under the circumstances in 
which Your Majesty’s Government is now placed, 
that Your Majesty should take this opportunity 
of giving that ordér to Lord Wellesley, his Grace 
would readily decline urging any pretension to it 
whatever. Mr. Perceval has now found, since 
Lord Wellesley’s arrival, that his Lordship does 
feel extremely anxious upon this subject. He 
has introduced it to Mr. Perceval’s notice through 
Mr. Arbuthnot,’ to whom he has expressed his 
feelings upon it in the strongest manner, thinking 
that the interest with which the Duke of Portland. 
had represented his Lordship’s views upon this 
subject to Your Majesty gave him a great claim 
upon Mr. Perceval to request Your Majesty to 

1 Charles Arbuthnot (1767-1850), who in 1803 was Under 
Secretary for Foreign Affairs, was in’ the following year 
appointed Ambassador-Extraordinary to Constantinople. He 
returned to England in 1807, and two years later re-entered 
Parliament.. From 1809 to 1823 he was one of the Joint- 


Secretaries of the Treasury. In his later life he was the 
confidential f ied of the Duke of Wellington. 


282 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [1809 


grant this mark of Your Majesty’s approbation 
and favour to him. Mr. Perceval has since seen 
Lord Wellesley, has explained'to his Lordship 
what the Duke of Richmond’s wishes were upon 
the point, and he added as his own private opinion 
that he thought his Lordship would judge better 
for himself if he omitted to press this object at 
this time ; that it would be open to unfavourable 
interpretation, as connected with his accepting 
his present office, but that if he continued really 
to wish it, Mr. Perceval would certainly submit 
his wishes to Your Majesty with his humble 
recommendation that they should be ,cemplied 
with. His Lordship thought that as it was so well 
known by Lord Grenville and others what his 
pretensions were to ask this favour, and as the 
fact was that he had actually signified his intention 
to accept office before he knew the Duke of Port- 
land’s death had made the vacancy, it would not 
be possible that his conduct could with any degree 
of justice be open to such interpretation, and he 
therefore did express his wish very strongly that 
Mr. Perceval should humbly present his anxious 
“desire to Your Majesty upon this subject. 

Mr. Perceval accordingly does submit to Your 
Majesty that in his humble opinion it is, under 
the circumstances of.his Lordship’s strong anxiety 
to obtain this honour, desirable that Your Majesty 
should confer it upon his Lordship, if Your Majesty 
should be graciqusly pleased so to do.? 


1 Sdd. MSS. 37295 £. 181. 


1809] REALISATION 283 


Tue Kinc to MR. PERCEVAL 

Wendsor Castle : December 1, 1809 
Although the King acquiesced in Mr. Perceval’s 
wish that the vacant Blue Ribbon should be 
conferred on Lord Wellesley, His Majesty con- 
siders that this previous suggestion to Lord Welles- 
ley was perfectly well founded, and that it is to 
be regretted that it did not receive due attention. 
At the present season of the year it would not be 
possible to collect a sufficient number of Knights 
of the Garter for the ceremony of investing Lord 

Wellesley, nor can the delay be material. 


SPENCER PERCEVAL fo THE KING 


Mr. Perceval transmits for Your Majesty’s 
perusal Lord Wellesley’s answer to Mr. Perceval’s 
letter acquainting his Lordship with Your 
Majesty’s gracious concurrence in Mr. Perceval’s 
humble recommendation, that Your Majesty should 
be pleased to confer the late Duke of Portland’s 
Garter upon Lord Wellesley. Mr. Perceval trusts 
that Your Majesty will think that he would not 
“he doing justly by Lord Wellesley if he withheld 
from Your Majesty the expressions of his Lord- 
ship’s gratitude upon this occasion.* 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY. fo SPENCER PERCEVAL 
Private and confidenizal Apsley House 
December 2, 1809 

I have returned a separate answer on the 
subject of the Garter. I must, however, add in 


1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 183. 
2 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 18s. 


284 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [x809 


this note my very warm thanks for the «great 
kindness and flattering attention which I have 
received from you on this occasion. 

With regard to the proposed delay, I wish to 
submit entirely to His Majesty’s pleasure. It is, 
however, very desirable that the honour should 
follow my Spanish Embassy as closely as possible. 
Instances may be found of publishing the honour 
in the Gazette before (and I believe even without) 

- formal investiture ; you will find those cases by 
reference. But I leave the whole of that point 
to your discretion. 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY to SPENCER PERCEVAL 


Private Apsley House 
December 2, 1809 


I am most deeply sensible of His Majesty’s 
gracious favour in the intention which he has been 
pleased to signify of conferring upon me the high 
honour of the Order of the Garter.? I request 
you to ussure His Majesty that my zeal for’ his 
service ‘required no incitement, and that my 
gratitude for the long course of favours and good- 
uess which I have experienced since I have had 
the satisfaction to serve him could not be increased. 
But the distinction which His Majesty has now 
been pleased to grant to me is so peculiarly cal- 
culated to mark to the world His Majesty’s appro- 
bation (after full knowledge) of my endeavours to 

1 Add. MSS. 3729 5 f. IOI. 

2 Wellesley was not installed as a Knight o the Garter 


until March 10, 18z0. He then retired from the, Order of St. 
Patrick. 


1809, GRATIFICATION 285 


serve: him and my country in many arduous 
situations, that 4% cannot receive the notification 
of the King’s pleasure on this occasion. without 
returning a most particular expression of my 
humble thanks and most cordial] satisfaction. 
With respect to the particular moment of complet- 
ing the ceremony necessary for the investiture, 
I am too sensible of His Majesty’s condescension 
to feel any other inclination than that of awaiting 
the King’s pleasure. 

I request you to accept’ my sincere acknowledg- 
ments for your kindness on this occasion, and to 
believe, that no more acceptable addition could 
be made to His Majesty’s favour than that it 
should be communicated through a person so 
justly entitled to high respect and esteem. 


* Add. MSS. 37295 f. 189. 


BOOK V 


SECRETARY OF STATE FOR 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS. 1809-1812 


BOOK V 


SECRETARY OF STATE FOR 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS 
December 1809 to January 1812 


CHAPTER I 


Geueral opinion of Wellesley : Creevey’s criticism : 
Difficuities of his situation : Lord Holland’s tribute : 
Wellesley’s Garter: British policy in the Peninsula : 
Spanish mistrust : Reform essential to success: 
Weliesley on Wellington’s achievements : Unsuc- 

- cessful attempt to rescue the King of Spain: Re- 
inforcements needed in Portugal : The Near Eastern 
question : The defence of Cadiz: The situation in 
the Peninsula : Progress of the siege of Cadiz. 


N December 12, 1809, Wellesley kissed 
@) hands as Secretary of State for Foreign 
Affairs. The value of his work in India 
being as yet unappreciated, he was generally 
regarded, at least by the public, as a man of little 
~impertance, though few thought of him as poorly 
as Creevey, who, pn January 8, 1810, wrote to Lord 
Milton: ‘ The Marquess . . . is a great calamity 
inflicted upon England, ang I heard to-day that, 
upon this last business with America, he has sent 
a proposal to her, the alternative of which is war. 
Here is the advantage of having the Conqueror- 
of the East for Foreign Secretary.” Wellesley 
assumed office when almost all Europe was under 


the sway of Napoleon, anc when England was 
I 289 U 


290 SHE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1809- 


apparently on the verge of a struggle with the 
United States, owing to the favour shown by that 
ceuntry to France. His difficulties were aggtav- 
ated by the fact that the Government was weak 
that for the Prime Minister he had a supreme 
disdain, and that he could expect little backing 
from a Cabinet divided against itself. 


THE. MARQUESS WELLESLEY to. THE KING 
Foveigh Office ; December 17, 1809 

The Marquess Wellesley has the honour to 
submit to Your Majesty an official note teceived 
this day from _ Prince Starkemberg,1 requesting 
passports for himself: and his suite, and also 
desiring a flag of truce for’ the return’ of the 
Austrian messenger lately arrived from Paris.. 

It is proposed,’ with Your Majesty’s gracious 
approbation, to grant Prince St aembste: S re- 
quests. 

A private note from Prince Starkemberg isalso 
submitted to Your Majesty’s notice. 

The Marquess Wellesley proposes to submst fos 
Yottr Majesty’s approbation some observations on 
the late Treaty of Peace between Austria and 
France? to accompany the official answer to 
Prince Starkemberg® * 

1 Prince rat Joseph Max Starkemberg, Austrian 
Ambassador to the Court of St. James’s. 

2 The Treaty of ‘Schénbrunn (or Vienna) between France 
and Austria was signed on October 15, 1809, by which Austria 


ceded to France the Tyrol, Dalmatia, and other*erritory. 
3 Add. MSS. 37291 f. 175. 
e 


(ORG E IL IN HIS PARLIAMENTARY ROBES 
e From an engraging 


1812] A REFRACTORY SON 201 


@HARLES ARBUTHNOT to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
‘Private Treasury Chambers 
December 12, 1809 
When I was last at Blackheath, I had a great 
deal of conversation with Mrs. Pole about William, 
and ‘it was impossible for me not to confess to her 
that I could not in future treat him with the very 
cordial affection. which I had formerly borne 
towards him. As she had heard from you that 
he had ven spoken disréspectfully of his father, 
she was not surprised to leas that I had not been 
spare@ ; but, anxious as she is to attempt reclaim- 
ing him, I being certain that he looks up: more to 
your Lordship than to any other person, she made 
me promise that i would entreat you to send for 
and to lecture him. She wishes it the more in 
consequence of a letter to her from his father, who 
is expecting to find him greatly improved, and of 
whose disappointment she dreads the effects. 
There was an Opposition dinner on Sunday last 
at Devonshire House, ;when you were highly 
pratsed. The Prince [of Wales] spoke of you in 
the highest terms, and Lord Holland,’ who" said 
that he was not personally acquainted with you, 
bore testimony to your statesmanlike abilities. 


1 William Pole Wellesley (1788-1857), son of the Hon. 
William Wellesley-Pole (who succeeded to the Irish earldom 
of Mormington in 1842). In r8r2 he enarried the heiress, 
Miss Tylney-Long, and assumed her name. He entere@ 

arliament im 1812, and in 1845 succeded his father as 
(fourth) Earl of Mornington. 

* Henry Richard V&ssall Fox, third Baron Holland (1773- 
1840), nephew of Charles James Fax, who took an active part 
in politics. He was Lord Privy Seal, 1806-1807. 


292 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [x809- 


I believe that on Friday I shall go to Huskisson’s 
for a feW days. I shall please hgm with all that 
you have said about him, and*it would please 
me greatly if I could report him as still belonging 
to us. 

I do not now intrude on your time, well knowing 
how unceasingly it must be occupied. I entered 
Perceval’s room yesterday the moment that you 
had left it. Had I found you, I could have given 
you an account of my visit to the Persian, which 
appeared to be well taken ; and it was the better 
taken as I could tglk to him of Turkish and 
Persian affairs.! 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo THE KiInG 
Foreign Office: December 17, 1809 

The Marquess Wellesley has the honour to 
acquaint Your Majesty that Mr. Erskine,?--Your 
Majesty’s late Minister in America, has expressed 
his desire to be presented to Your Majesty at the 
next levée. 

It ha8 not been thought necessary to refuse him 
the bonour of being presented to Your Majesty in- 
‘the ordinary manner by Your Majesty’s Secretary 
of State for Foreign Affairs ; but it has been fully 
explained that although Mr. Erskine could not 
completely be denied access to Your Majesty’s 

2 Add. MSS. 37309 f. 319. 

2 David Montagu Erskine (1776-1855), eldest son of 
Lhomas, first Barog Erskine, was appointed im 1806 Minister 
Plenipotentiary to the United States. He returned to England 
in 1809, and was not again employed fntil 18244 when he was 


given minor diplomatic posts in Germany.* In 1823 he 
succeeded to his father’s title. 


1812] WELLESLEY IMPATIENT 293 


presence, he is not to infer from that indulgence 
any diminution ef the disapprobgtion which has 
been signified t6 him respecting various circum- 
stances in his conduct in America, of which he 
proposes to offer further explanation. 

With this reserve Lord Wellesley hopes to meet 
Your Majesty’s gracious approbation in presenting 
Mr. Erskine to Your Majesty in the ordinary 
manner 6n Wednesday next.’ 


SPENCER PERCEVAL to THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Downing Sireat : December 20, 1809 


I dil not receive your note of last night till this 
tfiorning. I would otherwise have written upon 
the subject of it tp: the King last night, but I will 
mention it at the levée this day. 

I can assure you that I have no wish or feeling 
upon the subject of yqur Lordship’s Garter,? but 
that it should be conferred upon you in such a 
manner as may at once be most satisfactory to 
yourself and best mark the King’s approbation of 
your former services, and his satisfaetion at 
haying the advantage of them again ; and nothing 
shall be wanting on my part to ‘endeavotr to 
accomplish these objects. With this view, I 
should have been glad, if possible, that it should 
have been conferred upon you om the very first 
day of your appearance at Court. As to the delay 
which has taken place, your Lérdship knows al] 
that has passed between the Kipg and me upon 
that point That,I have not pressed this subject 


.1 Add. MSS. 37291 f. 176. 
3 See ante, p. 280, _ 


294 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  ({x809- 


on the King in regard to the time at which ¢his 
honour should be conferred, has been owing solely 
to my understanding from you that, however 
Much you wished its acceleration, yet you pre- 
ferred waiting, to having it pressed against the 
feelings and the wishes of the King. I do hope 
that I have been right in believing that my 
forbearing to press it upon the King has been really 
in conformity to your wishes, and that I have not 
deceived myself upon that head. I will thisday 
infallibly mention it to the King. - I willstate to 
him the awkward agd unpleasant constructions 
which you hear that our adversaries endeavour 
to put upon the delay, and your Lordship’ shall 
hear what the King’s remaining objections are, if 
there are any; and I will ther? urge it again, in 
any manner that you yourself may wish, if I 
should not in my conversation to-day bring the 
subject in your opinion to‘a satisfactory con- 
clusion.! 


THE Hon. HENRY WELLESLEY to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 
fanuary 25, 1810 

The following are the points upon which 
particular instructions to the Minister in Spain *® 
would appear to be necessary : 

Ist. With regard to our relations with the 
Supreme Junta, which it is absolutely necessary 
should be placed upon a different focting. For 

1 Add. MSS. 37295 f. 203. 


2 The state of Spain gad not materially Altered since 
Wellesley was Ambassador-Extraordinary. 


1812] OUR POLICY IN SPAIN 295 


this purpdse the Minister should take a higher 
tone than has ygt been assumed, and erfleavour 
to obtain a pseponderating influence in the 
Spanish Councils; but there is much reason to 
apprehend that this never can be effected without 
a radical change in the Government, and the 
British Minister should use every effort in order 
to effect this change. The existing Government 
in Spain is so unpopular that it is probable the 
Junta will ultimately be compelled to consent 
to the appointment of a Regency, and as it is 
probable that the different opinions with regard 
to the persons of whom the Regency should be 
gpmptsed will occasion much violence, it should 
be recommended, in order to reconcile all differ- 
ences upon this* important subject, that the 
existing law with respect to Regencies which 
excludes all branches of the Roya] Family should 
be strictly adhered to. 

and. The British Minister should endeavour to 
establish an intimate communication with the 
principal Members of the Cortes, and to ‘urge the 
immediate reform of all abuses in Spain ; fie should 
urfe the expediency of proceeding immediately to 
this reform as tefiding more than any other measuré 
to rouse the whole kingdom against the French. 
He should make it his business to bring together 
all persons who are known to be well affected to 
the Spanish cause, and who,from their high 
birth, their influence, or their talents, are likeby 
to be serviceable to their courttry. We should 
endeavout to intpress upon the minds of these 
persons, as tell as upon the Spanish Government, 


296 THY WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [1809- 


the impossibility of any cordial co-operation with 
Spain or? the part of His Majesty until the im- 
pressions, of jealousy with respect to the designs 
of His Majesty, which we know to have existed 
in the Spanish Government, shall be entirely 
removed. 

3rd. That His Majesty and his Government 
have but one object, the deliverance of Spain from 
the yoke of France, so that anything which his 
Minister may have occasion to suggest, either with 
respect to their government, their armies, er their 
fleets, will be solely for the advantage of the cause 
for which they are contending, and not fox any 
exclusive benefit which can be derived by His 
Majesty. It should be constantly urged that His 
Majesty proposes to himself no*other advantage 
from the complete success of the war in Spain 
than a perpetual alliance against the tyrannical 
and encroaching system of the French Government 
—an alliance which, considering their relative 
situations, would be attended with much mere 
important advantages to Spain than to England. 

Adverting to the printiples upon which Mis 
"Majesty has afforded such powerful assistance ‘to 
the Spanish cause, and to the spirit of the treaty 
of alliance subsisting between the two nations, 
His Majesty has a perfett right to insist upon the 
immediate removal of the Spanish and French (s?c) 
fleets from the pesition which they now occupy 
t6 a place of greater security. But great delicacy 
is necessary in the management of this subject. 
The fleet is now in a position where, if the French 
were to succeed in cfossing the Siérra and to 


1812] SPANISH JEALOUSY 207 


advance upon Cadiz, they might easily destroy or 
get possession of it ; but such is the unactountable 
jealousy enterteined of our dé&signs, that, the 
Government is unwilling to remove the fleet, be- 
cause it will then be placed in a situation where it 
might be possible for a British fleet to attack it. 
The same jealousy prevails with respect to the 
admission of a British garrison into Cadiz. These 
are, therefore, points to be managed with the 
utmpst nicety, but nevertheless to be insisted upon 
as absolutely necessary to the maintenance of the 
alliance. 

If the Junta should manifest any inclination to 
éhrow obstacles in the way of the assembly of the 
Cortes, the Minister is to state in the most forcible 
terms the urgefit necessity of their being im- 
mediately assembled., The Junta is become so 
unpopular that one of the first points for the 
deliberation of the Cortes will probably be the, 
formation of a Regency. ‘The British Minister is 
to.urge the expediency of the immediate adoption 
of this measure with all the Members of the Cortes 
ower whom he may have acquired an influence, or 
who may be disposed to confide in him.”.He ts, 
however, to be*particularly careful not to do any- 
thing which may excite the jealousy of the 
Princess of Brazil, of the reigning family of Sicily, 
or of any other of the members of the Royal 
family who may possess an hereditary claim to 
the crowy of Spain. 

No opportunity is to be lst of urging the 
necessity,of the immediate removal of the Spanish 
fleet from ifs present positfon. This is to be urged 


298 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS 800- 


to the uttermost point as essential to the majn- 
tenanceoé the treaty of alliance. 

It will be desir&ble to consult Lord Wellington 
with regard to the distribution of the arms which 
are now going to Spain, and of those which may be 
sent there from time to time. It should, however, 
be observed as a principle that the arms are to be 
distributed to the regular troops only, but every 
effort is to be made to encourage the war of parti- 
sans and to keep alive the spirit of animosity to ghe 
French now prevailing throughout the counéry. 

The ultimate hope of success to the Spanish 
cause rests principally” upon the improvement in 
their Government, upon the reform of abuses, and 
upon the formation of a regularly well-appointed 
and well-disciplined army ; and ho means are to 
be neglected to enforce upon the persons with 
whom the Minister may have to communicate 
officially, or upon those members of the Cortes 
with whom he may be enabled to establish an 
intercourse, the extreme importance of an early 
attention to these subjects. 

Another subject, ‘of equal, if not of greate, 
ingportehce is the state of our trade with Spanish 
America, which is even upon a les$ advantageous 
footing for England than it was previous to the 
peace with Spain. Theerepresentations of indi- 
viduals concerned in this trade, who have been 
treated with grave gnjustice and oppression by the 
agents of the Spanish Government, have been 
entirely neglected.* It is necessary that this trade 
should be placed immediately upon 4 properfooting.? 

2 Add. MSS. 37291 f. 200. 


18 12] TALAVERA 299 


la the “House | of Lords Lord Liverpool had, on 
January 26,, 1810, moved, “ That the thanks of 
this House be given to Viscount” Wellington, the 
officers and the army under his command, for 
the skill and ability, the valour and bravery by 
which they obtained a victory over the enemy 
at Talavera.”” This had been supported by Lord 
Mountjoy, and then opposed by Lord Grey, on 
the, grounds that it was open to grave doubt 
whether Talavera was a wictory at all. Wellesley, 
replying to Grey, made an eloquent speech in 
supp§$rt of the vote of thanks. “Ina military 
Sense perhaps nothing more could be said of the 
result of that. bajtle than that the British troops 
had succeeded in repulsing the attack of a French 
army almost double their numbers, the efforts of 
which had been chiefly directed against the 
British troops,” so ran the latter portion of his 
speech. ‘ But was there no skill, no bravery, no 
perseverance displayed in the mode ,in which 
tleat repulse was effected ? Did no glory redound 
from it to the qharacter of the British arms? Has 
it not been acknowledged even by the enemy as 
the severest which they have yet sustained? Now 
as to the consequences. Were they really such 
as to disparage the merits, and mar the splendour 
of that day? I will boldly maintain that éhe 
defeat of the enemy at Talavéra has essentially 
contribuged to fhe main objects of the campaign. 
For, unless that Slow hid been struck against 


300 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [x800- 


Victor, it would have been impossible to prevent 
the enem’ from overrunning the south of Spain, 
or from making. a fresh irruptior into Portugal. 
It saved the south of Spain from absolute des- 
truction. It has afforded time to Portugal to 
reorganise her army, and to strengthen her 
‘military ports. It also enabled, Lord Wellington 
to take a position where he might derive supplies 
from Spain at the same time that he drew negrer 
to his own magazines. Were not all these aehieve- 
ments essential to the objects of the expedition ? 
And what was the general result ? Until therf the 
French armies had been acting vigorously against; 
Spain and Portugal; but since the battle of 
Talavera they have been compelled to abandon 
their offensive operations and to resume .the 
defensive. I shall not attempt to diminish the 
‘disasters which afterwards befell the Spanish 
armies. Both my brother and I had earnestly 
advised. the Spaniards to keep to their defensive 
positions ; but, flushed with the victory of Tala; 
‘vera, and with hopes too sangujne ‘of further 
successes, they advanced at all points, and the 
result but too fatally justified the propriety of the 
Advice that had been given to them. But I will 
not go into any cfitical disquisition of military 
diseretion. It is enough for me to have shown 
that, in the prose€ution and attainment of the 
objects on which he was employed, Lord Welling- 
ton made a judicious Applicatfon of the means 


Sir 7. Lawrence, pinxt. 


ARTHUR WELLESLEY, IST DUKE Og WELLINGTON 


181e] ITS REAL VALUE 301 


entwisted to his’ hands, and derived from them 
every advantage to which they could be turned. 
He arrested the progress of the Frtnch armies jnto 
the south of Spain, and procured a breathing time 
for Portugal to organise the forces, and improve all 
her means of defence.. I will not take it upon me 
to say that Portugal was placed in a state of 
complete security, but I may safely assert that 
timg has been gained for producing an essential 
improvement in the cogdition of her army, so 
that it will be enabled effectually to assist and 
co-operate with the British troops. In fine, 
Portugal was placed in a greater degree of security 
than at any period ‘since she had been menaced 
by France. All these advantages are fairly to 
be ascribed to the skill, the courage, and the 
activity which directed the exertions of Lord 
Wellington and ‘his army,,and upon the whole I’ 
dg not hesitate to say that my brother is as justly 
entitled to every distinction which his Sovereign 
igs conferred upon hinf, and to every honour and 
reward which it is in the power of ‘the House to: 
bestow, as any noble Lord who for his personal 
services had obtained the same distinctions, and 
who sits here by descent from his illustrious 
ancestors.”? In the end the motion was carried 
nem. dis. 
a Parliamentary Debates,@xv. 150. 


302 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS [x809- 


Lapy MornincTon fo THE Mary “ess WELLESLEY 
Hampign Court Palace: January 28, 1810 
I cannot refrain from writing a few lines to 
express my extreme delight at your performance 
on Friday... In my opinion there never was 
anything so perfect of the kind, and I have the 
pleasure of being certain that by all parties this is 
the idea formed of it. I trust now that you will 
go on, for J was much annoyed by your silencg.*. 


Wellesley now bethought himself of rescuing 
the King of Spain. Charles IV. of Spain had 
abdicated the throne when the French army 
crossed the frontiers of his courtry, and his son 
Ferdinand VII. succeeded. Ferdinand, however, 
was taken prisoner by Napoleon and imprisoned 
in the Castle of Valengay, and Joseph, brother of 
the conqueror, reigned*in his stead. The expedi- 
tion failed, but this was through no faulteof 
Cockburn, who had merely to land the agents at 
some cgnvenient spot, and await their return wMide 
or without the King. As a matéer of fact, the 
agents were arrested svuon after landing, and 
Cockburn, apprised of this, sailed for England. 
yerdinand was not released from confinement at 
Valengay until the Peace of 1813. 


?- The speech just To on Wellington and Talavera. 
® Add. MSS. 37315 1. 102. 


181e] A SECRET MISSION 303 


THR MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo CAPTAIN GEORGE 
a CocKBURN 

Secret. No.1 Foreign Qffice 

February 2, 1810 


His Majesty having determined to make an 
effort to rescue the person of King Ferdinand 
‘VII. of Spain from the hands of the French, and 
to restore that monarch to his subjects, I have 
received His Majesty’s commands to direct you to 
proceed, with the ships which have been placed 
under your orders by the Lords Commissioners of 
the Admiralty to the immediate execution of this 
important service. 

“e After having received on board the agents who 
are to be emplgyed on this occasion, you will 
proceed to Quiberon Bay or to such other point 
upon the coast of France as you may judge most 
advisable for landing these persons. 

You will concert with. them the means of 
embarking them either in the event of the success 
or Of the failure of the plan. 

In the event of the sefe arrival of the King of 
@eain on board your ship, you will act accordings 
to the directions contained in my despatch” No. e 
of this date ; and if the plan should unfortunately 
fail, you will return to England, with the ships 
placed under your orders.’ 


1 Add. MSS. 37292 £ 214. 


304 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [i809- 


THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY fo Capratt GEQRGE 
CocKBURN!? 

Secret. No. 2 _ Foreign Office 

February 2, 1810 


(1) Inthe event of the safe arrival of the King 
of Spain on board your ship you will of course 
receive His Majesty with royal honours and with 
every mark of distinction and respect. 

(2) You will inform His Majesty that in the 
actual state of affairs in Spain it would appear most 
advisable that he shoulfl proceed to Portsmouth 
in order to concert with the British Government. 
The most advantageous steps which can ngw be 
taken for His Majesty’s arrival in England, the 
time and manner of his return to his own 
dominions, may be settled with a more correct 
knowledge of the state of Spain than can be 
obtained under the doubtful and precarious cir- 
cumstances of the present moment. 

(3) It cannot be supposed that His Majesty 
will object to visiting England in such a crisis. 
If, however, he should manifest any reluctance 
to your proposal (after ‘having employed evgyy 
endeavour compatible with the duties of respect 
and with the indulgence which you will naturally be 
inclined to pay to His Majesty’ s feelings and pre- 
judices), you will pro¢eéd to Cadiz, where you will 
communicate with the British Minister. You will 
then land the King of Spain in such manner as may 
be concerted between you and the British Minister. 

1 Upon the direction was written: ‘“‘ Wot to be opened by 


any person but Captain Cockburn, ngr communiéated by him 
to any other officer.” 


1812] AN ATTEMPT AT RESCUE 305 


(4) Yot will,-however, understand that it is 
very desirable to induce His Majesty to adopt the 
course explaihed*in the second pagagrapli of this 
letter, and that you will render an important 
service by prevailing on His Majesty to visit 
England in the first instance.’ 


CAPTAIN GEORGE COCKBURN fo THE MARQUESS. 
WELLESLEY 

Secret H.M.S. I paca Quiberon Bay 

March 15, 1810 


(rt). Supposing that yous Lordship must be 
extremely anxious to hear from me, I have deter- 
neined to send the Nonpareil schooner to England 
with this despatch, to inform your Lordship that I 
arrived here during a very heavy gale from the 
S.W. on the night of the 7th March, and having the 
next day reconnoitred the adjacent shores and 
taken all necessary precautions, I safely landed the 
Baron de Kolli and his friehd about eleven o’clock 
on"the night of the 9th, without the least disturbance 
or molestation, nearly oy the spot whichel pointed 
st to your Lordship, in London, as that qn which: 
I judged it most advisable to make otir firgt 
attempt. They were in high spirits at the facility 
with which they thus gaiped their first point, and 
Seemed very confident of further success. 

(2) I arranged with the Baron de Kolli, 
previous to his landing, a cypAer which can only 
be understood by himself and me, and I have 
Teason t@ beliew we shall find little or no difficulty 

1 agh. MSS. 37201 f. 217. 
I = 


306 THE WELLESLEY PAPERSe [3809- 


-n holding such communicatiorf as mé@y be found 
to be necessary jor the furtherance of our future 
operatiéns, as, I happened to find’ here (on the 
island of Houat) a Baron de Feriet, who is a 
General of the Vendéan Insurgents. He was in 
England a little while ago imploring the assistance 
of our Government for -his party, and has since 
been employed here’ smuggling British manu- 
factures and colonial produce into France. This 
traffic has afforded him a facility of intercoyrse 
with the adjacent coasts which I judged night be 
turned to the advantage of our presen’ under- 
taking. 

(3) The Baron de Kolli, therefore, and rtyself, 
having held a long conversation with this Baron de 
Feriet, and having examined several documents 
which he produced to us (amongst others a letter 
from Mr. Barron of the Admiralty, whose hand- 
writing I knew), and being fully convinced of his 
loyalty, and his enmity to the present Government 
of France, we determifed to employ him, for our 
present purpose at least, in so much as making Rim 
the instrament of our coramunication. Of course 
aye let him ng further into our secret than assurmg 
him that the service we were employed on was 
greatly for the advantage of the Royalist and 
Vendéan cause, and that his insuring to us a mode 
mf communicating when necessary would very 
much contribute to the ultimate success of our 
enterprise. I prorhised to reward him handsomely 
for whatever assistance he ‘might afford us, and, 
according to the zeal he now shewed, #o recom- 
mend his (the Vendéan) causAto the notice and 


18124 THE PLAN OF ACTION 307 


consideration ot my Government. He immediately 
engaged ‘t8 do everything I Wished him; and 
without even knewing who the Baron de Kolli. 
was, or whither he was going, he promised to give 
him every possible assistance ; but he requested — 
to be landed on the coast of the Vendée in pre- 
ference to being put on shore here, on account of 
his being proscribed for his late conduct, and most 
of the gens d’armes in this neighbourhood having 
hisedgscription ; but in any part of La Vendée he 
said he should be in almost perfect safety owing to 
his nunferous partisans, and that for the same 
reasone he could without danger proceed from 
wherever he might be landed on that coast to 
Néntes, where at’a private house (the situation of 
which he fully explained to the Baron de Kolli) 
he promised to wait such orders as might be sent 
to him, and to hold a chasse-marée in constant 
readiness to be despatched to me, or to bring him 
to me should he be directed to be himself the 
bearer of any letter or despatch. 

(4) These arrangements being deternyjned on, 
Linmediately despatched the schooner to land the 
Baron de Feriet on the coast of La Vendée, beéweerf 
St. Gilles and Sable d’Olonne, which she effected’ 
without creating the least alarm on the night of 
the 13th, being prevented*from doing it sooner 
Owing to the surf, which beats on all that coas 
whenever the wind is to the westvaard. M. de Feriet 
must, however, be at Nantes by ‘this time, and 
as the wind is now to the eastw&rd I shall be in 
Constant e$pectation,of receiving some intimation 
Of the continental proceedings of my friends. In 


308 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS _ [3800- 


the meantime, as I conceive it must be’ gratifying 
to your,Lordshipfto know that, so far #& depended 
upon us, every¢hing has been agfomplished to our 
most sanguine expectations, I have directed the 
lieutenant of the Nonpareil to proceed with this 
despatch for your Lordship to the first port in 
England ‘which he can fetch, there to put it in the 
post-office and to return to me immediately without 
having any other communication with the shore, 
or allowing other letters to be sent from his vgseel. 
I have also particularly impressed on his gnind the 
necessity of his preventing any hint being*given of 
where he has been ‘or to what station he is to 
return. 

(5) Should I receive any information from the 
Continent which I may think mecessary to com- 
municate to your Lordship, I will again despatch 
one of the small vessels under my orders therewith 
to England in a similar manner to this. 

(6) Should your Lordship wish to send me any 
further instructions, the Admiralty will, of course, 
furnish ‘a small vessel for that purpose, and I shall 
be always to be found in the neighbourhood of this 
anchofage.’ 


THE Hon. JOHN CHARLES VILLIERS fo THE 
MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
“Private Lisbon : ' February 10, 1810 
Lord Wellingtpn’s letters will have informed 
you of the disposition which he has thought 
himself obliged *to make of the reinforcements, 
which lately arrived in the qefence of{Cadiz. It 


1. Add. MSS. 37291 £8253. 


1812] REINFORCEMENTS NEEDED 309 


will mot estape your observation—though, obvious 
as it is, it would that of many Mfnisters—ghat this 
measure leaves “sis army and ¢he defence of 
Portugal exactly where it would have been if such 
reinforcements had never been sent, 

I trust that immediate measures will be taken 
for filling up this chasm ; more time may perhaps 
be safely given for supplying the sources from 
whence it may be filled up. But I conceive that 
inerecruiting and increasing the strength of Lord 
Wellingeon’s army no dejay is safe. 

With’a British army of 40, 000 effective men, and 
as mueh made of the Portuguese army and Militia 
as they admit of, a force might be assembled with 
Which in this country a very reasonable hope of 
defeating,all the views of the enemy in the 
Peninsula might be entertained. 

‘But it is vain to look at objects and not to 
afford the adequate means of attaining them. 

A few more British offigers in the Portuguese 
seryice, more arms and more money, and especially 
greater despatch in sending out the clothing, would 
@eshaps make the diffrence between all which 
has been afforded and spent being throwh away 
or most completély answering the ends proposed by’ 
such great exertions. I say this for the sake of 
calling your attention to tle subject, and in the 
hopes of exciting such vigour as produced tle 
beneficial and glorious results of your own ad- 
ministration in India. I have*nothing worth 

, adding in this private letter.’ 


1 Add. MISS. 37291 f. 220. 


310 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS ® [2800- 


THE EARL OF ABERDEEN! fo THE MARQWESS 
WELLESLEY 


‘Argyll House: February 19 [1810] 

In consequence of the few words on the ‘subject 
of America with which I troubled your Lordship 
on Tuesday evening, I have ventured to delay 
until this time my arfswer to your Lordship’s 
proposition. respecting Constantinople ; : and even 
now I must request of your goodness the per- 
mission to state with frankness and candouf fhe 
general view which IJ erstertain of this su®ject. 

It appears to be probable that in a short time 
the Turkish empire will experience a considerable 
change. The Russian army may either succegd 
in obtaining possession of the capital, or, by the 
intervention of Buonaparte, the Government may 
be permitted to exist, if it shall renounce all 
communication with this’ country, and adhere ‘to 
the continental system. In both cases the ordinary 
functions of a Minister at the Porte would be 
suspended, and the relations between the ¢wo 
countries entirely changed. Being persuaded of 
the probability of the occurrence of these or sain¢ 
‘ther ‘events’ which may produce a similar effect 
(perhaps even before the arrival of a British 
Minister), I think, with the country in such a 
disturbed and uncertain state, to go to Constan- 
tinople with no other object in view or system of 
proceeding contirf&ent on such a situation would 


1 George Hamilton*Gordon, fourth Earl of Aberdeen (1784- 
1860), Foreign Secretary, 1828-1830; sSecretasy for War, 
1834-1835; again Foreign Secret4ry, 1841-1846; Prime 
Minister, 1852-1855. 


". Wivelt, pin T. Wootnath, sculpt. 


. = 
GEORGE UWAMILTON-GORDON, 4TH EARL OF ABERDEEN P) 


1839] THE: NEAR EAST 311 


scaxcely ‘te conipatible with the duty I owe to 
my famil¥ or to myself. 

“I know not what may be your Lerdship’s opinion 
respecting the probability of these events, or of 
the course necessary to be pursued should any 
such take place. I will. venture, however, in the 
same spirit of candour, tg state distinctly the line 
of conduct which I should not only be ready but 
anxious to follow, and which appears to me to be 
masked out by such a situation of affairs. 

Thee dependence of European Greece, and 
especially of the islands, on the Turkish Govern- 
mené, is very slender. They have been for some 
time rapidly increasing in population, opulence, 
&nd maritime ‘strength, and are quite ready to 
assert ag independence under the auspices either 
of the Russians, or of the French. The Russians, 
however, from their numerous treacheries and 
atrocious barbarity, they very much dislike, and 
French connection, from the absence of navaf 
intercourse and protection, is much less desired 
than the friendship of this country. Afiy system, 
therefore, warich may provide for the occurrence, 
and, as fa§ as may be prudent, assi&t, in the 
establishment®*of such an order of things, appetts 
to merit your Lordship’s attention, and from its 


important and interestmg nature would deserve, 


the employment of abilities and.activity far greater 
than mine. To promotea plap of this or any other 
similar gescription I would wiltingly use myebest 
exertions ; but without any Such object in view 
I think%it impfobable that a residence at Constan- 
tinovle would. at the present moment. be desirable. 


312 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1800- 


IT am now sensible that it is necessary to 
request Your Lordfhip’s pardon for the free manner 
in which I haveewritten. In a cgmmon period of 
tranquillity and peace I should at once have 
accepted your Lordship’s proposal with delight, 
and have felt that I had obtained the chief object 
of my pursuit; but in. the present state of the 
Continent I found myself impelled in addressing 
your Lordship to detail with sincerity those views 
by which in my opinion the mission woulde ke 
rendered creditable to him who filled it, ared most 
advantageous to the country. 

In all events, I beg your Lordship to be asgured 
of the high sense I entertain of the value of youre 
good opinion, and of that kindness which has led 
you to make the proposition, in @nswer to which 
I have already troubled you too long.’ 


THE Hon. JOHN CHARLES VILLIERS to THE 
MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private : March 4, 18f0 

Let me,fin the first place give you joy of the 
Qonours of yesterday ; and believe n%e how #lagd 
am that “you thave received in so satisfactory a 
manner an honour long merited, dnd which you 
particularly desired.” 

I long much to see y8if again. If you have not 
reptnted of the liberties of speech which, as an old 
friend, you have sometimes allowed me, you must 
permit me from friendship to express a. wish to 
be permitted to usé them once more. However 


1 Add. MSS. 37309 f. 243. 
2 The Order df the Garter. 


1812] PORTUGAL’S IMPORTANCE — 313 


painful your owrt situation or that offthe country 
may be,*ydu must, for your own tharacer, et your 
shoulders thérowghly to the wo now y6u are in 
office. 

There are many points of detail with respect 
to Portugal which I can save you trouble in 
despatching, but the great ‘question is whether 
Buonaparte wll turn his whole force against it so 
as to makedts defence impracticable. This cléarly 
dsenpt the case at the present moment (120,000 
men ought not to conquer the Peninsula with an 
army of 30,000 British within it) ; and of particular 
operagions, or approach of danger, Lord Welling- 
gon’s*opinions on the spot ought, in my judgment, 
afone and entirely to decide. But how soon it 
may be the caseeand how soon evacuation may be 
necessary it is impossible to say. Let me then 
beg you to turn your thoughts (I say no more) 
to an immediate negotiation for peace, and think 
of the difference of negotiating when Portugal may 
be insisted on, and Spain tontested, or after both 
have been lost by an evacuation which, however 
Necessary, myst always be humiliatings perhaps 
diSastrous. 

On another epoint: Lord Bathurst told me 
yesterday how important and how popular some 
commercial arrangement with Portugal would be. 
From what Souza said to me I am satisfied tpat 
it should be practicable and. might shortly be 
finished. 

I have no personal wish to béesengaged in it, but, 
if you choose, Iethink that I could bring the thing 
to a point in a few days. 


314 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [x800- 


IT am golgg on painiul jourtiey to-day, tp see 
my poor sister, fin ‘is dangerously ilf.° I come 
back to-morroy*%at two o’clogk, and have no 
engagement except with Lord Liverpool at eleven 
the next day at the House of Commons. 

I will, therefore, wait upon you whenever you 
please. But pray, for your own sake, and for. 
that of the country, think well of what I say, and 
of what is expected of you." 


THE Hon. HENRY WELLESLEY fo THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 


Private Cadiz: March IP, 1810 


I have not much to say in addition to 9 
official letters. I fear that very little is to be 
expected from the Government? and since their 
letter to Cuesta* their best friends have begun to 
be of the same opinion. I am afraid, however, 
that the Regency did not see the letter to Cuesta 
until it appeared in the Gazette, and that General 
Castafios® entirely disapproves the expressions it 
contains sin praise of Cuesta. You know that 
Cuesta is the bitter enemy of ene andmabjties 
Duke of Albuquerque,t and when the letter was 
‘Shown to the Duke of Albuquerque he said that 

1 Add. MSS. 37291 f. 239. 

2 Gregoreo Garcia de*1% Cuesta (1740-1812), Spanish 
General. 

3 Francisco Saverio Castafios (1756-1852), a Spanish 
General, best rememWered for his victory over the French 


unser Dupont at Baylen in 1808. He was subsequently 
created Duke of Baylen. 


« José Marca de la Cueva, fourteenth Quke d’Albuquerque, 


au early in 1810 saved Cadiz from®the French army under 
oult. 


18r2] FRERE’S *OPTIMISM 315 


were, it net for His eae Ot ogtending the 
English fiftion he would use*his Best eldeavqurs to 
remove the Govérnment. I belfeye Cast&iios, and 
the other Members of the Regency to have *the 
best intentions, but even Whittingham? is now 
of opinion that Spain cannot be saved. You may 
be assured, however, that I shall use every exertion 
to ascertain and, if possible, to improve | the 
friendly cammunications now subsisting between 
the Regency and the British Minister, and that I 
will notgrelinquish this objéct as long as there is a 
shadow of a Governmenf or a remnant of spirit 
remagiing in the country. 

You will find the Freres® (if they both return 
t8 England, which is at present doubtful) very 
sanguine in their..language about this country. 
The eldest Frere told me that since the commence- 
ment of the contest the affairs of Spain never in his 
opinion wore so favourable an aspect as they do 
at this moment, and I believe his brother is of the: 
same way of thinking. 

own I cannot see any justifiable grounds for 
this.opinion.y If, indeed, they were iftclined to 
make any effertions for the improvement of theff 

1 Samuel Ford® Whittingham (1772-1841), an Engl?st- 
officer who served as Brigadier-General in the Spanish service 
from 1809 until after the Hundred Days. He was knighted 
in 1815, and became Lieutenant-General in the British army. 

2 John Hookham Frere (1769-1846), Under Secretar of 
State for Foreign Affairs, 1799 ; Ambassador Mt Lisbon, 1800, 
and at Madrid, 1802-1804; Ministe& with the Junta, 1808- 
1809. Heewvas a contributor to The A®i-Jacobin, 1797-4708, 
a translator of Aristophanes, etc. @ 

Bartholemew Fere (1778-1851), Minister at Lisbon, 1809- 
18x0, and®subsequentl¥ Minister at Constantinople. 

They were%ons of gobn Frerefthe antiquary (1740-1807), 


316 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1809- 


army, the me had so favofirable an oppor- 
tunity, and"General Stuart? is readv to%tve them 
all the assistange“n his power. 

An army of 30,000 men, regularly trained and 
disciplined, and punctually paid, might still do a 
great deal in the south of Spain, and could be a 
good example to the other parts of Spain which 
continue to hold out, but I have no hope that any 
improvement will take place; but as she defence 
of this place must depend principally ypon,the 
English, I wish it were possible to send a fgw more 
regiments here. I hopé, however, that General 
Stuart will not be suptrseded, as he is very pepular 
with the Spaniards, and upon good terms with the 
Duke of Albuquerque, which is an essential poirf. 

I know not what the effect ofea bombardment 
will be here. If the French get possession of the 
peninsula opposite Puntales the ships must moye 
from their present anchorage, as they will be 
completely within range of the enemy’s shells ; 
but unless they can force the Isle de Leon and the 
new batteyy of the Cortadura, which is now nearly 
completed, they will never be able to get -aeer 
énough to Cadiz to injure it with thir shells. I 
have sometimes thought that in the work of the 
conquest of the rest of Spain, Cadiz might be 
induced to declare itee}f a free port under the 
pratection of the English, and that its connection 
with South Ameriga might (if Spain were to be 

1 Sir John Stuart®(1759-1815), who greatly distinguished 
himself in the Peninsuwaa war. In 1809 he took Ischia and 
Procida and captured Murat’s gunboats, afterwards falling 


back on Messina, where in the followittg year he repulsed the 
enemy with great loss. 


181%] SIEGE OF. CADIZ 317 


conquered) facilitate any arrangemengs we might 
wish to ke in that quartef. Imerelf thraw this 
out as a hint for ¥pur consideratién 

If Cadiz should be hard pressed I believe it t6é be 
the intention of the Regency to remove to Majorca 
or Minorca, but to keep up their connection as 
long as may be possible with Catalonia and other 
parts of Spain. 

I hope yeu will not disapprove what I have done 
alequit the French prisoners, Their remaining here 
is really most dangerous, but I ‘think it very 
probable that before any ‘arrangement is made by 
the Government for sendirg them away I shall 
seceive your instructions, if you think any neces- 
sfry upon the subject.! 


THE Hon. JOHN CHARLES VILLIERS to THE 

: MARQUESS WELLESLEY 
Private North Audley Street 

March 19, 1810‘ 

Jf there is anything in the style of your letter of 
which I think I might complain, I am sq tmpressed 
Wi mofives which*dictated mine t6 you, and 
that, likewi&, which I entirely submittef to your 
approbation (of which approbation I own I had not 
even a doubt), that I will confine myself strictly to 
explanation. 

I have no topic to treat which hgs not keen 
treated in my despatches, bet, considering the 
Pressure ,of current business,*the change of, de- 
partments, and other circumetances, I sincerely 
thought? that eI sould render a most valuable 


1 Add. MSS. $7291 f. 249. 


318 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [1809- 


service tod brinking: themselves,*as well as tp the 
public, by§ bringing* the several tofités under 
discussion, and, #y proposing myself to be ques- 
tiohed upon. them. I had no other view; and 
the following are the principal heads to which I 
alluded : 

(t) The circumstances which must attend the 
evacuation of Portugal, ; if it musttake place, which 
circumstances relate to your own’ department, to 
the War department, to the Admiralty, apd ta tha 
Treasury. 

(2) Some discussion 6f the engagementstelative 
to the Portuguese arthy, which I will now shortly 
state. 

The money voted will not, according to the 
estimate sent home by me (in August, first and 
afterwards to you), quite pay for 30,000 évoops ; 
much less will it pay for an army complete of 30,000 
men according to the form and principle of the 
return required by Lord Bathurst for an army of 
20,000, of which you have likewise the estimate in 
the office., I submitted to Government Marshal 
Beresford’s two statemermts of 30,090 troo ‘— 
exclusive of , officers, the ‘other igtluding 
officers in the numbers, asking the decision of 
Government upon which was to be adopted, with- 
out which decision nether the paymaster nor the 
Portuguese. Government can go on. The pay 
of the British officers sent to serve in the Portu- 
guege army is likevAse an additional charge which 
has long since beea submitted to Government on 
different questions, and which, from being trifling 
at first in its amount, is now become considerable. 


181g] EVACUATION -OF PQRTUGAL 319 


(3) Thé third-point was the} Gircurnstances of 
our army,eand its probable danger. 

As I have saidybefore, almost @lj I have to say 
may be found with trouble in the despatches ; But 
I thought that in discussion, and in tendering 
myself to be questioned-by the different depart- 
ments to which the subjects relate, I could save 
much of that trouble. 

Let me jyst give, in passing, one hint of no small 
delicacy. | It is respecting the safety of our 
transports in the Tagus, pfevious to evacuation. 
Arrangements made as if the transports were in 
dangey (2f evidently made for *theiy security) would 
probably excite mischief, and add to the danger 
tobe apprehended ; and yet every danger is to be 
apprehended, both against the British and against 
their own Government, from a violent people in 
despair at being surrendered (as they would call it) 
to tH® French. I only, however, mean to bring 
this, and the other topics alluded to, under con- 
sideration, and wish ‘neither to trouble you nor 
the Government with opinions of my owns 
| Owme_the last subject to which you allude I 
certduliy"Mado idea of obtruding my sentiments 
upon the Cabinet. But if a sense of public duty, 
in a moment of the most critical emergency and 
imminent danger, made me wish.to discharge my 
mind, and if I had only proposed to Goyernment 
evthey to hear my ideas or to allow me to&tate them 
in Parliament, would there have Negn anything not 
Clearly within my own right {p do, and most, 
tespectful and ajtentive to yourself and to the 
Governmént,? These very, feelings I submitted 


320 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [%809- 


in the firs ingtgnce to your decision; and, now 
acquiesce in it, in hot sending my®4etter to 
Pexceval. 

‘Permit me upon the topic itself, for the chance 
of its being useful, in this shape to submit my 
ideas to you. Depend-upon it, our failure or 
complete success on the Peninsula has often 
turped upon a single circumstance which need not 
have occurred. Some of these circurgstances are 
such as opposition may well dwell upon. | wi 
not name them, and look only to the natyral state 
of things, in which tthe timely evacuation of 
Portugal and the prdvision of our army witlyinade- 
quate means of defence are both equally prégnagt 
with the most distressing consequences. ‘his 
view of the subject led me to consider the only path 
of safety, whilst we yet might insist upon Portugal 
in negotiation, and might bargain for Spain. Upon 
this subject I have only one new idea to offef, and 
I merely tender it for your consideration. 

I should say that we do not fight in Spain to 
re-establish either the Prince of Peace or Ferdifand 
VII., bit that if we stipulated for the Spanish, 
people’a free Government, and an gnpire declared 
independent and recognised as saich by a distinct 
Treaty of Commerce with Great Britain (though 
under a Buonaparte)p that we saved our credit 
anid se a better treaty than we are likely 
to do when Frgnce has gained Portugal and 
Spain. 

, I only, howewer, submit this idea to you, 
impressed as’ I am with epprehenston of thé 
dyeadful intelligence gvhich in no very long timé 


183.2] PURVIS NCOMPELENT 321 


may be eXpected, from the Penifdula on any other 
View of de subject? 


Tue Hon. HENRY WELLESLEY to THE MARQUESS 
WELLESLEY 


Private Cadiz: March 21, r810 


I enclose a copy of aeletter I received this 
morning from Admiral Purvis, with my answer to 
it. The Admiral knew that the packet was to sail 
%é-flay, 8nd his object appears to ke to do himself 
credit {vith the Admiralty for having urged me to 
adopj the measures which he recommends ; but the 
fact 4s, I have not only represented in the strongest 
‘taanner the necessity of these measures in every 
interview I have had with M. de Castaiios, but 
offered tomenk€ ihe Admiral to the Council of 
Regency in order that he might himself represent 
thesdangerous situation of the harbour ; and it is 
literally a fact that until I represented to the 
Admiral the danger which the shipping might 
sustain if the French wete allowed to retain the 

Pais which they now occupy, he had nevér thought 
7 sugpestigg the necessity of the remoyal of the 
ships or of dhy, other arrangement for the safety df 
the harbour. ‘I mention this in confidence to yor, 
not wishing you to make use of it to the prejudice 
of the Admiral, but the fact is (as I believe you 
well know) that he is totally unfit {gr this attive 
command, and the sooner hegis removed from it 
the better for the defence of ¢ hitis place. General 
Stuart ig of this opinion as welf as myself. Hadan 

1 Add. MSS. 37291 f. 263. 
I 


322 THE WELLESLEWY PAPERS ‘[1800- 


active admiral p@en Rere when.the Ffench first 
came down upo& Cadiz they never could have got 
possessian $f the ports which they.now occupy, 
ang*of which, if they are not digpossessed or if we 
cannot strengthen the castle of Matagorda (which 
General Stuart is endeavouring to do) so as to keep 
them in check, they will certainly destroy a great 
deal of the shipping oreelse compel it to leave the 
harbour. The ships of war, however, can easily 
move out of the reach of shells, and I hope we shall 
get rid of the prisondts before the en®my tan 
strengthen himself. Bug to return to the Admiral, 
he is really not equal éo the command here, gnd I 
believe would be very glad to give it up; and ¢f his 
recall were accompanied by a civil letter approving 
of his exertions in getting the Spanish ships out 
of the harbour I have no doubt T™would be 
perfectly satisfied. We want such a man as Sit 
Edward Pellew here, who would never leave*the 
enemy at rest for a moment ; but from my own 
observation, as well as_ from what I have learnt 
from General Stuart (who has more than s7ice 
entreated ne to write to, you upon the subjgst) 
J, am persuaded that no co-opemti0i with 
the land fortes is to be looked, for from the 
Admiral. 

I showed his letter {to General Stuart, who 
pronounced it to be a dirty trick to gain credit with 
thee AdmirSty, for that literally there was no 
one circumstance gtated in that letter which I 
had not repeatedty@ urged in his presen¢ée to the 
Admiral as a motive for remoying the feet and 
prisoners. 


1813] DEFENCE .OF CADIZ 323 


From hat *you told me Bifviously to my 
leaving dangland respecting, the state of the army 
at home, I .feay that to ask {gt refhforcéments 
would be totally u&eless ; but 5,o00°men in addftion 
to what we have got would not only secure this 
place, but enable General Stuart to attack the 
enemy with advantage, and without danger of 
failure. There are now hot more than 10,000« 
Spaniards andebout 5,000 English and Portuguese 
in the Isla and in Cadiz, making on the whole a 

orce of*about 15,000 mén; andeto defend the 
island dnd the town as they ought to be defended 
requiges a force of, about 23,000. General Stuart 
is very anxious that the chief engineer, Captain 

udmann, who has a perfect knowledge of all the 
works of the town and of the island, should not be 
superseded 

I very much fear that the Duke of Albuquerque 
has ost all his popularity in Cadiz by the absurdity 
of his conduct in publishing Mis letter to the. 
Regency. He is now at the Isla, where he has 
estaklished his head-quarters. 

a» ecannot say that my gpinion of the Gavernment 

Is chatgetw, They have disappointed .all thei 
warmest friehds, and nothing good is, I feat to he. 
expectedefrom their manner. It is the opinion of 

everybody that they oyght to establish them- 

selves at Cadiz, and they cannot, I think, ayoid 

doing so, as the Duke of Albuquerqueyifas remdved 

his head-quarters to the Isla. 


- Add. MSS. 372918. 266. 


324 THE WELLESLEY PAPERS  [r800- 


ENCLOSURE] 


ae Joun Cartes Purvif"to THE 
ON, (lENRY WELLESLEY 


Atlas, Cadiz Harbour: March 20, 1810 


I beg leave to call your Excellency’s attention to 
that part of the enemy’s movements which relates 
sto the ships in this harbeur, many of which are now 
within reach of the works of Santa, Catalina, and 
there can be no ‘doubt of his intentioh to force 
them to sea, or to obligegthem to anchor s@.clos® { 
each other as to expose them to a calamity*similar 
to that which they have lately experienced, or, 
what is still more to be dreaded, a visitati&n of 
fire-vessels, the effect of which may be easily‘ 
conceived, not only on the ships, but on the city 
itself. The enemy has hitherto be@sseept in check 
in his designs on the Isthmus of Trocadero, but he 
will persevere in the hopes of succeeding at last by 
Gestroying Fort Matagorda, and getting possession 
of the point opposite to Puntales. This would 
give him many advantdges, and, amongst othses, 
assist his’ wiews of driving the ships from their 
present sjtuation. It is needless for peste Hon? 
ott tosyour Excellency how very nectessary it is 
flat the Spanish ships should be removed to some 
place of security as soon as possible. I have no 
hesitation in asserting’ that they are not now in 
that state Of.security which by the existing treaty 
between the two cpuntries they ought to be. I 
have the highest Sp¥nion of the strength of Cadiz, 
aist there can be no-doubt_but the patriptic zeal 
of the inhabitants, with the “asgistance® of the 


1812t: PURVIS’ SUGGESVIONS 325 


military, will erable them to pul’ the enemy to 
defiatte >but’ if the case should atafortunately be 
otherwise (which, God forbid) it, would then be 
necessary to withéraw such of tne-Spanish skips 
as might remain in the harbour, and unless pre- 
parations are made for that purpose I will venture 
to say they will be reported not in a fit state to be 
removed. 

The enemy kas many strong inducements to 
Persist in his endeavours to gain Possession of this 
desirable: port and city, and amcngst them the 
getting ‘hold of the ships and liberating the 
prisoners. If, therefore, these ships and prisoners 
were sent away, there would be less cause for his 
perseverance, and the place relieved from a very 
great expense 0 of f provisions. And whilst I am on 
the subject’ uf «me prisoners, I take the liberty of 
requesting that means may be adopted for sending 
away the French seamen as soon as it can be 
done? 

_} Add. MSS. 372091 f. 270. 


END OF VOLUME I 


ACNOVANUU AMIN RUA 
00026424 


Digitized with financial assistance from 


HT Parekh 


FOUNDATION 


An Initiative by 


WITH YOU, RIGHT THROUGH 


on 15 October, 2018 


