# CANDIDATE -- The Earl of Mornington to the Right Honourable Henry Dundas, Fort William, 5 Mar 1800 ('Although most of
# the points touched in your several despatches have already been anticipated ... approbation of the treaty of
# Hyderabad'; the system of British security in India, the Nizam, the treaties of Hyderabad and Seringapatam, the
# partition, the courts, revenue and army). Printed: Martin, Despatches ... of the Marquess Wellesley, Vol. 2 (1836),
# No. LXIX, pp. 225-252. Source: archive.org india.history.resource.35315, 35315_djvu.txt raw lines 12485-13703 (OCR
# uncorrected, running heads kept). Grade C (printed clear text, rule 4) for every token. Candidate for: D623/27
# (5 Mar 1800, 'Letter and memorandum, partly in cipher, concerning the treaty of Hyderabad and policies for the
# preservation and consolidation of the British power in India') -- the same date, sender, recipient and subject;
# whether the cipher passages and the memorandum are in this printed text cannot be settled from print. Not a reading
# of any D623 item. GAPS4-mornington-1798, 2 Oct 2026.

No. LXIX.
The Earl of Mornington to the Right Honourable Henry Dundas.
My pear Sir, Fort William, March 5th, 1800.

Although most of the points touched in your several ‘des-
patches have already been anticipated, either by my letters to
you, by the communications which I trust you have received
through Mr. Wellesley, or by my despatches to the Secret
‘Committee and the Court of Directors, I propose in this letter
to reply regularly to such of your communications as have not
already been directly answered by me.

Hyprerasap.—I received with the greatest satisfaction your
approbation of the treaty of Hyderabad.* Subsequent events
have abundantly confirmed the justice of the expectations,
which you formed upon the first view of that treaty. It was
indeed the source of all. our recent successes in India; and
even if it has in any degree aggravated the characteristic
jealousy of the Mahrattas, it has furnished ample compensa-
tion in establishing an impregnable barrier against their power.
The system on which the treaty of Hyderabad was founded,
would certainly be most effectually completed by the conclu-
sion of a similar engagement at Poonah, and J am resolved
never to lose sight of that most desirable object.

The various instances in which the jealousy of the Mahratta
State has lately been disclosed, are rather to be attributed to
the peculiar character of that nation, and to the singular dis-
position of the present Peishwa, than to any formed aversion
to a nearer connection with the British power.

The influence of Scindia has also contributed “to frustrate
my proposed measures, because their necessary effect must
have been to restore the Peishwa to a certain degree of credit |

* See Vol. I. Appendix.
VOL. Il. Q

226 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March,

and power; and to reduce Scindia in the same: proportion.

I have no reason to believe that Scindia would be averse to a
separate connection with us, but not perceiving any possible
advantage which could arise from such a connection under all
the circumstances of the present moment, I have taken no
steps to cultivate it, while I have avoided any manifestation
of an unfriendly disposition.

The distractions of the Mahratta empire must continue to
increase, until they shall be checked by foreign interference.
No power in India excepting the British now possesses suf-
ficient strength to interpose with effect in these dissentions ;
and I shall not be surprised if ultimately the subsidiary force,
which I am so anxious to establish at Poonah, should be re-
quired with equal anxiety by the Mahratta State, as the only

‘means of restoring order, and of saving the whole of that
country from plunder and desolation.

Mr. Colebrooke has now resided several months at Nag-
poor, and I have every reason to believe, that the Rajah of
Berar will prove well inclined to support whatever plan the
British Government may ultimately adopt with regard to the
affairs of the Mahratta empire.

With respect to the views of Zemaun Shah, the papers
found in the palace at Seringapatam have completely justified
your opinion of Tippoo’s disposition to obtain the assistance of
that Prince; and of-Zemaun Shah’s inclination to afford it.

For some time to come, I trust that Zemaun Shah will be
too much occupied at home, to admit of turning his arms
against Hindostan ; and I am inclined to think that the en-
couragement of divisions in his own government, and of hos-
tility between the contiguous State of Persia and his dominions,
is the system of defence against Zemaun Shah on which it is
most safe to rely under the present circumstances of affairs
in India.

The profligacy of Scindia’s character, the distracted state
-of his councils and armies, ‘and the distress or rather ruin
of his finances preclude the hope of effecting a secure or
useful alliante with him.

The establishment of a subsidiary force at Poonah, would
compel Scindia to return to his own dominions; and in that
‘event, it might not be difficult to convince him that his best
security would consist in imitating the example of the Nizam

1800. THE RIGHT IION. HENRY DUNDAS. 2907

and of the Peishwa; and in placing himself under the imme-
diate protection of the British power.

With respect to the general system of policy to be. adopted
by us in India in consequence of the conquest of Mysore, I
shallre view all the important considerations connected with
that extensive question in a separate despatch, addressed by
some future opportunity, either to you or to the Secret
Committee.

I conclude, that the power of the French in Egypt is either
already extirpated, or that you will continue the war until
that indispensable object shall be completely effected. Not-
withstanding the present proud and commanding predomi-
nance of the British power in India, we cannot expect an
uninterrupted continuance of tranquillity while France shall
be permitted to maintain a powerful establishment in Egypt.

Since I wrote the preceding paragraph, I have received
despatches from Lord Elgin, dated the 22nd December,
1799, by which it appears that Kleber remains in Egypt
with 15,000 men, and that Buonaparte is at the head
of a new Government in France. Lord Elgin proposes a
powerful diversion from India, through the Red Sea, for the
purpose of accelerating the evacuation of Egypt by the French,
but after a full discussion of this subject with General Stuart,
I am satisfied that it would be an useless waste of treasure
and blood to attempt such an expedition on a large scale,
unless the whole plan of co-operation from the Mediteranean
had been previously concerted.* Desultory operations against
any places retained by the French on the shores of the Red
Sea may be advantageous, they would neither be perilous,
nor expensive.

You are already apprized ‘of my entire coincidence in your
opinion, respecting the importance of Goa; and I trust that
you will be enabled to give full effect to the measures which
I have adopted for the purpose of rendering that possession
an additional source of strength to the British Empire in
India. I also consider the possession of Diu to be a most —
desirable object, particularly with a view to the coercion of
the Piratical States on the north western coast of the peni-
sula of India. 4

* This was the suggestion of the Governor-General to Mr. Dundas on
the 16th of May, 1799. See Vol. I. p. 587.—[Ep.]

228 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March,

Frxances.—Notwithstanding the large import of bullion
during the present season, the expences of the war, and the
considerable amount of the 12 per .cent securities, coming in
course of payment within the current and succeeding year of
-account, have compelled me to continue the system of adding
to the debt in India, in order to secure a considerable com-
mercial investment for the ensuing season. I have however,
the satisfaction to assure you, that every symptom has con-
‘curred to confirm my opinion, that the debt in India is likely
to become more manageable in every succeeding year. The
loans which I have. opened at this Presidency during the
current year, have been made at a rate of interest much more
favourable than any which has been raised since the year
1796, as will appear by the terms of the loans of this year.
Although the second loan on the same terms is actually
open, the state of the public securities is now—

5th March, 1800.

Buying. Selling.
6 per cent. ; ; 1300 14002...
8 per cent. : _ 500 680 Discount,
10 per cent. : : 1080 980 ‘
I2@percent. .  . 180 200 } Premium.

Having been at the corresponding period in the preceding
year—
5th March, 1799.

Buying. Selling.
6 per cent. Ps : 2480 25 80
8 per cent. . . 1480 1580 Di
10 per cent. ; : — _— zESOune
12 per cent. . . 020 060

The distress for specie has gradually vanished, and private
credit has proportionably been improved; and I have been
enabled to send home with valuable cargoes every regular
ship belonging to the Company in India, while’on the other
hand, I have employed the whole tonnage which the Port of
Calcitfza could furnish since the month of December, to carry
to the Port of: London, nearly the whole of the goods of
individuals, which had been tendered for exportation previous
te“that month, over and above the 3,000 tons which the
soompany is bound by law to furnish.
The finances of the Government of Madras have improved
in a still greater proportion than those of Bengal. At that

1800, THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 229

Presidency they have opened a loan, under which they have
been enabled to raise a large supply.’ The great augmenta-
tion of the resources of Fort St. George, under the subsidiary
treaties of Hyderabad and Seringapatam, and the partition
treaty of Mysore, together with the improvements ‘in the
revenues of Tanjore and of the country of the Polygars will
render the finances of that Presidency an object of the high-
est consideration. It may also be expected that industry,
population and manufacture, and all the sources of public
and private credit will take a new spring in our possessions
on the Peninsula of India, in consequence of our increased
security in that quarter. !

To these causes of progressive prosperity, it is reason-

‘able to add the benefits which cannot fail to accrue from the
extension, to that part of our empire of the system of judica-
ture and revenue, under which these provinces have attained
so eminent a degree of opulence and internal tranquillity.

I trust that the 8 per cent loan now opened in Bengal, will
be rapidly filled, and will enable me to provide for all the
services stated in my several estimates; I expect hereafter
to be able to borrow money at 8 per cent under the former
system of repayment of the public securities according to
priority of date.

Notwithstanding these favourable expectations,”"I am of
opinion, that the surplus revenue of India is not likely to
afford any considerable or certain resource. The increasing
magnitude of our empire in India, and the continual expan-
sion of every branch of our numerous and complicated interests
must preclude any considerable reduction of our permanent
charges civil, military, or commercial. More cannot be hoped
from the utmost exertion of vigilance, integrity and ability in
any persons to whom the government of this empire may
hereafter be entrusted than to check, by a seasonable and
diligent system of revision, that tendency to excess and abuse
which is the inherent vice of all great establishments. On the
other hand, it is my decided opinion,.that the growing re-
sources of India will keep pace with the demands upon
them.

With respect to the resource which you expect to. derive
in India from bills upon the East India Company under the
plan of remittance, the prosperous state of public credit in

230 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March,

England and in India will co-operate to render that resource of
little avail. ‘The state of the public funds in England will
diminish the desire of remitting private fortunes to England
from India in proportion to the increase .of the public pros-
perity at home, and the high degree of security which our
Indian Empire has acquired by the success of the late war

*# against Tippoo Sultaun, has inspired so general a confidence
in the stability of the British power in India, that individuals
will think their capital equally safe in India, where it will
certainly be more productive than in England,

These circumstances, added to the vast increase of the ex-
port of goods from India to England will probably detain
much capital in this country, and retard the operation of any
plan of remittance which could be devised.

Private merchants, for commercial purposes, will always
offer more advantageous terms than the Company ; and in
time of public prosperity the bills of individuals of undoubted
capital will be received by many in preference to bills drawn
on.the Company on terms less favourable.

The same causes will naturally tend to maintain, if not to
increase the present high rate of exchange upon bills on
England ; and while the natural and current rate of exchange
shall be so much higher (as it is at present) than that al-
lowed by’ the plan of remittance through the Company, it is’
not to be expected, that individuals will resort to that plan to
such an extent as shall furnish any important financial re-
source. 7

Commerce.—That the export of British manufactures to
India, under proper regulations, might be extended to the
amount of a considerable resource, I entertain no doubt, but
I must observe, that before such an effect can be expected
an entire reform must take place in the conduct of the East
India Company’s exports to India.

The leading points which require minute and diligent care
in the management of this branch of the Company’s affairs
appear to me to be, first, that the goods should be of the
first quality ; secondly, that they should be invoiced at a rea-
sonable and just price; and thirdly, that they should be as-
sorted ta a manner suitable to this market, and couformably
to the;igdents sent from hence.

Under the present system the quality of the goods is fre-

Srp
Pe

1800. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 231

quently defective; for the two last years the invoice price
has been considerably increased without any correspondent
improvement in the quality of the goods, and the assortments
have been injudicious and contrary to the indents sent from
hence by those officers who are best acquainted with the
nature of the market.

As connected with this subject, in one point of view, I de-@
sire to call your particular attention to the defective and unser-
viceable state of the arms annually exported to India for the
use of our troops. This is a disgraceful evil, and of a most
pernicious tendency. I am apprehensive that the whole sys-
tem of the Company’s exports to India is rendered subser-
vient to private interests at the expense of the public.

Mr. Pitt’s Bill for the reduction of the duties upon im-
ports from India has grievously disappointed the expectation
of the commercial part of the community. The duty im-
posed by that bill upon the Sugars, particularly on the
coarser sort, is much Too uicH; and the object of inviting
the trade of India to the Port of London, will not, I fear, be
effected by the general scale of duties adopted in that bill.

InTERNAL ADMINISTRATION OF Bunoeau.—The increasing
arrears of the land revenue of Bengal occupied my attention
immediately. after my arrival in India.

After full consideration I passed a law for the purpose. of
remedying the increasing evil* of accumulating balances.
The beneficial effects of it have already been felt to so great
an extent as to warrant a confident expectation that the
stipulated income will hereafter be paid with great regularity.

My judgment and experience coincide entirely with your

‘opinion, that the system adopted by Lord Cornwallis has
proved and must continue to prove a fruitful source of happi-
ness, wealth, industry, and population to this flourishing
country. That system, however, has still to encounter some
avowed and many secret enemies; nor have its benefits been
yet fully realized, it has not been carried into execution with
cordiality, zeal, and energy proportioned to its merits; it has
received no aid of collateral institutions calculated to furnish
a supply of men properly qualified to fill the several stations
of judicature and revenue; nor has a due and impartial se-

mr Tt

* Regulation No. VII., 1799.

232 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, To March,

lection been uniformly made of the persons best qualified in
the actual state of the service to fill such stations as have
progressively become vacant; nor has the administration
of justice throughout the provinces been superintended with
a sufficient degree of vigilance and care.
I have nearly matured a plan with a view to these salutary
objects. The principal measures on which it will be founded
will be, first, the institation of a Court of Sudder Dewannee
and Nizamut Adawlut distinct from the council; but of which
the Chief Ju'stice shall be capable of sitting in council, if ap-
pointed from: home to a seat in council. The province of
this new Court shall be, not only.to receive and judge ap-
peals; but also to superintend the administration of justice
and the general state of police in all the inferior courts,
branches and departments of the judicial institutions.

It is my intention to constitute this court of those persons
who bore a principal share in framing the system so happily
adopted by Lord Cornwallis. Their talents, integrity, and
experience, as well as the peculiar propriety and dig-
nity of their manners render them the fittest to hold this dis-
tinguished station, to which it is my intention to annex the
highest rank which the law enables me to grant.

The Chief Justice of this new court may hereafter become
a member of the Council, in which event he will still con-
tinue to preside in the court. In the meanwhile I wish to be
empowered by law to give a rank to the Chief Justice of the
Sudder Dewannee and Nizamut Adawlut, which shall place
him as nearly as possible on a level with the Chief Justice of
the Supreme Court of Judicature.

2nd. The institution of a College or University at Calcutta
in which‘ the Writers shall be subject to the rules of colle-
giate discipline for the first two or three years subsequent to
their arrival; and shall study the languages, history, laws,
manners, and customs of India, the laws enacted by the
Governor-General in Council, and such rudiments of the laws
of England as are necessary to enable the judges through-
out these possessions to administer the laws of India in the
spirit of the British constitution,

8rdi¥I propose to pass regulations subjecting all persons
appointed to offices of the judicature or revenue to public
examination in the several Branehes of knowledge requisite

1800. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 933

' in their respective stations, before they shall be entitled to
receive the emoluments of the office to which mney may have
been appointed.

4th. In the several stations of revenue and judicature
throughout the provinces many public officers are to be
found avowedly incompetent to the due discharge of their
duties. Some from ignorance, natural incapacity or fixed h
bits of indolence and dissipation, others from age and. infir-
mity. Such persons have been suffered to retain their sta-
tions under the orders of the Court of Directors, prohibiting
the grant of pensions of retreat to the civil service. This
prohibition is contrary to-true principles of economy. The
inevitable operation of it has been to fix incapable persons in
stations requiring efficiency; and the loss sustained by their
negligencies or errors infinitely overbalances the expense of
providing for them at the public charge. The application of
this prohibition to persons who have grown old or infirm in
the public service is illiberal and cruel, as well as impolitic,
On the other hand it may, perhaps, be questioned whether
those whose ignorance, natural inability, or other defects dis-
qualify them for the public service, can be entitled to any
compensation from the state which has already supported
them at a considerable expense, under the presumption of
their sufficiency to discharge the duties for which they re-
ceive emolument.

But viewing the actual state of the civil service at this Pre-
sidency, I know that many persons do not, and never will,
render justice to the public in the stations which they now
hold, although it would appear an act of great harshness and
rigour to remove these persons, without making some provi-
sion for them. Their number is not very considerable, it
bears no proportion to the mischief occasioned by their evil
administration, and by the dangerous example which their
conduct affords to the younger branches of the service. My
intention, therefore, is (without waiting for orders from
home) to remove all persons of any of the descriptions to
which I have adverted from efficient office; and to pro-
vide for them by adequate pensions for life, payable to
their agents in India on the condition of their returning to
England. The present allowance to the Company’s ser-
vants out of employment being payable only to such as re-
side in India would not answer the purpose proposed.

234: THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March,

Among the servants now out of employment, but residing in
Bengal, few, if any, are qualified for efficient office; the
amount of the pensions to be paid under the new plan must
bear a just proportion to the period of service as well as to
the offices actually enjoyed at the period of removal, i¢ will
be for the Government at home to consider whether any per

anent plan of pension for civil servants retiring from the
service in India shall hereafter be adopted. The measure
which I propose to carry into effect, is more immediately ap-
plicable to the actual state of the civil service in India; but
the principles on which it is grounded may furnish the foun-
dation of a permanent system, which shall for ever secure
this Government against the evils of inefficiency, ignorance,
and negligence in the subordinate branches of the executive
administration.

Taxation.—The accounts which you will have received this
year of the revenue on salt will be highly satisfactory to you,
and you will have observed with peculiar pleasure that the
revenue arising from the sale of Opium has been completely
restored by the improved system of agency, by the extreme
care applied to the manufacture of the drug, by the due pro-
portion now preserved between the quantity manufactured
and the current demand, and by the measure which I have
uniformly.carried into effect of publicly destroying all such
opium as had been declared to be adulterated. The produce
of the two last sales of opium (which included the whole an-
nual quantity for the last season) has exceeded that of the

- most favourable sales of that drug ever experienced in Ben-
gal, the nett profit to the Company on the two sales in De-
cember, 1799, and February, 1800, having amounted to more
than 23 lacs of rupees (£287,500 sterling).* I have little
doubt that this branch of revenue will continue to flourish
under the same judicious system, vigilantly administered.
‘The public service is greatly indebted to Mr. Fleming, se-
cond Member of the Medical Board, for his careful inspec-

. tion of. the opium, as well as for his various suggestions by
which the manufacture has been placed under improved re-
gulations. ge

You will gbseyxe with great satisfaction the considerable
increase whickshas taken place in the Government customs

* Estimating the rupee at 2s. 6d., its then current value.—[Ep. |

1800. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 235

at Calcutta since my arrival in India. This is to be attribu-
ted entirely to increased care and vigilance in the business of
the custom house. The customs were placed for some time
under the management of Mr. Haldane, a Member of the
Board of Trade, who was principally aided by a young gen-
tleman of the name of Twining, in restoring order to the bu-
siness of the Custom-house. Mr. Twining has distinguishe® |
himself very much in this transaction; he is ‘at present too
young in the service to be placed in the enjoyment of a sa-
lary adequate to his merits, but I shall take the first practi-
cable opportunity of promoting him; in the meanwhile I have
appointed Mr. Dashwood to the collection of the customs.
I can rely on his diligence and integrity, and Mr. Twining
will act under him.

It is necessary to observe that the right of the Governor-
General in Council to raise the duties on goods in the Port of
Calcutta is questioned by the lawyers here, in the present in-
definite state of our powers of legislation.

An improvement of the tax upon Spirituous Liquors and
intoxicating Drugs is now under my consideration, and I
have little doubt that this branch of the revenue may be
much increased. But here again I feel myself embarrassed
by the anomalous constitution of this government. Under
‘the construction given to the laws for the government of the
British possessions, it is a received doctrine, that the Gover-
nor-General in Council cannot legislate for the town of Cal-
cutta. Therefore the capital City of this empire must be
exempt from the operation of any law imposing additional
duties on the articles above mentioned, unless I can contrive
to pass such a law under the pretext of an improvement of
the duties appropriated to the support of the police. I am
disposed to hope that sources of just and moderate taxation
may be discovered on other articles of general consumption ;
but this measure must be ‘adopted gradually and with great
caution. JF must bere also observe, that although Calcutta
must necessarily be the place of the greatest consumption,
as well as that where any new. tax would be less sensibly
felt than in the country, the supposed restrictions of the law,
and the strange conflict of authorities between the Supreme
Court of Judicature and the Government, preclude the pos-
sibility of my applying any system of taxation on articles of

236. THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March,

general consumption to the town of Calcutta. I trust you~
will, without delay, relieve this government from a predica-
ment so embarassing.

- Poticr.—The Police of Calcutta is now in a deplorable con-
dition, and if speedy measures be not adopted the town will soon
relapse into its ancient state of filth and unhealthiness, and
gill again become fatal to European constitutions. It is my
intention immediately to proceed to improve the drains and
roads, to widen the streets and avenues, and clear away the
jungles, and remove the tanks and other nuisances situated
in the neighbourhood of the town. These improvements
will necessarily occasion expense; but it is an expense which
the Company must incur, or forfeit every title to the charac-
ter of a wise and munificent sovereign. In aid of this ex-
pense it would be just to levy an assessment on the inha-
bitants of Calcutta; but I have already stated that measure
to be impracticable in the limited state of my powers. Va-
rious other regulations of police are requisite for the preser;
vation. of the peace and order of the town; even these I
shall find it difficult to enforce until my right to legislate for
Calcutta shall be rendered indisputable by act of parlia-
ment. :

Ovve.—Of the two general heads, under which you have
stated the objects of your anxiety, with regard to the situa-
tion of Oude, I trust that the second is now nearly accom-
plished; namely, the substitution of an efficient military force
under the Company’s authority, in place of the Nabob Vizier’s
dangerous and undisciplined army. This reform has not been
effected without great reluctance on the part of the Vizier,
whose character has been displayed on this occasion in the
genuine colours of Asiatic treachery and falsehood. I have
nothing to hope from any other quality in his Excellency’s
mind, excepting his acknowledged pusillanimity, which I flat-
ter myself will induce him to submit to the introduction of
such a portion of the British authority into the management of
his country, as is indispensably necessary to the just and pure
adwinistration of the Government; to the accurate collection
andi eéonomical expenditure of his revenues; and to the re-
lief of. his people from the extortion, cruelty and oppression,
under which they now suffer. I shall hereafter submit to
you a detailed view of my proceedings in Oude; at present

1800. ° THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 237

it may be sufficient to say, that I consider the reform of the
Vizier’s military establishment to be far advanced, and that
in consequence of the success of that preliminary step, I en-
tertain a sanguine hope of being able to carry the same spirit
of reform with vigour and effect into every other branch of
his affairs. :
GovERNMENT oF Fort Sz. Grorcr.—I am happy to bea
able to express my entire concurrence, in your opinion, with
regard to the progressive improvement. of the administration
of affairs at Fort St. George; and I have no doubt that the .
same system will continue to be pursued by Lord Clive and
by the persons who now constitute his advisers at that Presi-
dency. My long residence at Fort St. George, and the cor-
diality, temper, and honour of Lord Clive have completely
identified the two Governments, and I find no more difficulty
in governing our extensive possessions on the coast, with all
our recent acquisitions of territory and influence, than in re-
gulating any of the collectorships in Bengal. You will ob-
serve, by the public proceedings, that I have lately transmitted
to Fort St. George detailed orders for introducing into the
possessions under the immediate Government of that Presi-
dency, the same system of internal administration, under
which these provinces have so happily flourished. I enter-
tain no doubt, that, under the present Government at Fort
St. George, my orders will be carried into effect with the ut-
most degree of honesty, alacrity, and zeal. The execution,
however, of those orders must necessarily be imperfect un-
less accompanied by the application to the civil service at
Fort St. George, not only of all those subsidiary improve-
ments still requisite in Bengal, but of other remedies more
peculiarly demanded by the state of the service at Fort St.
George. My present inclination is to render the Court of
Sudder Dewannee and Nizamut Adawlut in Bengal the Su-
preme Court of Appeal from all the Company’s possessions, |
and to vest in it the general superintendence of the adminis-
tration of justice and the regulation of police throughout the
British empire in India. This arrangement appears to be
well calculated to secure uniformity, consistency, and purity
in the conduct of all the subordinate courts of justice, and
in every institution of police. I do not apprehend that if
will be necessary or expedient to establish any intermediate

238 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March,

Court of Appeal at Fort St. George between the Sudder
Dewannee Adawlut in Bengal, and the ordinary Courts of
Circuit and Appeal, to be instituted on the coast of Coro-
mandel. I am also inclined to think that the writers destined
for Fort St. George may advantageously pass the two first
years of their residence in India at the University of Calcutta;
»where proper professors may be established for their instruc-
tion in the languages peculiar to the territories subject to the
immediate Government of Fort St. George.

The adoption of a plan for pensioning public officers inca-
pable of service is required at least as much at Fort St.
George as in Bengal. But the peculiar evil now inherent.in
the constitution of the service at Fort St. George is not only
unknown in Bengal, but directly contrary to the fundamental
principle on which Lord Cornwallis rested all his plans for
amending and purifying the administration of affairs in these
provinces. He prohibited all indirect and secret emoluments,
and all mixture in pursuits of commerce, or of other affairs
incompatible with a due attention to the public service; and
he established the allowances of the public officers on so
liberal a scale as might enable them not merely to subsist
during the period of their public labours, but to realize, with
due economy, a competent provision after a moderate period
of service.

This system is not founded on any principle exclusively
applicable to the characters, habits, or interests of the public
servants in Bengal. It is founded in a just and correct know-
ledge of mankind, for no proposition can be more self-
evident, or of ‘more universal application, than that the best
security against the temptation of illicit profit, is to annex
liberal emolument to honest labour. It is, therefore,- difficult
to conceive on what ground an expectation can be formed,
that the public service at Fort St. George should be as pure
and correct as that in Bengal; while the civil servants of
Fort St. George shall be permitted to mix in pursuits foreign
to their public duties; and while the general scale of the
allowances at Fort St. George shall remain so low as to pre-
clude those prospects of honest profit deemed necessary in
Bengal for securing the integrity of the public servants. I
any aware that this remark does not apply with so much force
"tb the commercial as to other branches of the Company's

1800. THE RIGHT HON, HENRY DUNDAS. 239

service at Fort St. George. Some of the commercial allow-
ances have been increased at that Presidency, on the very
principle of rendering them so ample as to preclude the
temptation of irregular profit; \dnd yet the irresistible appli-
cation of the same principle to’ other branches of the service
at the same Presidency has never been admitted in practice,
however it may have been acknowledged in argument. For
it can never be supposed that the Company can deliberately
deem it to be a more incumbent duty of Government to se-
cure the honest discharge of its commercial concerns, than to
preserve its revenues from peculation, and the administration
of its laws from corruption and oppression. It is possible
that the limited and precarious condition of the revenues of
the Presidency of Fort St. George, and its state of insecurity
during the existence of the contiguous hostile power in My-
sore, may have retarded the due consideration of this subject.
But in the present increased, and, I trust, progressive state
of the prosperity and security of that valuable possession, no
such obstacle exists to a reform urgently demanded by every
principle of humanity, policy, and justice.

_ I am convinced that the continuance of the present inade-
quate allowances of the public servants at Fort St. George
would prove an insuperable bar .to the improvenient. of the
revenues, and to the due administration of justice in that part
of our Empire. At present the public servants at Fort St.
George, in most of the offices, can find no alternative but
poverty or corruption. Is it the part of wisdom or honour
in any Government to reduce its servants to such an alterna-
tive? During my residence at Fort St. George a most re-
spectable member of the Board of Revenue, Mr. Harrington,
resigned his seat at the Board because his salary did not
afford him the hope of providing a competent maintenance
for his family at the expiration of his service; and he en-
tered into a Commercial House of Agency, withdrawing
from the Company’s service talents, integrity, and zeal,
which had proved highly useful; and might have been ex-
erted with increased benefit to their affairs. I know that
Mr. Cockburne, (whose abilities, knowledge, and integrity,
are not surpassed by any person in India,) entertains simi-
lar intentions of retiring from the Company's service. And

3

240 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March,

it must be evident to your comprehensive view and long
experience of public affairs that this evil will be aggra-
vated in proportion to the increased magnitude and impor-
tance of the interests entrusted to the management of the
public servants at Fort. St. George; and that ultimately a
service so defective must be deserted by all who are not dis-
posed to take advantage of its abuses.

The consideration of ‘all these circumstances has induced
me to call Lord Clive’s particular attention to the scale of
allowances at Fort St. George; and it is my intention to ac-
company the institution of the new Courts of Judicature at
that Presidency by a general revision of the salaries of their
civil service ; the result of which will, I trust, enable me to
place all the allowances on a proper level.

‘The delay attendant upon the expectation of orders from
home and the urgent pressure of the evil will, I trust, suff-
ciently justify my determination to apply, with all practicable
despatch, such a remedy as shall appear to my judgmext to
promise the most speedy, beneficial, and permanent effect.

I entertain little doubt that the revenues, under the#ma-
nagement of the Government of Fort St. George, will be con-
siderably improved in all their branches ; and that the addi-
tional expense of providing for the important objects stated
in the preceding paragraphs will be far overbalanced by the
consequent amelioration of all our resources in that quarter.

Carnatic.—The double Government of the Carnatic is a
difficulty which continues to present the most serious, and
alarming obstacles to every attempt at reform. The expec-
tation of favourable opportunities of negociation witly the
Nabob of Arcot, and of the effects of conciliation and aten-
tion towards him will, I am convinced, be ever disappointed
by the event. You recollect with what sanguine hopes I
looked forward to the result of measures adopted in a spirit
of mildness and persuasion, but I have found them entirely
vain and fruitless; nor can I cherish the slightest ray of hope
that sugh,a ‘course can ever prove successful, during the life
of thespresent Nabob. His Highness is surrounded by Eu-
ropeanadvisers of tile most dangerous and profligate charac-
ter, whose intét#sts are deeply involved in the perpetuation
of the abuses .of his Government, and who (amongst other

1800. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 241

means of perverting his Councils) labour to inspire him with
the notion of a distinction of interests and powers between
the Royal Government and that constituted by Act of Parlia-
ment for the administration of the British Empire in India.
In all his conversations and correspondence, he studiously
distinguishes his Majesty's Government from that of the
Court of Directors; uniformly treating the latter with disre-
spect, and even with ridicule and contempt. In my last con-
versation with his Highness he plainly declared to me that he
considered his Majesty to be his father, friend, ally, and pro-
tector, but that the Court of Directors desired to “ obtain his
country any how.”

The principles of this distinction are encouraged in ‘his
Highness’s mind by the letters and embassies which have
occasionally reached him from his Majesty through channels
not only unconnected but avowedly at variance with the Bri-
tish Government in India. All such letters and embassies
have the most pernicious tendency to withdraw the confidence
and respect of the natives from the governments in India,
and to fix their attention on his Majesty’s naval or military
officers, or such persons (of whatever character) as may acci-
dentally be the bearers of his letters. The frequent letters
which his Highness the Nabob receives from his Royal High-
ness the Prince of Wales greatly aggravate the same evil;
and it is with the utmost concern that I feel myself bound by
my public duty to request that you will take an opportunity
of representing to his Royal Highness that his correspond-
ence with the Nabob of the Carnatic has produced an effect
entirely contrary to his Royal Highness’s wishes, and has
been highly injurious to the public service in India.

Few, if any, of the Company’s servants at Madras are now
directly engaged in the intrigues of his Highness’s Durbar.
The principal and most mischievous agents and counsellors
of his Highness are to be found among persons who have
been the bearers of letters to his Highness from England,
and among the attorneys and low practitioners of the law,
who notoriously conduct his Highness’s correspondence with
the Government. “Nor can I entertain any expectation that
the newly established Judicature at Madras, under its present
constitution, will in any degree assist the Government in re-
pressing the intrigues and corruption of the Durbar. My

VOL. I. R

242 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March,

experience during my residence at Fort St. George deads me
to believe that the powers of the Court of the Recortler will
prove entirely inadequate to the detection and punishment of
the usurious and corrupt practices which that Court was in-
tended to.repress, while the establishment of such a Court
will tend to confirm the audacity of the tribe of pettyfoggers
which now infests the Carnatic, and governs the Nabob’s
Durbar. I confess that I cannot concur with you in ascribing
the purity of the service in Bengal to the influence of the
Supreme Court of Judicature at Calcutta. The most corrupt
period in the history.of Bengal, or perhaps in that of any of
our foreign establishments, is to be dated from the institu-
tion of the Supreme Court to the arrival of Lord Cornwallis,
a period of time, during a considerable portion of which that
Court exercised its powers to their utmost possible extent.
The purity of Lord Cornwallis’s personal example, ahd the
integrity and wisdgm of his institutions, the increase ‘pf the
regular and avowed public allowances, the separation pf the
legislative, judicial, and executive powers of the Government,
and the consequent subjection of the Government itself to
the controul of its own laws, were the real foundations of the
reform at this Presidency. This constitution was the source,
and its operation has been the security, of that reform; nei-
ther the design nor the execution of the amended system of
administration in Bengal was in any degree aided by: the
co-operation, influence, or example of the Supreme Court.
During the administrations of Lord Cornwallis, and of Lord
Teignmouth, the Supreme Court teemed with abuses ofsevery
description, and would have afforded a much fitter gubject
than an instrument of reform. Respectable and hondéurable
as the person is who now presides in that Court, and eminent
as this public services have been. in the. detection and remedy
of the abuses abetted by his predecessors, I cannot discover
in what manner the influence or authority of the Supreme
Court now operate to preserve the purity of the service of
Gayernment.

pPhe public servants look exclusively to the person in whose
hands the Government resides, and to the practical result of
that constitution which he is bound to administer. Under
that constitution he possesses ample powers of reward and
punishment; and the due exercise of those powers consti-

1800. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 243

tutes the vital principle of the public service, and the sole
spring from which the purity or corruption of the subordi-
nate officers must ever flow. The responsibility of the Go-
vernor-General in Council to the Government at home, and
the conspicuous station in which he is placed, sufficiently
secure the due exercise of his arduous functions.

The Supreme Court possesses no power of rewarding thé
public servants, and with respect to their punishment, it can
never proceed vigorously or efficaciously without the co-ope-
ration of Government; even with that co-operation, the
powers of the Supreme Court must be limited by the difficul-
ties of obtaining legal proof of malversation ; and even where
such proofs can be obtained, the species of punishment which
the Supreme Court can inflict can neither be so speedy nor so
formidable to the public servants as the powers of suspension
and. subsequent prosecution at home vested in the Govern-
ment. Whenever punishment in the form of public prose-
cution may become requisite, I am convinced that it would be
much more effectually inflicted, ifthe prosecution were always
to be instituted in England. With regard to petty cases of
abuse every usefu) purpose would be answered by a tribunal,
independent of the Government, but placed towards it in the
relation of a mere interpreter of the laws of England, modi-
fied by such as may be enacted by the Governor-General in
Council.

The supposed controul of the Supreme Court over the
person of the Governor-General never can be exercised with-
out occasioning a convulsion in the Government; it is, there-
fore, either useless, or dangerous, and every trace of it ought
to be abolished. The extreme cases in which the crimes of
the Governor-General may require the controul of a superior
authority, cannot be provided against in India without the
application of a remedy infinitely more perilous than the sup-
posed evil; the existence of which’ is scarcely within the
verge of possibility. The remedy of such cases should be
left on the same ground as it stands on in Ireland with rela-
tion to the possible personal crimes of the chief Governor
exercising the sovereign executive power. No power in India
should appear to be co-ordinate with the Government, and.
still less to rival or to control it.

244 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March,

I shall hereafter address you more in detail on the present
constitution of the Supreme Court of Judicatuye, (particularly
on such parts of it as have proved practical impediments to
the exercise of the control of this government over its own
native officers, civil and military and native subjects; (but it
would have been uncandid in me to pass without notice a
passage in your correspondence, relating to so important a
subject, in which I have the misfortune not to goncur in your
opinion. Bt

I cannot conclude this subject without adding my cordial
testimony in favour of the moderation, discretion and propriety
with which the present Court (under the direction of Sir John
Anstruther) has uniformly exercised it powergsnot only with-
out a sympton of jealousy, but with every possible attention
to the dignity, vigour and efficacy of the government; but a
power radically dangerous ought not to find. protection in
the temporary forbearance of those hands in which it is
vested. \

The duty of communicating to you. without yeserve, my
sentiments on the subject of the utility of the Supreme Court
of Judicature, has led me to digress from the actual state of
the Carnatic.

I am thoroughly convinced, that no effectual remedy can
ever be applied to the evils which afflict that country, without
obtaining from the Nabob powers at least as extensive as
those vested in the Company by the late treaty of, Tanjore.
At the death of the present Nabob, such a treaty might
easily be obtained from his successor, (if after that event it
should be thought advisable to admit any nominal.sovereign
of the Carnatic, excepting the Company.) A young man re-
sides at Chepauk, who is treated by the Nabob as.his High-
ness’s son. This young man is certainly the son of a dancing
woman, who was received for some time in his Highness’s
house; and the Nabob declares himself to be the father.
Numerous legitimate descendants of Wallajah are in. exist-
ence. The whole question of the succession will therefore be
complgtalyopen to the decision of the Company, upon the
decease a#the present Nabob. The inclination of my opinion
is, that the most advisable settlement would be, to place
Omdut ul Omra’s supposed son on the Musnud, under a

1800. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 245

treaty similar to that which was lately concluded with the
Rajah of Tanjore, it will however, be expedient that you
should immediately consider whether it might not be a more
effectual arrangement to provide liberally for every branch of
the descendants of Wallajah and Omdut ul Omra, and to
vest even the nominal sovereignty of the Carnatic in the
Company.

On this subject I request your immediate instructions ;
which you will frame with reference to the following most im-
portant and interesting considerations.

During the whole course of the late war with Tippoo Sul-
taun, the conduct of all the Nabob’s officers without exception,
amounted nearly to positive hostility in every part of his
territories through which the British army, or that of the
Nizam marched, or even in which supplies were ordered to
be procured or collected for their use. When complaints
were stated to his Highness he promised redress, but.never
afforded it in any instance.

I was compelled to seize the persons of some of his princi-
pal officers, and to bring them down to Fort St. George,
from districts in which our force was not sufficiently consider-
able to furnish an effectual check to their treasonable prac-
tices. In all districts so circumstanced his Highness’s officers
did not scruple to proceed to open violence for the purpose
of obstructing our supplies.

During this arduous crisis, his Highness frequently endea-
voured to anticipate my complaints by alleging pretended
grievances to justify the conduct of his officers, but upon
examination his Highness’s complaints uniformly appeared to
be utterly devoid of foundation.

At the most critical period of our military preparations,
when every European and native at Madras, emulated each
other in aiding the public service by loan and contribu-
tion, his Highness could not be induced to advance, even on
account of his acknowledged debts, any assistance to the
public treasury. He indeed, with much reluctance, under
the apprehension of a cessation of all friendly intercourse
between him and me, engaged to advance a sum on account
of his new cavalry debt; but after the most solemn protesta-
tions of punctuality, he broke his faith with every circum-
stance of infamy and dishonour, at a moment when this viola-

246 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March,

tion of his engagements might have proved fatal to the
progress of the army; if I had suffered myself to be so far
the dupe of his repeated assurances, as to have relied in any
degree on their performance for any pecuniary supply of the
troops, in the field.

During the whole of this period, I have every reason to be
confident that his Highness possessed the ready means of
satisfying a much more considerable demand, than I had
deemed it expedient to make upon him.

It was perfectly evident during the progress of our success,
that his Highness derived no satisfaction from the triumph
of our arms ; and it is remarkable that he never appeared in
public at the celebration of any of the rejoicings occasioned
by the glorious termination of the war.

Whatever suspicions of his Highness’s personal disaffection
to the British Government might have been warranted by
all these combined circumstances, I was rather disposed. to
attribute them to the weakness of his government, or to, the
corruption and intrigues of his advisers than to any spirit of
positive treachery in his own disposition; but the records of
the late Tippoo Sultaun, which fell into our hands, after the
capture of Seringapatam, have furnished me with the most
authentic and indisputable evidence that a. secret correspon.
dence of a nature the most hostile to the British power, was
opened with Tippoo Sultaun by the late Nabob Wallajah
towards the close of his life, through the agency of Omdut
ul Omra the present Nabob.

Omdut ul Omra appears to have been extremely zealous
and forward in the conduct of this secret intercourse during
the life of his father, and no question can be entertained that
the late Naboh, as a principal, and Omdut ul Omra as an
agent, were guilty of a flagrant violation of the treaty of
1792; as well as of the fundamental principle of their connec-
tion with the Company. Omdut ul Omra was a party to the
treaty of 1792, and on that circumstance founds all his present
rights. Sufficient proof appears that Omdut ul Omra, after
his accession, manifested a disposition to maintain the corres-
pondencegommenced by his father through him; and I enter-
tain no ‘doybt that his objects in that correspondence were of
the samevhostile and treacherous character, as they had been
previous to the death of his father. The proof arising from

1800. _THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS, 24%

written doctnients of his overt acts of hostility since his ac-
cession, is not so full and distinct as that which relates to his
former agency. But this defect may be supplied by oral
testimony, ds all the’ necessary witnesses aré alive and in our
hands. 2

No doubt exists in my mind, that the British Government
would now be completely justified, in depriving the Nabob of
all power over his country, and’ reducing him to the state of
a mere pensioner.

The only questions which remain for decision are the time
of carrying this measure into execution, and the amount of
the provision to be made for the Nabob, for his des¢endants,
and for those of Wallajah. As soon as you shall have re-
ceived this letter, I request you to despatch an express to me
with your opinion, although mine is so decided, that I shall
not wait for the communication of yours, if the season should
appear to me to be favourable for the great measure which
is now become indispensable on every principle’ of justice
and policy.

TansorE.—With respéct to Tanjore, the treaty which I
framed previous to'my departure from Fort St. George, and
which has: since been carried into effect by Lord Clive, will,
TI trust, place the administration of the affairs of that country
on an improved foundation. The difficulties which I encoun-
tered in obtaining a correct and consistent account of Tanjore,
are scarcely to be described or imagined.

After'a most tedious enquiry, I brought the several con-
tending parties to a fair discussion (or rather to a bitter con-
test) in my presence; and after an argument which lasted three
or four days, I proceeded to review the whole case ina regular
manner, adverting to every fact and argument on both sides of
the question. At length the contending parties unanimously
concurred in the expediericy and justice of the treaty, in the
form!’ in which it has been concluded.

A question will arise with respect to the unregistered debt
of the late Rajah of Tanjore. I am inclined to believe that
some branches of that debt, as well as that of the unconsoli-
dated debt of the Nabob of the Carnatic, are at least as well
éntitled to consideration as any part of the debt sanctioned
by parliament. The subject merits your attention. I shall
not feel myself at liberty to act upon it without orders from

248 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO March,

home; but I am satisfied that you will find some cases of
great hardship among many rather deserving prosecution
than payment.

Circars.—The Northern Circars, according to the report
of the Board of Revenue at Fort St. George, are now in a
state to receive the same principles of government, with some
local modifications, which have been applied to Bengal. The
new settlement now about to be introduced upon the coast,
will therefore include that vast tract of country. It may be
convenient to observe to you in this place that my determina-
tion to render the new settlement of the land revenue on the
coast perpetual, without previous reference to the Court of
Directors was founded on intelligence from Mr. Cockburne
that the terror of such a reference would render all settle-
ment impracticable, and above all would entirely frustrate the
sale of the Havelly Lands.

Maxasar.—The condition of the coast of Malabar, has
been so entirely changed by the conquest of Mysore, that the
principles stated in your despatches to the Government of
Bombay, and in General Stuart’s letters to you, are no longer
applicable to the actual circumstances of that district. The
conquest of Mysore will, I trust, enable us to settle Malabar
and Canara on a systematic and durable plan of government.
The subject is now under my consideration. One principle
however, I am persuaded will appear as evident and incon-
trovertible to your mind as it does to mine; that whatever
may be our ultimate determination with respect to the power
of the several Rajahs, it must appear to flow from the gene-
rosity, justice and power of the British Government; and not
to be derived from a timid submission to the refractory spirit
of any rebellious tributary.

ComMuNIcATION WITH ENGLAND.-—If the war with France
should be protracted, and Buonaparte continue at the
head of affairs, I am persuaded that some attempt will be
made by France against our Indian empire. A regular
monthly despatch overland from London to India will, in that
event, , sbe of the utmost importance. Indeed, under any cir-
cumstantes, a speedy and certain communication between
England, and India, appears to me to be an object in which,
the intergsts of both countries are deeply involved. My opi-
nion is, that, in addition to the despatch overland, monthly

1800. THE RIGHT HON, LORD CLIVE. 249

packets should be established to sail regularly both from
Kurope and India. They might carry small cargoes and
passengers, which, with the profits of postage on letters,
-would more than defray their expence.

In reviewing your correspondence, I have not thought it
necessary to return any particular replies to your several
letters of recommendation. The receipt of them is noted in
the annexed memorandum. Being in possession of your prin-
ciples with respect to recommendations, I do not think any
further explanation necessary.

I remain, my dear Sir, &c.
MorNINeGTON.
