[Martin, Despatches, Minutes and Correspondence of the Marquess Wellesley, Vol. 2 (1836), No. XV, pp. 35-43; IA india.history.resource.35315, OCR text as served (35315_djvu.txt lines 2667-3054), uncorrected. The Earl of Mornington to the Right Hon. Henry Dundas, Fort St George, 7 June 1799: the date, sender, recipient and subject (settlement of Mysore) of D623/24, catalogued as a 'memorandum in cipher detailing the proposed settlement'. Printed text, grade C for the clear letter; whether D623/24's cipher text is this letter or a separate enclosure is not settled by print. Extracted GAPS2-mornington-1798, 2 Oct 2026.]

No. XV. 


The Earl of Mornington to the Right Hon. Henry Dundas. 
My pear Sir, Fort St. George, 7th June, 1799. 


- Nothing can be more favourable than the state of affairs 
in Mysore; the accounts which I have received from Mr. 
Henry Wellesley and from Colonel Kirkpatrick, induce me 
to believe that I shall effect the settlement of the country 
with more advantage from this place than if I were to pro- 
ceed to Seringapatam, and I shall therefore remain here, 
unless they should be of opinion that my presence upon the 
spot may be useful.. In the meanwhile, the information which 
I have collected has enabled me to determine the basis and 
outline of the new settlement of the extensive empire which 
the glorious success of the war has subjected to our power. 

I shall transmit to you, by a more convenient opportunity, 
an accurate view of the motives which have induced me to 
adopt the settlement of the country now carrying into effect 
in preference to any other; for the present, it may be sufficient 
to observe that, to have divided the whole territory equally 
between the Company and the Nizam, while it would have 


36 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO June, 


afforded strong grounds for jealousy to the Mahrattas, would 
have aggrandized the Nizam’s power beyond the bounds of 
discretion, and would have left in our hands a territory, so 
extensive, as it might have been difficult to manage, especially 
in the present state of the Company’s service at this Presi- 
dency. To have divided the territory into three equal portions, 
allowing the Mahrattas, who had taken no part in the ex- 
pense or hazard of the war, an equal share in the advantages 
of the peace, would neither have been just towards the Nizam, 
politic in the way of example to our other allies, nor prudent 
in respect to the aggrandizement of the Mahratta empire. 
To have given the Mahrattas no larger a territory than is 
now proposed, while the Company and the Nizam divided the 
whole of the remainder to the exclusion of any central power, 
would have been liable nearly to the same objection as that 
stated against a total exclusion of the Mahrattas from all 
participation. The establishment, therefore, of a central and 
separate power in the ancient territories of Mysore appeared 
to be the best expedient for reconciling the interests of all 
parties. It would certainly have been desirable that that 
power should have been placed in the hands of one of 
Tippoo’s sons ; but the hereditary and intimate connection 
established between Tippoo and the French, the probability 
that the French may be enabled to maintain themselves in 
Egypt, the perpetual interest which Tippoo’s family must 
feel to undermine and subvert a’system which had so much 
reduced their patrimony and power, added to their natura] 
hatred of the English name, and to the aspiring ambitiong 
indignant pride, and deadly revenge, congenial to the Maho 
medan character, precluded the possibility of restoring any 
‘branch of the family of the late Sultaun to the throne, with. 
out exposing us to the constant hazard of internal commotion, 
and even of foreign war. Such a settlement would have 
cherished in its bosom a restless and powerful principle of its 
own dissolution ; we could never have expected harmony or 
concord, or a spirit of friendship and alliance, where no true 
reconcilement could grow ; even submission must have been 
reluctant and treacherous;*where bitter memory of fallen 
dignity, wealth, and power, must have united every passion 
and_ vic& with many of the noblest virtues, in a constant 
desire to recover an empire, originally acquired by an extra- 


1799. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. ~ 37, 


‘ordinary combination of falsehood, cruelty, and courage, and 
maintained for a long time with eminent -policy and vigour, 
as well in its internal Government as in its foreign relations. 

You will observe that, throughout this view of the subject I 
have assumed the justice and necessity of the late war against 
Tippoo Sultaun, and consequently the right of conquest 
under which I conceive the absolute disposal of the territory 
to have accrued to the Company and the Nizam. In the 
exercise of this right, if I were to look to moral considerations 
alone, I should certainly, on every principle of justice and 
humanity, as well as of attention to the welfare of the people, 
have been led to restore the heir of the ancient Rajah of 
Mysore to that rank and dignity which were wrested from 
his ancestor, by the usurpation of Hyder Ali. 

The long and cruel imprisonment.which several branches 
of this family have suffered, the persecution and murder.of 
many of their adherents, both by Hyder and Tippoo, and the 
state of degradation and misery in which it has been the 
policy of both those usurpers to retain the surviving descen-. 
dants of their lawful Sovereign, would have entitled the re- 
presentative of the ancient family of Mysore to every degree 
of practicable consideration; but it is also evident, that every 
motive must concur to attach the heir of the Mysore family 
if placed on the throne to our interests, through which alone 
he car hope to maintain himself against the family of Tippoo. 
Something, perhaps, may also be expected from his gratitude, 
although that quality is not often found among States in any 
part of the world, and seldom, if ever, among the native 
States of India. 

For some time I doubted whether this ar rangement, how- 
ever desirable, could be attained in opposition to the Maho- 
medan interest, which I imagined to be firmly established in 
Mysore, but Iam happy to be able to assure you that the 
jealous policy of Tippoo, added to the brilliant and rapid 
success of the war, has left no Mahomedan influence in My- 
sore from which any serious opposition is to be apprehended. 
I cannot better explain the actual state of the Sultaun’s do- 
minions in ‘this respect than by quoting a passage of a letter 
received this day from Lieutenant-Colonel Close, which cor- 
responds entirely with all the information which I have col- 
lected from other quarters. 


38 THE EARL OF, MORNINGTON, TO June, 


“ That Tippoo loaded the departments of his Government 
with dronish Mussulmauns cannot be denied; but the charac- 
teristic of his domination was to retain all power within him- 
self, and to allow of no hereditary claims or fixed offices that 
might in any shape oppose the dictates of his will. Indivi- 
duals holding the principal offices of the State, doubtless, 
exercised authority, and from such cause possessed some in- 
‘fluence; but of these, how many remain? Buchaun Ooddeen 
was killed at Sattimungalum. The Binky Nabob fell at Se- 
daseer, Syed Saheb, Mahomed Saduck, and Syed Ghofar, 
at the storm of Seringapatam, Purneah is forthcoming, and 
rests upon our will. Cummur-ud-Dien rests upon our gene- 
rosity, and is perfectly at our devotion; where then is the 
Mahomedan influence to embarrass us, or give a turn to our 
politics 2? Tippoo’s infantry are discharged ; his Sillahdar horse 
are dissolved; his Killahdars pay us obedience; his Asophs, 
if so disposed, have not means to resist us. The stable 
horse remain, and look to our pleasure for subsistence ; at 
best, they are but so many loose individuals, connected by no 
head, and kept apart by separate interests. They are ours 
for actual service at a nod.” The Rajah of Mysore will, 
therefore, be easily restored to the throne, and maintained on 
it under the protection of the Company, the Nizam, and I 
trust also of the Mahrattas, who certainly all have a concur- 
rent and common interest in the exclusion of Tippoo’s family, 
especially since the discovery that Tippoo’s alliance with 
France was directed not only against the existence of the 
British power in India, but also against the Mahrattas and 
the Nizam, at least to the extent of recovering the districts 
ceded to those powers under the treaty of Seringapatam. It 
is my intention to draw the connection between the Company 
and the Rajah as close as possible by a subsidiary treaty, 
under which I mean to retain the general power of garrison- 
ing all his fortresses, such as Bednore, Chittledroog, &c., and 
I will so clearly define our powers of interference in his 
internal government as to preclude (if any precaution can 
preclude) the embarrassments which have occasioned so much 


_ distress in the @arrfatic, Oude, and Tanjore. 


Seringapatam F shall retain in full sovereignty for the Com- 
pany, as being a tower of strength, from which we may at 


any time shake Hindostan to its centre, if any combination 


1799. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 39 


should ever be formed against our interests. I shall not at 
present enlarge upon the advantages which are likely to be 
derived to the British interests from this settlement, they are 
too obvious to require any detailed explanation. The Nizam 
will acquire such an accession of strength, as, with the aid of 
our subsidiary force, will enable him to maintain himself 
against the Mahrattas, while he will not only have acquired 
no strength which can render him formidable to us, but, by 
our positions at Chitteldroog, Seringapatam, and along the 
heads of the passes, together with the establishment of about 
seven thousand of our troops in the heart of his dominions, 
he wik depend almost absolutely on our power. If this 
power be used with moderation, I think it must be perma- 
nent; we must abstain religiously from all interference with 
the Nizam’s internal government. 

The Mahrattas will receive an accession of territory, the 
value of which is considerable to them, but cannot render 
them in any degree dangerous to us or to the Nizam, while 
we retain the power of garrisoning the forts of Bednore and 
Chitteldroog. As the Mahrattas have no claim of right to 
any share in this partition, I shall endeavour to connect the 
cessions made to them with some arrangements which shall 
tend to give additional strength to our interests. 

The French influence in India, thanks be to God! is now 
nearly extirpated, some adventurers, however, still remain in, 
the service of the Mahrattas ; and I shall endeavour to ren- 
der the cession of territory to the Mahrattas the instrument 
of annihilating every remnant of a French party in that quar- 
ter. I must repeat to you my most earnest and anxious en- 
treaty, that you will never agree to the restoration of any 
part of the territories of France or of Holland (while con- 
nected with France) on the Continent of India. The papers 
found in Tippoo Sultaun’s palace at Seringapatam will suffi- 
ciently prove the danger of allowing France to retain even 
the isles of Mauritius and Bourbon, and if the war should 
continue, I trust you will strike a blow against those prolific 
sources of intrigue in peace, and of piracy and buccaneering 
in war. 

I transmit to you by this despatch a set of the French 
papers found in the palace at Seringapatam; it might appear 
vanity in me to make any comment upon them, further than 


40 THE EARL.OF MORNINGTON, TO June, 


to request that you will compare them with the whole course 
of my communications with the Court of Directors, the Se- 
cret Committee and yourself previous to the war. I confess 
that, in reading these papers, I could not avoid trembling to 
reflect on the dangers which we have escaped, and which I 
trust are now effectually averted. If Tippoo had obtained 
the aid of two or three thousand French, there is not a doubt 
that he would have rushed into the Carnatic; and I refer you 
to all the communications from this quarter during the last 
summer for an estimate of the consequences of such an in- 
eursion; all the officers with whom I have conversed, who 
served in this campaign, have assured me that, wiih one 
thousand French, Seringapatam would have been ntarly im- 
pregnable, not only from the strength of its own fortifications, 
but from the difficulty of approaching it through thdt strong 
barrier which lies at the entrance of the table land from the 
Carnatic in the neighbourhood of Kankanhelly, Anicul, &c. 


_Through the whole of that line of forest down to Sultaun 


Pett, a very small body of good French troops might have 
checked the progress of our whole army. 

You will observe, in the return of ordnance and stores 
taken at Seringapatam,* the magnitude of the Sultaun’s mili- 
tary preparations and resources. I have not yet received 
authentic accounts of the state of his military establishments 
compared with that of last war, but I expect accurate infor- 
mation on that subject from the records found at Seringapa- 
tam. I understand that the Sultaun’s horse appeared in 
larger bodies, and manifested more discipline, as well as bold- 
ness, in this war than in the last; that his infantry appeared 
to be less numerous, but to be greatly improved in efficiency 
for service, and that it both attacked and resisted our Eurv- 
pean troops on several occasions with great vigour, firmness, 
and resolution, Under these circumstances, I confess that it 
was a matter of exultation and triumph to me to see the 
standard of Tippoo Sultaun flying under the colours of Fort 
St. George on the 4th of June. 

A little more eagerness than I could have wished has ap- 
peared in thé army on the subject of the property captured 
in Seringapatam; the question would have been very awk- 

Secad : 
EF * See Vol. I. Appendix, p. 707. 


weer ae . 


1799, THE RIGHT HON, HENRY DUNDAS. 4h 


ward, if the amount of the property had approached the first 
statements which had been made by common rumour, and 
which extended to the enormous amount of eight or ten 
crores* of rupees. ‘The army conceive that, as the place 
was taken by storm, they are, of right, entitled to what 
was found in it; this is certainly an erroneous opinion, and if 
the principle had been established, and so large a sum as that 
which I have stated had been seized by the army and distri- 
buted, it is impossible to calculate the mischievous effects 
which would have resulted to our military power in India; 
no regular return has yet been made to me of the amount of 
the property taken; but I have every reason to believe that 
it does not exceed in value thirty lacs of pagodas, a suffi- 
ciently large sum. The official return has been withholden 
from an idea, that the right is absolute in the captors, and 
that they are not bound to render any account under the 
peculiar circumstances of the assault. I shall endeavour to 
persuade General Harris to make an official return of the 
property, with a view of saving the rights of Government 
and of correcting the erroneous opinions of the army; but I 
shall not hesitate to direct an immediate distribution of the 
treasure and jewels, as I am persuaded that, in so doing, I 
shall act conformably to your wishes and to those of the 
Crown, and the Court of Directors. The army would pro- 
bably become a little impatient were I to propose to them to 
postpone all distribution until the orders of the Directors and 
the King could be received. The question is rendered stilk 
more delicate by some orders of Lord Cornwallis, admitting 
the exclusive right of the army to all property captured in 
places taken by assault. The amount of the ordnance and 
military stores being very considerable, I shall endeavour to 
preserve them entire, until I can receive the orders of the 
Court of Directors and of his Majesty. I entreat you imme- 
diately, upon receiving this letter, to procure from the King 
and the Court of Directors, full powers for me to dispose of 
the ordnance and military stores, either by granting them to 
the captors or otherwise, as I shall judge most expedient for 
the public service. 


* A crore is now equal to £1,000,000 sterling; it was then about 
£1,200,000, owing to the difference of value in the rupee. 


42 THE EARL OF MORNINGTON, TO June, 


You will accompany these powers by a private letter from 
yourself, stating your wishes on the subject; and I beg that 
you will despatch these papers by express overland. My 
own opinion is decidedly that, unless the value of the ord- 
mance and stores should amount to an enormous sum, this 
also should be given to the army. I take this opportunity of 
requesting that you will take particular care not to permit 
any allowance which I have found it necessary to make to any 
of the officers of this army to be curtailed; a great effort was 
to be made, and it was essential to send the men of the first 
talents in the army into the field full of zeal and cordiality. 
For this purpose I made a handsome allowance to Licut.- 
Colonel Close, the Adjutant-General (a most able and excel- 
lent officer), and to others of General Harris's staff; to their 
efforts our success is to be attributed; if you reduce their 
appointments, it will be impossible to carry on government 
here in great emergencies. 

The extension of our territory and revenue in thd Penin- 
sula, as well as the command which we have now §cquired 
over the central part of Mysore, will render a revision of the 
limits of the Governments of Fort St. George and Bombay 
absolutely necessary. 

You ought to endeavour to negotiate with Portugal the 
cession of Goa, for which you might give Malacca in ex- 
change. This is an important point. The French look to 
Goa, and will labour to obtain it, either by force or intrigue. 
Our artillery throughout India is very deficient; we should 
feel this severely in the event of a French invasion. Las it 
ever occurred to you that it would be a good plan to incor- 
porate all the Company’s European regiments into the artil- 
lery in India? I cannot too strongly press the necessity of 
attention to the artillery in India; if you do not send out 
ample supplies of proper men and officers for this useful 
corps, it will soon fall to ruin; it is already on the decay. 
Indeed. the whole army is alarmingly deficient in European 
officers; a larger annual supply of cadets, and a reduction 
in the annual export of writers would tend to secure the com- 
mercial interests of the Company in India. I believe these 
doctrines: are not popular in London; but if the efficiency of 
the army in India be once allowed to decline, the territory, 
revenue and trade will not long survive: we must either be a 


1799, THE COMMISSIONERS FOR THE AFFAIRS OF MYSORE. 43 


predominant military power, or we must be content to suffer 
the fate of those whose minds are unequal to the magnitude 
of their fortunes, and who are afraid of their own strength. 


Believe me, my dear Sir, ever yours, 
Most faithfully and affectionately, _ 
MorninoTon. 


