[Martin, Despatches ... of the Marquess Wellesley, Vol. 2 (1836), No. LXXXVIII, pp. 361-366; IA india.history.resource.35315, OCR text as served (35315_djvu.txt lines 19467-19734), uncorrected. The Marquess Wellesley to the Right Hon. Henry Dundas, 13 July 1800, on the European force in India. Not a D623 item (D623 has no 13 July 1800 entry); saved because Dundas's 30 Dec 1800 reply (Owen 1877, GAPS 2 Oct 2026) answers an 'overland despatch in cypher, dated 13th July last' -- a counterpart-copy lead for the D623 cipher series, not a reading of anything. Extracted GAPS2-mornington-1798, 2 Oct 2026.]

No. LX XXVIII. 
The Marquess Wellesley to the Right Hon. Henry Dundas. 


My pear Sir, July 13th, 1800, 

The representations which I have lately received from Fort 
St. George, relative to the reduced state of his Majesty’s regi- 
ments of infantry serving at that Presidency, have suggested 
-such serious considerations to my mind, as render it my indis- 
pensable duty to direct ‘your immediate and unremitting at- 
tention to this most important subject. 


* For the statutes of the College, see Appendix. 


362 . THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY, TO July, 


It would be superfluous to detail in a letter to you, the 
reasons which demonstrate that the security of our interests 
in India require the European force, which may be deemed 
necessary for the different establishments in India, to be 
maintained as complete and efficient as possible. The total 
number of European troops to be maintained for the general 
service of India, may admit of a variety of opinions. My own 
judgment is, that the augmentation of our European force 
should always bear a due proportion to the increased value 
and extent of our possessions in India; since in every ardu- 
ous crisis we must principally depend, for the preservation of 
those possessions on our European troops. If, therefore, 
previous to the late war in Mysore, the European establish- 
ment in India did not exceed the requisite proportion, that 
establishment must be deemed inadequate to our present 
extended dominions, as well as ta the increase which it has 
been unavoidably necessary to make in the native part of our 
Indian army. Considerations of prudence as well as of mili- 
tary convenience demand, that every augmentation of our 
native troops in India should be accompanied by a due aug- 
mentation of our European force, artillery as well as infantry. 
The conquest of Mysore, by diminishing our danger in India 
from the native powers, may appear to diminish the necessity 
of augmenting our European force; but if the extension of 
our dominions, and of our alliances has rendered an increase 
of our native force indispensable, the same reasons demand a 
proportionate augmentation of the European part of the 
army. In addition to these considerations it must be observed 
that, while the war in Europe shall continue, our empire in 
India must constantly be exposed to the attempts of the 
French, although that danger also is certainly much diminished 
by the fall of Tippoo Sultaun: 

It is unnecessary to observe to you, that no augmentation 
of our European force has taken place since the late war in 
Mysore. But I desire to call your particular observation to 
the alarming condition of our European force in India since 
that: ‘period. The: casualties of the several corps have neces- 

sarit}een nuftierous, and the supply of recruits from Europe 
has either totally ceased, or been extremely inconsiderable. 
The number of his Majesty’s regiments of infantry in India, 
continues indeed to be the same; but instead of consisting 


ws 


te we, 


1800. THE RIGHT IION. HENRY DUNDAS. 863 


of 1,200 rank and file, according to the establishment, those 
employed under the Presidency of Fort St. George, are 
stated to be reduced to an average of about 500 rank 
and file fit for-duty.. The regiments belonging to the 
establishment of Bombay, and those on the Island of Ceylon 
are also very incomplete. His Majesty’s three regiments of 
infantry at this Presidency do not exceed 2,400 rank and 
file, or about 800 men each. The Company’s European ar- 
tillery are everywhere extremely weak. The fixed establish- 
ment of this corps is defective at all the Presidencies; and 
the numbers wanting to complete even that defective esta- 
blishment are now so considerable, that I intend without 
delay to reduce one of the Company’s European regiments in 
Bengal, for the purpose of augmenting the artillery of this 
Presidency, and I shall probably carry into effect a similar 
measure at Fort St. George and Bombay. 

From a statement which I have received from the Comman- 
der-in-Chief it appears that the sixteen King’s Regiments of 
Infantry now in India, consisted on the Ist of May, 1800, of 
about 11,000 rank and file; the deficiencies amounting to above 
8,000 men. - The Company’s four European Regiments may 
be reckoned at 2,500 rank and file; the Swiss Regiment De 
Meuron at about 600, making the total European infantry in 
India, King’s and Company’s, about 14,000 rank and file. 

But as these numbers include the sick, from this amount 
must be deducted at least one fourth in calculating the num- 
bers now ready for service, which would leave the total 
number of Europeans actually able to take the field in the 
British empire in India, about 10,500 men. 

This European force is far inferior to the strength of that 
which ought to be constantly maintained in India, in a con- 
dition for field service. In Bengal alone 6,000 European 
infantry should always be ready for active duty; and the 
establishment of Bengal, in order to be enabled at all times 
to furnish such a disposable force, ought to consist at least 
of eight regiments of the present nominal strength, or 1,200 
rank and file each. 

Kight thousand European infantry should always be ready 
for service on the Coast of Coromandel including Mysore; and 
at least 4,000 for the service of Ceylon and Bombay, and the 
Coasts of Canara and Malabar. To furnish 12,000 efficient 


364 THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY, TO July, 


men for these different points would require an establish- 
‘ment of at least 20,000 rank and file. 

- I would therefore propose that the European infantry for 
India should be fixed at twenty-five regiments of the present 
establishment of strength 1,200, (making altogether 30,000 
rank and file) which number, according to past experience 
would be requisite in order at all times to furnish a force of 
18,000 men for field-service. This calculation however, sup- 
poses an improved degree of attention to the regular supply 
of recruits from Europe. 

The whole of this European infantry should consist of 
King’s troops; and the Company’s European regiments in 
Bengal, at Fort St. George and Bombay, should be converted 
into artillery as far as the men might be found serviceable in 
that branch of the army. The remainder might either be 
drafted into his Majesty’s regiments, or returned to Europe. 

I am not of-opinion that it will be necessary that the Eu- 
ropean regiments of the Company, which I propose to be 
reduced, shall be replaced by new regiments of native infantry 
raised merely for that purpose. The course of our subsidiary 
engagements, and the extension of dominion to which they 
are likely to lead, by means of the commutation of subsidy 
for ‘territory, will necessarily require some increase of the 
native infantry, and consequently afford sufficient means of 
disposing of the officers belonging to the reduced European 
corps. But whatever augmentation of the native infantry 
may. hereafter be requisite on account of our new subsidiary 
engagements, and the augmentation of our territorial re- 
sources. You will observe that the expense will not prove 
any. additional .burthen to the Company, but will be defrayed 
either in money or cession of territory by the state, for 
whose service or protection the additional troops shall have 
been raised. . 

An augmentation of our European cavalry in India is 
scarcely less necessary than that of our infantry. Lam of opinion 
that we ought to maintain at Jeast eight complete regiments 
of dragoons. Of the additional regiments, two should be 
stationed, in the Peninsula of India, and two in the province 
of Oude.” 

‘Ihave already stated the alar ming deficiency of our artillery 
throughout India; and the expedient to which I intend to 


ts 
fad be 


1800. THE RIGHT HON. HENRY DUNDAS. 865 


resort for the remedy of this serious evil. But the best remedy 
which I may be enabled to apply will be insufficient, on ac- 
count of the great deficiency of officers of artillery; some 
companies have now no more than one commissioned officer - 
doing duty with them. This deficiency proceeds in a great 
measure, from the original inadequacy of the establishment 
in point of commissioned officers ; and partly from the neglect 
of a regular supply of cadets. Of the establishment of 
officers, defective as it is, nearly one-third are either on fur- 
lough, or employed in staff offices which preclude them from 
the performance of regimental duty. One additional subal- 
tern at least should be posted to every company of artillery; 
and I most particularly request your attention to the necessity 
of sending out to India without delay, both an ample supply 
of private artillery men, and of cadets for the artillery corps. 

As connected with the subject of artillery, I beg leave to 
call your particular attention to the declining state of the 
foundery at Fort William, which, owing to the ignorance of 
those in charge of that department, is no longer able to supply 
the ordnance required for the use of this, and of the other 
Presidencies. This failure has made it necessary that we 
should apply to England for a supply of field ordnance, and 
I earnestly entreat you to adopt the requisite measures for 
enforcing a complete compliance with the Indent ‘of the 
military board for this purpose. I also most particularly 
recommend to your immediate consideration the absolute 
necessity of sending as soon as -possible to Bengal one or 
more scientific persons properly qualified to conduct the 
foundery at Fort William, this is an evil which requires the 
most serious attention, and the most prompt remedy. 

Believe me, my dear Sir, : 
with the greatest regard and esteem, ever 
Yours most faithfully, 
WELLESLEY. 


366 THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY, TO Aug:' 


No, LXXXIX: 


The Marquess Wellesley to the Chairman of the Honourable Court of 
Directors. 


Sir, Fort William, August 18th, 1800. 

I have the honour to transmit to you the copy of a law,* 
which I have passed for the better instruction of the junior 
civil servants of the Company, in the arduous duties of their 
respective stations in India; I also enclose an extract from 
my notes,} explanatory of the grounds and objects of the law 
in question. 

_ Although this communication cannot be considered strictly 
official ; and although it is my intention to forward a regular 
official despatch to the Court of Directors by an early con- 
veyance, I am anxious that they should receive the earliest 
possible intelligence of the nature of the institution, which I 
have founded at Calcutta. I, therefore, request you to have 
the goodness to communicate the enclosed papers to the 
members of the Court; to the copy of the law and of my 
notes, I have added a copy of the Report of the Committee, 
appointed to examine the young gentlemen, who had been 
directed to attend Mr. Gilchrist’s lectures in thé Hindos- 
tannee language. 

The early support of the Court of Directors will tend to 
give animation and spirit to the new Institution. 

I have the honour to be, &e. 
WELLESLEY, 

P.S. Lord Wellesley requests that the ‘Chairman of the 
Court of Directors will have the goodness to transmit a copy 
of the “ Extract of the Governor-General’s Notes,” to Lord 
Cornwallis, and another to Lord Teignmouth. 


* 


See p. 356. + See p. 325. 


1800. THE RIGHT HON, LORD CLIVE. 367 