order of January 7th. Should it, contrary to expectation, turn out that the French decree was meant, and is to 
operate according to the latitude of its terms, you will, of course, have made the proper representations, grounded 
as well on the principles of public law, as on the express stipulations of the convention of 1800. Nothing, besides, 
could be more preposterous than to blend with an appeal to neutral rights and neutral nations, a gross infraction of 
the former, and outrage on the sentiments of the latter, unless it be to invite a species of contest on the high seas, 
in which the adversary has every possible advantage. But on the more probable supposition that the decree will 
not be unfavorably expounded, it will be still necessary to press on the French Government a despatch of such 
orders to their cruisers in every quarter, as will prevent a construction of the decree favorable to their licentious 
cupidity. The moment your letter was received, the answer of the French Minister of Marine to your note was 
communicated to General Turreau, with a call on him to transmit it immediately to the French Governors in the 
West Indies. This he readily engaged to do. But notwithstanding this precaution, there are proofs that the West 
India privateers have, under color of the edict, committed depredations which will constitute just claims of redress 
from their Government. 
Mr. Erving has forwarded a Spanish decree also, avowedly pursuing the example and the views of the French 
Emperor. The terms of this decree are even more vague, or rather more broad, than those of the prototype; and 
if not speedily recalled or corrected, will doubtless extend the scene of spoliations already begun in that quarter: 
and, of course, thicken the cloud that hangs over the amity of the two nations. 
Extract: — Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Monroe. 
Sir: Paris, July 7, 1807. 
The accounts you have had of recent captures made by French privateers of American vessels, under covei 
of the decree of November last, are not correct; at Wst, if such captures have been made, I know nothing of them: 
the only captures I have at any time heard of were those made from Porto Ferrajo. They are by no means of 
recent date, and have all (I believe,) been redressed by the council of prizes. Two of these cases, to which I at- 
tended personally, received decisions equally favorable and prompt; interest and damages were given to the plain- 
tiffs, and I know not why decisions equally favorable should not have been given in the other cases. I have 
within a week been informed by Mr. Erving that he had reason to believe that a French privateer, then in a port of 
Spain, had plundered American ships, either going to or coming from England, of dry goods to the amount of three 
hundred dollars. Before any thing could be done in Spain for the recovery of these goods, the ship went to 
sea, and professedly for the purpose of returning to the port of her armament. Believing her to have arrived there. 
I put all the evidence 1 possessed before M. Decres, who closes his answer with the following assurance. *"Your 
excellency may be assured that, as far as it depends on me, the captains of these vessels, or their owners, shall obtain, 
if there is ground for it, a prompt and full reparation." I quote this to show you that there is no disposition in the 
minister of this Government to sanction or protect such enterprises upon our commerce. From the uses you ma\ 
be able to make of the facts, and their relation to your question generally, I subjoin a brief exposition of the con- 
struction now given to the November decree. It was, you know, admitted by both ministerial and judicial authori- 
ties, that this decree did not infract the provisions of the treaty of 1800, between the United States and France. 
Still it was contended that vessels of the United States, coming from any port of Great Britain, since the date of 
the edict, could not be admitted to entry in the ports of France. This rule, without some qualifications, was likely 
to become mischievous, and I accordingly obtained the following modifications of it, and hope to obtain a further 
modification, which will render it perfectly harmless. These changes took place as circumstances rose to produce 
them; for though the necessity for them was both foreseen and represented, it was only upon real, not upon hypo- 
thetical cases, that the ministers of His Majesty were willing to act. 
1. Vessels leaving ports of the United States before a knowledge of the arrit had been promulgated there, are 
not subject to the rule. 
2. Vessels not coming directly from a British to a French port are not subject to the rule. 
* Votre excellence peut etre assuree qu'il ne tiendra pas a moi, que les capitainesde ces navires, ou Ieursproprietaires, n'ob- 
tiennent, s'il y a lieu, une reparation prompte et pleine. 
1808.J FRANCE. 243 
3. The cargoes of vessels coming directly from a British to a French port, and offered for entry, on proof tha 
The touching of the ship in England, &c. was involuntary, are put in depcit or sequestration, until His Majesty shal 
have decided on the sufficiency of the proof offered; or they are at once given up to the consignees, on their giving 
security to abide the decision which shall be ultimately taken by the Emperor in their respective cases. The ves- 
sels can go out freely, and without impediment of any kind. The former rule, of which this is an amelioration, 
was, that ships as well as cargoes, coming under this description, should be sequestered, &c. The further altera- 
tion which I have asked, is, the establishment of some principle which shall regulate the kind and degree of proof 
required with respect to the alleged application of a force majeure, &c; my own opinion is, that this may best be 
found in the greater or less correspondence which shall exist between the cargo when shipped in America, and when 
arrived here. If the correspondence be complete, the evidence ought to be considered as complete also, that they 
were not in Great Britain for the purposes of commerce; and, not being there for these purposes, the inference is 
fair, that their going there at all was involuntary. This is a rule the ministers will consent to; whether His Majesty 
will do so also will be known in a few days. He is expected here about the beginning of August. 
Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Madison. 
Sir: Paris, August 3, 1807. 
We had yesterday our first audience of the Emperor since his return to Paris. Happening to stand near the 
minister of Denmark, I overheard His Majesty say to that minister, " So M. Baron, the Baltic has been violated." 
The minister's answer was not audible to me, nor did it appear to have been satisfactory to the Emperor, who re- 
peated, in a tone of voice somewhat raised and peremptory, "But, sir, the Baltic has been violated." From Mr. 
Deyer he passed to myself and others, and lastly to the ambassador of Portugal, to whom, it is said, he read a very 
severe lecture on the conduct of his court. These circumstances go far to justify the whispers that begin to circu- 
late, that an army is organizing to the south for the purpose of taking possession of Portugal, and another to 
the north for a similar purpose with regard to Denmark; and, generally, thai having settled the business of bellige- 
rents, with the'exception of England, very much to his own liking, he is now on the point of settling that of neutrals 
in the same way. It was, perhaps, under the influence of this suggestion, that Mr. Deyer, taking me aside, inquired 
whether any application had been made to me with regard to the projected union of all the commercial States against 
Great Britain, and on my answering in the negative, he replied, "You are much favored, but it will not last." I 
give you this detail, not from any importance it has in itself, but from the circumstance of its containing all that I 
have yet heard in relation to a project highly interesting to the United States, and of which you ought to be im- 
mediately apprised. 
August 9. Not a syllable has yet been mentioned with regard to the projected union, &c. As far as I can learn, 
they are satisfied that the course we are pursuing is honest to ourselves, and not dishonest to either of the bellige- 
rents. 
August 15. We had this morning an audience of the Emperor. The seizure of Copenhagen by the British gave 
room for a new conversation with the minister of Denmark, in the course of which he stated the British force to 
have been but ten or twelve thousand men; demanded what had become of the Prince Regent, and asked why the 
Government had not defended the city? As in the former audience from Baron Deyer he came directly to me, and, 
after some questions merely personal, he adverted to the outrage committed by the Leopard on the Chesapeake. 
•• This," said he, " is abominable; they have pretended hitherto to visit merchantmen, and that they had a right to do 
so; but they, even they, have set up no such pretensions with respect to armed ships. They would now arrange it 
by giving up a right or usage which never existed; but they will arrange it; they are afraid to go to war with your 
country." 
I have the honor to be, sir, your most obedient servant, 
Mr. Madison. 
JOHN ARMSTRONG. 
Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Champagny. 
Sir: Paris, August 9, 1807. 
Your excellency is not unapprised that soon after the promulgation of the imperial decree of the 2d of 
November last, one of similar character and injunctions was issued by the Prince of Peace, in behalf of His Catho- 
lic Majesty. Under this order, sundry vessels belonging to the citizens of the United States have been captured on 
the high seas, brought into the ports of Spain, and are now before the Court of Admiralty for examination. To this 
brief statement I subjoin an extract from a letter of the 27th ultimo, from the charge des affaires of the United 
States at Madrid, which will show your excellency that the fate of these vessels will depend, not on the construction 
which might be given to the Spanish decree by the Spanish tribunals, but on the practice which shall have been 
established by France, under her decree of November last; and that Prince Massirano has accordingly been directed 
to ask from your excellency such exposition of that decree, and of the practice under it, as shall regulate, on this 
head, the conduct of Spanish courts and cruisers towards neutral commerce in general. Assured, as I feel myself, 
that this exposition, whenever given, will not be less friendly and liberal than that already found in the decisions of 
His Imperial Majesty's council of prizes, and correspondence of his Minister of Marine, viz: that the provisions 
of the decree in question do not infract any of the rights of commerce stipulated by treaty between France and the 
United States; it is incumbent on me to pray your excellency, that it (the exposition required) be given as expedi- 
tiously as possible, to the end that the legitimate commerce of the United States be relieved from all further annoy- 
ance growing out of the doubtful meaning and operation of the Spanish decree aforesaid. 
Your excellency will permit me to avail myself of this occasion to recall to your attention the subject of my 
letter of the 26th of June last. I learn from Antwerp that the cargoes mentioned in that letter are yet under 
sequestration, and that considerable loss, as well by diminution of price in the articles, as by accumulation of 
interest and charges, has been already incurred. 
Your excellency will do me the honor to accept the assurances of my profound respect. 
JOHN ARMSTRONG. 
His Excellency the Prince of Benevento. 
244 FOREIGN RELATIONS. [No. 216. 
Mr. Champagny (Prince of Bencvento) to Mr. Armstrong. 
Monsieur: Aout 21, 1807. 
J'ai recu la lettre que vous m'avez fait l'honneur dc m'adresser le 9 de ce mois, relativement a des bati- 
mens Americains conduits dans les ports d'Espagne, par suite des dispositions que cette Puissance a prises contre lo 
commerce Anglais, a l'exemple de la France. 
Cormne l'execution des mesures maritimes indiquees par le decret imperial du 21 Novembre, 1806, appartient 
naturellement a sou excellence le Ministre de la Marine, ct que d'ailleurs il a deja eu l'honneur de vous adresser de 
premieres observations sur 1'appllcation de ce decrel, je nie suis empresse de lui transmettre votre lettre, et de lui 
demander les nouvelles explications que vous pouvez desirer. Des qu'elles m'auront ete adress6es, j'aurai l'honneur 
de vous en dormer connaissance. 
Agreez, monsieur, 1'assurance de ma haute consideration, 
CHAMPAGNY. 
Son Ex. le Gen. Armstrong. 
[translation.] 
Mr. Champagny to Mr. Armstrong. 
Sir: August 21, 1807. 
I have received the letter which you did me the honor of addressing me on the 9th of this month, relative 
to American vessels carried into ports of Spain, in consequence of the measures taken by that Power against the 
English commerce, in imitation of France. 
As the execution of the maritime measures indicated by the imperial decree of the 21st of November, 1806, 
rests naturally with his excellency, the Minister of Marine, and that, moreover, he has already had the honor of 
addressing you some first observations on the application of that decree, I transmitted without delay your letter, 
and asked from him the new explanations which you might desire. When they shall have been forwarded to me, 
I will have the honor of informing you of them. 
Accept the assurance of my high csnsideratkm, 
CHAMPAGNY. 
His Excellency Gen. Armstrong. 
Mr. Armstrong to the French Minister of Exterior Relations. 
Sir: Paris, September 24, 1807. 
I have this moment learned that a new and extended construction, highly injurious to the commerce of the 
United States, was about to be given to the imperial decree of the 21st of November last. It is therefore incum- 
bent upon me to ask from your excellency an explanation of His Majesty's views in relation to this subject, and, 
particularly, whether it be His Majesty's intention, in any degree, to infract the obligations of the treaty now sub- 
sisting between the United States and the French empire? 
I prav vour excellency, &c. 
JOHN ARMSTRONG. 
His Excellency the Minister of Exterior Relations. 
General of the Council of Prizes. 
Paris, le 18 Septcmbre, 1807. 
J'ai soumis a Sa Majeste, l'Empereur ct Roi, monsieur, les doutes que s'etait forme son excellence le Ministre de 
la Marine et les Colonies sur l'etendue de quelques dispositions du decret imperial du 21 Novembre, 1806, qui a 
declare les Isles Britanniques en etat de blocus. Voici quelles sont les intentions de Sa Majeste sur les points qui 
avaient mis en question: 
1. Les bitimens amies en guerre, peuvent-ils, en vertu du decrel imperial du 21 Novembre dernier, saisir sur 
les b&timcns neutres, soit les proprietes Anglaises, soit m£me toutes marchandises provenant de manufactures du 
territoire Anglais? 
Sa Majeste m'a fait connaitre que, puis qu'elle avait juge a propos de n'exprimer aucune exception dans son 
decret, il n'y avait pas lieu d'en faire dans l'ex6cution a l'egard de qui que ce put §tre. 
2. Sa Majest6 a sursis a, statuer sur la question de savoir si les armemens Franeais doivent s'emparer des 
batimens neutres qui vont en Angleterre, ou qui en sortent, lors m6me qu'il n'ont point a bord de marchandises 
Anglaises. 
3. Sur la troisieme question, qui etait de savoir si les armemens Franeais sont passibles de la retenue ordonnec 
par l'article 6 du decret du 21 Novembre, Sa Majesty a declare que la disposition de cet article n'etait susceptible 
d'aucune restriction; e'est-a-dire, que la retenue doit avoir lieu sur le produit de toutes les confiscations de 
marchandises et proprietes qui ont ete, ou pourraient Otre, prononcees en execution du decret, sans egard au lieu de 
la saisie ou a la qualite des saisissans. 
Vous voudrez bien, monsieur, notifier ces decisions au conseil des prises, les faire consigner sur les registres, et 
m'accuser la reception de ma lettre. 
Recevez, See. Sec. 
Le Grand Jusre, Ministre de la Justice, REGNIER. 
Le Procureur General Imperial, Conseil des Prises. 
[translation.] 
Paris, September 18, 1807. 
I have submitted, sir, to His Majesty the Emperor and King, the doubts of his excellency the Minister o! 
Marine and Colonies on the extent of some of the provisions of the imperial decree of November 21, 1806, which 
has declared the British Islands in a state of blockade. The following are the intentions of His Majesty on the points 
in question: 
1808.] FRANCE. 245 
1. Can armed vessels, under the imperial decree of the 21st of November last, seize, in neutral vessels, either 
English property or merchandise proceeding from the manufactures of the English territories? 
His Majesty notifies me, that since he had not thought proper to express any exception in his decree, there is 
no ground to make any in the execution, with respect to any thing whatsoever. 
2. His Majesty has not decided the question, whether French armed vessels may possess themselves of neutral 
vessels going to or from England, although they have no English merchandise on board. 
3. On the question whether French armed vessels are subject to the deduction ordered by the sixth article of 
the decree of November 21, His Majesty has declared that the provision of that article was not susceptible of any 
restriction; that is to say, that the deduction must take effect on the proceeds of all confiscations of merchandise 
and property which have been or may be pronounced in execution of the decree, without regard to the place of 
seizure or character of the captors. 
You will be so good, sir, as to notify these decisions to the council of prizes, to have them entered in the 
registers, and to acknowledge the receipt of my letter. 
Accept, <fcc. &c. 
The Grand Judge, Minister of Justice, REGNIER. 
Imperial Procureur General of the Council of Prizes. 
Mr. Champagny to Mr. Armstrong. 
Monsieur: Fontainebleau, le 7 Octobre, 1807. 
Vous m'avez fait Phonneur de m'inviter le 24 Septembre a vous transmettre quelques eclaircissemens sur 
1'exexution du decret de blocus des isles Britanniques envers les batimens des Etats Unis. 
Les dispositions de tous les reglemens et de tous les traites relatives a l'etat de blocus out paru applicables a la 
circonstance actuelle, et il resulte des explications qui viennent de m'e"tre adressees par le procureur general 
imperial pres le conseil des prises, que Sa Majesty a regarde tout batiment neutre, sortant des ports Anglais, avec 
des cargaisons de marchandises Anglaises, ou d'origine Anglaise, comme pouvant 6tre valablement saisi par les 
batimens de guerre Francois. 
Le decret de blocus est rendu depuis pres d'onze mois; les principales Puissances d'Europe. loin de reclamer 
contre ses dispositions, les ont adoptees. Elles ont reconnu qu'il fallait en rendre l'execution complette pour la 
rendre plus effkace; et il a paru qu'il 6tait facile d'accorder ces mesures avec la conservation des traites, sur-tout 
dans un temps ou les infractions de l'Angleterre contre les droits de toutes les Puissances maritimes rendent leurs 
interets communs, et tendent a les unir pour le soutien de la m6me cause. 
Recevez, monsieur, &.c. &c. 
CHAMPAGNY. 
Son Exc. le Gen. Armstrong, Min. Plen. des Etats Unis. 
[translation.] 
Sir: Fontainebleau, October 7, 1807. 
You did me the honor on the 24th of September, to request me to send you some explanations as to the 
execution of the decree of blockade of the British islands as to vessels of the United States. 
The provisions of all the regulations and treaties relative to a state of blockade have appeared applicable to 
the existing circumstance; and it results, from the explanations which have been addressed to me by the imperial 
procureur general of the counsel of prizes, that His Majesty has considered every neutral vessel going from English 
ports, with cargoes of English merchandise, or of English origin, as lawfully seizable by French armed vessels. 
The decree of blockade has been now issued eleven months; the principal Powers of Europe, far from protesting 
against its provisions, have adopted them. They have perceived that its execution must be complete to render it 
more effectual, and it has seemed easy to reconcile these measures with the observance of treaties, especially at a 
time when the infractions by England of the rights of all maritime Powers render their interest common, and tend 
to unite them in support of the same cause. 
Accept, &.C. &c. 
CHAMPAGNY. 
His Ex. Gen. Armstrong, Min. Plen. of the United States. 
Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Madison. 
Sir: Paris, November 12, 1807. 
It was not till yesterday that I received from Mr. Skipwith a copy of the decree of the council of prizes in 
the case of the Horizon. This is the first unfriendly decision of that body, under the arret of the 21st of 
November, 1806. In this case, and on the petition of the defendant, the court has recommended the restitution of 
the whole cargo. I did not, however, think proper to join in asking, as a favor, what I believed myself entitled 
to as a right. I subjoin a copy of my note to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, and am, sir, your most obedient and 
very humble servant, 
JOHN ARMSTRONG. 
[Enclosed in Mr. Armstrong's letter of November 12.] 
Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Champagny. 
Sir: Paris, November 12, 1807. 
The document to which these observations are prefixed will inform your excellency than an American ship, 
trading under the protection of the laws of nations, and of particular treaties, and suffering shipwreck on the coast 
of France, has recently been seized by His Majesty's officers, and adjudged by his council of prizes as follows, 
viz: " Our council puts at liberty the American vessel, the Horizon, shipwrecked the 30th of May last, near 
Morlaix; and, consequently, orders that the amount arising from the sale legally made of the wreck of the said 
vessel, together with the merchandise of the cargo, which, according to an estimate made in presence of the over- 
seers of the administrations of the marine and custom-house shall have been acknowledged not to proceed from 
English manufactures, nor from English territory, shall be restored to Captain McClure, without deducting any 
32 vol. in. 
246 FOREIGN RELATIONS. [No. 216. 
other expenses than those relative to the sale; and with regard to the other merchandise of the cargo, which, from 
the result of the said estimate, shall he acknowledged to come from manufactures, or English territory, by virtue 
of the fifth article of the decree of the 21st of November, 1806, they shall be confiscated for the use of the State ; 
the whole to be sold by the forms prescribed in the regulations; and the application of the product to be made in 
conformity to the arrangements of the said decree, deduction being made for the expense of saving the goods, and 
that of the support of the crew, until the day that the captain shall receive the notification of the present decision." 
The reasons upon which this decision are founded are at once so new and so alarming to the present friendly 
relations of the two Powers, that I cannot but discuss them with a freedom in some degree proportioned to my 
sense of their novelty and importance. 
" Considering," says the council, " first, that the neutrality of the ship and cargo was sufficiently established, 
the whole ought to be restored, (agreeably to the provisions of the convention of the -30th of September, 1800,) 
provided no merchandise of English origin had been found in her, and, of course, that she had not been brought 
within the limits of the imperial decree of the 21st of November, 1806." 
Here is an open and unqualified admission that the ship was found within the rules prescribed by the convention 
of 1800; that, according to these rules, her cargo and herself ought to have been restored; and that such would 
have been the fact, but for the operation of the decree of the 21st of November, 1806. 
In the letter your excellency did me the honor to write to me on the 7th of October last, you thought it "easy 
to reconcile the obligations of this decree with the preservation of those arising from treaties." It was not for 
me to examine the means by which this reconciliation was to be effected: they no doubt fully existed, and yet exist, 
in His Majesty's good pleasure; and taking for granted this fact, I saw in the opinion nothing but proofs of friendly 
dispositions and pledges that these were not to be either wantonly destroyed or diminished. How inauspicious, 
however, to its authority, and the consolations derived from it, is tins recent act of the council of prizes! — an act 
which explicitly acknowledges the opposite characters and conflicting injunctions of these two instruments; and 
which, of course, draws after it considerations the most serious to the Government of the United States. 
The second reason of the council is, "that the decree declaring (British) merchandise good prize had princi- 
pally in view captures made on the high seas; but that the question, whether shipwrecked goods ought to be 
restored or confiscated, having always been judged under the fourteenth article of the regulation of the 26th of 
July, 1778, and, according to their character, (which might have rendered lawful, or have even commanded their 
seizure at sea,) there is no room to introduce, in this case, any new distinction, which, however philanthropic it 
may appear, has not as yet been adopted as a rule by any maritime nation." 
The doctrine resisted in this passage, and which inculcates the duty of extending protection to the unfortunate, 
is not new to His Majesty's council of prizes. They have themselves consecrated it by their decision of the 5th 
of March, 1800. By that decision they restored an enemy's ship, (the Diana) on the single reason, that " she 
had been compelled to enter a French port by stress of weather." " I should equally fail," says the attorney 
general, " in respect to myself and to the council, before whom I have the honor to represent the Government, 
were I not to maintain a principle consecrated by our laws, and by those of all nations. In all circumstances, let 
the loyalty of the French Government serve as the basis of your decisions. Prove yourselves at once generous 
and just; your enemies will know and respect your magnanimity." Such was the principle adopted by the council 
in the year 1800, and in the case of an enemy's ship; yet we are now told that this very principle, so honorable 
to the court, to the nation, and to human nature, is utterly unknown to all maritime [reople. And on what occa- 
sion do we hear this? When an enemy's ship is again thrown on the French coast? No: it has been reserved for 
the wreck of a neutral and a friendly vessel! for a ship of the United States! It is not denied, that, had this ship 
escaped the rocks and made the port of Morlaix, the only inhospitably to which she would have been exposed 
(under the most rigorous interpretation of the law in question) would have been that of being ordered again to 
sea. Has, then, the misfortune of shipwreck so far altered her condition, as to expose her to the injury of confisca- 
tion also? and is this among the principles which the defender of maritime rights means to consecrate by his power 
and his wisdom? It is impossible. 
The third reason of the council is, " that the application of the fifth article aforesaid, in as far as it concerns 
the Americans and other nations, is the result both of the general expressions of that very article, and of the com- 
munication recently made by his excellency, the grand judge, concerning the primitive intention of the sovereign." 
This reason will be found to be substantially answered in my reply to reason No. 5 of the council. It will be 
seen that the opinion given here that "the application of article fifth of the imperial decree, to American com- 
merce, is the result of the general expressions of that very article," was not the opinion of the council on the 
■ith of March last, when they judged the case of the Hibernia. They then declared, in totidetn verbis, that the 
decree " said nothing of its own influence on the convention of 1800" between the United States and France. 
The fourth reason of the council is, " that the expedition in question having certainly been made with full know- 
ledge of the said decree, no objection can be drawn, with any propriety, from the general rules forbidding a 
retrospective action, nor, even in this particular case, from the posterior date of the act in which the sovereign de- 
cides the question; since that act sprung from his supreme wisdom, not as an interpretation of a doubtful point, but 
as a declaration of an anterior and positive disposition." 
A distinction is here attempted to be taken between the interpretation of a doubtful point and the declaration 
of an anterior and positive rule. This distinction cannot be maintained: for, if the rule had been positive, there 
would have been no occasion for the declaration. Neither the Minister of Marine, nor the council of prizes, could 
have had any doubts on the subject; the execution of the decree would have been prompt and peremptory; nor 
would a second act on the part of His Majesty, after the lapse of twelve months, have been necessary to give opera- 
tion to the first. Need I appeal to your excellency's memory for the facts on which these remarks turn? You 
know that doubts did exist. You know that there was, under them, much hesitation in pronouncing. You know 
'Mat, »s late as the 9th of August, I sought an explanation of the decree in question; and that even then your 
excellency (who was surely a competent and legitimate organ of His Majesty,) did not think yourself prepared to 
give it. The conclusion is inevitable. Ilis Majesty's answer, transmitted to the court of prizes on the 18th of 
September last, through the medium of the grand judge, was in the nature of an interpretation, and, being so, could 
not, without possessing a retroactive quality, apply to events many months anterior iu date to itself. 
The fifth reason of the council, and the last which enters into my present view of the subject, is, "that, 
though one of the principal agents of His Majesty had given a contrary opinion, of which the council had at no 
period partaken, this opinion being that of an individual, could not. whatever consideration its author may merit, 
balance tin- formal declaration given in the name of Hi- Majesty himself; and that, if the communication of this 
Opinion had, as is alleged, given room to and served as a basis for many American shipments, and particularly of 
the one in question, this circumstance, which may call for the indulgence of His Majesty, in a case in which the 
confiscation is entirely to the advantage of the State, does not prevent a council, rigid in its duty, to pronounce in 
conformity to the decree of the 21st of November, and of the declaration which followed it." 
1808.] FRANCE. 247 
It would appear from this paragraph that, not finding it easy to untie the knot, the council had determined to 
cut it. Pressed hy the fact that an interpretation of the decree had been given by a minister of His Majesty, 
specially charged with its execution, they would now escape from this fact, and from the conclusions to which it 
evidently leads, by alleging, 1st, That at no time had the council partaken of the opinion given by the minister; 
and, 2d, That this opinion, being that of an individual, could not possess either the force or the authority of one 
truly ministerial. 
It appears to me, as I think it will appear to your excellency, that the council have, in these statements, been 
less correct than is usual to them on similar occasions. If, as they now assert, they have never partaken of the 
minister's opinion; if they have never even hesitated on the question, whether the decree of November did or did 
not derogate from the treaty of 1800, why, I ask, suspend the American cases generally; or why decide as they 
did in the case of the Hibernia? If I mistake not, we find in this case the recognition of the very principle laid 
down by the Minister of Marine. That officer says, " In my opinion, the November decree does not work any 
change in the rules at present observed witli respect to neutral commerce, and, consequently, none in the conven- 
tion of the 8th Vendemiaire, year 9." And what says the council? " Admitting that this part of the cargo (the 
rum and ginger,) was of British origin, the dispositions of the November decree, [which contain nothing with 
regard to their own influence, over the convention of the Sth Vendemiaire, year 9,] evidently cannot be applied to 
a ship leaving America on the 6th of the same month of November; and, of course, cannot have authorized her 
capture in the moment she was entering the neutral port of her destination." We have here three distinct grounds 
of exemption from the effects of the November decree: 
1st. The entire silence of that decree, with regard to its own influence over the convention of 1800. 
2d. The early period at which the ship left the United States; and, 
3d. The neutral character of the port to which she was destined. If such, sir, were the principles admitted 
by the council on the 25th of March last, with what correctness can it be now said, " that at no period have they 
partaken of the opinion of the minister'!" 
The second fact asserted by the council is, that the interpretation of the decree in question, given on the 24th 
of December, 1806, was private, not public; or, in other words, that it was the interpretation of the man, not that of 
the minister, and, as such, cannot outweigh the more recent declaration coming directly from His Majesty himself. 
On the comparative weight of those declarations I shall say nothing, nor shall I do more to repel the first part 
of the insinuation, (that the minister's declaration was that only of the individual,) than to submit to your excel- 
lency my letter of the 20th of December, 1806, claiming from that minister an ojpcial interpretation ol the decree 
in question, and his answer of the 24th of the same month, giving to me the interpretation demanded. 
To your excellency, who, as late as the 21sl of August last, considered the Minister of Marine as the natural 
organ of His Majesty's will, in whatever regarded the decree aforesaid, and who actually applied to him for 
information relating to it, this allegation of the council of prizes, and the reasoning founded upon it, cannot but 
appear very extraordinary, and will justify me in requesting that His Majesty may be moved to set aside the deci- 
sion in question, on the ground of error in the opinion of the council. 
If, in support of this conclusion, I have drawn no arguments from the treaty of 1800, nor from the laws of 
nations, your excellency will not be at a loss to assign to this omission its true cause. It would surely have been 
a useless formality to appeal to authorities, not only practically, but even professedly extinct. In the letter of the 
Minister of Justice of the 18th of September, we are told by His Majesty himself, that, " since he had not judged 
proper to make any exception in the letter of his decree, there was no room to make any in its execution;" and 
in the report of your excellency's predecessor, of the 20th of November, 1806, we have these memorable words: 
" England has declared these places blockaded, before which she had not a single ship of war. 
" She has done more; for she has declared in a state of blockade places which all her assembled forces were 
incapable of blockading — immense coasts, and a vast empire. 
"Afterwards, drawing from a chimerical right, and from an assumed fact, the consequence that she might 
justly make her prey of every thing going to the places laid under interdiction by a simple declaration of the 
British Admiralty, and of every thing arising therefrom, and carrying this doctrine into effect, she has alarmed 
neutral navigators, and driven them to a distance from ports whither their interests attracted them, and which the 
law of nations authorized them to frequent. 
"Thus it is that she has turned to her own profit, and to the detriment of Europe, hut more particularly of 
France, the audacity with which she mocks at all rights, and insults even reason itself. 
" Against a Power which forgets to such a pitch all ideas of justice and all humane sentiments, what can be done 
but to forget them for an instant one's self?" 
Words cannot go further to show the extinguished authority, in the one case, of the treaty subsisting between 
the United States and His Imperial Majesty, and, in the other, of the law of nations; to appeal to them, therefore, 
would be literally appealing to the dead. 
Accept, sir, tfce. &c. 
JOHN ARMSTRONG. 
To His Excellency the Minister of Foreign Relations. 
Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Madison. 
Sir: Paris, December 1, 1807. 
I have this moment received a letter from His Majesty's Minister of Foreign Relations, of which I subjoin 
a copy; and am, sir, with very high consideration, your most obedient and most humble servant, 
JOHN ARMSTRONG. 
[Enclosed in the above.] 
[ translation.] 
Mr. Champagny to General Armstrong. 
Sir: Milan, November 24, 1807. 
The execution of the measures taken against the English commerce has frequently caused reclamations on 
your part. The intention of His Majesty, without doubt, is, that every particular abuse may be repressed; but the 
Federal Government cannot make any complaint against the measures themselves; and while the United States 
allow that their vessels may be visited by England, that she may drag them into her ports and turn them from their 
destination; while they do not oblige England to respect their flag and the merchandise which it covers; while they 
248 FOREIGN RELATIONS. [No. 216. 
permit that Power to apply to them the absurd rules of blockade which it has set up, with the view of injuring France; 
they bind themselves, by that tolerance towards England, to allow also the application of the measures of reprisals 
which France is obliged to employ against her. His Majesty regrets, without doubt, to have been forced to recur to 
such measures: he knows all that the commercial classes may have to sutler in consequence of them, particularly those 
who, having habitual relations with England, using a common language, and often mixing their interests, might 
more frequently occasion an apprehension of some commercial connivance with the English, inasmuch as they would 
have greater facilities in covering it. This circumstance made it necessary to use towards them precautions more 
exact, and an unceasing watchfulness, in order not to be exposed to abuses which might result from a less constant 
vigilance. But it is not to France, it is to England, that these inconveniences to individuals ought to be imputed. 
She it is who has given the example of measures unjust and illegal, and infringing on the sovereignty of nations. 
To oblige her to renounce them, it has become necessary to combat her with her own arms; in violating the rights 
of all nations she has united them all by a common interest; and it is for them to have recourse to force against 
her, to forbid her the search (la visite) of their vessels, the taking away of their crews, and to declare themselves 
against measures which wound their dignity and their independence. The unjust pretensions of England will be 
kept up as long as those whose rights she violates are silent; and what Government has had more to complain of 
against her than the United .States? All the difficulties which have given rise to your reclamations, sir, would be 
removed with ease, if the Government of the United States, after complaining in vain of the injustice and violations 
of England, took with the whole continent the part of guarantying itself therefrom. England has introduced into 
the maritime war an entire disregard for the rights of nations; it is only in forcing her to a peace that it is possible 
to recover them. On this point the interest of all nations is the same, all have their honor and their independence 
to defend. 
Accept, sir, &c. 
CHAMPAGNY. 
Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Madison. 
Sir: Paris, December 27, 1807. 
I forward by Mr. McElhonny a copy of a second and very extraordinary decree of this Government with 
regard to neutral commerce. Whether it be meant to stimulate Great Britain to the commission of new outrages, 
or to quicken us in repelling those she has already committed, the policy is equally unwise, and so decidedly so, 
that I know not a single man of consideration who approves of it. It is, however, not less true that it is as diffi- 
cult to find one who will hazard an objection to it. T********d, who in this way is permitted to go further than 
any other person, dare not avow his opinion of it, nor (bad as he thinks it) will he do more than state that the pre- 
sent moment would appear to dictate some modifications. To this point he stands engaged to go, and I wait the 
result with much anxiety. The Emperor is expected here on the last day of the month. 
I have the honor to be, with very great respect, sir, your most obedient and humble servant, 
JOHN ARMSTRONG. 
P. S. — As Mr. Lee thinks it probable that both the copies of my despatch of the 15th November are taken to 
England, I send a third copy of it with this. There is no longer a doubt that the Emperor wished to get hold of 
the royal family of Portugal. There is a degree of wickedness that makes even scoundrels honest. This is veri- 
fied in the conduct of Aranjo. In every other act of his life he betrayed his master; in this he served, and per- 
haps saved him. The assailant confided to him his whole secret, and, abandoned as he was, he could not lend 
himself to its execution. 
I have seen a letter from the Minister of Marine, in which he says, " The vessels of friendly and allied Powers 
now in the ports of the empire shall not be permitted to depart until further orders." The professed object of this 
measure is " to prevent their falling into the hands of the enemy;" the real object to induce the British to arrest 
all such vessels [of ours] as may be within their grasp. Thus the two rivals are to go on endeavoring which can 
most outrage law and justice. The letter above mentioned was written to the minister of Denmark. A similar 
notice has not yet been sent to me: it is therefore possible that His Majesty's care is restricted to vessels of Powers 
both friendly and allied; that it is a squeeze purely fraternal. If so, we may escape for this time. I state this, 
however, as a thing barely possible. 
I am, sir, with verv high consideration your most obedient servant, 
JOHN ARMSTRONG 
Extract: — Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Madison. 
Paris, January 22, 1808. 
The conjecture offered in my last letter, with regard to the embargo of our vessels, turns out to be correct; the 
order was intended to be confined to the vessels of friendly and allied Powers, or Powers having both these char- 
acters; the word neutral crept into it merely by mistake. An extract from the minister's letter to me on this sub- 
ject is as follows, to wit: " No order has been given to retain neutral vessels in the ports of the empire; and as 
soon as I knew of the error committed in this respect, I h;wtoned to correct it, and to notify expressly that neutral 
vessels, and particularly those of the United States, should enjoy an entire freedom." I subjoin, also, a copy of 
a letter, in answer to the remonstrances I have made against the new arrfit of the 17th of December last; by this 
you will see that the captures under this decree, like those under that of November, 180G, are in the nature of 
detention, and that, in the contingency of an exclusion of British commerce from the United States, the ships and 
cargoes will be immediately released. I expect, from one moment to another, the Emperor's orders for immedi- 
ately raising all the sequestrations which have taken place under the November decree. 
[Referred to in Mr. Armstrong's despatch of January 22, 1808.] 
Translation of a letter from Mr. Champagny to General Armstrong, dated 
Sir: Paris, January 15, 1808. 
The different notes which you have done me the honor to address to me have been laid before His Ma- 
jesty. 
1808.] FRANCE. 249 
The proceedings of England towards all Governments are so contrary to the law of nations, and all the rules 
constantly observed even among enemies, that no recourse against this Power is any longer to be found in the ordi- 
nary means of repression. In order to annoy her, it is become necessary to turn against her the arms which she 
makes use of herself; and, if transient inconveniences result therefrom, it is to her alone that they are to be im- 
puted. Since England respects no laws, how could they be respected with regard to her? The maritime laws 
which she violates, ought they still to be a protection to her? And if some Powers tolerate the infractions com- 
mitted on their independence, could they have the right to require that France alone should restrain herself within 
limits which her enemy has every where overleaped? 
The United States, more than any other Power, have to complain of the aggressions of England. It has not 
been enough for her to offend against the independence of their flag, nay, against that of their territory and of their 
inhabitants, by attacking them even in their ports, by forcibly carrying away their crews; her decrees of the 11th 
November have made a fresh attack on their commerce and on their navigation, as they have done on those of all 
other Powers. 
In the situation on which England has placed the continent, especially since her decrees of the 11th Novem- 
ber, His Majesty has no doubt of a declaration of war against her by the United States, whatever transient sacri- 
fices war may occasion; they will not believe it consistent either with their interest or dignity to acknowledge the 
monstrous principle and the anarchy which that Government wishes to establish on the seas. If it be useful and 
honorable for all nations to cause the true maritime law of nations to be re-established, and to avenge the insults 
committed by England against every flag, it is indispensable for the United States, who, from the extent of their 
commerce, have oftener to complain of these violations. War exists, then, in fact, between England and the United 
States; and His Majesty considers it as declared from the day on which England published her decrees. In that 
persuasion, His Majesty, ready to consider the United States as associated with the cause of all the Powers who 
have to defend themselves against England, has not taken any definitive measures towards the American vessels 
which may have been brought into our ports; he has ordered that they should remain sequestered until a decision 
may be had thereon, according to the disposition which shall have been expressed by the Government of the 
United States. 
Extract: — Mr. Madison to Mr. Armstrong. 
Department of State, February 8, 1808. 
Your letters and communications by Doctor Bullus were duly delivered on the 14th day of December; the 
same conveyance brought a copy of the sentence pronounced by the French prize court in the case of the Hori- 
zon, giving a judicial effect to the decree of November 21, 1806, as expounded in the answer of Mr. Champagnv 
to your letter of the 12th November, 1807. 
Whilst the French Government did not avow or enforce a meaning of the decree of November, 1806, in relation 
to the United States extending its purview beyond the municipal limits, it could not, in strictness, be regarded as 
an infraction either of our neutral or conventional rights; and, consequently, did not authorize more than a demand 
of seasonable explanations of its doubtful import, or friendly expostulations with respect to the rigor and sudden- 
ness of its innovations. 
The case is now essentially changed. A construction of the decree is avowed and executed, which violates as 
well the positive stipulations of the convention of September 30, 1800, as the incontestable principles of public 
law. And the President charges you to superadd, to whatever representations you may have previously made, a 
formal remonstrance in such terms as may be best calculated either to obtain a recall of the illegal measure, so 
far as it relates to the United States, or to have the effect of leaving, in full force, all the rights accruing to them 
from a failure to do so. 
That the execution of local laws against foreign nations on the high seas is a violation of the rights of the for- 
mer and the freedom of the latJer, will probably not be questioned. A contrary principle would, in fact, imply the 
same exclusive dominion over the entire ocean as is enjoyed within the limits of the local sovereignty, and a degra- 
dation of every other nation from its common rights and equal rank. 
If it be contended that the decree, as a retaliation on the other belligerent, at the expense of neutral nations, is 
justified by a culpable acquiescence in the prior measures of that belligerent operating through neutrals, you will 
be able to deny such acquiescence; and to urge, moreover, that, on every supposition, the retaliating measure could 
not be justly enforced in relation to neutrals, without allowing them, at least, a reasonable time for choosing be- 
tween due measures against the prior wrong and an acquiescence in both. The copy of the representations to the 
British Government, through its minister here, on the subject of its orders of January, 1807, will at once disprove 
an acquiescence on the part of the United States, and explain the grounds on which the late extension of the French 
decree of November, 1806, is an object of just remonstrance. 
The conduct of the French Government in giving this extended operation to its decree, and, indeed, in issuing 
one with such an apparent or doubtful import against the rights of the sea, is the more extraordinary, inasmuch 
as the inability to enforce it on that element exhibited the measure in the light of an empty menace, at the same 
time that it afforded pretexts to her enemy for severe retaliations, for which ample means are found in her naval 
superiority. 
The accumulated dangers to which the illegal proceedings of the belligerent nations have subjected the com- 
merce and navigation of the United States, have at length induced Congress to resort to an embargo on our own 
vessels, as a measure best fitted for the crisis; being an effectual security for our mercantile property and mariners 
now at home and daily arriving, and, at the same time, neither a measure nor just cause of war. Copies of this 
act were soon after its passage transmitted to Mr. Pinkney, with an authority to assure the British Government 
that it was to be viewed in this light, and that it was not meant to be the slightest impediment to amicable nejo- 
tiations with foreign Governments. He was requested to avail himself of an opportunity of communicating to 
you and Mr. Erving this view of the subject; and I hope that you will have been thence enabled to present it to 
the French Government. Not relying, however, on that indirect opportunity, I send by this another copy of the 
act, with an instruction from the President, that you make it the subject of such explanations as will guard against 
any misconception of the policy which led to it. It is strictly a measure of precaution, required by the dangers 
incident to external commerce, and, being indiscriminate in its terms and operation towards all nations, can give no 
just offence to any. The duration of the act is not fixed by itself, and will, consequently, depend on a continu- 
ance or cessation of its causes, in a degree sufficient, in the judgment of the Legislature, to induce or forbid its 
repeal. It may be hoped that the inconveniences felt from it by the belligerent nations may lead to a change of 
250 FOREIGN RELATIONS. [No 216. 
conduct which imposed the inconveniences of it on ourselves. France herself will be a sufferer, and some of her 
allies far more so. It will be very agreeable to find in that consideration, and still more in her sense of justice, a 
sufficient motive to an early manifestation of the respect due to our commercial rights. The example would be 
worthy of the professions which she makes to the world on this subject. 
February IS. Since the above was written 1 have been under a degree of indisposition, which lias suspended 
the proposed continuation of it, and which now will oblige me to be very brief; the more so, as the vessel has been 
some days detained, which was engaged for the special purpose of conveying public despatches and private letters 
to Europe. 
The delay has enabled me to inform you that Mr. Erskine, a few days ago, communicated, by instructions from 
his Government, its late decrees of November 11th, and those forming a sequel to them. The communication 
was accompanied with assurances that much regret was felt by His Britannic Majesty at the necessity which the 
conduct of his enemy had created for measures so embarrassing to neutral commerce, and that His Majesty would 
readily follow an example of relinquishing such a course, or even of making relaxations pari passu with his enemy. 
Whether these intimations have any reference to the distinction between such parts of the French decree as 
operate municipally on shore, and such as, operating on the high seas, violate the rights of neutrals, or to a distinc- 
tion between the former restriction and the late extension of the decree with respect to the United States, Mr. 
Erskine did not seem authorized to say. The probability is that neither of these distinctions entered into the views 
of the British cabinet. But it is certainly neither less the duty nor the true policy of the Emperor of the French 
so to vary his decree as to make it consistent with the rights of neutrals, and the freedom of the seas, and particu- 
larly with his positive stipulations to the United States. This may be the more reasonably expected, as nothing 
can be more clear, as has been already observed, than that the effect of the decree, as far as it can be carried into 
effect, would not be sensibly diminished by abolishing its operation beyond the limits of the territorial sovereignty. 
In remonstrating against the injustice and illegality of the French decree, I am aware that you may be remind- 
ed of antecedent injuries to France and her allies through British violations of neutral commerce. The fact can- 
not be denied, and may be urged with great force, in our remonstrances against the orders to which Great Britain 
has given a retaliating character, since the French decree might on the same ground be pronounced a retaliation 
on the preceding conduct of Great Britain. But ought the legitimate commerce of neutrals to be thus the victim 
and the sport of belligerents contesting with each other the priority of their destructive innovations, and, without 
leaving either of them to neutrals, even the opportunity or the time for disproving that culpable acquiescence which 
is made the pretext by both for the wrongs done to them? And I must repeat that, apart from all questions of this 
nature, the French decree, or at least the illogal extensions of it to the United States, remain chargeable with al! 
the impolicy which has been pointed out. 
I find by accounts from Hamburgh, Bremen, Holland, and Leghorn, that the trade and property of our citizens 
have been much vexed by regulations subaltern to those of the original decree of November 21, 1806. How far 
the complaints are founded on proceedings violating our public rights, or on such as are unfriendly and inequitable 
towardj our citizens who have placed their property within those jurisdictions, you will be able to decide better 
than we can do at this distance; and the President refers to your own judgment the kind of representation to the 
French Government which those and other analogous cases may require. 
Extract: — Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Madison. 
Paris, February 17, 1808. 
Enclosed is a copy of the answer from the Minister of Marine, to my letter of the 13th instant, in relation to 
the sale of a part of the cargo of the ship James Adams. It would now appear, that the promises of forbearance 
made by another Department arc applicable only to vessels sequestered in the ports, and not to such as have been 
captured at sea. 
[translation.] 
Extract: — From a letter of the Minister of Marine to General Armstrong. 
Fifth Division of Prizes, Paris, February 15, 1808. 
I observe to you, moreover, the question now is, not as to a vessel sequestered in port, but as to a prize made 
at sea, and seized for a contravention of the decree of the 17th December last; that the provisional sale ordered 
on account of the " average" is for the interest as well of -the captured as of the captors, and that it is directed 
according to the case provided for by the regulation of the 2d Prairial, 11th year. 
Extract: — Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Madison. 
Paris, February 22, 1808. 
Mr. Patterson offers so good a conveyance that I cannot but employ it. Nothing has occurred here since the 
date of my public despatches (the 17th instant,) to give to our business an aspect more favorable than it then had; 
hut, on the other hand, I have come at the knowledge of two facts, which, I think, sufficiently show the decided 
character of the Emperor's policy with regard to us: these are, 1st, that in a council of administration held a few 
days past, when it was proposed to modify the operation of the decrees of November, 1S06, and December, 1S07. 
(though the proposition was supported by the whole weight of the council,) he became highly indignant, and declared 
that these decrees should suffer no change, and that the Americans should be compelled to take the positive char- 
acter, either of allies or of enemies: 2d; that on the 27th of January last, twelve days after Mr. Champagny's 
written assurances that these decrees should work no change in the property sequestered until our discussions 
with England were brought to a close, and seven days before he repeated to me verbally these very assurances, 
tin Emperor had, by a special decision, confiscated two of our ships and their cargoes, (the Julius Henry and 
Juniatta,*) for want merely of a document, not required by any law or usage of the commerce in which they had 
been engaged. Tin- act was taken, as \ am informed, on a general report of sequestered cases, amounting to one 
hundred and sixty, and which, at present prices, will yield upwards of one hundred millions of francs; a sum the 
magnitude of which alone renders hopeless all attempts at saving it. Danes, Portuguese, and Americans will be 
the principal sufferers. 
If I am right in supposing that the Emperor has definitively taken his ground, I cannot he wrong in conclu- 
ding that you will immediately take yours. 
' These cases have been referred to the Grand Judge. 
1808.] FRANCE. 251 
Extract: — Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Madison. 
Paris, March 9, 1808. 
The conversation nlluded to in the copy of the letter of did not take place till the 8th instant, when the 
Emperor declared, that if means could be found to make an exception to the operation of the November decree, 
such exception should have his consent. 
Extract: — Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Madison. 
Paris, March 15, 1S08. 
I stated in my last letter the substance of a declaration made by (he Emperor, viz: that if means could be found 
to except American property from the operation of the decree of November, 1800, without infringing the principles 
of the decrees, he would immediately make the exception. No time was lost in communicating this declaration 
to me; and I was invited to point out the means it required, and assured that they should be immediately submitted 
to His Majesty. Little as I liked the proposition, and much as I doubt the sincerity of the declaration out of which 
it grew, I could not refuse any agency of mine in rescuing so much of the American property sequestered in the 
ports of France as should come within this new rule. I accordingly wrote the note, (a copy of which is subjoined 
to this letter,) pointing out, in a few words, the property to which that rule would apply. This note was put into 
the Emperor's hand by the Prince of Benevento, who, though six days have now elapsed, has not yet received an 
answer. 
[Note referred to in the extract from Mr. Armstrong's letter of the 15th March, 1808.] 
The imperial decree of November, 1806, contains no authority to sequester the cargoes of neutral vessels 
touching at English ports, and subsequently coming into those of France, excepting in cases in which the captains 
or supercargoes may have made false declarations. The penalty provided by that decree for offences other than 
those of false declarations is immediate departure from the empire; and as in these cases no false declarations 
have been made, nor are alleged to have been made, so no penalty, other than that of departure from the empire 
tan be legallv inflicted. 
Extract: — Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Madison. 
Paris, April 5, 1808. 
I received the despatches you did me the honor to address to me by Mr. Lewis, on the 26th ultimo. 
Though I had complained often and earnestly of both the principles and operation of the Emperor's decrees of 
November, 1806, and December, 1807, (having written at least twenty notes on the different cases which have 
arisen under them,) yet, as the President's orders were express, that, on receipt of your letter, 1 should superadd, 
to whatever representations might have been previously made, a formal remonstrance against those decrees, I did 
not lose a moment in writing and presenting the enclosed note ; the terms of which will, I hope, appear to be such 
as were proper or necessary to the case, and calculated either to obtain a recall of the illegal measures, or to leave 
in full force the rights accruing to the United States from a failure on the part of France to recall them. To this 
note I have not yet received an answer, nor have I reason to expect one soon, as the Emperor has left Paris, (it 
is said for Spain,) and had, at no time before he set out, indicated any alteration in the views which originally pro- 
duced the decrees in question. 
Mr. Pinkncy found means (in the return to the continent of M. D'Alopeus) to communicate the President's 
views on the subject of the general embargo, and particularly the desire he had that it should not be considered as 
a measure of hostility against any foreign nation. Some explanations of this kind, were, perhaps, necessary in 
England, where, from the misrepresentations of our own people, the character of the policy was likely to be mis- 
understood; but as neither the same nor any other reason existed for making them here, none have been offered. 
[Enclosed in the preceding despatch.] 
Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Champagny. 
Sir: Paris, April 2, 1808. 
Having submitted to the Government of the United States copies of the imperial decrees of the 21st of 
November, 1806, and 17th December, 1807, and of the expositions which your excellency has been pleased, at 
different times, to give of them, I have recently received the instructions of the President to remonstrate against 
both the provisions and operation of the said decrees, on the ground of their infracting, as well the positive stipula- 
tions of a particular treaty, as the incontestable principles of public law. 
In discharging this duty, your excellency will permit me to recall to your remembrance the twelfth and four- 
teenth articles of the treaty made between the United States and France, on the 30th of September, 1800. These 
articles provide — 
1st. That " it shall be lawful for the citizens of either country to sail with their ships and merchandise (con 
traband goods always excepted) from any port whatever, to any port of the enemy of the other, and to sail and 
trade with their ships and merchandise, with perfect security and liberty, from the countries, ports, and places of 
those who are enemies of both, or of either party, without any opposition or disturbance whatsoever; and to pass 
not only directly from the places and ports of the enemy aforesaid to neutral ports and places, but also from one 
place belonging to an enemy to another place belonging to an enemy, whether they be or be not under the juris- 
diction of the same Power, unless such ports or places shall be actually blockaded, besieged, or invested." 
2d. That " vessels sailing for a port or place belonging to an enemy, without knowing that the same is 
either besieged, blockaded, or invested, may be turned away from such port or place, but they shall not be detained, 
nor any part of their cargo (not contraband) confiscated, unless, after notice of such blockade or investment, they 
shall again attempt to enter; but they shall be permitted to go to any other port or place they shall think proper." 
3d. That " free ships shall give a freedom to goods, and that every thing shall be deemed to be free and 
exempt which shall be found on board the ships belonging to the citizens of either of the contracting parties, 
252 FOREIGN RELATIONS. [No. 216. 
although the whole lading, or any part thereof, should appertain to the enemies of either; contraband goods being 
always excepted. " 
These stipulations are not more clear in themselves, nor of more indisputable application and authority in the 
present case, than the injunctions of public law by which they are enforced, viz: That local regulations (excepting 
by virtue of convention) cannot apply to foreign nations on the high seas, without violating the rights of the one, 
and the freedom of the other; that blockades can only exist when places are so invested that no serious attempt 
can be made to approach them without exposing the parties making them to imminent danger; that merchant ves- 
sels may be visited without any degradation to the flag of the nation to which they belong, &c. But why multiply 
proofs of a position which is not denied? Does not the official report of your enlightened predecessor of the 21st 
of November, 1806, admit the illegitimacy of the original decree? Does it not expressly say, that the doctrines of 
blockade introduced by England are monstrous and indefensible? and that the practice, like the doctrine, is a mock- 
ery of right, and an insult upon reason? After strictures so severe, because so just, what can be said for the policy 
of France, which differs in nothing from that of England? Has your excellency attempted to defend either the 
theory or the practice of this policy, on the ground of its conformity to the principles of public law? Or have you 
done more at any time, or on any occasion, than to seek a justification for it on the bare suggestion that the United 
States have acquiesced in the measures of England? And how has even this suggestion been maintained? By an 
exposition of the wrongs inflicted on American commerce! and which have been notoriously practised by all the 
belligerents in turn. Have not the ships of the United States been encountered by all? Have they not been turn- 
ed from their original destination? Have they not been dragged into foreign ports for adjudication? Have they 
not, in several instances, been burnt on the high seas? Is not the argument, founded on this state of things, equally 
good for either, or for all the belligerents? And can France derive from it rights which do not equally accrue to 
her enemies? There is, however, another and a better answer to this suggestion, which your excellency has already 
seen in the letter I had the honor of writing to you on the 16th of February last, viz: that the suggestion is neither 
well nor plausibly founded; and that the United States neither have submitted, nor will submit, to the usurpations 
of Great Britain nor to those of any other nation. 
Accept, sir, &c. 
JOHN ARMSTRONG. 
His Excellency the Minister of Foreign Relations. 
Extract: — Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Madison. 
Paris, April 12, 1808. 
I have detained Mr. Lewis till to-day, on the supposition that my letter of the 2d instant would be 
answered. This was, however, a mere accommodation to forms, as the absence of the Emperor and of the Min- 
ister of Foreign Relations rendered this supposition highly improbable. There being then no public reason for Mr. 
Lewis's longer stay in Paris, and the permission to the Osage to prosecute her voyage to England not including 
one to return to France, I have thought it best that he should embark with such despatches as were ready, proceed 
to Falmouth in England, and thence, after receiving Mr. Pinkney's orders, return with all possible expedition to 
the United States. He has accordingly been instructed to this effect. 
Extract: — Mr. Madison to Mr. Armstrong. 
Department of State, May 2, 1808. 
Since my last, of which Lieutenant Lewis was the bearer, I have received your several letters of 27th of De- 
cember, 22d of January, 15th and 17th of February, with their respective enclosures. 
That of the 15th of January, from Mr. Champagny to you, has, as you will see by the papers herewith sent, 
produced all the sensations here which the spirit and style of it were calculated to excite in minds alive to the 
interests and honor of the nation. To present to the United States the alternative of bending to the views of France 
against her enemy, or of incurring a confiscation of all the property of their citizens carried into the Fiench prize 
courts, implied that they were susceptible of impressions by which no independent and honorable nation can be 
guided; and to prejudge and pronounce for them the eflect which the conduct of another nation ought to have on 
their councils and course of proceeding, had the air at least of an assumed authority, not less irritating to the public 
feelings. In these lights the President makes it your duty to present to the French Government the contents of 
Mr. Champagny's letter; taking care, as your discretion will doubtless suggest, that while you make that Govern- 
ment sensible of the offensive tone employed, you leave the way open for friendly and respectful explanations, if 
there be a disposition to offer them; and for a decision here on any reply which may be of a different character. 
Congress closed their session on the 25th ultimo. For a general view of their proceedings, I refer to the series 
of newspapers heretofore and now forwarded, and to other prints which are added. Among their acts of chief im- 
portance is that which vests in the President an authority to suspend, in whole or in part, the embargo laws. 
The conditions on which the suspending authority is to be exercised will engage your particular attention. They 
appeal equally to the justice and the policy of the two great belligerent Powers now emulating each other in viola- 
tions of both. The President counts on your best endeavors to give to this appeal all the eflect possible with the 
French Government. Mr. Pinkney will be doing the same with that of Great Britain. The relation in which a 
recall of its retaliating decrees by either Power will place the United States to the other, is obvious, and ought to 
be a motive to the measure proportioned to the desire which has been manifested by each to produce collisions 
between the United States and its adversary, and which must be equally felt by each to avoid one with itself. 
Should wiser councils or increasing distresses induce Great Britain to revoke her impolitic orders against 
neutral commerce, and thereby prepare the way for the removal of the embargo, as it applies to her, France could 
not persist in the illegal part of her decrees, if she does not mean to force a contest with the United States. On 
the other hand, should she set the example of revocation, Great Britain would be obliged, either by following it to 
restore to France the full benefit of neutral trade, which she needs, or, by persevering in her obnoxious orders after 
the pretext for them had ceased, to render collisions with the United States inevitable. 
In every point of view, therefore, it is so clearly the sound policy of France to rescind so much at least of her 
decrees as trespass on neutral rights, and particularly to be the first in taking the retrograde step, that it cannot be 
unreasonable to expect that it will be immediately taken. 
FRANCE. 
253 
The repeal of her decrees is the more to be expected, above all, if Great Britain should repeal, or be likely to 
repeal, hers, as the plan of the original decree at Berlin did not extend to a violation of the freedom of the seas, 
and was restricted to a municipal operation for nearly an entire year, notwithstanding the illegal British orders of 
January, 1807, and as a return of France to that restricted scope of her plan would so immaterially diminish its 
operation against the British commerce; that operation being so completely in the power of France on land, and so 
little in her power on the high seas. 
But although we cannot of right demand from France more than a repeal of so much of her decrees as violate 
the freedom of the seas, and a great point will be gained by a repeal of that part of them, yet, as it may not have 
the effect of inducing a repeal of the whole illegal system of the British Government, which may seek pretexts or 
plead a necessity for counteracting the unprecedented and formidable mode of warfare practised against her, it 
will be desirable that as little room as possible should be left for this remaining danger to the tranquil enjoyment 
of our commercial rights. 
In whatever degree the French Government may be led to change its system, you will lose no time in trans- 
mitting the information to this Department and to Mr. Pinkney, and by hired conveyances, if necessary. A corre- 
spondent instruction is given to Mr. Pinkney. 
It is of the greater importance that you should receive from each other the earliest notice of any relaxations, as 
each Government is under a pledge to follow such an example by the other. And it is not of less importance that 
the President or Congress should be acquainted with the facts, that the proceedings here may be accommodated 
to them. 
That you may know the grounds on which the British orders of November have been arranged by this Govern- 
ment, I enclose a copy of the answer to Mr. Erskine's note communicating them, a copy of the note being also 
enclosed. 
The other documents communicated will put you in full possession of the relations of the United States with 
Great Britain, as resulting from the issue of our general negotiations, and from that of the mission of Mr. Rose. 
This despatch is forwarded by Mr. Baker, who takes his passage from Baltimore, in a vessel engaged, 
as was the Osage which sailed from New York, for the special purpose of public and mercantile correspondences 
with Europe. She will proceed in the first instance to L'Orient, where she will leave Mr. Baker, and thence 
proceed with despatches for Mr. Pinkney to Falmouth, where she will remain a few days to receive communica- 
tions from him: she will then return to L'Orient, in order to bring back Mr. Baker, with your communications. 
Extract: — Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Madison. 
Sir: Paris, June 25, 1808. 
The St. Michael arrived at L'Orient on the 1st instant, and, like the Osage, was immediately put under 
sequestration. It was not till the 8th that Mr. Baker arrived here. 
The remonstrance ordered, with respect to the terms of Mr. Champagny's letter of the 15th of January, shall 
be executed the moment the Prince of Benevento returns from Valencay, and I hope in a way which, while it makes 
the French Government sensible of the offensiveness of those terms, will not obstruct the road to friendly and re- 
spectful explanations on its part. 
To give this a chance of finding Mr. Livingston at Bordeaux, I must close it here. 
With very high respect, sir, your obedient servant, 
J. Madison, Esq., Secretary of State. 
JOHN ARMSTRONG. 
Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Madison. 
Sir: Paris, July 18, 1808. 
I avail myself of the detention of the Arcturus, to transmit copies of two letters which I have written to 
M. de Champagny; the one in execution of the President's orders with regard to the offensive terms employed 
by that minister in his note of the 15th of January last; the other demanding from him, on the part of His Gov- 
ernment, an avowal or disavowal of the conduct of Rear Admiral Baudin in burning or otherwise destroying, on 
the high seas, four American ships and their cargoes. 
I have the honor to be, sir, with very high consideration, 
your most obedient and very humble servant, 
JOHN ARMSTRONG. 
James Madison, Esq., Secretary of State. 
[Referred to in Mr. Armstrong's despatch of 18th July.] 
Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Champagny. 
Sir: Paris, July 10, 1808. 
Your excellency will see, by the enclosed extracts from two letters which His Majesty's Minister of Marine 
has done me the honor to address to me on the 18th of April and 13th of June last, that the property taken from 
the four American ships destroyed by Rear Admiral Baudin has been placed under the jurisdiction of the Imperial 
Council of Prizes, to be judged by it, as a case of ordinary capture. 
To your excellency it will be unnecessary to remark that, whatever may be the decision of the council in rela- 
tion to the merchandise which has been saved, the case presents a question of much higher import, and entirely 
beyond the jurisdiction of a maritime court, viz. the kind and degree of reparation which shall be due for the ships 
and merchandise which have been destroyed. And, by way of opening tins subject, your excellency will permit 
me to ask whether His Majesty's Government does or does not justify the conduct of Rear Admiral Baudin in 
burning or otherwise destroying, on the high seas, the ships and merchandise of a neutral and friendly Power? 
I prav your excellency, &c. 
JOHN ARMSTRONG. 
M. Champagny. 
33 VOL. HI. 
2 54 FOREIGN RELATIONS. [No. 216. 
[Referred to in Mr. Armstrong's letter of July 18.] 
Extract: — Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Champagny. 
gIR: Paris, July 4, 1808. 
It has been made the duty of the undersigned to bring to the view of the French Government an official 
note addressed to him, on the 15th of January last, by His Majesty's Minister of Exterior Relations, and which, 
in the opinion of the President, is calculated to derogate from the rights of the United States, as an independent 
nation. The note is in the following words, viz: 
(See Mr. Champagny's letter of the 15th of January, 1808, page 244.) 
On this note the undersigned would remark — 
1st. That the United States have a right to elect their own policy with regard to England, as they have with 
regard to France, and that it is only while they continue to exercise this right, without suffering any degree of re- 
straint from either Power, that they can maintain the independent relation in which they stand to both: whence, it 
follows, that, to have pronounced, in the peremptory tone of the preceding note, the effects which the measures of 
the British Government ought to have produced on their counsels and conduct, was a language less adapted to 
accomplish its own object than to offend against the respect due from one independent nation to another; and, 
2dly. That the alternative to be found in the last paragraph, and which leaves the United States to choose 
between an acquiescence in the views of France against Great Britain, and a confiscation of all American pro- 
perty sequestered by order of His Imperial Majesty, is equally offensive to both Governments; to France, as it 
would impute to her a proposition founded in wrong to individuals; and to the United States, as it would imply on 
their part a subjection to pecuniary interests totally inconsistent with their principles, and highly dishonorable to 
their character. 
His excellency will be persuaded that the President, in directing the undersigned to make this representation, 
no object in view beyond that of seeking an explanation, which cannot but tend to promote the harmony of 
the two Powers 
His Excellency the Minister of Foreign Relations. 
The Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States, 
JOHN ARMSTRONG. 
Mr. Madison to Mr. Armstrong. 
Sir: Department of State, July 21, 1808. 
Herewith you will receive a copy of the papers relating to one of the vessels which were destroyed at sea 
by the French frigates returning from the West Indies. I observe that, in your letter to Mr. Champagny of the 
2d of April, you have incidentally noticed this occurrence. If ample reparation should not have been made to the 
sufferers, the" President thinks it proper that, as their cases become authenticated, you should present them in terms 
which may awaken the French Government to the nature of the injury and the demands of justice. The burning 
of neutral vessels detained on the high seas is the most distressing of all the modes by which belligerents exert force 
contrary to right, and, in proportion as it is destitute of apology, ought at least to be the promptitude and ampli- 
tude of the redress. 
If it be contended that the destruction in these cases proceeded solely from the danger that otherwise intelli- 
gence might reach a pursuing or hovering force, it may be answered, that, if such a plea were of greater avail, it 
would only disprove an hostility of intention, without diminishing the obligation to indemnify, on the most liberal 
scale, the injured individuals. It may be added, that, if the outrage on the individuals was not meant as an hostility 
towards their nation, the latter might justly expect a tender of such explanations as would leave no doubt on this 
subject. 
I have the honor to be, &c. 
JAMES MADISON. 
General Armstrong, Minister Plenipotentiary of the U. S., Paris. 
Extract: — Mr. Madison to Mr. Armstrong. 
Department of State, July 22, 1808. 
Your despatches by Lieutenant Lewis were delivered on the 8th instant. 
It is regretted that the interval between his arrival and the date of your letter to Mr. Champagny, during which 
I presume some verbal intercommunication must have taken place, had produced no indication of a favorable 
change in the views of the French Government with respect to its decrees; and still more that, instead of an early 
and favorable answer to your letter, it should have been followed by such a decree as is reported to have been 
issued on the 22d April, at Bayonne. The decree has not yet reached the United States, and therefore its precise 
import cannot be ascertained. But if it should be, as it is represented, a sweeping stroke at all American vessels 
on the high seas, it will not only extend our demands of reparation, but is rendered the more ominous with respect 
to the temper and views of the Emperor towards the United States by the date of the measure. 
The arrival of Mr. Baker with my letter of May 2d, of which a copy is herewith sent, will have enabled you 
to resume the subject of the decrees, with the fairest opportunity that could be given to the French Government 
for a change of the unjust and unwise course which has been pursued; and I assure myself that you will not have 
failed to turn the communications with which you are furnished to the best account. If France does not wish to 
throw the United States into the war against her, for which it is impossible to find a rational or plausible induce- 
ment, she ought not to hesitate a moment in revoking at least so much of her decrees as violate the rights of the 
sea, and furnish to her adversary the pretext for his retaliating measures. It would seem as if the imperial cabi- 
net had never paid sufficient attention to the smallness of the sacrifice which a repeal of that portion of its system 
would involve, if an act of justice is to be called a sacrifice. 
The information by the return of the Osage from England is not more satisfactory than that from France. 
Nothing was said on the subject of the Chesapeake, nor any thing done or promised as to the orders in council. It 
is probable that further accounts from the United States were waited for, and that the arrival of the St. Michael 
will have led to a manifestation of the real views of that Government on those and other subjects. In the mean 
time, it cannot be doubted that hopes were cherished there of some events in this country favorable to the policy 
1808.] FRANCE. 255 
of the orders, and particularly that the offensive language and proceedings of France would bring on a hostile re- 
sistance from the United States; in which case the British Government would be able to mould every thing to its 
satisfaction. There is much reason to believe that, if the British Government should not concur in a mutual abo- 
lition of the orders and of the embargo, it will result from an unwillingness to set an example which might be fol- 
lowed, and might, consequently, put an end to the irritating career of her enemy, on which the calculation is built. 
Might not use be made of this view of the matter in those frank and friendly conversations which sometimes best 
admit topics of a delicate nature, and in which pride and prejudice can be best managed without descending from 
the necessary level? In every view, it is evidently proper, as far as respect to the national honor will allow, to 
avoid a style of procedure which might co-operate with the policy of the British Government, by stimulating the 
passions of the French. 
Extract of a letter from General Armstrong to the Secretary of State, dated 
Sir: Paris, July 26, 1808. 
It would have given me the highest pleasure to have drawn from this Government such explanations on 
general subject of our differences with them as would have met the friendly and equitable views of the Uni 
States; but I owe it, as well to you as to myself, to declare that every attempt for that purpose hitherto made 
failed, and under circumstances which by no means indicate any change in their aspect for the better. 
With very high consideration, I am, sir, your most obedient servant, 
JOHN ARMSTRONG. 
James Madison, Esq., Secretary of State. 
Extract: — Mr. Armstrong to the Secretary of State. 
* Paris, August 7, 1808. 
I wrote a few lines to you yesterday. Two weeks have gone by without any new condemnation. My remon- 
strances continue to be unanswered. 
P. S. I enclose a copy of my note of yesterday to M. de Champagny. 
[Referred to and enclosed in Mr. Armstrong's despatch of August 7, 1808.] 
Extract: — Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Champagny. 
Paris, August 6, 1808. 
Mr. Armstrong presents his compliments to M. de Champagny, and begs leave to inform him that, having for 
some months past made trial of the artificial waters of Rivoli without any useful effect, his physician has prescribed 
for him those of Bourbon l'Archambault. Should M. de Champagny have any communication to make to Mr. 
Armstrong, he will be pleased to address them as usual to the Hotel de Legation Americaine, Rue Vaugirard, No. 
100, whence they will be regularly and promptly transmitted to Bourbon. 
On leaving Paris, Mr. Armstrong thinks proper to express his regrets that the political relations of the two 
Powers should continue to wear an aspect less auspicious to their future good understanding than is wished for by 
those who are the friends of both. 
That His Majesty has a right to make such municipal regulations as he may deem proper, with regard to 
foreign commerce, neither is, nor has been, denied: for example, he may forbid the entry into the ports of France 
of American ships which have touched in England, or been destined to England; and he may either sequester or 
confiscate such vessels of the United States as shall infract these laws, after due promulgation and notice thereof; 
but beyond this the United States hope and believe that His Majesty will not go. 
M. de Champagny will not fail to seize the distinction which these remarks present, between the authority of 
municipal regulations and that of public law; and will decide whether it does or does not offer a ground on which 
the good understanding, so long and so usefully maintained between the United States and France, may be pre- 
served, and a degree of intercourse between them renewed, which shall have the effect of re-animating their former 
industry. 
Does His Majesty fear that the balance of trade, arising from this renewed industry, would go to the advantage 
of England? Means are certainly not wanting to prevent this consequence. Would it not be entirely avoided by 
making it a condition of the commerce in question, that all ships leaving France shall take (in some article or 
articles of their produce or manufacture) the full amount of the cargoes they bring hither? 
Ships sailing under this regulation would or would not go voluntarily to England. If they went voluntarily, it 
would only be because that country afforded the best markets for the productions of France; in which case the 
habitual results would be entirely changed, and England, ceasing to receive a balance for her manufactures, would 
begin to pay one to the United States on the productions of France. Could France wish a state of commerce more 
prosperous than this? 
If, on the other hand, the American ships did not go voluntarily to England, but were captured and sent in for 
adjudication, it may be fairly presumed that the United States could no longer hesitate about becoming a party to 
the war against England. 
Thus, in either case, the interests of His Majesty would be directly advanced by the measure: in the one, the 
wants of France and her colonies would be not only regularly supplied, but she would herself become an entrepot 
for the supply of the continent; in the other, the wishes of His Majesty, as expressed in February last, would be 
directly promoted. 
Mr. Armstrong has the honor of renewing to M. de Champagny the assurances of his very high consideration. 
To His Excellency M. de Champagny, Minister of Exterior Relations. 
Extract: — Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Madison. 
Bourbon l'Archambault, August 28, 1808. 
Since my arrival at this place, I have been honored by the receipt of your despatch of the 21st ultimo, and 
would immediately return to Paris to renew my discussions with M. de Champagnv, either personally, as you suggest. 
or by writing, had I not the most solemn conviction that any new experiment, made at the present moment, in 
either form, and of official character, would certainly be useless, and probably injurious. 
256 FOREIGN RELATIONS. [No. 217. 
(Confidential.) Extract: — Gen. Armstrong to Mr. Madison. 
Bourbon l'Archambault, August 30, 1808. 
We have somewhat overrated our means of coercing the two great belligerents to a course of justice. The 
embargo is a measure calculated, above any other, to keep us whole and keep us in peace; but, beyond this, you 
must not count upon it. Here it is not felt, and in England (in the midst of the more recent and interesting 
events of the day) it is forgotten. 
I hope that, unless France shall do us justice, we will raise the embargo, and make in its stead the experiment 
of an armed commerce. .Should she adhere to her wicked and foolish measures, we ought not to content ourselves 
with doing this; there is much, very much besides that we can do, and we ought not to omit doing all we can, 
because it is believed here that we cannot do much, and even that we will not do what we have the power of doing. 
10th Congress.] No. 217. [3d Session, 
REPORTED TO THE,HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, NOVEMBER 16, 1808, AND JUNE 9, 1809. 
