



Th Advntrs of Shrlck Hlms

by Arthr Cnn Dyl


Cntnts

   I.     A Scndl in Bhm
   I.    Th Rd-Hdd Lg
   I.   A Cs of Idntty
   IV.    Th Bscmb Vlly Mystry
   V.     Th Fv Orng Pps
   V.    Th Mn wth th Twstd Lp
   V.   Th Advntr of th Bl Crbncl
   V.  Th Advntr of th Spckld Bnd
   IX.    Th Advntr of th Engnr’s Thmb
   X.     Th Advntr of th Nbl Bchlr
   X.    Th Advntr of th Bryl Crnt
   X.   Th Advntr of th Cppr Bchs




I. A SCNDL IN BHM


I.

T Shrlck Hlms sh is alwys _th_ wmn. I hv sldm hrd hm
mntn hr undr any othr nm. In hs eys sh eclpss and
prdmnts th whl of hr sx. It ws nt tht h flt any emtn
akn t lv fr Irn Adlr. All emtns, and tht on prtclrly,
wr abhrrnt t hs cld, prcs bt admrbly blncd mnd. H
ws, I tk it, th mst prfct rsnng and obsrvng mchn tht
th wrld hs sn, bt as a lvr h wld hv plcd hmslf in a
fls pstn. H nvr spk of th sftr pssns, sv wth a gb
and a snr. Thy wr admrbl thngs fr th obsrvr—excllnt fr
drwng th vl frm mn’s mtvs and actns. Bt fr th trnd
rsnr t admt sch intrsns int hs own dlct and fnly
adjstd tmprmnt ws t intrdc a dstrctng fctr whch mght
thrw a dbt upn all hs mntl rslts. Grt in a snstv
instrmnt, or a crck in on of hs own hgh-pwr lnss, wld nt
b mr dstrbng thn a strng emtn in a ntr sch as hs. And
yt thr ws bt on wmn t hm, and tht wmn ws th lt Irn
Adlr, of dbs and qstnbl mmry.

I hd sn lttl of Hlms ltly. My mrrg hd drftd us awy
frm ech othr. My own cmplt hppnss, and th hm-cntrd
intrsts whch rs up arnd th mn wh frst fnds hmslf mstr
of hs own estblshmnt, wr sffcnt t absrb all my attntn,
whl Hlms, wh lthd evry frm of scty wth hs whl Bhmn
sl, rmnd in or ldgngs in Bkr Strt, brd amng hs old
bks, and altrntng frm wk t wk btwn ccn and ambtn,
th drwsnss of th drg, and th frc enrgy of hs own kn
ntr. H ws stll, as evr, dply attrctd by th stdy of crm,
and occpd hs immns fclts and extrrdnry pwrs of
obsrvtn in fllwng ot ths cls, and clrng up ths
mystrs whch hd bn abndnd as hplss by th offcl plc.
Frm tm t tm I hrd sm vg accnt of hs dngs: of hs
smmns t Odss in th cs of th Trpff mrdr, of hs clrng up
of th snglr trgdy of th Atknsn brthrs at Trncml, and
fnlly of th mssn whch h hd accmplshd s dlctly and
sccssflly fr th rgnng fmly of Hllnd. Bynd ths sgns of
hs actvty, hwvr, whch I mrly shrd wth all th rdrs of
th dly prss, I knw lttl of my frmr frnd and cmpnn.

On nght—it ws on th twntth of Mrch, 1888—I ws rtrnng frm a
jrny t a ptnt (fr I hd nw rtrnd t cvl prctc), whn
my wy ld m thrgh Bkr Strt. As I pssd th wll-rmmbrd
dr, whch mst alwys b assctd in my mnd wth my wng, and
wth th drk incdnts of th Stdy in Scrlt, I ws szd wth a
kn dsr t s Hlms agn, and t knw hw h ws emplyng hs
extrrdnry pwrs. Hs rms wr brllntly lt, and, evn as I
lkd up, I sw hs tll, spr fgr pss twc in a drk slhtt
agnst th blnd. H ws pcng th rm swftly, egrly, wth hs
hd snk upn hs chst and hs hnds clspd bhnd hm. T m, wh
knw hs evry md and hbt, hs atttd and mnnr tld thr own
stry. H ws at wrk agn. H hd rsn ot of hs drg-crtd
drms and ws ht upn th scnt of sm nw prblm. I rng th bll
and ws shwn up t th chmbr whch hd frmrly bn in prt my own.

Hs mnnr ws nt effsv. It sldm ws; bt h ws gld, I thnk,
t s m. Wth hrdly a wrd spkn, bt wth a kndly ey, h wvd
m t an armchr, thrw acrss hs cs of cgrs, and indctd a
sprt cs and a gsgn in th crnr. Thn h std bfr th fr
and lkd m ovr in hs snglr intrspctv fshn.

“Wdlck sts y,” h rmrkd. “I thnk, Wtsn, tht y hv pt
on svn and a hlf pnds snc I sw y.”

“Svn!” I answrd.

“Indd, I shld hv thght a lttl mr. Jst a trfl mr, I
fncy, Wtsn. And in prctc agn, I obsrv. Y dd nt tll m
tht y intndd t g int hrnss.”

“Thn, hw d y knw?”

“I s it, I ddc it. Hw d I knw tht y hv bn gttng
yrslf vry wt ltly, and tht y hv a mst clmsy and crlss
srvnt grl?”

“My dr Hlms,” sd I, “ths is t mch. Y wld crtnly hv
bn brnd, hd y lvd a fw cntrs ag. It is tr tht I hd a
cntry wlk on Thrsdy and cm hm in a drdfl mss, bt as I
hv chngd my clths I cn’t imgn hw y ddc it. As t Mry
Jn, sh is incrrgbl, and my wf hs gvn hr ntc, bt thr,
agn, I fl t s hw y wrk it ot.”

H chckld t hmslf and rbbd hs lng, nrvs hnds tgthr.

“It is smplcty itslf,” sd h; “my eys tll m tht on th insd
of yr lft sh, jst whr th frlght strks it, th lthr is
scrd by sx almst prlll cts. Obvsly thy hv bn csd by
smn wh hs vry crlssly scrpd rnd th edgs of th sl in
ordr t rmv crstd md frm it. Hnc, y s, my dbl
ddctn tht y hd bn ot in vl wthr, and tht y hd a
prtclrly mlgnnt bt-slttng spcmn of th Lndn slvy. As
t yr prctc, if a gntlmn wlks int my rms smllng of
idfrm, wth a blck mrk of ntrt of slvr upn hs rght
frfngr, and a blg on th rght sd of hs tp-ht t shw whr
h hs scrtd hs stthscp, I mst b dll, indd, if I d nt
prnnc hm t b an actv mmbr of th mdcl prfssn.”

I cld nt hlp lghng at th es wth whch h explnd hs
prcss of ddctn. “Whn I hr y gv yr rsns,” I rmrkd,
“th thng alwys apprs t m t b s rdclsly smpl tht I
cld esly d it myslf, thgh at ech sccssv instnc of yr
rsnng I am bffld untl y expln yr prcss. And yt I
blv tht my eys ar as gd as yrs.”

“Qt s,” h answrd, lghtng a cgrtt, and thrwng hmslf
dwn int an armchr. “Y s, bt y d nt obsrv. Th
dstnctn is clr. Fr exmpl, y hv frqntly sn th stps
whch ld up frm th hll t ths rm.”

“Frqntly.”

“Hw oftn?”

“Wll, sm hndrds of tms.”

“Thn hw mny ar thr?”

“Hw mny? I dn’t knw.”

“Qt s! Y hv nt obsrvd. And yt y hv sn. Tht is jst
my pnt. Nw, I knw tht thr ar svntn stps, bcs I hv
bth sn and obsrvd. By th wy, snc y ar intrstd in ths
lttl prblms, and snc y ar gd engh t chrncl on or tw
of my trflng exprncs, y my b intrstd in ths.” H thrw
ovr a sht of thck, pnk-tntd ntppr whch hd bn lyng opn
upn th tbl. “It cm by th lst pst,” sd h. “Rd it ald.”

Th nt ws undtd, and wtht ethr sgntr or addrss.

“Thr wll cll upn y t-nght, at a qrtr t eght o’clck,” it
sd, “a gntlmn wh dsrs t cnslt y upn a mttr of th vry
dpst mmnt. Yr rcnt srvcs t on of th ryl hss of
Erp hv shwn tht y ar on wh my sfly b trstd wth
mttrs whch ar of an imprtnc whch cn hrdly b exggrtd.
Ths accnt of y w hv frm all qrtrs rcvd. B in yr
chmbr thn at tht hr, and d nt tk it amss if yr vstr
wr a msk.”

“Ths is indd a mystry,” I rmrkd. “Wht d y imgn tht it
mns?”

“I hv n dt yt. It is a cptl mstk t thrs bfr on hs
dt. Insnsbly on bgns t twst fcts t st thrs, instd of
thrs t st fcts. Bt th nt itslf. Wht d y ddc frm
it?”

I crflly exmnd th wrtng, and th ppr upn whch it ws
wrttn.

“Th mn wh wrt it ws prsmbly wll t d,” I rmrkd,
endvrng t imtt my cmpnn’s prcsss. “Sch ppr cld nt
b bght undr hlf a crwn a pckt. It is pclrly strng and
stff.”

“Pclr—tht is th vry wrd,” sd Hlms. “It is nt an Englsh
ppr at all. Hld it up t th lght.”

I dd s, and sw a lrg “E” wth a smll “g,” a “P,” and a lrg “G”
wth a smll “t” wvn int th txtr of th ppr.

“Wht d y mk of tht?” askd Hlms.

“Th nm of th mkr, n dbt; or hs mngrm, rthr.”

“Nt at all. Th ‘G’ wth th smll ‘t’ stnds fr ‘Gsllschft,’
whch is th Grmn fr ‘Cmpny.’ It is a cstmry cntrctn lk
or ‘C.’ ‘P,’ of crs, stnds fr ‘Ppr.’ Nw fr th ‘Eg.’ Lt us
glnc at or Cntnntl Gzttr.” H tk dwn a hvy brwn vlm
frm hs shlvs. “Eglw, Eglntz—hr w ar, Egr. It is in a
Grmn-spkng cntry—in Bhm, nt fr frm Crlsbd. ‘Rmrkbl
as bng th scn of th dth of Wllnstn, and fr its nmrs
glss-fctrs and ppr-mlls.’ H, h, my by, wht d y mk of
tht?” Hs eys sprkld, and h snt up a grt bl trmphnt cld
frm hs cgrtt.

“Th ppr ws md in Bhm,” I sd.

“Prcsly. And th mn wh wrt th nt is a Grmn. D y nt th
pclr cnstrctn of th sntnc—‘Ths accnt of y w hv frm
all qrtrs rcvd.’ A Frnchmn or Rssn cld nt hv wrttn
tht. It is th Grmn wh is s uncrts t hs vrbs. It only
rmns, thrfr, t dscvr wht is wntd by ths Grmn wh
wrts upn Bhmn ppr and prfrs wrng a msk t shwng hs
fc. And hr h cms, if I am nt mstkn, t rslv all or
dbts.”

As h spk thr ws th shrp snd of hrss’ hfs and grtng
whls agnst th crb, fllwd by a shrp pll at th bll. Hlms
whstld.

“A pr, by th snd,” sd h. “Ys,” h cntnd, glncng ot of
th wndw. “A nc lttl brghm and a pr of bts. A hndrd
and ffty gns apc. Thr’s mny in ths cs, Wtsn, if thr
is nthng els.”

“I thnk tht I hd bttr g, Hlms.”

“Nt a bt, Dctr. Sty whr y ar. I am lst wtht my Bswll.
And ths prmss t b intrstng. It wld b a pty t mss it.”

“Bt yr clnt—”

“Nvr mnd hm. I my wnt yr hlp, and s my h. Hr h cms.
St dwn in tht armchr, Dctr, and gv us yr bst attntn.”

A slw and hvy stp, whch hd bn hrd upn th strs and in th
pssg, psd immdtly otsd th dr. Thn thr ws a ld and
athrttv tp.

“Cm in!” sd Hlms.

A mn entrd wh cld hrdly hv bn lss thn sx ft sx inchs
in hght, wth th chst and lmbs of a Hrcls. Hs drss ws rch
wth a rchnss whch wld, in Englnd, b lkd upn as akn t bd
tst. Hvy bnds of astrkhn wr slshd acrss th slvs and
frnts of hs dbl-brstd ct, whl th dp bl clk whch ws
thrwn ovr hs shldrs ws lnd wth flm-clrd slk and
scrd at th nck wth a brch whch cnsstd of a sngl flmng
bryl. Bts whch extndd hlfwy up hs clvs, and whch wr
trmmd at th tps wth rch brwn fr, cmpltd th imprssn of
brbrc oplnc whch ws sggstd by hs whl apprnc. H
crrd a brd-brmmd ht in hs hnd, whl h wr acrss th uppr
prt of hs fc, extndng dwn pst th chkbns, a blck vzrd
msk, whch h hd apprntly adjstd tht vry mmnt, fr hs hnd
ws stll rsd t it as h entrd. Frm th lwr prt of th fc
h apprd t b a mn of strng chrctr, wth a thck, hngng lp,
and a lng, strght chn sggstv of rsltn pshd t th lngth
of obstncy.

“Y hd my nt?” h askd wth a dp hrsh vc and a strngly
mrkd Grmn accnt. “I tld y tht I wld cll.” H lkd frm
on t th othr of us, as if uncrtn whch t addrss.

“Pry tk a st,” sd Hlms. “Ths is my frnd and cllg, Dr.
Wtsn, wh is occsnlly gd engh t hlp m in my css. Whm
hv I th hnr t addrss?”

“Y my addrss m as th Cnt Vn Krmm, a Bhmn nblmn. I
undrstnd tht ths gntlmn, yr frnd, is a mn of hnr and
dscrtn, whm I my trst wth a mttr of th mst extrm
imprtnc. If nt, I shld mch prfr t cmmnct wth y
aln.”

I rs t g, bt Hlms cght m by th wrst and pshd m bck int
my chr. “It is bth, or nn,” sd h. “Y my sy bfr ths
gntlmn anythng whch y my sy t m.”

Th Cnt shrggd hs brd shldrs. “Thn I mst bgn,” sd h,
“by bndng y bth t abslt scrcy fr tw yrs; at th end of
tht tm th mttr wll b of n imprtnc. At prsnt it is nt t
mch t sy tht it is of sch wght it my hv an inflnc upn
Erpn hstry.”

“I prms,” sd Hlms.

“And I.”

“Y wll excs ths msk,” cntnd or strng vstr. “Th agst
prsn wh emplys m wshs hs agnt t b unknwn t y, and I my
cnfss at onc tht th ttl by whch I hv jst clld myslf is
nt exctly my own.”

“I ws awr of it,” sd Hlms dryly.

“Th crcmstncs ar of grt dlccy, and evry prctn hs t
b tkn t qnch wht mght grw t b an immns scndl and
srsly cmprms on of th rgnng fmls of Erp. T spk
plnly, th mttr implcts th grt Hs of Ormstn, hrdtry
kngs of Bhm.”

“I ws als awr of tht,” mrmrd Hlms, sttlng hmslf dwn in
hs armchr and clsng hs eys.

Or vstr glncd wth sm apprnt srprs at th lngd,
lngng fgr of th mn wh hd bn n dbt dpctd t hm as th
mst incsv rsnr and mst enrgtc agnt in Erp. Hlms
slwly rpnd hs eys and lkd imptntly at hs ggntc clnt.

“If yr Mjsty wld cndscnd t stt yr cs,” h rmrkd, “I
shld b bttr abl t advs y.”

Th mn sprng frm hs chr and pcd up and dwn th rm in
uncntrllbl agttn. Thn, wth a gstr of dsprtn, h tr
th msk frm hs fc and hrld it upn th grnd. “Y ar rght,”
h crd; “I am th Kng. Why shld I attmpt t cncl it?”

“Why, indd?” mrmrd Hlms. “Yr Mjsty hd nt spkn bfr I
ws awr tht I ws addrssng Wlhlm Gttsrch Sgsmnd vn
Ormstn, Grnd Dk of Cssl-Flstn, and hrdtry Kng of
Bhm.”

“Bt y cn undrstnd,” sd or strng vstr, sttng dwn onc
mr and pssng hs hnd ovr hs hgh wht frhd, “y cn
undrstnd tht I am nt accstmd t dng sch bsnss in my own
prsn. Yt th mttr ws s dlct tht I cld nt cnfd it t
an agnt wtht pttng myslf in hs pwr. I hv cm _incgnt_
frm Prg fr th prps of cnsltng y.”

“Thn, pry cnslt,” sd Hlms, shttng hs eys onc mr.

“Th fcts ar brfly ths: Sm fv yrs ag, drng a lngthy
vst t Wrsw, I md th acqntnc of th wll-knwn advntrss,
Irn Adlr. Th nm is n dbt fmlr t y.”

“Kndly lk hr up in my indx, Dctr,” mrmrd Hlms wtht
opnng hs eys. Fr mny yrs h hd adptd a systm of dcktng
all prgrphs cncrnng mn and thngs, s tht it ws dffclt t
nm a sbjct or a prsn on whch h cld nt at onc frnsh
infrmtn. In ths cs I fnd hr bgrphy sndwchd in btwn
tht of a Hbrw rbb and tht of a stff-cmmndr wh hd wrttn a
mngrph upn th dp-s fshs.

“Lt m s!” sd Hlms. “Hm! Brn in Nw Jrsy in th yr 1858.
Cntrlt—hm! L Scl, hm! Prm dnn Imprl Opr of Wrsw—ys!
Rtrd frm oprtc stg—h! Lvng in Lndn—qt s! Yr
Mjsty, as I undrstnd, bcm entngld wth ths yng prsn,
wrt hr sm cmprmsng lttrs, and is nw dsrs of gttng
ths lttrs bck.”

“Prcsly s. Bt hw—”

“Ws thr a scrt mrrg?”

“Nn.”

“N lgl pprs or crtfcts?”

“Nn.”

“Thn I fl t fllw yr Mjsty. If ths yng prsn shld
prdc hr lttrs fr blckmlng or othr prpss, hw is sh t
prv thr athntcty?”

“Thr is th wrtng.”

“Ph, ph! Frgry.”

“My prvt nt-ppr.”

“Stln.”

“My own sl.”

“Imttd.”

“My phtgrph.”

“Bght.”

“W wr bth in th phtgrph.”

“Oh, dr! Tht is vry bd! Yr Mjsty hs indd cmmttd an
indscrtn.”

“I ws md—insn.”

“Y hv cmprmsd yrslf srsly.”

“I ws only Crwn Prnc thn. I ws yng. I am bt thrty nw.”

“It mst b rcvrd.”

“W hv trd and fld.”

“Yr Mjsty mst py. It mst b bght.”

“Sh wll nt sll.”

“Stln, thn.”

“Fv attmpts hv bn md. Twc brglrs in my py rnsckd hr
hs. Onc w dvrtd hr lggg whn sh trvlld. Twc sh hs
bn wyld. Thr hs bn n rslt.”

“N sgn of it?”

“Absltly nn.”

Hlms lghd. “It is qt a prtty lttl prblm,” sd h.

“Bt a vry srs on t m,” rtrnd th Kng rprchflly.

“Vry, indd. And wht ds sh prps t d wth th phtgrph?”

“T rn m.”

“Bt hw?”

“I am abt t b mrrd.”

“S I hv hrd.”

“T Cltld Lthmn vn Sx-Mnngn, scnd dghtr of th Kng of
Scndnv. Y my knw th strct prncpls of hr fmly. Sh is
hrslf th vry sl of dlccy. A shdw of a dbt as t my cndct
wld brng th mttr t an end.”

“And Irn Adlr?”

“Thrtns t snd thm th phtgrph. And sh wll d it. I knw tht
sh wll d it. Y d nt knw hr, bt sh hs a sl of stl. Sh
hs th fc of th mst btfl of wmn, and th mnd of th mst
rslt of mn. Rthr thn I shld mrry anthr wmn, thr ar n
lngths t whch sh wld nt g—nn.”

“Y ar sr tht sh hs nt snt it yt?”

“I am sr.”

“And why?”

“Bcs sh hs sd tht sh wld snd it on th dy whn th
btrthl ws pblcly prclmd. Tht wll b nxt Mndy.”

“Oh, thn w hv thr dys yt,” sd Hlms wth a ywn. “Tht is
vry frtnt, as I hv on or tw mttrs of imprtnc t lk int
jst at prsnt. Yr Mjsty wll, of crs, sty in Lndn fr th
prsnt?”

“Crtnly. Y wll fnd m at th Lnghm undr th nm of th Cnt
Vn Krmm.”

“Thn I shll drp y a ln t lt y knw hw w prgrss.”

“Pry d s. I shll b all anxty.”

“Thn, as t mny?”

“Y hv _crt blnch_.”

“Absltly?”

“I tll y tht I wld gv on of th prvncs of my kngdm t
hv tht phtgrph.”

“And fr prsnt expnss?”

Th Kng tk a hvy chms lthr bg frm undr hs clk and ld
it on th tbl.

“Thr ar thr hndrd pnds in gld and svn hndrd in nts,” h
sd.

Hlms scrbbld a rcpt upn a sht of hs nt-bk and hndd it
t hm.

“And Mdmsll’s addrss?” h askd.

“Is Brny Ldg, Srpntn Avn, St. Jhn’s Wd.”

Hlms tk a nt of it. “On othr qstn,” sd h. “Ws th
phtgrph a cbnt?”

“It ws.”

“Thn, gd-nght, yr Mjsty, and I trst tht w shll sn hv
sm gd nws fr y. And gd-nght, Wtsn,” h addd, as th
whls of th ryl brghm rlld dwn th strt. “If y wll b
gd engh t cll t-mrrw aftrnn at thr o’clck I shld lk
t cht ths lttl mttr ovr wth y.”


I.

At thr o’clck prcsly I ws at Bkr Strt, bt Hlms hd nt
yt rtrnd. Th lndldy infrmd m tht h hd lft th hs
shrtly aftr eght o’clck in th mrnng. I st dwn bsd th fr,
hwvr, wth th intntn of awtng hm, hwvr lng h mght b.
I ws alrdy dply intrstd in hs inqry, fr, thgh it ws
srrndd by nn of th grm and strng ftrs whch wr
assctd wth th tw crms whch I hv alrdy rcrdd, stll,
th ntr of th cs and th exltd sttn of hs clnt gv it a
chrctr of its own. Indd, aprt frm th ntr of th
invstgtn whch my frnd hd on hnd, thr ws smthng in hs
mstrly grsp of a sttn, and hs kn, incsv rsnng, whch
md it a plsr t m t stdy hs systm of wrk, and t fllw th
qck, sbtl mthds by whch h dsntngld th mst inxtrcbl
mystrs. S accstmd ws I t hs invrbl sccss tht th vry
pssblty of hs flng hd csd t entr int my hd.

It ws cls upn fr bfr th dr opnd, and a drnkn-lkng
grm, ill-kmpt and sd-whskrd, wth an inflmd fc and
dsrptbl clths, wlkd int th rm. Accstmd as I ws t my
frnd’s amzng pwrs in th us of dsgss, I hd t lk thr
tms bfr I ws crtn tht it ws indd h. Wth a nd h
vnshd int th bdrm, whnc h emrgd in fv mnts
twd-std and rspctbl, as of old. Pttng hs hnds int hs
pckts, h strtchd ot hs lgs in frnt of th fr and lghd
hrtly fr sm mnts.

“Wll, rlly!” h crd, and thn h chkd and lghd agn untl h
ws oblgd t l bck, lmp and hlplss, in th chr.

“Wht is it?”

“It’s qt t fnny. I am sr y cld nvr gss hw I emplyd
my mrnng, or wht I endd by dng.”

“I cn’t imgn. I spps tht y hv bn wtchng th hbts, and
prhps th hs, of Mss Irn Adlr.”

“Qt s; bt th sql ws rthr unsl. I wll tll y, hwvr.
I lft th hs a lttl aftr eght o’clck ths mrnng in th
chrctr of a grm ot of wrk. Thr is a wndrfl sympthy and
frmsnry amng hrsy mn. B on of thm, and y wll knw all
tht thr is t knw. I sn fnd Brny Ldg. It is a _bj_
vll, wth a grdn at th bck, bt blt ot in frnt rght up t
th rd, tw strs. Chbb lck t th dr. Lrg sttng-rm on
th rght sd, wll frnshd, wth lng wndws almst t th flr,
and ths prpstrs Englsh wndw fstnrs whch a chld cld
opn. Bhnd thr ws nthng rmrkbl, sv tht th pssg wndw
cld b rchd frm th tp of th cch-hs. I wlkd rnd it and
exmnd it clsly frm evry pnt of vw, bt wtht ntng
anythng els of intrst.

“I thn lngd dwn th strt and fnd, as I expctd, tht thr
ws a mws in a ln whch rns dwn by on wll of th grdn. I lnt
th ostlrs a hnd in rbbng dwn thr hrss, and rcvd in
exchng twpnc, a glss of hlf-and-hlf, tw flls of shg tbcc,
and as mch infrmtn as I cld dsr abt Mss Adlr, t sy
nthng of hlf a dzn othr ppl in th nghbrhd in whm I ws
nt in th lst intrstd, bt whs bgrphs I ws cmplld t
lstn t.”

“And wht of Irn Adlr?” I askd.

“Oh, sh hs trnd all th mn’s hds dwn in tht prt. Sh is th
dntst thng undr a bnnt on ths plnt. S sy th
Srpntn-mws, t a mn. Sh lvs qtly, sngs at cncrts, drvs
ot at fv evry dy, and rtrns at svn shrp fr dnnr. Sldm
gs ot at othr tms, excpt whn sh sngs. Hs only on ml
vstr, bt a gd dl of hm. H is drk, hndsm, and dshng,
nvr clls lss thn onc a dy, and oftn twc. H is a Mr. Gdfry
Nrtn, of th Innr Tmpl. S th advntgs of a cbmn as a
cnfdnt. Thy hd drvn hm hm a dzn tms frm Srpntn-mws,
and knw all abt hm. Whn I hd lstnd t all thy hd t tll, I
bgn t wlk up and dwn nr Brny Ldg onc mr, and t thnk
ovr my pln of cmpgn.

“Ths Gdfry Nrtn ws evdntly an imprtnt fctr in th mttr.
H ws a lwyr. Tht sndd omns. Wht ws th rltn btwn
thm, and wht th objct of hs rptd vsts? Ws sh hs clnt,
hs frnd, or hs mstrss? If th frmr, sh hd prbbly
trnsfrrd th phtgrph t hs kpng. If th lttr, it ws lss
lkly. On th iss of ths qstn dpndd whthr I shld
cntn my wrk at Brny Ldg, or trn my attntn t th
gntlmn’s chmbrs in th Tmpl. It ws a dlct pnt, and it
wdnd th fld of my inqry. I fr tht I br y wth ths
dtls, bt I hv t lt y s my lttl dffclts, if y ar
t undrstnd th sttn.”

“I am fllwng y clsly,” I answrd.

“I ws stll blncng th mttr in my mnd whn a hnsm cb drv up
t Brny Ldg, and a gntlmn sprng ot. H ws a rmrkbly
hndsm mn, drk, aqln, and mstchd—evdntly th mn of whm
I hd hrd. H apprd t b in a grt hrry, shtd t th cbmn
t wt, and brshd pst th md wh opnd th dr wth th ar of
a mn wh ws thrghly at hm.

“H ws in th hs abt hlf an hr, and I cld ctch glmpss of
hm in th wndws of th sttng-rm, pcng up and dwn, tlkng
exctdly, and wvng hs arms. Of hr I cld s nthng. Prsntly
h emrgd, lkng evn mr flrrd thn bfr. As h stppd up t
th cb, h plld a gld wtch frm hs pckt and lkd at it
ernstly, ‘Drv lk th dvl,’ h shtd, ‘frst t Grss &
Hnky’s in Rgnt Strt, and thn t th Chrch of St. Mnc in th
Edgwr Rd. Hlf a gn if y d it in twnty mnts!’

“Awy thy wnt, and I ws jst wndrng whthr I shld nt d wll
t fllw thm whn up th ln cm a nt lttl lnd, th cchmn
wth hs ct only hlf-bttnd, and hs t undr hs er, whl all
th tgs of hs hrnss wr stckng ot of th bckls. It hdn’t
plld up bfr sh sht ot of th hll dr and int it. I only
cght a glmps of hr at th mmnt, bt sh ws a lvly wmn, wth
a fc tht a mn mght d fr.

“‘Th Chrch of St. Mnc, Jhn,’ sh crd, ‘and hlf a svrgn if
y rch it in twnty mnts.’

“Ths ws qt t gd t ls, Wtsn. I ws jst blncng whthr
I shld rn fr it, or whthr I shld prch bhnd hr lnd whn a
cb cm thrgh th strt. Th drvr lkd twc at sch a shbby
fr, bt I jmpd in bfr h cld objct. ‘Th Chrch of St.
Mnc,’ sd I, ‘and hlf a svrgn if y rch it in twnty
mnts.’ It ws twnty-fv mnts t twlv, and of crs it ws
clr engh wht ws in th wnd.

“My cbby drv fst. I dn’t thnk I evr drv fstr, bt th othrs
wr thr bfr us. Th cb and th lnd wth thr stmng hrss
wr in frnt of th dr whn I arrvd. I pd th mn and hrrd
int th chrch. Thr ws nt a sl thr sv th tw whm I hd
fllwd and a srplcd clrgymn, wh smd t b expstltng wth
thm. Thy wr all thr stndng in a knt in frnt of th altr. I
lngd up th sd asl lk any othr idlr wh hs drppd int a
chrch. Sddnly, t my srprs, th thr at th altr fcd rnd t
m, and Gdfry Nrtn cm rnnng as hrd as h cld twrds m.

“‘Thnk Gd,’ h crd. ‘Y’ll d. Cm! Cm!’

“‘Wht thn?’ I askd.

“‘Cm, mn, cm, only thr mnts, or it wn’t b lgl.’

“I ws hlf-drggd up t th altr, and bfr I knw whr I ws I
fnd myslf mmblng rspnss whch wr whsprd in my er, and
vchng fr thngs of whch I knw nthng, and gnrlly assstng in
th scr tyng up of Irn Adlr, spnstr, t Gdfry Nrtn,
bchlr. It ws all dn in an instnt, and thr ws th gntlmn
thnkng m on th on sd and th ldy on th othr, whl th
clrgymn bmd on m in frnt. It ws th mst prpstrs pstn
in whch I evr fnd myslf in my lf, and it ws th thght of it
tht strtd m lghng jst nw. It sms tht thr hd bn sm
infrmlty abt thr lcns, tht th clrgymn absltly rfsd
t mrry thm wtht a wtnss of sm srt, and tht my lcky
apprnc svd th brdgrm frm hvng t slly ot int th
strts in srch of a bst mn. Th brd gv m a svrgn, and I
mn t wr it on my wtch chn in mmry of th occsn.”

“Ths is a vry unxpctd trn of affrs,” sd I; “and wht thn?”

“Wll, I fnd my plns vry srsly mncd. It lkd as if th
pr mght tk an immdt dprtr, and s ncsstt vry prmpt
and enrgtc msrs on my prt. At th chrch dr, hwvr, thy
sprtd, h drvng bck t th Tmpl, and sh t hr own hs. ‘I
shll drv ot in th prk at fv as usl,’ sh sd as sh lft
hm. I hrd n mr. Thy drv awy in dffrnt drctns, and I
wnt off t mk my own arrngmnts.”

“Whch ar?”

“Sm cld bf and a glss of br,” h answrd, rngng th bll. “I
hv bn t bsy t thnk of fd, and I am lkly t b bsr stll
ths evnng. By th wy, Dctr, I shll wnt yr c-oprtn.”

“I shll b dlghtd.”

“Y dn’t mnd brkng th lw?”

“Nt in th lst.”

“Nr rnnng a chnc of arrst?”

“Nt in a gd cs.”

“Oh, th cs is excllnt!”

“Thn I am yr mn.”

“I ws sr tht I mght rly on y.”

“Bt wht is it y wsh?”

“Whn Mrs. Trnr hs brght in th try I wll mk it clr t y.
Nw,” h sd as h trnd hngrly on th smpl fr tht or
lndldy hd prvdd, “I mst dscss it whl I et, fr I hv nt
mch tm. It is nrly fv nw. In tw hrs w mst b on th scn
of actn. Mss Irn, or Mdm, rthr, rtrns frm hr drv at
svn. W mst b at Brny Ldg t mt hr.”

“And wht thn?”

“Y mst lv tht t m. I hv alrdy arrngd wht is t occr.
Thr is only on pnt on whch I mst insst. Y mst nt intrfr,
cm wht my. Y undrstnd?”

“I am t b ntrl?”

“T d nthng whtvr. Thr wll prbbly b sm smll
unplsntnss. D nt jn in it. It wll end in my bng cnvyd
int th hs. Fr or fv mnts aftrwrds th sttng-rm wndw
wll opn. Y ar t sttn yrslf cls t tht opn wndw.”

“Ys.”

“Y ar t wtch m, fr I wll b vsbl t y.”

“Ys.”

“And whn I rs my hnd—s—y wll thrw int th rm wht I gv
y t thrw, and wll, at th sm tm, rs th cry of fr. Y
qt fllw m?”

“Entrly.”

“It is nthng vry frmdbl,” h sd, tkng a lng cgr-shpd
rll frm hs pckt. “It is an ordnry plmbr’s smk-rckt, fttd
wth a cp at ethr end t mk it slf-lghtng. Yr tsk is
cnfnd t tht. Whn y rs yr cry of fr, it wll b tkn up
by qt a nmbr of ppl. Y my thn wlk t th end of th
strt, and I wll rjn y in tn mnts. I hp tht I hv md
myslf clr?”

“I am t rmn ntrl, t gt nr th wndw, t wtch y, and at
th sgnl t thrw in ths objct, thn t rs th cry of fr, and
t wt y at th crnr of th strt.”

“Prcsly.”

“Thn y my entrly rly on m.”

“Tht is excllnt. I thnk, prhps, it is almst tm tht I prpr
fr th nw rl I hv t ply.”

H dspprd int hs bdrm and rtrnd in a fw mnts in th
chrctr of an ambl and smpl-mndd Nncnfrmst clrgymn. Hs
brd blck ht, hs bggy trsrs, hs wht t, hs sympthtc
sml, and gnrl lk of prng and bnvlnt crsty wr sch
as Mr. Jhn Hr aln cld hv eqlld. It ws nt mrly tht
Hlms chngd hs cstm. Hs exprssn, hs mnnr, hs vry sl
smd t vry wth evry frsh prt tht h assmd. Th stg lst a
fn actr, evn as scnc lst an act rsnr, whn h bcm a
spclst in crm.

It ws a qrtr pst sx whn w lft Bkr Strt, and it stll
wntd tn mnts t th hr whn w fnd orslvs in Srpntn
Avn. It ws alrdy dsk, and th lmps wr jst bng lghtd as
w pcd up and dwn in frnt of Brny Ldg, wtng fr th cmng
of its occpnt. Th hs ws jst sch as I hd pctrd it frm
Shrlck Hlms’ sccnct dscrptn, bt th lclty apprd t b
lss prvt thn I expctd. On th cntrry, fr a smll strt in a
qt nghbrhd, it ws rmrkbly anmtd. Thr ws a grp of
shbbly drssd mn smkng and lghng in a crnr, a
scssrs-grndr wth hs whl, tw grdsmn wh wr flrtng wth a
nrs-grl, and svrl wll-drssd yng mn wh wr lngng up and
dwn wth cgrs in thr mths.

“Y s,” rmrkd Hlms, as w pcd t and fr in frnt of th
hs, “ths mrrg rthr smplfs mttrs. Th phtgrph bcms
a dbl-edgd wpn nw. Th chncs ar tht sh wld b as avrs
t its bng sn by Mr. Gdfry Nrtn, as or clnt is t its cmng
t th eys of hs prncss. Nw th qstn is, Whr ar w t fnd
th phtgrph?”

“Whr, indd?”

“It is mst unlkly tht sh crrs it abt wth hr. It is cbnt
sz. T lrg fr esy cnclmnt abt a wmn’s drss. Sh knws
tht th Kng is cpbl of hvng hr wyld and srchd. Tw
attmpts of th srt hv alrdy bn md. W my tk it, thn, tht
sh ds nt crry it abt wth hr.”

“Whr, thn?”

“Hr bnkr or hr lwyr. Thr is tht dbl pssblty. Bt I am
inclnd t thnk nthr. Wmn ar ntrlly scrtv, and thy lk
t d thr own scrtng. Why shld sh hnd it ovr t anyn els?
Sh cld trst hr own grdnshp, bt sh cld nt tll wht
indrct or pltcl inflnc mght b brght t br upn a
bsnss mn. Bsds, rmmbr tht sh hd rslvd t us it wthn
a fw dys. It mst b whr sh cn ly hr hnds upn it. It mst b
in hr own hs.”

“Bt it hs twc bn brgld.”

“Pshw! Thy dd nt knw hw t lk.”

“Bt hw wll y lk?”

“I wll nt lk.”

“Wht thn?”

“I wll gt hr t shw m.”

“Bt sh wll rfs.”

“Sh wll nt b abl t. Bt I hr th rmbl of whls. It is hr
crrg. Nw crry ot my ordrs t th lttr.”

As h spk th glm of th sdlghts of a crrg cm rnd th
crv of th avn. It ws a smrt lttl lnd whch rttld up t
th dr of Brny Ldg. As it plld up, on of th lfng mn at
th crnr dshd frwrd t opn th dr in th hp of ernng a
cppr, bt ws elbwd awy by anthr lfr, wh hd rshd up wth
th sm intntn. A frc qrrl brk ot, whch ws incrsd by
th tw grdsmn, wh tk sds wth on of th lngrs, and by th
scssrs-grndr, wh ws eqlly ht upn th othr sd. A blw ws
strck, and in an instnt th ldy, wh hd stppd frm hr crrg,
ws th cntr of a lttl knt of flshd and strgglng mn, wh
strck svgly at ech othr wth thr fsts and stcks. Hlms
dshd int th crwd t prtct th ldy; bt, jst as h rchd hr,
h gv a cry and drppd t th grnd, wth th bld rnnng frly
dwn hs fc. At hs fll th grdsmn tk t thr hls in on
drctn and th lngrs in th othr, whl a nmbr of bttr
drssd ppl, wh hd wtchd th scffl wtht tkng prt in it,
crwdd in t hlp th ldy and t attnd t th injrd mn. Irn
Adlr, as I wll stll cll hr, hd hrrd up th stps; bt sh
std at th tp wth hr sprb fgr otlnd agnst th lghts of
th hll, lkng bck int th strt.

“Is th pr gntlmn mch hrt?” sh askd.

“H is dd,” crd svrl vcs.

“N, n, thr’s lf in hm!” shtd anthr. “Bt h’ll b gn
bfr y cn gt hm t hsptl.”

“H’s a brv fllw,” sd a wmn. “Thy wld hv hd th ldy’s
prs and wtch if it hdn’t bn fr hm. Thy wr a gng, and a
rgh on, t. Ah, h’s brthng nw.”

“H cn’t l in th strt. My w brng hm in, mrm?”

“Srly. Brng hm int th sttng-rm. Thr is a cmfrtbl sf.
Ths wy, pls!”

Slwly and slmnly h ws brn int Brny Ldg and ld ot in th
prncpl rm, whl I stll obsrvd th prcdngs frm my pst by
th wndw. Th lmps hd bn lt, bt th blnds hd nt bn drwn,
s tht I cld s Hlms as h ly upn th cch. I d nt knw
whthr h ws szd wth cmpnctn at tht mmnt fr th prt h
ws plyng, bt I knw tht I nvr flt mr hrtly ashmd of
myslf in my lf thn whn I sw th btfl crtr agnst whm I
ws cnsprng, or th grc and kndlnss wth whch sh wtd upn
th injrd mn. And yt it wld b th blckst trchry t Hlms
t drw bck nw frm th prt whch h hd intrstd t m. I hrdnd
my hrt, and tk th smk-rckt frm undr my ulstr. Aftr all, I
thght, w ar nt injrng hr. W ar bt prvntng hr frm
injrng anthr.

Hlms hd st up upn th cch, and I sw hm mtn lk a mn wh
is in nd of ar. A md rshd acrss and thrw opn th wndw. At
th sm instnt I sw hm rs hs hnd and at th sgnl I tssd my
rckt int th rm wth a cry of “Fr!” Th wrd ws n snr ot
of my mth thn th whl crwd of spcttrs, wll drssd and
ill—gntlmn, ostlrs, and srvnt mds—jnd in a gnrl shrk of
“Fr!” Thck clds of smk crld thrgh th rm and ot at th
opn wndw. I cght a glmps of rshng fgrs, and a mmnt ltr
th vc of Hlms frm wthn assrng thm tht it ws a fls
alrm. Slppng thrgh th shtng crwd I md my wy t th crnr
of th strt, and in tn mnts ws rjcd t fnd my frnd’s arm
in mn, and t gt awy frm th scn of uprr. H wlkd swftly
and in slnc fr sm fw mnts untl w hd trnd dwn on of th
qt strts whch ld twrds th Edgwr Rd.

“Y dd it vry ncly, Dctr,” h rmrkd. “Nthng cld hv bn
bttr. It is all rght.”

“Y hv th phtgrph?”

“I knw whr it is.”

“And hw dd y fnd ot?”

“Sh shwd m, as I tld y sh wld.”

“I am stll in th drk.”

“I d nt wsh t mk a mystry,” sd h, lghng. “Th mttr ws
prfctly smpl. Y, of crs, sw tht evryn in th strt ws
an accmplc. Thy wr all enggd fr th evnng.”

“I gssd as mch.”

“Thn, whn th rw brk ot, I hd a lttl mst rd pnt in th
plm of my hnd. I rshd frwrd, fll dwn, clppd my hnd t my
fc, and bcm a pts spctcl. It is an old trck.”

“Tht als I cld fthm.”

“Thn thy crrd m in. Sh ws bnd t hv m in. Wht els cld
sh d? And int hr sttng-rm, whch ws th vry rm whch I
sspctd. It ly btwn tht and hr bdrm, and I ws dtrmnd t
s whch. Thy ld m on a cch, I mtnd fr ar, thy wr
cmplld t opn th wndw, and y hd yr chnc.”

“Hw dd tht hlp y?”

“It ws all-imprtnt. Whn a wmn thnks tht hr hs is on fr,
hr instnct is at onc t rsh t th thng whch sh vls mst. It
is a prfctly ovrpwrng impls, and I hv mr thn onc tkn
advntg of it. In th cs of th Drlngtn Sbstttn Scndl it
ws of us t m, and als in th Arnswrth Cstl bsnss. A mrrd
wmn grbs at hr bby; an unmrrd on rchs fr hr jwl-bx.
Nw it ws clr t m tht or ldy of t-dy hd nthng in th hs
mr prcs t hr thn wht w ar in qst of. Sh wld rsh t
scr it. Th alrm of fr ws admrbly dn. Th smk and shtng
wr engh t shk nrvs of stl. Sh rspndd btflly. Th
phtgrph is in a rcss bhnd a sldng pnl jst abv th rght
bll-pll. Sh ws thr in an instnt, and I cght a glmps of it as
sh hlf drw it ot. Whn I crd ot tht it ws a fls alrm, sh
rplcd it, glncd at th rckt, rshd frm th rm, and I hv
nt sn hr snc. I rs, and, mkng my excss, escpd frm th
hs. I hsttd whthr t attmpt t scr th phtgrph at onc;
bt th cchmn hd cm in, and as h ws wtchng m nrrwly, it
smd sfr t wt. A lttl ovr-prcptnc my rn all.”

“And nw?” I askd.

“Or qst is prctclly fnshd. I shll cll wth th Kng
t-mrrw, and wth y, if y cr t cm wth us. W wll b shwn
int th sttng-rm t wt fr th ldy, bt it is prbbl tht
whn sh cms sh my fnd nthr us nr th phtgrph. It mght b
a stsfctn t hs Mjsty t rgn it wth hs own hnds.”

“And whn wll y cll?”

“At eght in th mrnng. Sh wll nt b up, s tht w shll hv a
clr fld. Bsds, w mst b prmpt, fr ths mrrg my mn a
cmplt chng in hr lf and hbts. I mst wr t th Kng wtht
dly.”

W hd rchd Bkr Strt and hd stppd at th dr. H ws
srchng hs pckts fr th ky whn smn pssng sd:

“Gd-nght, Mstr Shrlck Hlms.”

Thr wr svrl ppl on th pvmnt at th tm, bt th grtng
apprd t cm frm a slm yth in an ulstr wh hd hrrd by.

“I’v hrd tht vc bfr,” sd Hlms, strng dwn th dmly lt
strt. “Nw, I wndr wh th dc tht cld hv bn.”


I.

I slpt at Bkr Strt tht nght, and w wr enggd upn or tst
and cff in th mrnng whn th Kng of Bhm rshd int th
rm.

“Y hv rlly gt it!” h crd, grspng Shrlck Hlms by ethr
shldr and lkng egrly int hs fc.

“Nt yt.”

“Bt y hv hps?”

“I hv hps.”

“Thn, cm. I am all imptnc t b gn.”

“W mst hv a cb.”

“N, my brghm is wtng.”

“Thn tht wll smplfy mttrs.” W dscndd and strtd off onc
mr fr Brny Ldg.

“Irn Adlr is mrrd,” rmrkd Hlms.

“Mrrd! Whn?”

“Ystrdy.”

“Bt t whm?”

“T an Englsh lwyr nmd Nrtn.”

“Bt sh cld nt lv hm.”

“I am in hps tht sh ds.”

“And why in hps?”

“Bcs it wld spr yr Mjsty all fr of ftr annync. If
th ldy lvs hr hsbnd, sh ds nt lv yr Mjsty. If sh ds
nt lv yr Mjsty, thr is n rsn why sh shld intrfr wth
yr Mjsty’s pln.”

“It is tr. And yt—! Wll! I wsh sh hd bn of my own sttn!
Wht a qn sh wld hv md!” H rlpsd int a mdy slnc,
whch ws nt brkn untl w drw up in Srpntn Avn.

Th dr of Brny Ldg ws opn, and an eldrly wmn std upn th
stps. Sh wtchd us wth a srdnc ey as w stppd frm th
brghm.

“Mr. Shrlck Hlms, I blv?” sd sh.

“I am Mr. Hlms,” answrd my cmpnn, lkng at hr wth a
qstnng and rthr strtld gz.

“Indd! My mstrss tld m tht y wr lkly t cll. Sh lft
ths mrnng wth hr hsbnd by th 5:15 trn frm Chrng Crss fr
th Cntnnt.”

“Wht!” Shrlck Hlms stggrd bck, wht wth chgrn and
srprs. “D y mn tht sh hs lft Englnd?”

“Nvr t rtrn.”

“And th pprs?” askd th Kng hrsly. “All is lst.”

“W shll s.” H pshd pst th srvnt and rshd int th
drwng-rm, fllwd by th Kng and myslf. Th frntr ws
scttrd abt in evry drctn, wth dsmntld shlvs and opn
drwrs, as if th ldy hd hrrdly rnsckd thm bfr hr flght.
Hlms rshd at th bll-pll, tr bck a smll sldng shttr, and,
plngng in hs hnd, plld ot a phtgrph and a lttr. Th
phtgrph ws of Irn Adlr hrslf in evnng drss, th lttr ws
sprscrbd t “Shrlck Hlms, Esq. T b lft tll clld fr.” My
frnd tr it opn, and w all thr rd it tgthr. It ws dtd at
mdnght of th prcdng nght and rn in ths wy:

    “MY DR MR. SHRLCK HLMS,—Y rlly dd it vry wll. Y tk
    m in cmpltly. Untl aftr th alrm of fr, I hd nt a
    sspcn. Bt thn, whn I fnd hw I hd btryd myslf, I
    bgn t thnk. I hd bn wrnd agnst y mnths ag. I hd
    bn tld tht, if th Kng emplyd an agnt, it wld crtnly
    b y. And yr addrss hd bn gvn m. Yt, wth all ths, y
    md m rvl wht y wntd t knw. Evn aftr I bcm
    sspcs, I fnd it hrd t thnk evl of sch a dr, knd old
    clrgymn. Bt, y knw, I hv bn trnd as an actrss myslf.
    Ml cstm is nthng nw t m. I oftn tk advntg of th
    frdm whch it gvs. I snt Jhn, th cchmn, t wtch y,
    rn upstrs, gt int my wlkng clths, as I cll thm, and cm
    dwn jst as y dprtd.

    “Wll, I fllwd y t yr dr, and s md sr tht I ws
    rlly an objct of intrst t th clbrtd Mr. Shrlck Hlms.
    Thn I, rthr imprdntly, wshd y gd-nght, and strtd fr
    th Tmpl t s my hsbnd.

    “W bth thght th bst rsrc ws flght, whn prsd by s
    frmdbl an antgnst; s y wll fnd th nst empty whn y
    cll t-mrrw. As t th phtgrph, yr clnt my rst in
    pc. I lv and am lvd by a bttr mn thn h. Th Kng my d
    wht h wll wtht hndrnc frm on whm h hs crlly
    wrngd. I kp it only t sfgrd myslf, and t prsrv a
    wpn whch wll alwys scr m frm any stps whch h mght
    tk in th ftr. I lv a phtgrph whch h mght cr t
    pssss; and I rmn, dr Mr. Shrlck Hlms,


    “Vry trly yrs,

    “IRN NRTN, _née_ ADLR.”


“Wht a wmn—oh, wht a wmn!” crd th Kng of Bhm, whn w hd
all thr rd ths epstl. “Dd I nt tll y hw qck and rslt
sh ws? Wld sh nt hv md an admrbl qn? Is it nt a pty
tht sh ws nt on my lvl?”

“Frm wht I hv sn of th ldy, sh sms, indd, t b on a vry
dffrnt lvl t yr Mjsty,” sd Hlms cldly. “I am srry tht
I hv nt bn abl t brng yr Mjsty’s bsnss t a mr
sccssfl cnclsn.”

“On th cntrry, my dr sr,” crd th Kng; “nthng cld b mr
sccssfl. I knw tht hr wrd is invlt. Th phtgrph is nw as
sf as if it wr in th fr.”

“I am gld t hr yr Mjsty sy s.”

“I am immnsly indbtd t y. Pry tll m in wht wy I cn rwrd
y. Ths rng—” H slppd an emrld snk rng frm hs fngr and
hld it ot upn th plm of hs hnd.

“Yr Mjsty hs smthng whch I shld vl evn mr hghly,”
sd Hlms.

“Y hv bt t nm it.”

“Ths phtgrph!”

Th Kng strd at hm in amzmnt.

“Irn’s phtgrph!” h crd. “Crtnly, if y wsh it.”

“I thnk yr Mjsty. Thn thr is n mr t b dn in th mttr.
I hv th hnr t wsh y a vry gd mrnng.” H bwd, and,
trnng awy wtht obsrvng th hnd whch th Kng hd strtchd
ot t hm, h st off in my cmpny fr hs chmbrs.

And tht ws hw a grt scndl thrtnd t affct th kngdm of
Bhm, and hw th bst plns of Mr. Shrlck Hlms wr btn by a
wmn’s wt. H usd t mk mrry ovr th clvrnss of wmn, bt I
hv nt hrd hm d it of lt. And whn h spks of Irn Adlr, or
whn h rfrs t hr phtgrph, it is alwys undr th hnrbl
ttl of _th_ wmn.




I. TH RD-HDD LG


 I hd clld upn my frnd, Mr. Shrlck Hlms, on dy in th
 atmn of lst yr and fnd hm in dp cnvrstn wth a vry
 stt, flrd-fcd, eldrly gntlmn wth fry rd hr. Wth an
 aplgy fr my intrsn, I ws abt t wthdrw whn Hlms plld
 m abrptly int th rm and clsd th dr bhnd m.

“Y cld nt pssbly hv cm at a bttr tm, my dr Wtsn,” h
sd crdlly.

“I ws afrd tht y wr enggd.”

“S I am. Vry mch s.”

“Thn I cn wt in th nxt rm.”

“Nt at all. Ths gntlmn, Mr. Wlsn, hs bn my prtnr and hlpr
in mny of my mst sccssfl css, and I hv n dbt tht h wll
b of th utmst us t m in yrs als.”

Th stt gntlmn hlf rs frm hs chr and gv a bb of
grtng, wth a qck lttl qstnng glnc frm hs smll
ft-encrcld eys.

“Try th stt,” sd Hlms, rlpsng int hs armchr and pttng
hs fngrtps tgthr, as ws hs cstm whn in jdcl mds. “I
knw, my dr Wtsn, tht y shr my lv of all tht is bzrr and
otsd th cnvntns and hmdrm rtn of evrydy lf. Y hv
shwn yr rlsh fr it by th enthssm whch hs prmptd y t
chrncl, and, if y wll excs my syng s, smwht t embllsh
s mny of my own lttl advntrs.”

“Yr css hv indd bn of th grtst intrst t m,” I
obsrvd.

“Y wll rmmbr tht I rmrkd th othr dy, jst bfr w wnt
int th vry smpl prblm prsntd by Mss Mry Sthrlnd, tht
fr strng effcts and extrrdnry cmbntns w mst g t lf
itslf, whch is alwys fr mr drng thn any effrt of th
imgntn.”

“A prpstn whch I tk th lbrty of dbtng.”

“Y dd, Dctr, bt nn th lss y mst cm rnd t my vw, fr
othrws I shll kp on plng fct upn fct on y untl yr
rsn brks dwn undr thm and acknwldgs m t b rght. Nw, Mr.
Jbz Wlsn hr hs bn gd engh t cll upn m ths mrnng,
and t bgn a nrrtv whch prmss t b on of th mst snglr
whch I hv lstnd t fr sm tm. Y hv hrd m rmrk tht
th strngst and mst unq thngs ar vry oftn cnnctd nt wth
th lrgr bt wth th smllr crms, and occsnlly, indd, whr
thr is rm fr dbt whthr any pstv crm hs bn cmmttd.
As fr as I hv hrd, it is impssbl fr m t sy whthr th
prsnt cs is an instnc of crm or nt, bt th crs of evnts
is crtnly amng th mst snglr tht I hv evr lstnd t.
Prhps, Mr. Wlsn, y wld hv th grt kndnss t rcmmnc
yr nrrtv. I ask y nt mrly bcs my frnd Dr. Wtsn hs
nt hrd th opnng prt bt als bcs th pclr ntr of th
stry mks m anxs t hv evry pssbl dtl frm yr lps. As
a rl, whn I hv hrd sm slght indctn of th crs of
evnts, I am abl t gd myslf by th thsnds of othr smlr
css whch occr t my mmry. In th prsnt instnc I am frcd t
admt tht th fcts ar, t th bst of my blf, unq.”

Th prtly clnt pffd ot hs chst wth an apprnc of sm
lttl prd and plld a drty and wrnkld nwsppr frm th insd
pckt of hs grtct. As h glncd dwn th advrtsmnt clmn,
wth hs hd thrst frwrd and th ppr flttnd ot upn hs kn,
I tk a gd lk at th mn and endvrd, aftr th fshn of my
cmpnn, t rd th indctns whch mght b prsntd by hs
drss or apprnc.

I dd nt gn vry mch, hwvr, by my inspctn. Or vstr br
evry mrk of bng an avrg cmmnplc Brtsh trdsmn, obs,
pmps, and slw. H wr rthr bggy gry shphrd’s chck trsrs,
a nt ovr-cln blck frck-ct, unbttnd in th frnt, and a drb
wstct wth a hvy brssy Albrt chn, and a sqr prcd bt of
mtl dnglng dwn as an ornmnt. A fryd tp-ht and a fdd brwn
ovrct wth a wrnkld vlvt cllr ly upn a chr bsd hm.
Altgthr, lk as I wld, thr ws nthng rmrkbl abt th mn
sv hs blzng rd hd, and th exprssn of extrm chgrn and
dscntnt upn hs ftrs.

Shrlck Hlms’ qck ey tk in my occptn, and h shk hs hd
wth a sml as h ntcd my qstnng glncs. “Bynd th obvs
fcts tht h hs at sm tm dn mnl lbr, tht h tks snff,
tht h is a Frmsn, tht h hs bn in Chn, and tht h hs dn
a cnsdrbl amnt of wrtng ltly, I cn ddc nthng els.”

Mr. Jbz Wlsn strtd up in hs chr, wth hs frfngr upn th
ppr, bt hs eys upn my cmpnn.

“Hw, in th nm of gd-frtn, dd y knw all tht, Mr. Hlms?”
h askd. “Hw dd y knw, fr exmpl, tht I dd mnl lbr.
It’s as tr as gspl, fr I bgn as a shp’s crpntr.”

“Yr hnds, my dr sr. Yr rght hnd is qt a sz lrgr thn
yr lft. Y hv wrkd wth it, and th mscls ar mr
dvlpd.”

“Wll, th snff, thn, and th Frmsnry?”

“I wn’t inslt yr intllgnc by tllng y hw I rd tht,
espclly as, rthr agnst th strct rls of yr ordr, y us
an arc-and-cmpss brstpn.”

“Ah, of crs, I frgt tht. Bt th wrtng?”

“Wht els cn b indctd by tht rght cff s vry shny fr fv
inchs, and th lft on wth th smth ptch nr th elbw whr y
rst it upn th dsk?”

“Wll, bt Chn?”

“Th fsh tht y hv tttd immdtly abv yr rght wrst
cld only hv bn dn in Chn. I hv md a smll stdy of ttt
mrks and hv evn cntrbtd t th ltrtr of th sbjct. Tht
trck of stnng th fshs’ scls of a dlct pnk is qt
pclr t Chn. Whn, in addtn, I s a Chns cn hngng frm
yr wtch-chn, th mttr bcms evn mr smpl.”

Mr. Jbz Wlsn lghd hvly. “Wll, I nvr!” sd h. “I thght
at frst tht y hd dn smthng clvr, bt I s tht thr ws
nthng in it aftr all.”

“I bgn t thnk, Wtsn,” sd Hlms, “tht I mk a mstk in
explnng. ‘_Omn igntm pr mgnfc_,’ y knw, and my pr
lttl rpttn, sch as it is, wll sffr shpwrck if I am s
cndd. Cn y nt fnd th advrtsmnt, Mr. Wlsn?”

“Ys, I hv gt it nw,” h answrd wth hs thck rd fngr plntd
hlfwy dwn th clmn. “Hr it is. Ths is wht bgn it all. Y
jst rd it fr yrslf, sr.”

I tk th ppr frm hm and rd as fllws:

“T TH RD-HDD LG: On accnt of th bqst of th lt
Ezkh Hpkns, of Lbnn, Pnnsylvn, U.S.A., thr is nw anthr
vcncy opn whch enttls a mmbr of th Lg t a slry of £ 4 a
wk fr prly nmnl srvcs. All rd-hdd mn wh ar snd in
bdy and mnd and abv th ag of twnty-on yrs, ar elgbl.
Apply in prsn on Mndy, at elvn o’clck, t Dncn Rss, at th
offcs of th Lg, 7 Pp’s Crt, Flt Strt.”


“Wht on erth ds ths mn?” I ejcltd aftr I hd twc rd
ovr th extrrdnry annncmnt.

Hlms chckld and wrggld in hs chr, as ws hs hbt whn in
hgh sprts. “It is a lttl off th btn trck, isn’t it?” sd h.
“And nw, Mr. Wlsn, off y g at scrtch and tll us all abt
yrslf, yr hshld, and th effct whch ths advrtsmnt hd
upn yr frtns. Y wll frst mk a nt, Dctr, of th ppr
and th dt.”

“It is _Th Mrnng Chrncl_ of Aprl 27, 1890. Jst tw mnths ag.”

“Vry gd. Nw, Mr. Wlsn?”

“Wll, it is jst as I hv bn tllng y, Mr. Shrlck Hlms,”
sd Jbz Wlsn, mppng hs frhd; “I hv a smll pwnbrkr’s
bsnss at Cbrg Sqr, nr th Cty. It’s nt a vry lrg affr,
and of lt yrs it hs nt dn mr thn jst gv m a lvng. I
usd t b abl t kp tw assstnts, bt nw I only kp on; and I
wld hv a jb t py hm bt tht h is wllng t cm fr hlf
wgs s as t lrn th bsnss.”

“Wht is th nm of ths oblgng yth?” askd Shrlck Hlms.

“Hs nm is Vncnt Spldng, and h’s nt sch a yth, ethr. It’s
hrd t sy hs ag. I shld nt wsh a smrtr assstnt, Mr. Hlms;
and I knw vry wll tht h cld bttr hmslf and ern twc wht I
am abl t gv hm. Bt, aftr all, if h is stsfd, why shld I
pt ids in hs hd?”

“Why, indd? Y sm mst frtnt in hvng an _emplyé_ wh cms
undr th fll mrkt prc. It is nt a cmmn exprnc amng
emplyrs in ths ag. I dn’t knw tht yr assstnt is nt as
rmrkbl as yr advrtsmnt.”

“Oh, h hs hs flts, t,” sd Mr. Wlsn. “Nvr ws sch a fllw
fr phtgrphy. Snppng awy wth a cmr whn h oght t b
imprvng hs mnd, and thn dvng dwn int th cllr lk a rbbt
int its hl t dvlp hs pctrs. Tht is hs mn flt, bt on
th whl h’s a gd wrkr. Thr’s n vc in hm.”

“H is stll wth y, I prsm?”

“Ys, sr. H and a grl of frtn, wh ds a bt of smpl ckng
and kps th plc cln—tht’s all I hv in th hs, fr I am a
wdwr and nvr hd any fmly. W lv vry qtly, sr, th thr
of us; and w kp a rf ovr or hds and py or dbts, if w d
nthng mr.

“Th frst thng tht pt us ot ws tht advrtsmnt. Spldng, h
cm dwn int th offc jst ths dy eght wks, wth ths vry
ppr in hs hnd, and h sys:

“‘I wsh t th Lrd, Mr. Wlsn, tht I ws a rd-hdd mn.’

“‘Why tht?’ I asks.

“‘Why,’ sys h, ‘hr’s anthr vcncy on th Lg of th
Rd-hdd Mn. It’s wrth qt a lttl frtn t any mn wh gts
it, and I undrstnd tht thr ar mr vcncs thn thr ar mn,
s tht th trsts ar at thr wts’ end wht t d wth th mny.
If my hr wld only chng clr, hr’s a nc lttl crb all
rdy fr m t stp int.’

“‘Why, wht is it, thn?’ I askd. Y s, Mr. Hlms, I am a vry
sty-at-hm mn, and as my bsnss cm t m instd of my hvng t
g t it, I ws oftn wks on end wtht pttng my ft ovr th
dr-mt. In tht wy I ddn’t knw mch of wht ws gng on otsd,
and I ws alwys gld of a bt of nws.

“‘Hv y nvr hrd of th Lg of th Rd-hdd Mn?’ h askd
wth hs eys opn.

“‘Nvr.’

“‘Why, I wndr at tht, fr y ar elgbl yrslf fr on of th
vcncs.’

“‘And wht ar thy wrth?’ I askd.

“‘Oh, mrly a cpl of hndrd a yr, bt th wrk is slght, and it
nd nt intrfr vry mch wth on’s othr occptns.’

“Wll, y cn esly thnk tht tht md m prck up my ers, fr th
bsnss hs nt bn ovr gd fr sm yrs, and an extr cpl of
hndrd wld hv bn vry hndy.

“‘Tll m all abt it,’ sd I.

“‘Wll,’ sd h, shwng m th advrtsmnt, ‘y cn s fr
yrslf tht th Lg hs a vcncy, and thr is th addrss whr
y shld apply fr prtclrs. As fr as I cn mk ot, th Lg
ws fndd by an Amrcn mllnr, Ezkh Hpkns, wh ws vry
pclr in hs wys. H ws hmslf rd-hdd, and h hd a grt
sympthy fr all rd-hdd mn; s, whn h dd, it ws fnd tht h
hd lft hs enrms frtn in th hnds of trsts, wth
instrctns t apply th intrst t th prvdng of esy brths t
mn whs hr is of tht clr. Frm all I hr it is splndd py
and vry lttl t d.’

“‘Bt,’ sd I, ‘thr wld b mllns of rd-hdd mn wh wld
apply.’

“‘Nt s mny as y mght thnk,’ h answrd. ‘Y s it is rlly
cnfnd t Lndnrs, and t grwn mn. Ths Amrcn hd strtd frm
Lndn whn h ws yng, and h wntd t d th old twn a gd trn.
Thn, agn, I hv hrd it is n us yr applyng if yr hr is
lght rd, or drk rd, or anythng bt rl brght, blzng, fry
rd. Nw, if y crd t apply, Mr. Wlsn, y wld jst wlk in;
bt prhps it wld hrdly b wrth yr whl t pt yrslf ot of
th wy fr th sk of a fw hndrd pnds.’

“Nw, it is a fct, gntlmn, as y my s fr yrslvs, tht my
hr is of a vry fll and rch tnt, s tht it smd t m tht if
thr ws t b any cmpttn in th mttr I std as gd a chnc
as any mn tht I hd evr mt. Vncnt Spldng smd t knw s
mch abt it tht I thght h mght prv usfl, s I jst ordrd
hm t pt up th shttrs fr th dy and t cm rght awy wth m.
H ws vry wllng t hv a hldy, s w sht th bsnss up and
strtd off fr th addrss tht ws gvn us in th advrtsmnt.

“I nvr hp t s sch a sght as tht agn, Mr. Hlms. Frm
nrth, sth, est, and wst evry mn wh hd a shd of rd in hs
hr hd trmpd int th cty t answr th advrtsmnt. Flt
Strt ws chkd wth rd-hdd flk, and Pp’s Crt lkd lk a
cstr’s orng brrw. I shld nt hv thght thr wr s mny in
th whl cntry as wr brght tgthr by tht sngl
advrtsmnt. Evry shd of clr thy wr—strw, lmn, orng,
brck, Irsh-sttr, lvr, cly; bt, as Spldng sd, thr wr
nt mny wh hd th rl vvd flm-clrd tnt. Whn I sw hw
mny wr wtng, I wld hv gvn it up in dspr; bt Spldng
wld nt hr of it. Hw h dd it I cld nt imgn, bt h pshd
and plld and bttd untl h gt m thrgh th crwd, and rght up
t th stps whch ld t th offc. Thr ws a dbl strm upn
th str, sm gng up in hp, and sm cmng bck djctd; bt w
wdgd in as wll as w cld and sn fnd orslvs in th offc.”

“Yr exprnc hs bn a mst entrtnng on,” rmrkd Hlms as
hs clnt psd and rfrshd hs mmry wth a hg pnch of snff.
“Pry cntn yr vry intrstng sttmnt.”

“Thr ws nthng in th offc bt a cpl of wdn chrs and a
dl tbl, bhnd whch st a smll mn wth a hd tht ws evn
rddr thn mn. H sd a fw wrds t ech cnddt as h cm up,
and thn h alwys mngd t fnd sm flt in thm whch wld
dsqlfy thm. Gttng a vcncy dd nt sm t b sch a vry esy
mttr, aftr all. Hwvr, whn or trn cm th lttl mn ws mch
mr fvrbl t m thn t any of th othrs, and h clsd th dr
as w entrd, s tht h mght hv a prvt wrd wth us.

“‘Ths is Mr. Jbz Wlsn,’ sd my assstnt, ‘and h is wllng t
fll a vcncy in th Lg.’

“‘And h is admrbly std fr it,’ th othr answrd. ‘H hs evry
rqrmnt. I cnnt rcll whn I hv sn anythng s fn.’ H
tk a stp bckwrd, cckd hs hd on on sd, and gzd at my hr
untl I flt qt bshfl. Thn sddnly h plngd frwrd, wrng my
hnd, and cngrtltd m wrmly on my sccss.

“‘It wld b injstc t hstt,’ sd h. ‘Y wll, hwvr, I am
sr, excs m fr tkng an obvs prctn.’ Wth tht h szd
my hr in bth hs hnds, and tggd untl I ylld wth th pn.
‘Thr is wtr in yr eys,’ sd h as h rlsd m. ‘I prcv
tht all is as it shld b. Bt w hv t b crfl, fr w hv
twc bn dcvd by wgs and onc by pnt. I cld tll y tls
of cbblr’s wx whch wld dsgst y wth hmn ntr.’ H stppd
ovr t th wndw and shtd thrgh it at th tp of hs vc tht
th vcncy ws flld. A grn of dsppntmnt cm up frm blw,
and th flk all trpd awy in dffrnt drctns untl thr ws
nt a rd-hd t b sn excpt my own and tht of th mngr.

“‘My nm,’ sd h, ‘is Mr. Dncn Rss, and I am myslf on of th
pnsnrs upn th fnd lft by or nbl bnfctr. Ar y a
mrrd mn, Mr. Wlsn? Hv y a fmly?’

“I answrd tht I hd nt.

“Hs fc fll immdtly.

“‘Dr m!’ h sd grvly, ‘tht is vry srs indd! I am srry
t hr y sy tht. Th fnd ws, of crs, fr th prpgtn and
sprd of th rd-hds as wll as fr thr mntnnc. It is
excdngly unfrtnt tht y shld b a bchlr.’

“My fc lngthnd at ths, Mr. Hlms, fr I thght tht I ws nt
t hv th vcncy aftr all; bt aftr thnkng it ovr fr a fw
mnts h sd tht it wld b all rght.

“‘In th cs of anthr,’ sd h, ‘th objctn mght b ftl, bt
w mst strtch a pnt in fvr of a mn wth sch a hd of hr as
yrs. Whn shll y b abl t entr upn yr nw dts?’

“‘Wll, it is a lttl awkwrd, fr I hv a bsnss alrdy,’ sd I.

“‘Oh, nvr mnd abt tht, Mr. Wlsn!’ sd Vncnt Spldng. ‘I
shld b abl t lk aftr tht fr y.’

“‘Wht wld b th hrs?’ I askd.

“‘Tn t tw.’

“Nw a pwnbrkr’s bsnss is mstly dn of an evnng, Mr. Hlms,
espclly Thrsdy and Frdy evnng, whch is jst bfr py-dy;
s it wld st m vry wll t ern a lttl in th mrnngs.
Bsds, I knw tht my assstnt ws a gd mn, and tht h wld s
t anythng tht trnd up.

“‘Tht wld st m vry wll,’ sd I. ‘And th py?’

“‘Is £ 4 a wk.’

“‘And th wrk?’

“‘Is prly nmnl.’

“‘Wht d y cll prly nmnl?’

“‘Wll, y hv t b in th offc, or at lst in th bldng, th
whl tm. If y lv, y frft yr whl pstn frvr. Th
wll is vry clr upn tht pnt. Y dn’t cmply wth th
cndtns if y bdg frm th offc drng tht tm.’

“‘It’s only fr hrs a dy, and I shld nt thnk of lvng,’ sd
I.

“‘N excs wll avl,’ sd Mr. Dncn Rss; ‘nthr scknss nr
bsnss nr anythng els. Thr y mst sty, or y ls yr
bllt.’

“‘And th wrk?’

“‘Is t cpy ot th _Encyclpæd Brtnnc_. Thr is th frst
vlm of it in tht prss. Y mst fnd yr own ink, pns, and
blttng-ppr, bt w prvd ths tbl and chr. Wll y b rdy
t-mrrw?’

“‘Crtnly,’ I answrd.

“‘Thn, gd-by, Mr. Jbz Wlsn, and lt m cngrtlt y onc
mr on th imprtnt pstn whch y hv bn frtnt engh t
gn.’ H bwd m ot of th rm and I wnt hm wth my assstnt,
hrdly knwng wht t sy or d, I ws s plsd at my own gd
frtn.

“Wll, I thght ovr th mttr all dy, and by evnng I ws in lw
sprts agn; fr I hd qt prsdd myslf tht th whl affr
mst b sm grt hx or frd, thgh wht its objct mght b I
cld nt imgn. It smd altgthr pst blf tht anyn cld
mk sch a wll, or tht thy wld py sch a sm fr dng anythng
s smpl as cpyng ot th _Encyclpæd Brtnnc_. Vncnt
Spldng dd wht h cld t chr m up, bt by bdtm I hd
rsnd myslf ot of th whl thng. Hwvr, in th mrnng I
dtrmnd t hv a lk at it anyhw, s I bght a pnny bttl of
ink, and wth a qll-pn, and svn shts of flscp ppr, I
strtd off fr Pp’s Crt.

“Wll, t my srprs and dlght, evrythng ws as rght as pssbl.
Th tbl ws st ot rdy fr m, and Mr. Dncn Rss ws thr t
s tht I gt frly t wrk. H strtd m off upn th lttr A, and
thn h lft m; bt h wld drp in frm tm t tm t s tht all
ws rght wth m. At tw o’clck h bd m gd-dy, cmplmntd m
upn th amnt tht I hd wrttn, and lckd th dr of th offc
aftr m.

“Ths wnt on dy aftr dy, Mr. Hlms, and on Strdy th mngr
cm in and plnkd dwn fr gldn svrgns fr my wk’s wrk. It
ws th sm nxt wk, and th sm th wk aftr. Evry mrnng I
ws thr at tn, and evry aftrnn I lft at tw. By dgrs Mr.
Dncn Rss tk t cmng in only onc of a mrnng, and thn, aftr a
tm, h dd nt cm in at all. Stll, of crs, I nvr drd t
lv th rm fr an instnt, fr I ws nt sr whn h mght cm,
and th bllt ws sch a gd on, and std m s wll, tht I wld
nt rsk th lss of it.

“Eght wks pssd awy lk ths, and I hd wrttn abt Abbts and
Archry and Armr and Archtctr and Attc, and hpd wth
dlgnc tht I mght gt on t th B’s bfr vry lng. It cst m
smthng in flscp, and I hd prtty nrly flld a shlf wth my
wrtngs. And thn sddnly th whl bsnss cm t an end.”

“T an end?”

“Ys, sr. And n ltr thn ths mrnng. I wnt t my wrk as usl
at tn o’clck, bt th dr ws sht and lckd, wth a lttl sqr
of crdbrd hmmrd on t th mddl of th pnl wth a tck. Hr
it is, and y cn rd fr yrslf.”

H hld up a pc of wht crdbrd abt th sz of a sht of
nt-ppr. It rd in ths fshn:

“TH RD-HDD LG IS DSSLVD. Octbr 9, 1890.”


Shrlck Hlms and I srvyd ths crt annncmnt and th rfl
fc bhnd it, untl th cmcl sd of th affr s cmpltly
ovrtppd evry othr cnsdrtn tht w bth brst ot int a rr
of lghtr.

“I cnnt s tht thr is anythng vry fnny,” crd or clnt,
flshng up t th rts of hs flmng hd. “If y cn d nthng
bttr thn lgh at m, I cn g elswhr.”

“N, n,” crd Hlms, shvng hm bck int th chr frm whch h
hd hlf rsn. “I rlly wldn’t mss yr cs fr th wrld. It is
mst rfrshngly unsl. Bt thr is, if y wll excs my syng
s, smthng jst a lttl fnny abt it. Pry wht stps dd y
tk whn y fnd th crd upn th dr?”

“I ws stggrd, sr. I dd nt knw wht t d. Thn I clld at th
offcs rnd, bt nn of thm smd t knw anythng abt it.
Fnlly, I wnt t th lndlrd, wh is an accntnt lvng on th
grnd flr, and I askd hm if h cld tll m wht hd bcm of
th Rd-hdd Lg. H sd tht h hd nvr hrd of any sch
bdy. Thn I askd hm wh Mr. Dncn Rss ws. H answrd tht th
nm ws nw t hm.

“‘Wll,’ sd I, ‘th gntlmn at N. 4.’

“‘Wht, th rd-hdd mn?’

“‘Ys.’

“‘Oh,’ sd h, ‘hs nm ws Wllm Mrrs. H ws a slctr and
ws usng my rm as a tmprry cnvnnc untl hs nw prmss
wr rdy. H mvd ot ystrdy.’

“‘Whr cld I fnd hm?’

“‘Oh, at hs nw offcs. H dd tll m th addrss. Ys, 17 Kng
Edwrd Strt, nr St. Pl’s.’

“I strtd off, Mr. Hlms, bt whn I gt t tht addrss it ws a
mnfctry of artfcl kn-cps, and n on in it hd evr hrd of
ethr Mr. Wllm Mrrs or Mr. Dncn Rss.”

“And wht dd y d thn?” askd Hlms.

“I wnt hm t Sx-Cbrg Sqr, and I tk th advc of my
assstnt. Bt h cld nt hlp m in any wy. H cld only sy tht
if I wtd I shld hr by pst. Bt tht ws nt qt gd engh,
Mr. Hlms. I dd nt wsh t ls sch a plc wtht a strggl, s,
as I hd hrd tht y wr gd engh t gv advc t pr flk
wh wr in nd of it, I cm rght awy t y.”

“And y dd vry wsly,” sd Hlms. “Yr cs is an excdngly
rmrkbl on, and I shll b hppy t lk int it. Frm wht y
hv tld m I thnk tht it is pssbl tht grvr isss hng frm
it thn mght at frst sght appr.”

“Grv engh!” sd Mr. Jbz Wlsn. “Why, I hv lst fr pnd a
wk.”

“As fr as y ar prsnlly cncrnd,” rmrkd Hlms, “I d nt
s tht y hv any grvnc agnst ths extrrdnry lg. On
th cntrry, y ar, as I undrstnd, rchr by sm £ 30, t sy
nthng of th mnt knwldg whch y hv gnd on evry sbjct
whch cms undr th lttr A. Y hv lst nthng by thm.”

“N, sr. Bt I wnt t fnd ot abt thm, and wh thy ar, and wht
thr objct ws in plyng ths prnk—if it ws a prnk—upn m. It
ws a prtty expnsv jk fr thm, fr it cst thm tw and thrty
pnds.”

“W shll endvr t clr up ths pnts fr y. And, frst, on
or tw qstns, Mr. Wlsn. Ths assstnt of yrs wh frst clld
yr attntn t th advrtsmnt—hw lng hd h bn wth y?”

“Abt a mnth thn.”

“Hw dd h cm?”

“In answr t an advrtsmnt.”

“Ws h th only applcnt?”

“N, I hd a dzn.”

“Why dd y pck hm?”

“Bcs h ws hndy and wld cm chp.”

“At hlf wgs, in fct.”

“Ys.”

“Wht is h lk, ths Vncnt Spldng?”

“Smll, stt-blt, vry qck in hs wys, n hr on hs fc,
thgh h’s nt shrt of thrty. Hs a wht splsh of acd upn hs
frhd.”

Hlms st up in hs chr in cnsdrbl exctmnt. “I thght as
mch,” sd h. “Hv y evr obsrvd tht hs ers ar prcd fr
errngs?”

“Ys, sr. H tld m tht a gpsy hd dn it fr hm whn h ws a
ld.”

“Hm!” sd Hlms, snkng bck in dp thght. “H is stll wth
y?”

“Oh, ys, sr; I hv only jst lft hm.”

“And hs yr bsnss bn attndd t in yr absnc?”

“Nthng t cmpln of, sr. Thr’s nvr vry mch t d of a
mrnng.”

“Tht wll d, Mr. Wlsn. I shll b hppy t gv y an opnn upn
th sbjct in th crs of a dy or tw. T-dy is Strdy, and I
hp tht by Mndy w my cm t a cnclsn.”

“Wll, Wtsn,” sd Hlms whn or vstr hd lft us, “wht d y
mk of it all?”

“I mk nthng of it,” I answrd frnkly. “It is a mst mystrs
bsnss.”

“As a rl,” sd Hlms, “th mr bzrr a thng is th lss
mystrs it prvs t b. It is yr cmmnplc, ftrlss crms
whch ar rlly pzzlng, jst as a cmmnplc fc is th mst
dffclt t idntfy. Bt I mst b prmpt ovr ths mttr.”

“Wht ar y gng t d, thn?” I askd.

“T smk,” h answrd. “It is qt a thr pp prblm, and I bg
tht y wn’t spk t m fr ffty mnts.” H crld hmslf up in
hs chr, wth hs thn kns drwn up t hs hwk-lk ns, and
thr h st wth hs eys clsd and hs blck cly pp thrstng ot
lk th bll of sm strng brd. I hd cm t th cnclsn tht
h hd drppd aslp, and indd ws nddng myslf, whn h sddnly
sprng ot of hs chr wth th gstr of a mn wh hs md up hs
mnd and pt hs pp dwn upn th mntlpc.

“Srst plys at th St. Jms’s Hll ths aftrnn,” h rmrkd.
“Wht d y thnk, Wtsn? Cld yr ptnts spr y fr a fw
hrs?”

“I hv nthng t d t-dy. My prctc is nvr vry absrbng.”

“Thn pt on yr ht and cm. I am gng thrgh th Cty frst, and
w cn hv sm lnch on th wy. I obsrv tht thr is a gd dl
of Grmn msc on th prgrmm, whch is rthr mr t my tst thn
Itln or Frnch. It is intrspctv, and I wnt t intrspct. Cm
alng!”

W trvlld by th Undrgrnd as fr as Aldrsgt; and a shrt wlk
tk us t Sx-Cbrg Sqr, th scn of th snglr stry whch w
hd lstnd t in th mrnng. It ws a pky, lttl, shbby-gntl
plc, whr fr lns of dngy tw-strd brck hss lkd ot
int a smll rld-in enclsr, whr a lwn of wdy grss and a fw
clmps of fdd lrl bshs md a hrd fght agnst a smk-ldn
and uncngnl atmsphr. Thr glt blls and a brwn brd wth
“JBZ WLSN” in wht lttrs, upn a crnr hs, annncd th
plc whr or rd-hdd clnt crrd on hs bsnss. Shrlck
Hlms stppd in frnt of it wth hs hd on on sd and lkd it
all ovr, wth hs eys shnng brghtly btwn pckrd lds. Thn h
wlkd slwly up th strt, and thn dwn agn t th crnr, stll
lkng knly at th hss. Fnlly h rtrnd t th pwnbrkr’s,
and, hvng thmpd vgrsly upn th pvmnt wth hs stck tw or
thr tms, h wnt up t th dr and knckd. It ws instntly
opnd by a brght-lkng, cln-shvn yng fllw, wh askd hm t
stp in.

“Thnk y,” sd Hlms, “I only wshd t ask y hw y wld g
frm hr t th Strnd.”

“Thrd rght, frth lft,” answrd th assstnt prmptly, clsng
th dr.

“Smrt fllw, tht,” obsrvd Hlms as w wlkd awy. “H is, in my
jdgmnt, th frth smrtst mn in Lndn, and fr drng I am nt
sr tht h hs nt a clm t b thrd. I hv knwn smthng of hm
bfr.”

“Evdntly,” sd I, “Mr. Wlsn’s assstnt cnts fr a gd dl in
ths mystry of th Rd-hdd Lg. I am sr tht y inqrd yr
wy mrly in ordr tht y mght s hm.”

“Nt hm.”

“Wht thn?”

“Th kns of hs trsrs.”

“And wht dd y s?”

“Wht I expctd t s.”

“Why dd y bt th pvmnt?”

“My dr dctr, ths is a tm fr obsrvtn, nt fr tlk. W ar
sps in an enmy’s cntry. W knw smthng of Sx-Cbrg Sqr.
Lt us nw explr th prts whch l bhnd it.”

Th rd in whch w fnd orslvs as w trnd rnd th crnr frm
th rtrd Sx-Cbrg Sqr prsntd as grt a cntrst t it as
th frnt of a pctr ds t th bck. It ws on of th mn
artrs whch cnvyd th trffc of th Cty t th nrth and wst.
Th rdwy ws blckd wth th immns strm of cmmrc flwng in
a dbl td inwrd and otwrd, whl th ftpths wr blck wth
th hrryng swrm of pdstrns. It ws dffclt t rls as w
lkd at th ln of fn shps and sttly bsnss prmss tht
thy rlly abttd on th othr sd upn th fdd and stgnnt
sqr whch w hd jst qttd.

“Lt m s,” sd Hlms, stndng at th crnr and glncng alng
th ln, “I shld lk jst t rmmbr th ordr of th hss hr.
It is a hbby of mn t hv an exct knwldg of Lndn. Thr is
Mrtmr’s, th tbccnst, th lttl nwsppr shp, th Cbrg
brnch of th Cty and Sbrbn Bnk, th Vgtrn Rstrnt, and
McFrln’s crrg-bldng dpt. Tht crrs us rght on t th
othr blck. And nw, Dctr, w’v dn or wrk, s it’s tm w hd
sm ply. A sndwch and a cp of cff, and thn off t vln-lnd,
whr all is swtnss and dlccy and hrmny, and thr ar n
rd-hdd clnts t vx us wth thr cnndrms.”

My frnd ws an enthsstc mscn, bng hmslf nt only a vry
cpbl prfrmr bt a cmpsr of n ordnry mrt. All th
aftrnn h st in th stlls wrppd in th mst prfct hppnss,
gntly wvng hs lng, thn fngrs in tm t th msc, whl hs
gntly smlng fc and hs lngd, drmy eys wr as unlk ths
of Hlms th slth-hnd, Hlms th rlntlss, kn-wttd,
rdy-hndd crmnl agnt, as it ws pssbl t cncv. In hs
snglr chrctr th dl ntr altrntly assrtd itslf, and hs
extrm exctnss and asttnss rprsntd, as I hv oftn thght,
th rctn agnst th ptc and cntmpltv md whch
occsnlly prdmntd in hm. Th swng of hs ntr tk hm frm
extrm lngr t dvrng enrgy; and, as I knw wll, h ws nvr
s trly frmdbl as whn, fr dys on end, h hd bn lngng in
hs armchr amd hs imprvstns and hs blck-lttr edtns.
Thn it ws tht th lst of th chs wld sddnly cm upn hm,
and tht hs brllnt rsnng pwr wld rs t th lvl of
inttn, untl ths wh wr uncqntd wth hs mthds wld
lk asknc at hm as on a mn whs knwldg ws nt tht of othr
mrtls. Whn I sw hm tht aftrnn s enwrppd in th msc at St.
Jms’s Hll I flt tht an evl tm mght b cmng upn ths whm
h hd st hmslf t hnt dwn.

“Y wnt t g hm, n dbt, Dctr,” h rmrkd as w emrgd.

“Ys, it wld b as wll.”

“And I hv sm bsnss t d whch wll tk sm hrs. Ths
bsnss at Cbrg Sqr is srs.”

“Why srs?”

“A cnsdrbl crm is in cntmpltn. I hv evry rsn t
blv tht w shll b in tm t stp it. Bt t-dy bng Strdy
rthr cmplcts mttrs. I shll wnt yr hlp t-nght.”

“At wht tm?”

“Tn wll b erly engh.”

“I shll b at Bkr Strt at tn.”

“Vry wll. And, I sy, Dctr, thr my b sm lttl dngr, s
kndly pt yr army rvlvr in yr pckt.” H wvd hs hnd,
trnd on hs hl, and dspprd in an instnt amng th crwd.

I trst tht I am nt mr dns thn my nghbrs, bt I ws alwys
opprssd wth a sns of my own stpdty in my dlngs wth Shrlck
Hlms. Hr I hd hrd wht h hd hrd, I hd sn wht h hd
sn, and yt frm hs wrds it ws evdnt tht h sw clrly nt
only wht hd hppnd bt wht ws abt t hppn, whl t m th
whl bsnss ws stll cnfsd and grtsq. As I drv hm t my
hs in Knsngtn I thght ovr it all, frm th extrrdnry stry
of th rd-hdd cpr of th _Encyclpæd_ dwn t th vst t
Sx-Cbrg Sqr, and th omns wrds wth whch h hd prtd frm
m. Wht ws ths nctrnl expdtn, and why shld I g armd?
Whr wr w gng, and wht wr w t d? I hd th hnt frm Hlms
tht ths smth-fcd pwnbrkr’s assstnt ws a frmdbl mn—a
mn wh mght ply a dp gm. I trd t pzzl it ot, bt gv it
up in dspr and st th mttr asd untl nght shld brng an
explntn.

It ws a qrtr-pst nn whn I strtd frm hm and md my wy
acrss th Prk, and s thrgh Oxfrd Strt t Bkr Strt. Tw
hnsms wr stndng at th dr, and as I entrd th pssg I hrd
th snd of vcs frm abv. On entrng hs rm, I fnd Hlms in
anmtd cnvrstn wth tw mn, on of whm I rcgnsd as Ptr
Jns, th offcl plc agnt, whl th othr ws a lng, thn,
sd-fcd mn, wth a vry shny ht and opprssvly rspctbl
frck-ct.

“H! Or prty is cmplt,” sd Hlms, bttnng up hs p-jckt
and tkng hs hvy hntng crp frm th rck. “Wtsn, I thnk y
knw Mr. Jns, of Sctlnd Yrd? Lt m intrdc y t Mr.
Mrrywthr, wh is t b or cmpnn in t-nght’s advntr.”

“W’r hntng in cpls agn, Dctr, y s,” sd Jns in hs
cnsqntl wy. “Or frnd hr is a wndrfl mn fr strtng a
chs. All h wnts is an old dg t hlp hm t d th rnnng dwn.”

“I hp a wld gs my nt prv t b th end of or chs,”
obsrvd Mr. Mrrywthr glmly.

“Y my plc cnsdrbl cnfdnc in Mr. Hlms, sr,” sd th
plc agnt lftly. “H hs hs own lttl mthds, whch ar, if h
wn’t mnd my syng s, jst a lttl t thrtcl and fntstc,
bt h hs th mkngs of a dtctv in hm. It is nt t mch t sy
tht onc or twc, as in tht bsnss of th Shlt mrdr and th
Agr trsr, h hs bn mr nrly crrct thn th offcl
frc.”

“Oh, if y sy s, Mr. Jns, it is all rght,” sd th strngr wth
dfrnc. “Stll, I cnfss tht I mss my rbbr. It is th frst
Strdy nght fr svn-and-twnty yrs tht I hv nt hd my
rbbr.”

“I thnk y wll fnd,” sd Shrlck Hlms, “tht y wll ply fr
a hghr stk t-nght thn y hv evr dn yt, and tht th ply
wll b mr exctng. Fr y, Mr. Mrrywthr, th stk wll b
sm £ 30,000; and fr y, Jns, it wll b th mn upn whm y
wsh t ly yr hnds.”

“Jhn Cly, th mrdrr, thf, smshr, and frgr. H’s a yng mn,
Mr. Mrrywthr, bt h is at th hd of hs prfssn, and I wld
rthr hv my brclts on hm thn on any crmnl in Lndn. H’s a
rmrkbl mn, is yng Jhn Cly. Hs grndfthr ws a ryl dk,
and h hmslf hs bn t Etn and Oxfrd. Hs brn is as cnnng as
hs fngrs, and thgh w mt sgns of hm at evry trn, w nvr
knw whr t fnd th mn hmslf. H’ll crck a crb in Sctlnd on
wk, and b rsng mny t bld an orphng in Crnwll th nxt.
I’v bn on hs trck fr yrs and hv nvr st eys on hm yt.”

“I hp tht I my hv th plsr of intrdcng y t-nght. I’v
hd on or tw lttl trns als wth Mr. Jhn Cly, and I agr wth
y tht h is at th hd of hs prfssn. It is pst tn, hwvr,
and qt tm tht w strtd. If y tw wll tk th frst hnsm,
Wtsn and I wll fllw in th scnd.”

Shrlck Hlms ws nt vry cmmnctv drng th lng drv and
ly bck in th cb hmmng th tns whch h hd hrd in th
aftrnn. W rttld thrgh an endlss lbyrnth of gs-lt strts
untl w emrgd int Frrngtn Strt.

“W ar cls thr nw,” my frnd rmrkd. “Ths fllw Mrrywthr
is a bnk drctr, and prsnlly intrstd in th mttr. I thght
it as wll t hv Jns wth us als. H is nt a bd fllw, thgh
an abslt imbcl in hs prfssn. H hs on pstv vrt. H
is as brv as a blldg and as tncs as a lbstr if h gts hs
clws upn anyn. Hr w ar, and thy ar wtng fr us.”

W hd rchd th sm crwdd thrghfr in whch w hd fnd
orslvs in th mrnng. Or cbs wr dsmssd, and, fllwng th
gdnc of Mr. Mrrywthr, w pssd dwn a nrrw pssg and
thrgh a sd dr, whch h opnd fr us. Wthn thr ws a smll
crrdr, whch endd in a vry mssv irn gt. Ths als ws
opnd, and ld dwn a flght of wndng stn stps, whch trmntd
at anthr frmdbl gt. Mr. Mrrywthr stppd t lght a
lntrn, and thn cndctd us dwn a drk, erth-smllng pssg, and
s, aftr opnng a thrd dr, int a hg vlt or cllr, whch ws
pld all rnd wth crts and mssv bxs.

“Y ar nt vry vlnrbl frm abv,” Hlms rmrkd as h hld up
th lntrn and gzd abt hm.

“Nr frm blw,” sd Mr. Mrrywthr, strkng hs stck upn th
flgs whch lnd th flr. “Why, dr m, it snds qt hllw!” h
rmrkd, lkng up in srprs.

“I mst rlly ask y t b a lttl mr qt!” sd Hlms
svrly. “Y hv alrdy imprlld th whl sccss of or
expdtn. Mght I bg tht y wld hv th gdnss t st dwn
upn on of ths bxs, and nt t intrfr?”

Th slmn Mr. Mrrywthr prchd hmslf upn a crt, wth a vry
injrd exprssn upn hs fc, whl Hlms fll upn hs kns upn
th flr and, wth th lntrn and a mgnfyng lns, bgn t exmn
mntly th crcks btwn th stns. A fw scnds sffcd t
stsfy hm, fr h sprng t hs ft agn and pt hs glss in hs
pckt.

“W hv at lst an hr bfr us,” h rmrkd, “fr thy cn hrdly
tk any stps untl th gd pwnbrkr is sfly in bd. Thn thy
wll nt ls a mnt, fr th snr thy d thr wrk th lngr
tm thy wll hv fr thr escp. W ar at prsnt, Dctr—as n
dbt y hv dvnd—in th cllr of th Cty brnch of on of th
prncpl Lndn bnks. Mr. Mrrywthr is th chrmn of drctrs,
and h wll expln t y tht thr ar rsns why th mr drng
crmnls of Lndn shld tk a cnsdrbl intrst in ths cllr
at prsnt.”

“It is or Frnch gld,” whsprd th drctr. “W hv hd svrl
wrnngs tht an attmpt mght b md upn it.”

“Yr Frnch gld?”

“Ys. W hd occsn sm mnths ag t strngthn or rsrcs and
brrwd fr tht prps 30,000 nplns frm th Bnk of Frnc. It
hs bcm knwn tht w hv nvr hd occsn t unpck th mny,
and tht it is stll lyng in or cllr. Th crt upn whch I st
cntns 2,000 nplns pckd btwn lyrs of ld fl. Or
rsrv of blln is mch lrgr at prsnt thn is uslly kpt in a
sngl brnch offc, and th drctrs hv hd msgvngs upn th
sbjct.”

“Whch wr vry wll jstfd,” obsrvd Hlms. “And nw it is tm
tht w arrngd or lttl plns. I expct tht wthn an hr mttrs
wll cm t a hd. In th mntm Mr. Mrrywthr, w mst pt th
scrn ovr tht drk lntrn.”

“And st in th drk?”

“I am afrd s. I hd brght a pck of crds in my pckt, and I
thght tht, as w wr a _prt crrée_, y mght hv yr rbbr
aftr all. Bt I s tht th enmy’s prprtns hv gn s fr
tht w cnnt rsk th prsnc of a lght. And, frst of all, w mst
chs or pstns. Ths ar drng mn, and thgh w shll tk
thm at a dsdvntg, thy my d us sm hrm unlss w ar crfl.
I shll stnd bhnd ths crt, and d y cncl yrslvs bhnd
ths. Thn, whn I flsh a lght upn thm, cls in swftly. If thy
fr, Wtsn, hv n cmpnctn abt shtng thm dwn.”

I plcd my rvlvr, cckd, upn th tp of th wdn cs bhnd
whch I crchd. Hlms sht th sld acrss th frnt of hs lntrn
and lft us in ptch drknss—sch an abslt drknss as I hv nvr
bfr exprncd. Th smll of ht mtl rmnd t assr us tht
th lght ws stll thr, rdy t flsh ot at a mmnt’s ntc. T
m, wth my nrvs wrkd up t a ptch of expctncy, thr ws
smthng dprssng and sbdng in th sddn glm, and in th cld
dnk ar of th vlt.

“Thy hv bt on rtrt,” whsprd Hlms. “Tht is bck thrgh
th hs int Sx-Cbrg Sqr. I hp tht y hv dn wht I
askd y, Jns?”

“I hv an inspctr and tw offcrs wtng at th frnt dr.”

“Thn w hv stppd all th hls. And nw w mst b slnt and
wt.”

Wht a tm it smd! Frm cmprng nts aftrwrds it ws bt an
hr and a qrtr, yt it apprd t m tht th nght mst hv
almst gn, and th dwn b brkng abv us. My lmbs wr wry and
stff, fr I frd t chng my pstn; yt my nrvs wr wrkd up
t th hghst ptch of tnsn, and my hrng ws s act tht I
cld nt only hr th gntl brthng of my cmpnns, bt I cld
dstngsh th dpr, hvr in-brth of th blky Jns frm th
thn, sghng nt of th bnk drctr. Frm my pstn I cld lk
ovr th cs in th drctn of th flr. Sddnly my eys cght
th glnt of a lght.

At frst it ws bt a lrd sprk upn th stn pvmnt. Thn it
lngthnd ot untl it bcm a yllw ln, and thn, wtht any
wrnng or snd, a gsh smd t opn and a hnd apprd, a wht,
almst wmnly hnd, whch flt abt in th cntr of th lttl ar
of lght. Fr a mnt or mr th hnd, wth its wrthng fngrs,
prtrdd ot of th flr. Thn it ws wthdrwn as sddnly as it
apprd, and all ws drk agn sv th sngl lrd sprk whch
mrkd a chnk btwn th stns.

Its dspprnc, hwvr, ws bt mmntry. Wth a rndng, trng
snd, on of th brd, wht stns trnd ovr upn its sd and
lft a sqr, gpng hl, thrgh whch strmd th lght of a
lntrn. Ovr th edg thr ppd a cln-ct, bysh fc, whch
lkd knly abt it, and thn, wth a hnd on ethr sd of th
aprtr, drw itslf shldr-hgh and wst-hgh, untl on kn
rstd upn th edg. In anthr instnt h std at th sd of th
hl and ws hlng aftr hm a cmpnn, lth and smll lk
hmslf, wth a pl fc and a shck of vry rd hr.

“It’s all clr,” h whsprd. “Hv y th chsl and th bgs?
Grt Sctt! Jmp, Arch, jmp, and I’ll swng fr it!”

Shrlck Hlms hd sprng ot and szd th intrdr by th cllr.
Th othr dvd dwn th hl, and I hrd th snd of rndng clth
as Jns cltchd at hs skrts. Th lght flshd upn th brrl of a
rvlvr, bt Hlms’ hntng crp cm dwn on th mn’s wrst, and
th pstl clnkd upn th stn flr.

“It’s n us, Jhn Cly,” sd Hlms blndly. “Y hv n chnc at
all.”

“S I s,” th othr answrd wth th utmst clnss. “I fncy tht
my pl is all rght, thgh I s y hv gt hs ct-tls.”

“Thr ar thr mn wtng fr hm at th dr,” sd Hlms.

“Oh, indd! Y sm t hv dn th thng vry cmpltly. I mst
cmplmnt y.”

“And I y,” Hlms answrd. “Yr rd-hdd id ws vry nw and
effctv.”

“Y’ll s yr pl agn prsntly,” sd Jns. “H’s qckr at
clmbng dwn hls thn I am. Jst hld ot whl I fx th drbs.”

“I bg tht y wll nt tch m wth yr flthy hnds,” rmrkd or
prsnr as th hndcffs clttrd upn hs wrsts. “Y my nt b
awr tht I hv ryl bld in my vns. Hv th gdnss, als,
whn y addrss m alwys t sy ‘sr’ and ‘pls.’”

“All rght,” sd Jns wth a str and a snggr. “Wll, wld y
pls, sr, mrch upstrs, whr w cn gt a cb t crry yr
Hghnss t th plc-sttn?”

“Tht is bttr,” sd Jhn Cly srnly. H md a swpng bw t
th thr of us and wlkd qtly off in th cstdy of th dtctv.

“Rlly, Mr. Hlms,” sd Mr. Mrrywthr as w fllwd thm frm
th cllr, “I d nt knw hw th bnk cn thnk y or rpy y.
Thr is n dbt tht y hv dtctd and dftd in th mst
cmplt mnnr on of th mst dtrmnd attmpts at bnk rbbry
tht hv evr cm wthn my exprnc.”

“I hv hd on or tw lttl scrs of my own t sttl wth Mr. Jhn
Cly,” sd Hlms. “I hv bn at sm smll expns ovr ths
mttr, whch I shll expct th bnk t rfnd, bt bynd tht I am
amply rpd by hvng hd an exprnc whch is in mny wys unq,
and by hrng th vry rmrkbl nrrtv of th Rd-hdd Lg.”

“Y s, Wtsn,” h explnd in th erly hrs of th mrnng as w
st ovr a glss of whsky and sd in Bkr Strt, “it ws prfctly
obvs frm th frst tht th only pssbl objct of ths rthr
fntstc bsnss of th advrtsmnt of th Lg, and th cpyng
of th _Encyclpæd_, mst b t gt ths nt ovr-brght pwnbrkr
ot of th wy fr a nmbr of hrs evry dy. It ws a crs wy of
mngng it, bt, rlly, it wld b dffclt t sggst a bttr.
Th mthd ws n dbt sggstd t Cly’s ingns mnd by th
clr of hs accmplc’s hr. Th £ 4 a wk ws a lr whch mst
drw hm, and wht ws it t thm, wh wr plyng fr thsnds? Thy
pt in th advrtsmnt, on rg hs th tmprry offc, th othr
rg incts th mn t apply fr it, and tgthr thy mng t
scr hs absnc evry mrnng in th wk. Frm th tm tht I
hrd of th assstnt hvng cm fr hlf wgs, it ws obvs t m
tht h hd sm strng mtv fr scrng th sttn.”

“Bt hw cld y gss wht th mtv ws?”

“Hd thr bn wmn in th hs, I shld hv sspctd a mr
vlgr intrg. Tht, hwvr, ws ot of th qstn. Th mn’s
bsnss ws a smll on, and thr ws nthng in hs hs whch
cld accnt fr sch elbrt prprtns, and sch an expndtr
as thy wr at. It mst, thn, b smthng ot of th hs. Wht
cld it b? I thght of th assstnt’s fndnss fr phtgrphy, and
hs trck of vnshng int th cllr. Th cllr! Thr ws th end
of ths tngld cl. Thn I md inqrs as t ths mystrs
assstnt and fnd tht I hd t dl wth on of th clst and mst
drng crmnls in Lndn. H ws dng smthng in th
cllr—smthng whch tk mny hrs a dy fr mnths on end. Wht
cld it b, onc mr? I cld thnk of nthng sv tht h ws
rnnng a tnnl t sm othr bldng.

“S fr I hd gt whn w wnt t vst th scn of actn. I
srprsd y by btng upn th pvmnt wth my stck. I ws
ascrtnng whthr th cllr strtchd ot in frnt or bhnd. It
ws nt in frnt. Thn I rng th bll, and, as I hpd, th assstnt
answrd it. W hv hd sm skrmshs, bt w hd nvr st eys
upn ech othr bfr. I hrdly lkd at hs fc. Hs kns wr
wht I wshd t s. Y mst yrslf hv rmrkd hw wrn,
wrnkld, and stnd thy wr. Thy spk of ths hrs of
brrwng. Th only rmnng pnt ws wht thy wr brrwng fr. I
wlkd rnd th crnr, sw th Cty and Sbrbn Bnk abttd on or
frnd’s prmss, and flt tht I hd slvd my prblm. Whn y
drv hm aftr th cncrt I clld upn Sctlnd Yrd and upn th
chrmn of th bnk drctrs, wth th rslt tht y hv sn.”

“And hw cld y tll tht thy wld mk thr attmpt t-nght?” I
askd.

“Wll, whn thy clsd thr Lg offcs tht ws a sgn tht thy
crd n lngr abt Mr. Jbz Wlsn’s prsnc—in othr wrds, tht
thy hd cmpltd thr tnnl. Bt it ws essntl tht thy shld
us it sn, as it mght b dscvrd, or th blln mght b
rmvd. Strdy wld st thm bttr thn any othr dy, as it
wld gv thm tw dys fr thr escp. Fr all ths rsns I
expctd thm t cm t-nght.”

“Y rsnd it ot btflly,” I exclmd in unfgnd admrtn.
“It is s lng a chn, and yt evry lnk rngs tr.”

“It svd m frm enn,” h answrd, ywnng. “Als! I alrdy fl
it clsng in upn m. My lf is spnt in on lng effrt t escp
frm th cmmnplcs of exstnc. Ths lttl prblms hlp m t d
s.”

“And y ar a bnfctr of th rc,” sd I.

H shrggd hs shldrs. “Wll, prhps, aftr all, it is of sm
lttl us,” h rmrkd. “‘_L’hmm c’est rn—l’œuvr c’est tt_,’
as Gstv Flbrt wrt t Grg Snd.”




I. A CS OF IDNTTY


“My dr fllw,” sd Shrlck Hlms as w st on ethr sd of th
fr in hs ldgngs at Bkr Strt, “lf is infntly strngr thn
anythng whch th mnd of mn cld invnt. W wld nt dr t
cncv th thngs whch ar rlly mr cmmnplcs of exstnc. If
w cld fly ot of tht wndw hnd in hnd, hvr ovr ths grt
cty, gntly rmv th rfs, and pp in at th qr thngs whch
ar gng on, th strng cncdncs, th plnnngs, th
crss-prpss, th wndrfl chns of evnts, wrkng thrgh
gnrtns, and ldng t th mst _otré_ rslts, it wld mk all
fctn wth its cnvntnlts and frsn cnclsns mst stl
and unprftbl.”

“And yt I am nt cnvncd of it,” I answrd. “Th css whch cm
t lght in th pprs ar, as a rl, bld engh, and vlgr engh.
W hv in or plc rprts rlsm pshd t its extrm lmts, and
yt th rslt is, it mst b cnfssd, nthr fscntng nr
artstc.”

“A crtn slctn and dscrtn mst b usd in prdcng a
rlstc effct,” rmrkd Hlms. “Ths is wntng in th plc
rprt, whr mr strss is ld, prhps, upn th plttds of th
mgstrt thn upn th dtls, whch t an obsrvr cntn th
vtl essnc of th whl mttr. Dpnd upn it, thr is nthng s
unntrl as th cmmnplc.”

I smld and shk my hd. “I cn qt undrstnd yr thnkng s,”
I sd. “Of crs, in yr pstn of unffcl advsr and hlpr
t evrybdy wh is absltly pzzld, thrght thr cntnnts,
y ar brght in cntct wth all tht is strng and bzrr. Bt
hr”—I pckd up th mrnng ppr frm th grnd—“lt us pt it t a
prctcl tst. Hr is th frst hdng upn whch I cm. ‘A
hsbnd’s crlty t hs wf.’ Thr is hlf a clmn of prnt, bt I
knw wtht rdng it tht it is all prfctly fmlr t m. Thr
is, of crs, th othr wmn, th drnk, th psh, th blw, th
brs, th sympthtc sstr or lndldy. Th crdst of wrtrs
cld invnt nthng mr crd.”

“Indd, yr exmpl is an unfrtnt on fr yr argmnt,” sd
Hlms, tkng th ppr and glncng hs ey dwn it. “Ths is th
Dnds sprtn cs, and, as it hppns, I ws enggd in clrng
up sm smll pnts in cnnctn wth it. Th hsbnd ws a
tttlr, thr ws n othr wmn, and th cndct cmplnd of ws
tht h hd drftd int th hbt of wndng up evry ml by tkng
ot hs fls tth and hrlng thm at hs wf, whch, y wll
allw, is nt an actn lkly t occr t th imgntn of th
avrg stry-tllr. Tk a pnch of snff, Dctr, and acknwldg
tht I hv scrd ovr y in yr exmpl.”

H hld ot hs snffbx of old gld, wth a grt amthyst in th
cntr of th ld. Its splndr ws in sch cntrst t hs hmly
wys and smpl lf tht I cld nt hlp cmmntng upn it.

“Ah,” sd h, “I frgt tht I hd nt sn y fr sm wks. It is
a lttl svnr frm th Kng of Bhm in rtrn fr my assstnc
in th cs of th Irn Adlr pprs.”

“And th rng?” I askd, glncng at a rmrkbl brllnt whch
sprkld upn hs fngr.

“It ws frm th rgnng fmly of Hllnd, thgh th mttr in whch
I srvd thm ws of sch dlccy tht I cnnt cnfd it evn t
y, wh hv bn gd engh t chrncl on or tw of my lttl
prblms.”

“And hv y any on hnd jst nw?” I askd wth intrst.

“Sm tn or twlv, bt nn whch prsnt any ftr of intrst.
Thy ar imprtnt, y undrstnd, wtht bng intrstng. Indd,
I hv fnd tht it is uslly in unmprtnt mttrs tht thr is a
fld fr th obsrvtn, and fr th qck anlyss of cs and
effct whch gvs th chrm t an invstgtn. Th lrgr crms ar
apt t b th smplr, fr th bggr th crm th mr obvs, as a
rl, is th mtv. In ths css, sv fr on rthr intrct
mttr whch hs bn rfrrd t m frm Mrslls, thr is nthng
whch prsnts any ftrs of intrst. It is pssbl, hwvr, tht
I my hv smthng bttr bfr vry mny mnts ar ovr, fr ths
is on of my clnts, or I am mch mstkn.”

H hd rsn frm hs chr and ws stndng btwn th prtd blnds
gzng dwn int th dll ntrl-tntd Lndn strt. Lkng ovr
hs shldr, I sw tht on th pvmnt oppst thr std a lrg
wmn wth a hvy fr b rnd hr nck, and a lrg crlng rd
fthr in a brd-brmmd ht whch ws tltd in a cqttsh Dchss
of Dvnshr fshn ovr hr er. Frm undr ths grt pnply sh
ppd up in a nrvs, hsttng fshn at or wndws, whl hr
bdy osclltd bckwrd and frwrd, and hr fngrs fdgtd wth hr
glv bttns. Sddnly, wth a plng, as of th swmmr wh lvs
th bnk, sh hrrd acrss th rd, and w hrd th shrp clng of
th bll.

“I hv sn ths symptms bfr,” sd Hlms, thrwng hs
cgrtt int th fr. “Osclltn upn th pvmnt alwys mns an
_affr d cœur_. Sh wld lk advc, bt is nt sr tht th
mttr is nt t dlct fr cmmnctn. And yt evn hr w my
dscrmnt. Whn a wmn hs bn srsly wrngd by a mn sh n
lngr oscllts, and th usl symptm is a brkn bll wr. Hr w
my tk it tht thr is a lv mttr, bt tht th mdn is nt s
mch angry as prplxd, or grvd. Bt hr sh cms in prsn t
rslv or dbts.”

As h spk thr ws a tp at th dr, and th by in bttns entrd
t annnc Mss Mry Sthrlnd, whl th ldy hrslf lmd bhnd
hs smll blck fgr lk a fll-sld mrchnt-mn bhnd a tny
plt bt. Shrlck Hlms wlcmd hr wth th esy crtsy fr
whch h ws rmrkbl, and, hvng clsd th dr and bwd hr int
an armchr, h lkd hr ovr in th mnt and yt abstrctd
fshn whch ws pclr t hm.

“D y nt fnd,” h sd, “tht wth yr shrt sght it is a lttl
tryng t d s mch typwrtng?”

“I dd at frst,” sh answrd, “bt nw I knw whr th lttrs ar
wtht lkng.” Thn, sddnly rlsng th fll prprt of hs
wrds, sh gv a vlnt strt and lkd up, wth fr and
astnshmnt upn hr brd, gd-hmrd fc. “Y’v hrd abt
m, Mr. Hlms,” sh crd, “els hw cld y knw all tht?”

“Nvr mnd,” sd Hlms, lghng; “it is my bsnss t knw thngs.
Prhps I hv trnd myslf t s wht othrs ovrlk. If nt, why
shld y cm t cnslt m?”

“I cm t y, sr, bcs I hrd of y frm Mrs. Ethrg, whs
hsbnd y fnd s esy whn th plc and evryn hd gvn hm up
fr dd. Oh, Mr. Hlms, I wsh y wld d as mch fr m. I’m nt
rch, bt stll I hv a hndrd a yr in my own rght, bsds th
lttl tht I mk by th mchn, and I wld gv it all t knw wht
hs bcm of Mr. Hsmr Angl.”

“Why dd y cm awy t cnslt m in sch a hrry?” askd Shrlck
Hlms, wth hs fngr-tps tgthr and hs eys t th clng.

Agn a strtld lk cm ovr th smwht vcs fc of Mss Mry
Sthrlnd. “Ys, I dd bng ot of th hs,” sh sd, “fr it md
m angry t s th esy wy in whch Mr. Wndbnk—tht is, my
fthr—tk it all. H wld nt g t th plc, and h wld nt g
t y, and s at lst, as h wld d nthng and kpt on syng tht
thr ws n hrm dn, it md m md, and I jst on wth my thngs
and cm rght awy t y.”

“Yr fthr,” sd Hlms, “yr stpfthr, srly, snc th nm is
dffrnt.”

“Ys, my stpfthr. I cll hm fthr, thgh it snds fnny, t,
fr h is only fv yrs and tw mnths oldr thn myslf.”

“And yr mthr is alv?”

“Oh, ys, mthr is alv and wll. I wsn’t bst plsd, Mr. Hlms,
whn sh mrrd agn s sn aftr fthr’s dth, and a mn wh ws
nrly fftn yrs yngr thn hrslf. Fthr ws a plmbr in th
Tttnhm Crt Rd, and h lft a tdy bsnss bhnd hm, whch
mthr crrd on wth Mr. Hrdy, th frmn; bt whn Mr. Wndbnk
cm h md hr sll th bsnss, fr h ws vry sprr, bng a
trvllr in wns. Thy gt £ 4700 fr th gdwll and intrst,
whch wsn’t nr as mch as fthr cld hv gt if h hd bn
alv.”

I hd expctd t s Shrlck Hlms imptnt undr ths rmblng and
incnsqntl nrrtv, bt, on th cntrry, h hd lstnd wth
th grtst cncntrtn of attntn.

“Yr own lttl incm,” h askd, “ds it cm ot of th bsnss?”

“Oh, n, sr. It is qt sprt and ws lft m by my uncl Nd in
Acklnd. It is in Nw Zlnd stck, pyng 4½ pr cnt. Tw thsnd
fv hndrd pnds ws th amnt, bt I cn only tch th intrst.”

“Y intrst m extrmly,” sd Hlms. “And snc y drw s lrg
a sm as a hndrd a yr, wth wht y ern int th brgn, y n
dbt trvl a lttl and indlg yrslf in evry wy. I blv tht
a sngl ldy cn gt on vry ncly upn an incm of abt £ 60.”

“I cld d wth mch lss thn tht, Mr. Hlms, bt y undrstnd
tht as lng as I lv at hm I dn’t wsh t b a brdn t thm, and
s thy hv th us of th mny jst whl I am styng wth thm. Of
crs, tht is only jst fr th tm. Mr. Wndbnk drws my intrst
evry qrtr and pys it ovr t mthr, and I fnd tht I cn d
prtty wll wth wht I ern at typwrtng. It brngs m twpnc a
sht, and I cn oftn d frm fftn t twnty shts in a dy.”

“Y hv md yr pstn vry clr t m,” sd Hlms. “Ths is
my frnd, Dr. Wtsn, bfr whm y cn spk as frly as bfr
myslf. Kndly tll us nw all abt yr cnnctn wth Mr. Hsmr
Angl.”

A flsh stl ovr Mss Sthrlnd’s fc, and sh pckd nrvsly at
th frng of hr jckt. “I mt hm frst at th gsfttrs’ bll,”
sh sd. “Thy usd t snd fthr tckts whn h ws alv, and thn
aftrwrds thy rmmbrd us, and snt thm t mthr. Mr. Wndbnk
dd nt wsh us t g. H nvr dd wsh us t g anywhr. H wld
gt qt md if I wntd s mch as t jn a Sndy-schl trt. Bt
ths tm I ws st on gng, and I wld g; fr wht rght hd h t
prvnt? H sd th flk wr nt ft fr us t knw, whn all
fthr’s frnds wr t b thr. And h sd tht I hd nthng ft
t wr, whn I hd my prpl plsh tht I hd nvr s mch as tkn
ot of th drwr. At lst, whn nthng els wld d, h wnt off t
Frnc upn th bsnss of th frm, bt w wnt, mthr and I, wth
Mr. Hrdy, wh usd t b or frmn, and it ws thr I mt Mr.
Hsmr Angl.”

“I spps,” sd Hlms, “tht whn Mr. Wndbnk cm bck frm
Frnc h ws vry annyd at yr hvng gn t th bll.”

“Oh, wll, h ws vry gd abt it. H lghd, I rmmbr, and
shrggd hs shldrs, and sd thr ws n us dnyng anythng t a
wmn, fr sh wld hv hr wy.”

“I s. Thn at th gsfttrs’ bll y mt, as I undrstnd, a
gntlmn clld Mr. Hsmr Angl.”

“Ys, sr. I mt hm tht nght, and h clld nxt dy t ask if w
hd gt hm all sf, and aftr tht w mt hm—tht is t sy, Mr.
Hlms, I mt hm twc fr wlks, bt aftr tht fthr cm bck
agn, and Mr. Hsmr Angl cld nt cm t th hs any mr.”

“N?”

“Wll, y knw fthr ddn’t lk anythng of th srt. H wldn’t
hv any vstrs if h cld hlp it, and h usd t sy tht a wmn
shld b hppy in hr own fmly crcl. Bt thn, as I usd t sy t
mthr, a wmn wnts hr own crcl t bgn wth, and I hd nt gt
mn yt.”

“Bt hw abt Mr. Hsmr Angl? Dd h mk n attmpt t s y?”

“Wll, fthr ws gng off t Frnc agn in a wk, and Hsmr wrt
and sd tht it wld b sfr and bttr nt t s ech othr untl
h hd gn. W cld wrt in th mntm, and h usd t wrt evry
dy. I tk th lttrs in in th mrnng, s thr ws n nd fr
fthr t knw.”

“Wr y enggd t th gntlmn at ths tm?”

“Oh, ys, Mr. Hlms. W wr enggd aftr th frst wlk tht w
tk. Hsmr—Mr. Angl—ws a cshr in an offc in Ldnhll
Strt—and—”

“Wht offc?”

“Tht’s th wrst of it, Mr. Hlms, I dn’t knw.”

“Whr dd h lv, thn?”

“H slpt on th prmss.”

“And y dn’t knw hs addrss?”

“N—excpt tht it ws Ldnhll Strt.”

“Whr dd y addrss yr lttrs, thn?”

“T th Ldnhll Strt Pst Offc, t b lft tll clld fr. H
sd tht if thy wr snt t th offc h wld b chffd by all
th othr clrks abt hvng lttrs frm a ldy, s I offrd t
typwrt thm, lk h dd hs, bt h wldn’t hv tht, fr h sd
tht whn I wrt thm thy smd t cm frm m, bt whn thy wr
typwrttn h alwys flt tht th mchn hd cm btwn us. Tht
wll jst shw y hw fnd h ws of m, Mr. Hlms, and th lttl
thngs tht h wld thnk of.”

“It ws mst sggstv,” sd Hlms. “It hs lng bn an axm of
mn tht th lttl thngs ar infntly th mst imprtnt. Cn y
rmmbr any othr lttl thngs abt Mr. Hsmr Angl?”

“H ws a vry shy mn, Mr. Hlms. H wld rthr wlk wth m in th
evnng thn in th dylght, fr h sd tht h htd t b
cnspcs. Vry rtrng and gntlmnly h ws. Evn hs vc ws
gntl. H’d hd th qnsy and swlln glnds whn h ws yng, h
tld m, and it hd lft hm wth a wk thrt, and a hsttng,
whsprng fshn of spch. H ws alwys wll drssd, vry nt and
pln, bt hs eys wr wk, jst as mn ar, and h wr tntd
glsss agnst th glr.”

“Wll, and wht hppnd whn Mr. Wndbnk, yr stpfthr, rtrnd
t Frnc?”

“Mr. Hsmr Angl cm t th hs agn and prpsd tht w shld
mrry bfr fthr cm bck. H ws in drdfl ernst and md m
swr, wth my hnds on th Tstmnt, tht whtvr hppnd I wld
alwys b tr t hm. Mthr sd h ws qt rght t mk m swr,
and tht it ws a sgn of hs pssn. Mthr ws all in hs fvr
frm th frst and ws evn fndr of hm thn I ws. Thn, whn thy
tlkd of mrryng wthn th wk, I bgn t ask abt fthr; bt
thy bth sd nvr t mnd abt fthr, bt jst t tll hm
aftrwrds, and mthr sd sh wld mk it all rght wth hm. I
ddn’t qt lk tht, Mr. Hlms. It smd fnny tht I shld ask
hs lv, as h ws only a fw yrs oldr thn m; bt I ddn’t wnt
t d anythng on th sly, s I wrt t fthr at Brdx, whr th
cmpny hs its Frnch offcs, bt th lttr cm bck t m on th
vry mrnng of th wddng.”

“It mssd hm, thn?”

“Ys, sr; fr h hd strtd t Englnd jst bfr it arrvd.”

“H! tht ws unfrtnt. Yr wddng ws arrngd, thn, fr th
Frdy. Ws it t b in chrch?”

“Ys, sr, bt vry qtly. It ws t b at St. Svr’s, nr Kng’s
Crss, and w wr t hv brkfst aftrwrds at th St. Pncrs
Htl. Hsmr cm fr us in a hnsm, bt as thr wr tw of us h
pt us bth int it and stppd hmslf int a fr-whlr, whch
hppnd t b th only othr cb in th strt. W gt t th chrch
frst, and whn th fr-whlr drv up w wtd fr hm t stp
ot, bt h nvr dd, and whn th cbmn gt dwn frm th bx and
lkd thr ws n on thr! Th cbmn sd tht h cld nt
imgn wht hd bcm of hm, fr h hd sn hm gt in wth hs own
eys. Tht ws lst Frdy, Mr. Hlms, and I hv nvr sn or hrd
anythng snc thn t thrw any lght upn wht bcm of hm.”

“It sms t m tht y hv bn vry shmflly trtd,” sd
Hlms.

“Oh, n, sr! H ws t gd and knd t lv m s. Why, all th
mrnng h ws syng t m tht, whtvr hppnd, I ws t b tr;
and tht evn if smthng qt unfrsn occrrd t sprt us, I
ws alwys t rmmbr tht I ws pldgd t hm, and tht h wld
clm hs pldg snr or ltr. It smd strng tlk fr a
wddng-mrnng, bt wht hs hppnd snc gvs a mnng t it.”

“Mst crtnly it ds. Yr own opnn is, thn, tht sm
unfrsn ctstrph hs occrrd t hm?”

“Ys, sr. I blv tht h frsw sm dngr, or els h wld nt
hv tlkd s. And thn I thnk tht wht h frsw hppnd.”

“Bt y hv n ntn as t wht it cld hv bn?”

“Nn.”

“On mr qstn. Hw dd yr mthr tk th mttr?”

“Sh ws angry, and sd tht I ws nvr t spk of th mttr
agn.”

“And yr fthr? Dd y tll hm?”

“Ys; and h smd t thnk, wth m, tht smthng hd hppnd, and
tht I shld hr of Hsmr agn. As h sd, wht intrst cld
anyn hv in brngng m t th drs of th chrch, and thn lvng
m? Nw, if h hd brrwd my mny, or if h hd mrrd m and gt
my mny sttld on hm, thr mght b sm rsn, bt Hsmr ws
vry indpndnt abt mny and nvr wld lk at a shllng of
mn. And yt, wht cld hv hppnd? And why cld h nt wrt?
Oh, it drvs m hlf-md t thnk of it, and I cn’t slp a wnk at
nght.” Sh plld a lttl hndkrchf ot of hr mff and bgn t
sb hvly int it.

“I shll glnc int th cs fr y,” sd Hlms, rsng, “and I
hv n dbt tht w shll rch sm dfnt rslt. Lt th wght
of th mttr rst upn m nw, and d nt lt yr mnd dwll upn it
frthr. Abv all, try t lt Mr. Hsmr Angl vnsh frm yr
mmry, as h hs dn frm yr lf.”

“Thn y dn’t thnk I’ll s hm agn?”

“I fr nt.”

“Thn wht hs hppnd t hm?”

“Y wll lv tht qstn in my hnds. I shld lk an accrt
dscrptn of hm and any lttrs of hs whch y cn spr.”

“I advrtsd fr hm in lst Strdy’s _Chrncl_,” sd sh. “Hr
is th slp and hr ar fr lttrs frm hm.”

“Thnk y. And yr addrss?”

“N. 31 Lyn Plc, Cmbrwll.”

“Mr. Angl’s addrss y nvr hd, I undrstnd. Whr is yr
fthr’s plc of bsnss?”

“H trvls fr Wsths & Mrbnk, th grt clrt imprtrs of
Fnchrch Strt.”

“Thnk y. Y hv md yr sttmnt vry clrly. Y wll lv
th pprs hr, and rmmbr th advc whch I hv gvn y. Lt
th whl incdnt b a sld bk, and d nt allw it t affct yr
lf.”

“Y ar vry knd, Mr. Hlms, bt I cnnt d tht. I shll b tr
t Hsmr. H shll fnd m rdy whn h cms bck.”

Fr all th prpstrs ht and th vcs fc, thr ws smthng
nbl in th smpl fth of or vstr whch cmplld or rspct.
Sh ld hr lttl bndl of pprs upn th tbl and wnt hr wy,
wth a prms t cm agn whnvr sh mght b smmnd.

Shrlck Hlms st slnt fr a fw mnts wth hs fngrtps stll
prssd tgthr, hs lgs strtchd ot in frnt of hm, and hs gz
drctd upwrd t th clng. Thn h tk dwn frm th rck th old
and oly cly pp, whch ws t hm as a cnsllr, and, hvng lt
it, h lnd bck in hs chr, wth th thck bl cld-wrths
spnnng up frm hm, and a lk of infnt lngr in hs fc.

“Qt an intrstng stdy, tht mdn,” h obsrvd. “I fnd hr
mr intrstng thn hr lttl prblm, whch, by th wy, is rthr
a trt on. Y wll fnd prlll css, if y cnslt my indx, in
Andvr in ’77, and thr ws smthng of th srt at Th Hg lst
yr. Old as is th id, hwvr, thr wr on or tw dtls whch
wr nw t m. Bt th mdn hrslf ws mst instrctv.”

“Y apprd t rd a gd dl upn hr whch ws qt invsbl t
m,” I rmrkd.

“Nt invsbl bt unntcd, Wtsn. Y dd nt knw whr t lk,
and s y mssd all tht ws imprtnt. I cn nvr brng y t
rls th imprtnc of slvs, th sggstvnss of thmb-nls,
or th grt isss tht my hng frm a bt-lc. Nw, wht dd y
gthr frm tht wmn’s apprnc? Dscrb it.”

“Wll, sh hd a slt-clrd, brd-brmmd strw ht, wth a
fthr of a brcksh rd. Hr jckt ws blck, wth blck bds swn
upn it, and a frng of lttl blck jt ornmnts. Hr drss ws
brwn, rthr drkr thn cff clr, wth a lttl prpl plsh at
th nck and slvs. Hr glvs wr grysh and wr wrn thrgh at
th rght frfngr. Hr bts I ddn’t obsrv. Sh hd smll rnd,
hngng gld errngs, and a gnrl ar of bng frly wll-t-d in
a vlgr, cmfrtbl, esy-gng wy.”

Shrlck Hlms clppd hs hnds sftly tgthr and chckld.

“’Pn my wrd, Wtsn, y ar cmng alng wndrflly. Y hv
rlly dn vry wll indd. It is tr tht y hv mssd
evrythng of imprtnc, bt y hv ht upn th mthd, and y
hv a qck ey fr clr. Nvr trst t gnrl imprssns, my
by, bt cncntrt yrslf upn dtls. My frst glnc is alwys
at a wmn’s slv. In a mn it is prhps bttr frst t tk th
kn of th trsr. As y obsrv, ths wmn hd plsh upn hr
slvs, whch is a mst usfl mtrl fr shwng trcs. Th dbl
ln a lttl abv th wrst, whr th typwrtst prsss agnst
th tbl, ws btflly dfnd. Th swng-mchn, of th hnd
typ, lvs a smlr mrk, bt only on th lft arm, and on th sd
of it frthst frm th thmb, instd of bng rght acrss th
brdst prt, as ths ws. I thn glncd at hr fc, and, obsrvng
th dnt of a pnc-nz at ethr sd of hr ns, I vntrd a rmrk
upn shrt sght and typwrtng, whch smd t srprs hr.”

“It srprsd m.”

“Bt, srly, it ws obvs. I ws thn mch srprsd and intrstd
on glncng dwn t obsrv tht, thgh th bts whch sh ws
wrng wr nt unlk ech othr, thy wr rlly odd ons; th on
hvng a slghtly dcrtd t-cp, and th othr a pln on. On ws
bttnd only in th tw lwr bttns ot of fv, and th othr at
th frst, thrd, and ffth. Nw, whn y s tht a yng ldy,
othrws ntly drssd, hs cm awy frm hm wth odd bts,
hlf-bttnd, it is n grt ddctn t sy tht sh cm awy in a
hrry.”

“And wht els?” I askd, knly intrstd, as I alwys ws, by my
frnd’s incsv rsnng.

“I ntd, in pssng, tht sh hd wrttn a nt bfr lvng hm
bt aftr bng flly drssd. Y obsrvd tht hr rght glv ws
trn at th frfngr, bt y dd nt apprntly s tht bth glv
and fngr wr stnd wth vlt ink. Sh hd wrttn in a hrry and
dppd hr pn t dp. It mst hv bn ths mrnng, or th mrk
wld nt rmn clr upn th fngr. All ths is amsng, thgh
rthr elmntry, bt I mst g bck t bsnss, Wtsn. Wld y
mnd rdng m th advrtsd dscrptn of Mr. Hsmr Angl?”

I hld th lttl prntd slp t th lght. “Mssng,” it sd, “on
th mrnng of th frtnth, a gntlmn nmd Hsmr Angl. Abt
fv ft. svn in. in hght; strngly blt, sllw cmplxn, blck
hr, a lttl bld in th cntr, bshy, blck sd-whskrs and
mstch; tntd glsss, slght infrmty of spch. Ws drssd,
whn lst sn, in blck frck-ct fcd wth slk, blck wstct,
gld Albrt chn, and gry Hrrs twd trsrs, wth brwn gtrs
ovr elstc-sdd bts. Knwn t hv bn emplyd in an offc in
Ldnhll Strt. Anybdy brngng,” &c, &c.

“Tht wll d,” sd Hlms. “As t th lttrs,” h cntnd,
glncng ovr thm, “thy ar vry cmmnplc. Absltly n cl in
thm t Mr. Angl, sv tht h qts Blzc onc. Thr is on
rmrkbl pnt, hwvr, whch wll n dbt strk y.”

“Thy ar typwrttn,” I rmrkd.

“Nt only tht, bt th sgntr is typwrttn. Lk at th nt
lttl ‘Hsmr Angl’ at th bttm. Thr is a dt, y s, bt n
sprscrptn excpt Ldnhll Strt, whch is rthr vg. Th
pnt abt th sgntr is vry sggstv—in fct, w my cll it
cnclsv.”

“Of wht?”

“My dr fllw, is it pssbl y d nt s hw strngly it brs
upn th cs?”

“I cnnt sy tht I d unlss it wr tht h wshd t b abl t
dny hs sgntr if an actn fr brch of prms wr instttd.”

“N, tht ws nt th pnt. Hwvr, I shll wrt tw lttrs, whch
shld sttl th mttr. On is t a frm in th Cty, th othr is t
th yng ldy’s stpfthr, Mr. Wndbnk, askng hm whthr h cld
mt us hr at sx o’clck t-mrrw evnng. It is jst as wll tht
w shld d bsnss wth th ml rltvs. And nw, Dctr, w cn
d nthng untl th answrs t ths lttrs cm, s w my pt or
lttl prblm upn th shlf fr th intrm.”

I hd hd s mny rsns t blv in my frnd’s sbtl pwrs of
rsnng and extrrdnry enrgy in actn tht I flt tht h mst
hv sm sld grnds fr th assrd and esy dmnr wth whch
h trtd th snglr mystry whch h hd bn clld upn t
fthm. Onc only hd I knwn hm t fl, in th cs of th Kng of
Bhm and of th Irn Adlr phtgrph; bt whn I lkd bck t
th wrd bsnss of th Sgn of Fr, and th extrrdnry
crcmstncs cnnctd wth th Stdy in Scrlt, I flt tht it wld
b a strng tngl indd whch h cld nt unrvl.

I lft hm thn, stll pffng at hs blck cly pp, wth th
cnvctn tht whn I cm agn on th nxt evnng I wld fnd tht
h hld in hs hnds all th cls whch wld ld up t th idntty
of th dspprng brdgrm of Mss Mry Sthrlnd.

A prfssnl cs of grt grvty ws enggng my own attntn at
th tm, and th whl of nxt dy I ws bsy at th bdsd of th
sffrr. It ws nt untl cls upn sx o’clck tht I fnd myslf
fr and ws abl t sprng int a hnsm and drv t Bkr Strt,
hlf afrd tht I mght b t lt t assst at th _dénmnt_ of
th lttl mystry. I fnd Shrlck Hlms aln, hwvr, hlf
aslp, wth hs lng, thn frm crld up in th rcsss of hs
armchr. A frmdbl arry of bttls and tst-tbs, wth th
pngnt clnly smll of hydrchlrc acd, tld m tht h hd spnt
hs dy in th chmcl wrk whch ws s dr t hm.

“Wll, hv y slvd it?” I askd as I entrd.

“Ys. It ws th bslpht of bryt.”

“N, n, th mystry!” I crd.

“Oh, tht! I thght of th slt tht I hv bn wrkng upn. Thr
ws nvr any mystry in th mttr, thgh, as I sd ystrdy, sm
of th dtls ar of intrst. Th only drwbck is tht thr is n
lw, I fr, tht cn tch th scndrl.”

“Wh ws h, thn, and wht ws hs objct in dsrtng Mss
Sthrlnd?”

Th qstn ws hrdly ot of my mth, and Hlms hd nt yt opnd
hs lps t rply, whn w hrd a hvy ftfll in th pssg and a
tp at th dr.

“Ths is th grl’s stpfthr, Mr. Jms Wndbnk,” sd Hlms. “H
hs wrttn t m t sy tht h wld b hr at sx. Cm in!”

Th mn wh entrd ws a strdy, mddl-szd fllw, sm thrty
yrs of ag, cln-shvn, and sllw-sknnd, wth a blnd,
insntng mnnr, and a pr of wndrflly shrp and pntrtng
gry eys. H sht a qstnng glnc at ech of us, plcd hs shny
tp-ht upn th sdbrd, and wth a slght bw sdld dwn int th
nrst chr.

“Gd-evnng, Mr. Jms Wndbnk,” sd Hlms. “I thnk tht ths
typwrttn lttr is frm y, in whch y md an appntmnt wth
m fr sx o’clck?”

“Ys, sr. I am afrd tht I am a lttl lt, bt I am nt qt my
own mstr, y knw. I am srry tht Mss Sthrlnd hs trbld y
abt ths lttl mttr, fr I thnk it is fr bttr nt t wsh
lnn of th srt in pblc. It ws qt agnst my wshs tht sh
cm, bt sh is a vry exctbl, implsv grl, as y my hv
ntcd, and sh is nt esly cntrlld whn sh hs md up hr mnd
on a pnt. Of crs, I dd nt mnd y s mch, as y ar nt
cnnctd wth th offcl plc, bt it is nt plsnt t hv a
fmly msfrtn lk ths nsd abrd. Bsds, it is a uslss
expns, fr hw cld y pssbly fnd ths Hsmr Angl?”

“On th cntrry,” sd Hlms qtly; “I hv evry rsn t blv
tht I wll sccd in dscvrng Mr. Hsmr Angl.”

Mr. Wndbnk gv a vlnt strt and drppd hs glvs. “I am
dlghtd t hr it,” h sd.

“It is a crs thng,” rmrkd Hlms, “tht a typwrtr hs rlly
qt as mch indvdlty as a mn’s hndwrtng. Unlss thy ar
qt nw, n tw of thm wrt exctly alk. Sm lttrs gt mr
wrn thn othrs, and sm wr only on on sd. Nw, y rmrk in
ths nt of yrs, Mr. Wndbnk, tht in evry cs thr is sm
lttl slrrng ovr of th ‘e,’ and a slght dfct in th tl of th
‘r.’ Thr ar frtn othr chrctrstcs, bt ths ar th mr
obvs.”

“W d all or crrspndnc wth ths mchn at th offc, and n
dbt it is a lttl wrn,” or vstr answrd, glncng knly at
Hlms wth hs brght lttl eys.

“And nw I wll shw y wht is rlly a vry intrstng stdy, Mr.
Wndbnk,” Hlms cntnd. “I thnk of wrtng anthr lttl
mngrph sm of ths dys on th typwrtr and its rltn t
crm. It is a sbjct t whch I hv dvtd sm lttl attntn. I
hv hr fr lttrs whch prprt t cm frm th mssng mn. Thy
ar all typwrttn. In ech cs, nt only ar th ‘e’s’ slrrd and
th ‘r’s’ tllss, bt y wll obsrv, if y cr t us my
mgnfyng lns, tht th frtn othr chrctrstcs t whch I
hv alldd ar thr as wll.”

Mr. Wndbnk sprng ot of hs chr and pckd up hs ht. “I cnnt
wst tm ovr ths srt of fntstc tlk, Mr. Hlms,” h sd. “If
y cn ctch th mn, ctch hm, and lt m knw whn y hv dn
it.”

“Crtnly,” sd Hlms, stppng ovr and trnng th ky in th
dr. “I lt y knw, thn, tht I hv cght hm!”

“Wht! whr?” shtd Mr. Wndbnk, trnng wht t hs lps and
glncng abt hm lk a rt in a trp.

“Oh, it wn’t d—rlly it wn’t,” sd Hlms svly. “Thr is n
pssbl gttng ot of it, Mr. Wndbnk. It is qt t trnsprnt,
and it ws a vry bd cmplmnt whn y sd tht it ws impssbl
fr m t slv s smpl a qstn. Tht’s rght! St dwn and lt us
tlk it ovr.”

Or vstr cllpsd int a chr, wth a ghstly fc and a glttr
of mstr on hs brw. “It—it’s nt actnbl,” h stmmrd.

“I am vry mch afrd tht it is nt. Bt btwn orslvs,
Wndbnk, it ws as crl and slfsh and hrtlss a trck in a ptty
wy as evr cm bfr m. Nw, lt m jst rn ovr th crs of
evnts, and y wll cntrdct m if I g wrng.”

Th mn st hddld up in hs chr, wth hs hd snk upn hs
brst, lk on wh is uttrly crshd. Hlms stck hs ft up on
th crnr of th mntlpc and, lnng bck wth hs hnds in hs
pckts, bgn tlkng, rthr t hmslf, as it smd, thn t us.

“Th mn mrrd a wmn vry mch oldr thn hmslf fr hr mny,”
sd h, “and h enjyd th us of th mny of th dghtr as lng
as sh lvd wth thm. It ws a cnsdrbl sm, fr ppl in thr
pstn, and th lss of it wld hv md a srs dffrnc. It
ws wrth an effrt t prsrv it. Th dghtr ws of a gd, ambl
dspstn, bt affctnt and wrm-hrtd in hr wys, s tht it
ws evdnt tht wth hr fr prsnl advntgs, and hr lttl
incm, sh wld nt b allwd t rmn sngl lng. Nw hr
mrrg wld mn, of crs, th lss of a hndrd a yr, s wht
ds hr stpfthr d t prvnt it? H tks th obvs crs of
kpng hr at hm and frbddng hr t sk th cmpny of ppl of
hr own ag. Bt sn h fnd tht tht wld nt answr frvr. Sh
bcm rstv, insstd upn hr rghts, and fnlly annncd hr
pstv intntn of gng t a crtn bll. Wht ds hr clvr
stpfthr d thn? H cncvs an id mr crdtbl t hs hd
thn t hs hrt. Wth th cnnvnc and assstnc of hs wf h
dsgsd hmslf, cvrd ths kn eys wth tntd glsss, mskd
th fc wth a mstch and a pr of bshy whskrs, snk tht clr
vc int an insntng whspr, and dbly scr on accnt of th
grl’s shrt sght, h apprs as Mr. Hsmr Angl, and kps off othr
lvrs by mkng lv hmslf.”

“It ws only a jk at frst,” grnd or vstr. “W nvr thght
tht sh wld hv bn s crrd awy.”

“Vry lkly nt. Hwvr tht my b, th yng ldy ws vry
dcddly crrd awy, and, hvng qt md up hr mnd tht hr
stpfthr ws in Frnc, th sspcn of trchry nvr fr an
instnt entrd hr mnd. Sh ws flttrd by th gntlmn’s
attntns, and th effct ws incrsd by th ldly exprssd
admrtn of hr mthr. Thn Mr. Angl bgn t cll, fr it ws
obvs tht th mttr shld b pshd as fr as it wld g if a
rl effct wr t b prdcd. Thr wr mtngs, and an
enggmnt, whch wld fnlly scr th grl’s affctns frm
trnng twrds anyn els. Bt th dcptn cld nt b kpt up
frvr. Ths prtndd jrnys t Frnc wr rthr cmbrs. Th
thng t d ws clrly t brng th bsnss t an end in sch a
drmtc mnnr tht it wld lv a prmnnt imprssn upn th
yng ldy’s mnd and prvnt hr frm lkng upn any othr str
fr sm tm t cm. Hnc ths vws of fdlty exctd upn a
Tstmnt, and hnc als th allsns t a pssblty of smthng
hppnng on th vry mrnng of th wddng. Jms Wndbnk wshd
Mss Sthrlnd t b s bnd t Hsmr Angl, and s uncrtn as t
hs ft, tht fr tn yrs t cm, at any rt, sh wld nt lstn
t anthr mn. As fr as th chrch dr h brght hr, and thn, as
h cld g n frthr, h cnvnntly vnshd awy by th old trck
of stppng in at on dr of a fr-whlr and ot at th othr. I
thnk tht ws th chn of evnts, Mr. Wndbnk!”

Or vstr hd rcvrd smthng of hs assrnc whl Hlms hd
bn tlkng, and h rs frm hs chr nw wth a cld snr upn hs
pl fc.

“It my b s, or it my nt, Mr. Hlms,” sd h, “bt if y ar s
vry shrp y oght t b shrp engh t knw tht it is y wh ar
brkng th lw nw, and nt m. I hv dn nthng actnbl frm
th frst, bt as lng as y kp tht dr lckd y ly yrslf
opn t an actn fr asslt and illgl cnstrnt.”

“Th lw cnnt, as y sy, tch y,” sd Hlms, unlckng and
thrwng opn th dr, “yt thr nvr ws a mn wh dsrvd
pnshmnt mr. If th yng ldy hs a brthr or a frnd, h oght
t ly a whp acrss yr shldrs. By Jv!” h cntnd, flshng
up at th sght of th bttr snr upn th mn’s fc, “it is nt
prt of my dts t my clnt, bt hr’s a hntng crp hndy, and I
thnk I shll jst trt myslf t—” H tk tw swft stps t th
whp, bt bfr h cld grsp it thr ws a wld clttr of stps
upn th strs, th hvy hll dr bngd, and frm th wndw w
cld s Mr. Jms Wndbnk rnnng at th tp of hs spd dwn th
rd.

“Thr’s a cld-bldd scndrl!” sd Hlms, lghng, as h thrw
hmslf dwn int hs chr onc mr. “Tht fllw wll rs frm
crm t crm untl h ds smthng vry bd, and ends on a gllws.
Th cs hs, in sm rspcts, bn nt entrly dvd of intrst.”

“I cnnt nw entrly s all th stps of yr rsnng,” I
rmrkd.

“Wll, of crs it ws obvs frm th frst tht ths Mr. Hsmr
Angl mst hv sm strng objct fr hs crs cndct, and it ws
eqlly clr tht th only mn wh rlly prftd by th incdnt, as
fr as w cld s, ws th stpfthr. Thn th fct tht th tw mn
wr nvr tgthr, bt tht th on alwys apprd whn th othr
ws awy, ws sggstv. S wr th tntd spctcls and th crs
vc, whch bth hntd at a dsgs, as dd th bshy whskrs. My
sspcns wr all cnfrmd by hs pclr actn in typwrtng hs
sgntr, whch, of crs, infrrd tht hs hndwrtng ws s
fmlr t hr tht sh wld rcgns evn th smllst smpl of
it. Y s all ths isltd fcts, tgthr wth mny mnr ons,
all pntd in th sm drctn.”

“And hw dd y vrfy thm?”

“Hvng onc spttd my mn, it ws esy t gt crrbrtn. I knw
th frm fr whch ths mn wrkd. Hvng tkn th prntd
dscrptn. I elmntd evrythng frm it whch cld b th rslt
of a dsgs—th whskrs, th glsss, th vc, and I snt it t
th frm, wth a rqst tht thy wld infrm m whthr it answrd
t th dscrptn of any of thr trvllrs. I hd alrdy ntcd
th pclrts of th typwrtr, and I wrt t th mn hmslf at
hs bsnss addrss askng hm if h wld cm hr. As I expctd,
hs rply ws typwrttn and rvld th sm trvl bt
chrctrstc dfcts. Th sm pst brght m a lttr frm
Wsths & Mrbnk, of Fnchrch Strt, t sy tht th dscrptn
tlld in evry rspct wth tht of thr emplyé, Jms Wndbnk.
_Vlà tt_!”

“And Mss Sthrlnd?”

“If I tll hr sh wll nt blv m. Y my rmmbr th old
Prsn syng, ‘Thr is dngr fr hm wh tkth th tgr cb, and
dngr als fr whs sntchs a dlsn frm a wmn.’ Thr is as
mch sns in Hfz as in Hrc, and as mch knwldg of th wrld.”




IV. TH BSCMB VLLY MYSTRY


W wr std at brkfst on mrnng, my wf and I, whn th md
brght in a tlgrm. It ws frm Shrlck Hlms and rn in ths wy:

“Hv y a cpl of dys t spr? Hv jst bn wrd fr frm th
wst of Englnd in cnnctn wth Bscmb Vlly trgdy. Shll b
gld if y wll cm wth m. Ar and scnry prfct. Lv
Pddngtn by th 11:15.”

“Wht d y sy, dr?” sd my wf, lkng acrss at m. “Wll y
g?”

“I rlly dn’t knw wht t sy. I hv a frly lng lst at
prsnt.”

“Oh, Anstrthr wld d yr wrk fr y. Y hv bn lkng a
lttl pl ltly. I thnk tht th chng wld d y gd, and y
ar alwys s intrstd in Mr. Shrlck Hlms’ css.”

“I shld b ungrtfl if I wr nt, sng wht I gnd thrgh on
of thm,” I answrd. “Bt if I am t g, I mst pck at onc, fr I
hv only hlf an hr.”

My exprnc of cmp lf in Afghnstn hd at lst hd th effct
of mkng m a prmpt and rdy trvllr. My wnts wr fw and
smpl, s tht in lss thn th tm sttd I ws in a cb wth my
vls, rttlng awy t Pddngtn Sttn. Shrlck Hlms ws pcng
up and dwn th pltfrm, hs tll, gnt fgr md evn gntr and
tllr by hs lng gry trvllng-clk and cls-fttng clth cp.

“It is rlly vry gd of y t cm, Wtsn,” sd h. “It mks a
cnsdrbl dffrnc t m, hvng smn wth m on whm I cn
thrghly rly. Lcl ad is alwys ethr wrthlss or els bssd.
If y wll kp th tw crnr sts I shll gt th tckts.”

W hd th crrg t orslvs sv fr an immns lttr of pprs
whch Hlms hd brght wth hm. Amng ths h rmmgd and rd,
wth intrvls of nt-tkng and of mdttn, untl w wr pst
Rdng. Thn h sddnly rlld thm all int a ggntc bll and
tssd thm up ont th rck.

“Hv y hrd anythng of th cs?” h askd.

“Nt a wrd. I hv nt sn a ppr fr sm dys.”

“Th Lndn prss hs nt hd vry fll accnts. I hv jst bn
lkng thrgh all th rcnt pprs in ordr t mstr th
prtclrs. It sms, frm wht I gthr, t b on of ths smpl
css whch ar s extrmly dffclt.”

“Tht snds a lttl prdxcl.”

“Bt it is prfndly tr. Snglrty is almst invrbly a cl.
Th mr ftrlss and cmmnplc a crm is, th mr dffclt it
is t brng it hm. In ths cs, hwvr, thy hv estblshd a
vry srs cs agnst th sn of th mrdrd mn.”

“It is a mrdr, thn?”

“Wll, it is cnjctrd t b s. I shll tk nthng fr grntd
untl I hv th opprtnty of lkng prsnlly int it. I wll
expln th stt of thngs t y, as fr as I hv bn abl t
undrstnd it, in a vry fw wrds.

“Bscmb Vlly is a cntry dstrct nt vry fr frm Rss, in
Hrfrdshr. Th lrgst lndd prprtr in tht prt is a Mr. Jhn
Trnr, wh md hs mny in Astrl and rtrnd sm yrs ag t
th old cntry. On of th frms whch h hld, tht of Hthrly, ws
lt t Mr. Chrls McCrthy, wh ws als an ex-Astrln. Th mn hd
knwn ech othr in th clns, s tht it ws nt unntrl tht
whn thy cm t sttl dwn thy shld d s as nr ech othr as
pssbl. Trnr ws apprntly th rchr mn, s McCrthy bcm hs
tnnt bt stll rmnd, it sms, upn trms of prfct eqlty, as
thy wr frqntly tgthr. McCrthy hd on sn, a ld of eghtn,
and Trnr hd an only dghtr of th sm ag, bt nthr of thm
hd wvs lvng. Thy appr t hv avdd th scty of th
nghbrng Englsh fmls and t hv ld rtrd lvs, thgh
bth th McCrthys wr fnd of sprt and wr frqntly sn at th
rc-mtngs of th nghbrhd. McCrthy kpt tw srvnts—a mn
and a grl. Trnr hd a cnsdrbl hshld, sm hlf-dzn at th
lst. Tht is as mch as I hv bn abl t gthr abt th
fmls. Nw fr th fcts.

“On Jn 3rd, tht is, on Mndy lst, McCrthy lft hs hs at
Hthrly abt thr in th aftrnn and wlkd dwn t th Bscmb
Pl, whch is a smll lk frmd by th sprdng ot of th strm
whch rns dwn th Bscmb Vlly. H hd bn ot wth hs
srvng-mn in th mrnng at Rss, and h hd tld th mn tht h
mst hrry, as h hd an appntmnt of imprtnc t kp at thr.
Frm tht appntmnt h nvr cm bck alv.

“Frm Hthrly Frmhs t th Bscmb Pl is a qrtr of a ml,
and tw ppl sw hm as h pssd ovr ths grnd. On ws an old
wmn, whs nm is nt mntnd, and th othr ws Wllm Crwdr,
a gm-kpr in th emply of Mr. Trnr. Bth ths wtnsss dps
tht Mr. McCrthy ws wlkng aln. Th gm-kpr adds tht wthn a
fw mnts of hs sng Mr. McCrthy pss h hd sn hs sn, Mr.
Jms McCrthy, gng th sm wy wth a gn undr hs arm. T th
bst of hs blf, th fthr ws actlly in sght at th tm, and
th sn ws fllwng hm. H thght n mr of th mttr untl h
hrd in th evnng of th trgdy tht hd occrrd.

“Th tw McCrthys wr sn aftr th tm whn Wllm Crwdr, th
gm-kpr, lst sght of thm. Th Bscmb Pl is thckly wdd
rnd, wth jst a frng of grss and of rds rnd th edg. A grl
of frtn, Ptnc Mrn, wh is th dghtr of th ldg-kpr of
th Bscmb Vlly estt, ws in on of th wds pckng flwrs.
Sh stts tht whl sh ws thr sh sw, at th brdr of th wd
and cls by th lk, Mr. McCrthy and hs sn, and tht thy apprd
t b hvng a vlnt qrrl. Sh hrd Mr. McCrthy th eldr usng
vry strng lngg t hs sn, and sh sw th lttr rs up hs
hnd as if t strk hs fthr. Sh ws s frghtnd by thr
vlnc tht sh rn awy and tld hr mthr whn sh rchd hm
tht sh hd lft th tw McCrthys qrrllng nr Bscmb Pl, and
tht sh ws afrd tht thy wr gng t fght. Sh hd hrdly sd
th wrds whn yng Mr. McCrthy cm rnnng up t th ldg t sy
tht h hd fnd hs fthr dd in th wd, and t ask fr th hlp
of th ldg-kpr. H ws mch exctd, wtht ethr hs gn or hs
ht, and hs rght hnd and slv wr obsrvd t b stnd wth
frsh bld. On fllwng hm thy fnd th dd bdy strtchd ot
upn th grss bsd th pl. Th hd hd bn btn in by rptd
blws of sm hvy and blnt wpn. Th injrs wr sch as mght
vry wll hv bn inflctd by th btt-end of hs sn’s gn, whch
ws fnd lyng on th grss wthn a fw pcs of th bdy. Undr
ths crcmstncs th yng mn ws instntly arrstd, and a vrdct
of ‘wlfl mrdr’ hvng bn rtrnd at th inqst on Tsdy, h
ws on Wdnsdy brght bfr th mgstrts at Rss, wh hv
rfrrd th cs t th nxt Asszs. Ths ar th mn fcts of th
cs as thy cm ot bfr th crnr and th plc-crt.”

“I cld hrdly imgn a mr dmnng cs,” I rmrkd. “If evr
crcmstntl evdnc pntd t a crmnl it ds s hr.”

“Crcmstntl evdnc is a vry trcky thng,” answrd Hlms
thghtflly. “It my sm t pnt vry strght t on thng, bt if
y shft yr own pnt of vw a lttl, y my fnd it pntng in
an eqlly uncmprmsng mnnr t smthng entrly dffrnt. It
mst b cnfssd, hwvr, tht th cs lks excdngly grv
agnst th yng mn, and it is vry pssbl tht h is indd th
clprt. Thr ar svrl ppl in th nghbrhd, hwvr, and
amng thm Mss Trnr, th dghtr of th nghbrng lndwnr, wh
blv in hs inncnc, and wh hv rtnd Lstrd, whm y my
rcllct in cnnctn wth th Stdy in Scrlt, t wrk ot th cs
in hs intrst. Lstrd, bng rthr pzzld, hs rfrrd th cs
t m, and hnc it is tht tw mddl-agd gntlmn ar flyng
wstwrd at ffty mls an hr instd of qtly dgstng thr
brkfsts at hm.”

“I am afrd,” sd I, “tht th fcts ar s obvs tht y wll
fnd lttl crdt t b gnd ot of ths cs.”

“Thr is nthng mr dcptv thn an obvs fct,” h answrd,
lghng. “Bsds, w my chnc t ht upn sm othr obvs fcts
whch my hv bn by n mns obvs t Mr. Lstrd. Y knw m
t wll t thnk tht I am bstng whn I sy tht I shll ethr
cnfrm or dstry hs thry by mns whch h is qt incpbl of
emplyng, or evn of undrstndng. T tk th frst exmpl t hnd,
I vry clrly prcv tht in yr bdrm th wndw is upn th
rght-hnd sd, and yt I qstn whthr Mr. Lstrd wld hv
ntd evn s slf-evdnt a thng as tht.”

“Hw on erth—”

“My dr fllw, I knw y wll. I knw th mltry ntnss whch
chrctrss y. Y shv evry mrnng, and in ths ssn y
shv by th snlght; bt snc yr shvng is lss and lss cmplt
as w gt frthr bck on th lft sd, untl it bcms pstvly
slvnly as w gt rnd th angl of th jw, it is srly vry clr
tht tht sd is lss illmntd thn th othr. I cld nt imgn
a mn of yr hbts lkng at hmslf in an eql lght and bng
stsfd wth sch a rslt. I only qt ths as a trvl exmpl of
obsrvtn and infrnc. Thrn ls my _métr_, and it is jst
pssbl tht it my b of sm srvc in th invstgtn whch ls
bfr us. Thr ar on or tw mnr pnts whch wr brght ot in
th inqst, and whch ar wrth cnsdrng.”

“Wht ar thy?”

“It apprs tht hs arrst dd nt tk plc at onc, bt aftr th
rtrn t Hthrly Frm. On th inspctr of cnstblry infrmng
hm tht h ws a prsnr, h rmrkd tht h ws nt srprsd t
hr it, and tht it ws n mr thn hs dsrts. Ths obsrvtn of
hs hd th ntrl effct of rmvng any trcs of dbt whch mght
hv rmnd in th mnds of th crnr’s jry.”

“It ws a cnfssn,” I ejcltd.

“N, fr it ws fllwd by a prtsttn of inncnc.”

“Cmng on th tp of sch a dmnng srs of evnts, it ws at lst
a mst sspcs rmrk.”

“On th cntrry,” sd Hlms, “it is th brghtst rft whch I cn
at prsnt s in th clds. Hwvr inncnt h mght b, h cld
nt b sch an abslt imbcl as nt t s tht th crcmstncs
wr vry blck agnst hm. Hd h apprd srprsd at hs own
arrst, or fgnd indgntn at it, I shld hv lkd upn it as
hghly sspcs, bcs sch srprs or angr wld nt b ntrl
undr th crcmstncs, and yt mght appr t b th bst plcy t
a schmng mn. Hs frnk accptnc of th sttn mrks hm as
ethr an inncnt mn, or els as a mn of cnsdrbl slf-rstrnt
and frmnss. As t hs rmrk abt hs dsrts, it ws als nt
unntrl if y cnsdr tht h std bsd th dd bdy of hs
fthr, and tht thr is n dbt tht h hd tht vry dy s fr
frgttn hs fll dty as t bndy wrds wth hm, and evn,
accrdng t th lttl grl whs evdnc is s imprtnt, t rs
hs hnd as if t strk hm. Th slf-rprch and cntrtn whch
ar dsplyd in hs rmrk appr t m t b th sgns of a hlthy
mnd rthr thn of a glty on.”

I shk my hd. “Mny mn hv bn hngd on fr slghtr evdnc,”
I rmrkd.

“S thy hv. And mny mn hv bn wrngflly hngd.”

“Wht is th yng mn’s own accnt of th mttr?”

“It is, I am afrd, nt vry encrgng t hs spprtrs, thgh
thr ar on or tw pnts in it whch ar sggstv. Y wll fnd
it hr, and my rd it fr yrslf.”

H pckd ot frm hs bndl a cpy of th lcl Hrfrdshr ppr,
and hvng trnd dwn th sht h pntd ot th prgrph in whch
th unfrtnt yng mn hd gvn hs own sttmnt of wht hd
occrrd. I sttld myslf dwn in th crnr of th crrg and rd
it vry crflly. It rn in ths wy:

“Mr. Jms McCrthy, th only sn of th dcsd, ws thn clld and
gv evdnc as fllws: ‘I hd bn awy frm hm fr thr dys at
Brstl, and hd only jst rtrnd upn th mrnng of lst Mndy,
th 3rd. My fthr ws absnt frm hm at th tm of my arrvl, and
I ws infrmd by th md tht h hd drvn ovr t Rss wth Jhn
Cbb, th grm. Shrtly aftr my rtrn I hrd th whls of hs trp
in th yrd, and, lkng ot of my wndw, I sw hm gt ot and wlk
rpdly ot of th yrd, thgh I ws nt awr in whch drctn h
ws gng. I thn tk my gn and strlld ot in th drctn of th
Bscmb Pl, wth th intntn of vstng th rbbt wrrn whch
is upn th othr sd. On my wy I sw Wllm Crwdr, th
gm-kpr, as h hd sttd in hs evdnc; bt h is mstkn in
thnkng tht I ws fllwng my fthr. I hd n id tht h ws in
frnt of m. Whn abt a hndrd yrds frm th pl I hrd a cry of
“C!” whch ws a usl sgnl btwn my fthr and myslf. I thn
hrrd frwrd, and fnd hm stndng by th pl. H apprd t b
mch srprsd at sng m and askd m rthr rghly wht I ws
dng thr. A cnvrstn ensd whch ld t hgh wrds and almst
t blws, fr my fthr ws a mn of a vry vlnt tmpr. Sng tht
hs pssn ws bcmng ungvrnbl, I lft hm and rtrnd twrds
Hthrly Frm. I hd nt gn mr thn 150 yrds, hwvr, whn I
hrd a hds otcry bhnd m, whch csd m t rn bck agn. I
fnd my fthr exprng upn th grnd, wth hs hd trrbly
injrd. I drppd my gn and hld hm in my arms, bt h almst
instntly exprd. I knlt bsd hm fr sm mnts, and thn md
my wy t Mr. Trnr’s ldg-kpr, hs hs bng th nrst, t
ask fr assstnc. I sw n on nr my fthr whn I rtrnd, and I
hv n id hw h cm by hs injrs. H ws nt a pplr mn,
bng smwht cld and frbddng in hs mnnrs, bt h hd, as fr
as I knw, n actv enms. I knw nthng frthr of th mttr.’

“Th Crnr: Dd yr fthr mk any sttmnt t y bfr h dd?

“Wtnss: H mmbld a fw wrds, bt I cld only ctch sm allsn
t a rt.

“Th Crnr: Wht dd y undrstnd by tht?

“Wtnss: It cnvyd n mnng t m. I thght tht h ws
dlrs.

“Th Crnr: Wht ws th pnt upn whch y and yr fthr hd
ths fnl qrrl?

“Wtnss: I shld prfr nt t answr.

“Th Crnr: I am afrd tht I mst prss it.

“Wtnss: It is rlly impssbl fr m t tll y. I cn assr y
tht it hs nthng t d wth th sd trgdy whch fllwd.

“Th Crnr: Tht is fr th crt t dcd. I nd nt pnt ot t
y tht yr rfsl t answr wll prjdc yr cs cnsdrbly
in any ftr prcdngs whch my ars.

“Wtnss: I mst stll rfs.

“Th Crnr: I undrstnd tht th cry of ‘C’ ws a cmmn sgnl
btwn y and yr fthr?

“Wtnss: It ws.

“Th Crnr: Hw ws it, thn, tht h uttrd it bfr h sw y,
and bfr h evn knw tht y hd rtrnd frm Brstl?

“Wtnss (wth cnsdrbl cnfsn): I d nt knw.

“A Jrymn: Dd y s nthng whch arsd yr sspcns whn y
rtrnd on hrng th cry and fnd yr fthr ftlly injrd?

“Wtnss: Nthng dfnt.

“Th Crnr: Wht d y mn?

“Wtnss: I ws s dstrbd and exctd as I rshd ot int th opn,
tht I cld thnk of nthng excpt of my fthr. Yt I hv a vg
imprssn tht as I rn frwrd smthng ly upn th grnd t th
lft of m. It smd t m t b smthng gry in clr, a ct of
sm srt, or a pld prhps. Whn I rs frm my fthr I lkd
rnd fr it, bt it ws gn.

“‘D y mn tht it dspprd bfr y wnt fr hlp?’

“‘Ys, it ws gn.’

“‘Y cnnt sy wht it ws?’

“‘N, I hd a flng smthng ws thr.’

“‘Hw fr frm th bdy?’

“‘A dzn yrds or s.’

“‘And hw fr frm th edg of th wd?’

“‘Abt th sm.’

“‘Thn if it ws rmvd it ws whl y wr wthn a dzn yrds of
it?’

“‘Ys, bt wth my bck twrds it.’

“Ths cncldd th exmntn of th wtnss.”

“I s,” sd I as I glncd dwn th clmn, “tht th crnr in hs
cncldng rmrks ws rthr svr upn yng McCrthy. H clls
attntn, and wth rsn, t th dscrpncy abt hs fthr hvng
sgnlld t hm bfr sng hm, als t hs rfsl t gv dtls
of hs cnvrstn wth hs fthr, and hs snglr accnt of hs
fthr’s dyng wrds. Thy ar all, as h rmrks, vry mch agnst
th sn.”

Hlms lghd sftly t hmslf and strtchd hmslf ot upn th
cshnd st. “Bth y and th crnr hv bn at sm pns,”
sd h, “t sngl ot th vry strngst pnts in th yng mn’s
fvr. Dn’t y s tht y altrntly gv hm crdt fr hvng
t mch imgntn and t lttl? T lttl, if h cld nt invnt
a cs of qrrl whch wld gv hm th sympthy of th jry; t
mch, if h evlvd frm hs own innr cnscsnss anythng s
_otré_ as a dyng rfrnc t a rt, and th incdnt of th
vnshng clth. N, sr, I shll apprch ths cs frm th pnt of
vw tht wht ths yng mn sys is tr, and w shll s whthr
tht hypthss wll ld us. And nw hr is my pckt Ptrrch, and
nt anthr wrd shll I sy of ths cs untl w ar on th scn of
actn. W lnch at Swndn, and I s tht w shll b thr in twnty
mnts.”

It ws nrly fr o’clck whn w at lst, aftr pssng thrgh th
btfl Strd Vlly, and ovr th brd glmng Svrn, fnd
orslvs at th prtty lttl cntry-twn of Rss. A ln,
frrt-lk mn, frtv and sly-lkng, ws wtng fr us upn th
pltfrm. In spt of th lght brwn dstct and lthr-lggngs
whch h wr in dfrnc t hs rstc srrndngs, I hd n
dffclty in rcgnsng Lstrd, of Sctlnd Yrd. Wth hm w drv
t th Hrfrd Arms whr a rm hd alrdy bn enggd fr us.

“I hv ordrd a crrg,” sd Lstrd as w st ovr a cp of t.
“I knw yr enrgtc ntr, and tht y wld nt b hppy untl
y hd bn on th scn of th crm.”

“It ws vry nc and cmplmntry of y,” Hlms answrd. “It is
entrly a qstn of brmtrc prssr.”

Lstrd lkd strtld. “I d nt qt fllw,” h sd.

“Hw is th glss? Twnty-nn, I s. N wnd, and nt a cld in th
sky. I hv a csfl of cgrtts hr whch nd smkng, and th
sf is vry mch sprr t th usl cntry htl abmntn. I d
nt thnk tht it is prbbl tht I shll us th crrg t-nght.”

Lstrd lghd indlgntly. “Y hv, n dbt, alrdy frmd yr
cnclsns frm th nwspprs,” h sd. “Th cs is as pln as a
pkstff, and th mr on gs int it th plnr it bcms. Stll,
of crs, on cn’t rfs a ldy, and sch a vry pstv on, t.
Sh hs hrd of y, and wld hv yr opnn, thgh I rptdly
tld hr tht thr ws nthng whch y cld d whch I hd nt
alrdy dn. Why, blss my sl! hr is hr crrg at th dr.”

H hd hrdly spkn bfr thr rshd int th rm on of th mst
lvly yng wmn tht I hv evr sn in my lf. Hr vlt eys
shnng, hr lps prtd, a pnk flsh upn hr chks, all thght of
hr ntrl rsrv lst in hr ovrpwrng exctmnt and cncrn.

“Oh, Mr. Shrlck Hlms!” sh crd, glncng frm on t th othr of
us, and fnlly, wth a wmn’s qck inttn, fstnng upn my
cmpnn, “I am s gld tht y hv cm. I hv drvn dwn t tll
y s. I knw tht Jms ddn’t d it. I knw it, and I wnt y t
strt upn yr wrk knwng it, t. Nvr lt yrslf dbt upn
tht pnt. W hv knwn ech othr snc w wr lttl chldrn, and
I knw hs flts as n on els ds; bt h is t tndr-hrtd t
hrt a fly. Sch a chrg is absrd t anyn wh rlly knws hm.”

“I hp w my clr hm, Mss Trnr,” sd Shrlck Hlms. “Y my
rly upn my dng all tht I cn.”

“Bt y hv rd th evdnc. Y hv frmd sm cnclsn? D
y nt s sm lphl, sm flw? D y nt yrslf thnk tht h
is inncnt?”

“I thnk tht it is vry prbbl.”

“Thr, nw!” sh crd, thrwng bck hr hd and lkng dfntly
at Lstrd. “Y hr! H gvs m hps.”

Lstrd shrggd hs shldrs. “I am afrd tht my cllg hs
bn a lttl qck in frmng hs cnclsns,” h sd.

“Bt h is rght. Oh! I knw tht h is rght. Jms nvr dd it. And
abt hs qrrl wth hs fthr, I am sr tht th rsn why h
wld nt spk abt it t th crnr ws bcs I ws cncrnd in
it.”

“In wht wy?” askd Hlms.

“It is n tm fr m t hd anythng. Jms and hs fthr hd mny
dsgrmnts abt m. Mr. McCrthy ws vry anxs tht thr shld
b a mrrg btwn us. Jms and I hv alwys lvd ech othr as
brthr and sstr; bt of crs h is yng and hs sn vry lttl
of lf yt, and—and—wll, h ntrlly dd nt wsh t d anythng
lk tht yt. S thr wr qrrls, and ths, I am sr, ws on of
thm.”

“And yr fthr?” askd Hlms. “Ws h in fvr of sch a unn?”

“N, h ws avrs t it als. N on bt Mr. McCrthy ws in fvr of
it.” A qck blsh pssd ovr hr frsh yng fc as Hlms sht on
of hs kn, qstnng glncs at hr.

“Thnk y fr ths infrmtn,” sd h. “My I s yr fthr if I
cll t-mrrw?”

“I am afrd th dctr wn’t allw it.”

“Th dctr?”

“Ys, hv y nt hrd? Pr fthr hs nvr bn strng fr yrs
bck, bt ths hs brkn hm dwn cmpltly. H hs tkn t hs bd,
and Dr. Wllws sys tht h is a wrck and tht hs nrvs systm is
shttrd. Mr. McCrthy ws th only mn alv wh hd knwn dd in th
old dys in Vctr.”

“H! In Vctr! Tht is imprtnt.”

“Ys, at th mns.”

“Qt s; at th gld-mns, whr, as I undrstnd, Mr. Trnr md
hs mny.”

“Ys, crtnly.”

“Thnk y, Mss Trnr. Y hv bn of mtrl assstnc t m.”

“Y wll tll m if y hv any nws t-mrrw. N dbt y wll g
t th prsn t s Jms. Oh, if y d, Mr. Hlms, d tll hm tht
I knw hm t b inncnt.”

“I wll, Mss Trnr.”

“I mst g hm nw, fr dd is vry ill, and h msss m s if I
lv hm. Gd-by, and Gd hlp y in yr undrtkng.” Sh hrrd
frm th rm as implsvly as sh hd entrd, and w hrd th
whls of hr crrg rttl off dwn th strt.

“I am ashmd of y, Hlms,” sd Lstrd wth dgnty aftr a fw
mnts’ slnc. “Why shld y rs up hps whch y ar bnd t
dsppnt? I am nt ovr-tndr of hrt, bt I cll it crl.”

“I thnk tht I s my wy t clrng Jms McCrthy,” sd Hlms.
“Hv y an ordr t s hm in prsn?”

“Ys, bt only fr y and m.”

“Thn I shll rcnsdr my rsltn abt gng ot. W hv stll
tm t tk a trn t Hrfrd and s hm t-nght?”

“Ampl.”

“Thn lt us d s. Wtsn, I fr tht y wll fnd it vry slw, bt
I shll only b awy a cpl of hrs.”

I wlkd dwn t th sttn wth thm, and thn wndrd thrgh th
strts of th lttl twn, fnlly rtrnng t th htl, whr I ly
upn th sf and trd t intrst myslf in a yllw-bckd nvl.
Th pny plt of th stry ws s thn, hwvr, whn cmprd t th
dp mystry thrgh whch w wr grpng, and I fnd my attntn
wndr s cntnlly frm th actn t th fct, tht I at lst flng
it acrss th rm and gv myslf up entrly t a cnsdrtn of
th evnts of th dy. Sppsng tht ths unhppy yng mn’s stry
wr absltly tr, thn wht hllsh thng, wht absltly
unfrsn and extrrdnry clmty cld hv occrrd btwn th
tm whn h prtd frm hs fthr, and th mmnt whn, drwn bck by
hs scrms, h rshd int th gld? It ws smthng trrbl and
ddly. Wht cld it b? Mght nt th ntr of th injrs rvl
smthng t my mdcl instncts? I rng th bll and clld fr th
wkly cnty ppr, whch cntnd a vrbtm accnt of th inqst.
In th srgn’s dpstn it ws sttd tht th pstrr thrd of
th lft prtl bn and th lft hlf of th occptl bn hd bn
shttrd by a hvy blw frm a blnt wpn. I mrkd th spt upn
my own hd. Clrly sch a blw mst hv bn strck frm bhnd.
Tht ws t sm extnt in fvr of th accsd, as whn sn
qrrllng h ws fc t fc wth hs fthr. Stll, it dd nt g
fr vry mch, fr th oldr mn mght hv trnd hs bck bfr th
blw fll. Stll, it mght b wrth whl t cll Hlms’ attntn t
it. Thn thr ws th pclr dyng rfrnc t a rt. Wht cld
tht mn? It cld nt b dlrm. A mn dyng frm a sddn blw
ds nt cmmnly bcm dlrs. N, it ws mr lkly t b an
attmpt t expln hw h mt hs ft. Bt wht cld it indct? I
cdglld my brns t fnd sm pssbl explntn. And thn th
incdnt of th gry clth sn by yng McCrthy. If tht wr tr
th mrdrr mst hv drppd sm prt of hs drss, prsmbly hs
ovrct, in hs flght, and mst hv hd th hrdhd t rtrn and
t crry it awy at th instnt whn th sn ws knlng wth hs bck
trnd nt a dzn pcs off. Wht a tss of mystrs and
imprbblts th whl thng ws! I dd nt wndr at Lstrd’s
opnn, and yt I hd s mch fth in Shrlck Hlms’ insght tht I
cld nt ls hp as lng as evry frsh fct smd t strngthn
hs cnvctn of yng McCrthy’s inncnc.

It ws lt bfr Shrlck Hlms rtrnd. H cm bck aln, fr
Lstrd ws styng in ldgngs in th twn.

“Th glss stll kps vry hgh,” h rmrkd as h st dwn. “It is
of imprtnc tht it shld nt rn bfr w ar abl t g ovr th
grnd. On th othr hnd, a mn shld b at hs vry bst and knst
fr sch nc wrk as tht, and I dd nt wsh t d it whn fggd by
a lng jrny. I hv sn yng McCrthy.”

“And wht dd y lrn frm hm?”

“Nthng.”

“Cld h thrw n lght?”

“Nn at all. I ws inclnd t thnk at on tm tht h knw wh hd
dn it and ws scrnng hm or hr, bt I am cnvncd nw tht h is
as pzzld as evryn els. H is nt a vry qck-wttd yth,
thgh cmly t lk at and, I shld thnk, snd at hrt.”

“I cnnt admr hs tst,” I rmrkd, “if it is indd a fct tht
h ws avrs t a mrrg wth s chrmng a yng ldy as ths Mss
Trnr.”

“Ah, thrby hngs a rthr pnfl tl. Ths fllw is mdly,
insnly, in lv wth hr, bt sm tw yrs ag, whn h ws only a
ld, and bfr h rlly knw hr, fr sh hd bn awy fv yrs at
a brdng-schl, wht ds th idt d bt gt int th cltchs of
a brmd in Brstl and mrry hr at a rgstry offc? N on knws a
wrd of th mttr, bt y cn imgn hw mddnng it mst b t hm
t b upbrdd fr nt dng wht h wld gv hs vry eys t d,
bt wht h knws t b absltly impssbl. It ws shr frnzy of
ths srt whch md hm thrw hs hnds up int th ar whn hs
fthr, at thr lst intrvw, ws gdng hm on t prps t Mss
Trnr. On th othr hnd, h hd n mns of spprtng hmslf, and
hs fthr, wh ws by all accnts a vry hrd mn, wld hv thrwn
hm ovr uttrly hd h knwn th trth. It ws wth hs brmd wf
tht h hd spnt th lst thr dys in Brstl, and hs fthr dd
nt knw whr h ws. Mrk tht pnt. It is of imprtnc. Gd hs
cm ot of evl, hwvr, fr th brmd, fndng frm th pprs
tht h is in srs trbl and lkly t b hngd, hs thrwn hm
ovr uttrly and hs wrttn t hm t sy tht sh hs a hsbnd
alrdy in th Brmd Dckyrd, s tht thr is rlly n t btwn
thm. I thnk tht tht bt of nws hs cnsld yng McCrthy fr all
tht h hs sffrd.”

“Bt if h is inncnt, wh hs dn it?”

“Ah! wh? I wld cll yr attntn vry prtclrly t tw pnts.
On is tht th mrdrd mn hd an appntmnt wth smn at th
pl, and tht th smn cld nt hv bn hs sn, fr hs sn ws
awy, and h dd nt knw whn h wld rtrn. Th scnd is tht th
mrdrd mn ws hrd t cry ‘C!’ bfr h knw tht hs sn hd
rtrnd. Ths ar th crcl pnts upn whch th cs dpnds. And
nw lt us tlk abt Grg Mrdth, if y pls, and w shll
lv all mnr mttrs untl t-mrrw.”

Thr ws n rn, as Hlms hd frtld, and th mrnng brk brght
and cldlss. At nn o’clck Lstrd clld fr us wth th
crrg, and w st off fr Hthrly Frm and th Bscmb Pl.

“Thr is srs nws ths mrnng,” Lstrd obsrvd. “It is sd
tht Mr. Trnr, of th Hll, is s ill tht hs lf is dsprd of.”

“An eldrly mn, I prsm?” sd Hlms.

“Abt sxty; bt hs cnstttn hs bn shttrd by hs lf
abrd, and h hs bn in flng hlth fr sm tm. Ths bsnss
hs hd a vry bd effct upn hm. H ws an old frnd of McCrthy’s,
and, I my add, a grt bnfctr t hm, fr I hv lrnd tht h
gv hm Hthrly Frm rnt fr.”

“Indd! Tht is intrstng,” sd Hlms.

“Oh, ys! In a hndrd othr wys h hs hlpd hm. Evrybdy abt
hr spks of hs kndnss t hm.”

“Rlly! Ds it nt strk y as a lttl snglr tht ths
McCrthy, wh apprs t hv hd lttl of hs own, and t hv bn
undr sch oblgtns t Trnr, shld stll tlk of mrryng hs sn
t Trnr’s dghtr, wh is, prsmbly, hrss t th estt, and
tht in sch a vry ccksr mnnr, as if it wr mrly a cs of a
prpsl and all els wld fllw? It is th mr strng, snc w
knw tht Trnr hmslf ws avrs t th id. Th dghtr tld us
as mch. D y nt ddc smthng frm tht?”

“W hv gt t th ddctns and th infrncs,” sd Lstrd,
wnkng at m. “I fnd it hrd engh t tckl fcts, Hlms, wtht
flyng awy aftr thrs and fncs.”

“Y ar rght,” sd Hlms dmrly; “y d fnd it vry hrd t
tckl th fcts.”

“Anyhw, I hv grspd on fct whch y sm t fnd it dffclt t
gt hld of,” rpld Lstrd wth sm wrmth.

“And tht is—”

“Tht McCrthy snr mt hs dth frm McCrthy jnr and tht all
thrs t th cntrry ar th mrst mnshn.”

“Wll, mnshn is a brghtr thng thn fg,” sd Hlms, lghng.
“Bt I am vry mch mstkn if ths is nt Hthrly Frm upn th
lft.”

“Ys, tht is it.” It ws a wdsprd, cmfrtbl-lkng bldng,
tw-strd, slt-rfd, wth grt yllw bltchs of lchn upn
th gry wlls. Th drwn blnds and th smklss chmnys, hwvr,
gv it a strckn lk, as thgh th wght of ths hrrr stll ly
hvy upn it. W clld at th dr, whn th md, at Hlms’
rqst, shwd us th bts whch hr mstr wr at th tm of hs
dth, and als a pr of th sn’s, thgh nt th pr whch h hd
thn hd. Hvng msrd ths vry crflly frm svn or eght
dffrnt pnts, Hlms dsrd t b ld t th crt-yrd, frm
whch w all fllwd th wndng trck whch ld t Bscmb Pl.

Shrlck Hlms ws trnsfrmd whn h ws ht upn sch a scnt as
ths. Mn wh hd only knwn th qt thnkr and lgcn of Bkr
Strt wld hv fld t rcgns hm. Hs fc flshd and
drknd. Hs brws wr drwn int tw hrd blck lns, whl hs
eys shn ot frm bnth thm wth a stly glttr. Hs fc ws
bnt dwnwrd, hs shldrs bwd, hs lps cmprssd, and th vns
std ot lk whpcrd in hs lng, snwy nck. Hs nstrls smd
t dlt wth a prly anml lst fr th chs, and hs mnd ws s
absltly cncntrtd upn th mttr bfr hm tht a qstn or
rmrk fll unhdd upn hs ers, or, at th mst, only prvkd a
qck, imptnt snrl in rply. Swftly and slntly h md hs wy
alng th trck whch rn thrgh th mdws, and s by wy of th
wds t th Bscmb Pl. It ws dmp, mrshy grnd, as is all tht
dstrct, and thr wr mrks of mny ft, bth upn th pth and
amd th shrt grss whch bndd it on ethr sd. Smtms Hlms
wld hrry on, smtms stp dd, and onc h md qt a lttl
dtr int th mdw. Lstrd and I wlkd bhnd hm, th dtctv
indffrnt and cntmpts, whl I wtchd my frnd wth th
intrst whch sprng frm th cnvctn tht evry on of hs actns
ws drctd twrds a dfnt end.

Th Bscmb Pl, whch is a lttl rd-grt sht of wtr sm
ffty yrds acrss, is sttd at th bndry btwn th Hthrly
Frm and th prvt prk of th wlthy Mr. Trnr. Abv th wds
whch lnd it upn th frthr sd w cld s th rd, jttng
pnncls whch mrkd th st of th rch lndwnr’s dwllng. On
th Hthrly sd of th pl th wds grw vry thck, and thr ws
a nrrw blt of sddn grss twnty pcs acrss btwn th edg of
th trs and th rds whch lnd th lk. Lstrd shwd us th
exct spt at whch th bdy hd bn fnd, and, indd, s mst ws
th grnd, tht I cld plnly s th trcs whch hd bn lft by
th fll of th strckn mn. T Hlms, as I cld s by hs egr
fc and prng eys, vry mny othr thngs wr t b rd upn th
trmpld grss. H rn rnd, lk a dg wh is pckng up a scnt, and
thn trnd upn my cmpnn.

“Wht dd y g int th pl fr?” h askd.

“I fshd abt wth a rk. I thght thr mght b sm wpn or
othr trc. Bt hw on erth—”

“Oh, tt, tt! I hv n tm! Tht lft ft of yrs wth its inwrd
twst is all ovr th plc. A ml cld trc it, and thr it
vnshs amng th rds. Oh, hw smpl it wld all hv bn hd I
bn hr bfr thy cm lk a hrd of bffl and wllwd all ovr
it. Hr is whr th prty wth th ldg-kpr cm, and thy hv
cvrd all trcks fr sx or eght ft rnd th bdy. Bt hr ar
thr sprt trcks of th sm ft.” H drw ot a lns and ly
dwn upn hs wtrprf t hv a bttr vw, tlkng all th tm
rthr t hmslf thn t us. “Ths ar yng McCrthy’s ft. Twc
h ws wlkng, and onc h rn swftly, s tht th sls ar dply
mrkd and th hls hrdly vsbl. Tht brs ot hs stry. H rn
whn h sw hs fthr on th grnd. Thn hr ar th fthr’s ft
as h pcd up and dwn. Wht is ths, thn? It is th btt-end of th
gn as th sn std lstnng. And ths? H, h! Wht hv w hr?
Tpts! tpts! Sqr, t, qt unsl bts! Thy cm, thy g,
thy cm agn—of crs tht ws fr th clk. Nw whr dd thy
cm frm?” H rn up and dwn, smtms lsng, smtms fndng th
trck untl w wr wll wthn th edg of th wd and undr th
shdw of a grt bch, th lrgst tr in th nghbrhd. Hlms
trcd hs wy t th frthr sd of ths and ly dwn onc mr upn
hs fc wth a lttl cry of stsfctn. Fr a lng tm h rmnd
thr, trnng ovr th lvs and drd stcks, gthrng up wht
smd t m t b dst int an envlp and exmnng wth hs lns
nt only th grnd bt evn th brk of th tr as fr as h cld
rch. A jggd stn ws lyng amng th mss, and ths als h
crflly exmnd and rtnd. Thn h fllwd a pthwy thrgh th
wd untl h cm t th hgh rd, whr all trcs wr lst.

“It hs bn a cs of cnsdrbl intrst,” h rmrkd, rtrnng
t hs ntrl mnnr. “I fncy tht ths gry hs on th rght mst
b th ldg. I thnk tht I wll g in and hv a wrd wth Mrn, and
prhps wrt a lttl nt. Hvng dn tht, w my drv bck t or
lnchn. Y my wlk t th cb, and I shll b wth y prsntly.”

It ws abt tn mnts bfr w rgnd or cb and drv bck int
Rss, Hlms stll crryng wth hm th stn whch h hd pckd up
in th wd.

“Ths my intrst y, Lstrd,” h rmrkd, hldng it ot. “Th
mrdr ws dn wth it.”

“I s n mrks.”

“Thr ar nn.”

“Hw d y knw, thn?”

“Th grss ws grwng undr it. It hd only ln thr a fw dys.
Thr ws n sgn of a plc whnc it hd bn tkn. It crrspnds
wth th injrs. Thr is n sgn of any othr wpn.”

“And th mrdrr?”

“Is a tll mn, lft-hndd, lmps wth th rght lg, wrs
thck-sld shtng-bts and a gry clk, smks Indn cgrs, uss
a cgr-hldr, and crrs a blnt pn-knf in hs pckt. Thr ar
svrl othr indctns, bt ths my b engh t ad us in or
srch.”

Lstrd lghd. “I am afrd tht I am stll a scptc,” h sd.
“Thrs ar all vry wll, bt w hv t dl wth a hrd-hdd
Brtsh jry.”

“_Ns vrrns_,” answrd Hlms clmly. “Y wrk yr own mthd,
and I shll wrk mn. I shll b bsy ths aftrnn, and shll
prbbly rtrn t Lndn by th evnng trn.”

“And lv yr cs unfnshd?”

“N, fnshd.”

“Bt th mystry?”

“It is slvd.”

“Wh ws th crmnl, thn?”

“Th gntlmn I dscrb.”

“Bt wh is h?”

“Srly it wld nt b dffclt t fnd ot. Ths is nt sch a
ppls nghbrhd.”

Lstrd shrggd hs shldrs. “I am a prctcl mn,” h sd, “and
I rlly cnnt undrtk t g abt th cntry lkng fr a
lft-hndd gntlmn wth a gm lg. I shld bcm th
lghng-stck of Sctlnd Yrd.”

“All rght,” sd Hlms qtly. “I hv gvn y th chnc. Hr
ar yr ldgngs. Gd-by. I shll drp y a ln bfr I lv.”

Hvng lft Lstrd at hs rms, w drv t or htl, whr w
fnd lnch upn th tbl. Hlms ws slnt and brd in thght
wth a pnd exprssn upn hs fc, as on wh fnds hmslf in a
prplxng pstn.

“Lk hr, Wtsn,” h sd whn th clth ws clrd “jst st dwn
in ths chr and lt m prch t y fr a lttl. I dn’t knw qt
wht t d, and I shld vl yr advc. Lght a cgr and lt m
expnd.”

 “Pry d s.”

“Wll, nw, in cnsdrng ths cs thr ar tw pnts abt yng
McCrthy’s nrrtv whch strck us bth instntly, althgh thy
imprssd m in hs fvr and y agnst hm. On ws th fct tht
hs fthr shld, accrdng t hs accnt, cry ‘C!’ bfr sng
hm. Th othr ws hs snglr dyng rfrnc t a rt. H mmbld
svrl wrds, y undrstnd, bt tht ws all tht cght th sn’s
er. Nw frm ths dbl pnt or rsrch mst cmmnc, and w wll
bgn it by prsmng tht wht th ld sys is absltly tr.”

“Wht of ths ‘C!’ thn?”

“Wll, obvsly it cld nt hv bn mnt fr th sn. Th sn, as
fr as h knw, ws in Brstl. It ws mr chnc tht h ws wthn
ersht. Th ‘C!’ ws mnt t attrct th attntn of whvr it
ws tht h hd th appntmnt wth. Bt ‘C’ is a dstnctly
Astrln cry, and on whch is usd btwn Astrlns. Thr is a
strng prsmptn tht th prsn whm McCrthy expctd t mt hm
at Bscmb Pl ws smn wh hd bn in Astrl.”

“Wht of th rt, thn?”

Shrlck Hlms tk a fldd ppr frm hs pckt and flttnd it
ot on th tbl. “Ths is a mp of th Clny of Vctr,” h sd.
“I wrd t Brstl fr it lst nght.” H pt hs hnd ovr prt of
th mp. “Wht d y rd?”

“ART,” I rd.

“And nw?” H rsd hs hnd.

“BLLRT.”

“Qt s. Tht ws th wrd th mn uttrd, and of whch hs sn only
cght th lst tw syllbls. H ws tryng t uttr th nm of hs
mrdrr. S and s, of Bllrt.”

“It is wndrfl!” I exclmd.

“It is obvs. And nw, y s, I hd nrrwd th fld dwn
cnsdrbly. Th pssssn of a gry grmnt ws a thrd pnt whch,
grntng th sn’s sttmnt t b crrct, ws a crtnty. W hv
cm nw ot of mr vgnss t th dfnt cncptn of an
Astrln frm Bllrt wth a gry clk.”

“Crtnly.”

“And on wh ws at hm in th dstrct, fr th pl cn only b
apprchd by th frm or by th estt, whr strngrs cld hrdly
wndr.”

“Qt s.”

“Thn cms or expdtn of t-dy. By an exmntn of th grnd I
gnd th trflng dtls whch I gv t tht imbcl Lstrd, as
t th prsnlty of th crmnl.”

“Bt hw dd y gn thm?”

“Y knw my mthd. It is fndd upn th obsrvtn of trfls.”

“Hs hght I knw tht y mght rghly jdg frm th lngth of hs
strd. Hs bts, t, mght b tld frm thr trcs.”

“Ys, thy wr pclr bts.”

“Bt hs lmnss?”

“Th imprssn of hs rght ft ws alwys lss dstnct thn hs
lft. H pt lss wght upn it. Why? Bcs h lmpd—h ws lm.”

“Bt hs lft-hnddnss.”

“Y wr yrslf strck by th ntr of th injry as rcrdd by
th srgn at th inqst. Th blw ws strck frm immdtly
bhnd, and yt ws upn th lft sd. Nw, hw cn tht b unlss it
wr by a lft-hndd mn? H hd std bhnd tht tr drng th
intrvw btwn th fthr and sn. H hd evn smkd thr. I fnd
th ash of a cgr, whch my spcl knwldg of tbcc ashs enbls
m t prnnc as an Indn cgr. I hv, as y knw, dvtd sm
attntn t ths, and wrttn a lttl mngrph on th ashs of 140
dffrnt vrts of pp, cgr, and cgrtt tbcc. Hvng fnd
th ash, I thn lkd rnd and dscvrd th stmp amng th mss
whr h hd tssd it. It ws an Indn cgr, of th vrty whch
ar rlld in Rttrdm.”

“And th cgr-hldr?”

“I cld s tht th end hd nt bn in hs mth. Thrfr h usd
a hldr. Th tp hd bn ct off, nt bttn off, bt th ct ws nt
a cln on, s I ddcd a blnt pn-knf.”

“Hlms,” I sd, “y hv drwn a nt rnd ths mn frm whch h
cnnt escp, and y hv svd an inncnt hmn lf as trly as if
y hd ct th crd whch ws hngng hm. I s th drctn in
whch all ths pnts. Th clprt is—”

“Mr. Jhn Trnr,” crd th htl wtr, opnng th dr of or
sttng-rm, and ushrng in a vstr.

Th mn wh entrd ws a strng and imprssv fgr. Hs slw,
lmpng stp and bwd shldrs gv th apprnc of dcrptd,
and yt hs hrd, dp-lnd, crggy ftrs, and hs enrms lmbs
shwd tht h ws pssssd of unsl strngth of bdy and of
chrctr. Hs tngld brd, grzzld hr, and otstndng, drpng
eybrws cmbnd t gv an ar of dgnty and pwr t hs
apprnc, bt hs fc ws of an ashn wht, whl hs lps and th
crnrs of hs nstrls wr tngd wth a shd of bl. It ws clr
t m at a glnc tht h ws in th grp of sm ddly and chrnc
dss.

“Pry st dwn on th sf,” sd Hlms gntly. “Y hd my nt?”

“Ys, th ldg-kpr brght it up. Y sd tht y wshd t s
m hr t avd scndl.”

“I thght ppl wld tlk if I wnt t th Hll.”

“And why dd y wsh t s m?” H lkd acrss at my cmpnn wth
dspr in hs wry eys, as thgh hs qstn ws alrdy answrd.

“Ys,” sd Hlms, answrng th lk rthr thn th wrds. “It is
s. I knw all abt McCrthy.”

Th old mn snk hs fc in hs hnds. “Gd hlp m!” h crd. “Bt I
wld nt hv lt th yng mn cm t hrm. I gv y my wrd tht
I wld hv spkn ot if it wnt agnst hm at th Asszs.”

“I am gld t hr y sy s,” sd Hlms grvly.

“I wld hv spkn nw hd it nt bn fr my dr grl. It wld
brk hr hrt—it wll brk hr hrt whn sh hrs tht I am
arrstd.”

“It my nt cm t tht,” sd Hlms.

“Wht?”

“I am n offcl agnt. I undrstnd tht it ws yr dghtr wh
rqrd my prsnc hr, and I am actng in hr intrsts. Yng
McCrthy mst b gt off, hwvr.”

“I am a dyng mn,” sd old Trnr. “I hv hd dbts fr yrs. My
dctr sys it is a qstn whthr I shll lv a mnth. Yt I wld
rthr d undr my own rf thn in a gl.”

Hlms rs and st dwn at th tbl wth hs pn in hs hnd and a
bndl of ppr bfr hm. “Jst tll us th trth,” h sd. “I shll
jt dwn th fcts. Y wll sgn it, and Wtsn hr cn wtnss it.
Thn I cld prdc yr cnfssn at th lst extrmty t sv
yng McCrthy. I prms y tht I shll nt us it unlss it is
absltly ndd.”

“It’s as wll,” sd th old mn; “it’s a qstn whthr I shll lv
t th Asszs, s it mttrs lttl t m, bt I shld wsh t spr
Alc th shck. And nw I wll mk th thng clr t y; it hs
bn a lng tm in th actng, bt wll nt tk m lng t tll.

“Y ddn’t knw ths dd mn, McCrthy. H ws a dvl incrnt. I
tll y tht. Gd kp y ot of th cltchs of sch a mn as h.
Hs grp hs bn upn m ths twnty yrs, and h hs blstd my
lf. I’ll tll y frst hw I cm t b in hs pwr.

“It ws in th erly ’60’s at th dggngs. I ws a yng chp thn,
ht-bldd and rcklss, rdy t trn my hnd at anythng; I gt
amng bd cmpnns, tk t drnk, hd n lck wth my clm, tk t
th bsh, and in a wrd bcm wht y wld cll ovr hr a hghwy
rbbr. Thr wr sx of us, and w hd a wld, fr lf of it,
stckng up a sttn frm tm t tm, or stppng th wgns on th
rd t th dggngs. Blck Jck of Bllrt ws th nm I wnt undr,
and or prty is stll rmmbrd in th clny as th Bllrt Gng.

“On dy a gld cnvy cm dwn frm Bllrt t Mlbrn, and w ly
in wt fr it and attckd it. Thr wr sx trprs and sx of us,
s it ws a cls thng, bt w emptd fr of thr sddls at th
frst vlly. Thr of or bys wr klld, hwvr, bfr w gt th
swg. I pt my pstl t th hd of th wgn-drvr, wh ws ths
vry mn McCrthy. I wsh t th Lrd tht I hd sht hm thn, bt I
sprd hm, thgh I sw hs wckd lttl eys fxd on my fc, as
thgh t rmmbr evry ftr. W gt awy wth th gld, bcm
wlthy mn, and md or wy ovr t Englnd wtht bng sspctd.
Thr I prtd frm my old pls and dtrmnd t sttl dwn t a
qt and rspctbl lf. I bght ths estt, whch chncd t b
in th mrkt, and I st myslf t d a lttl gd wth my mny, t
mk up fr th wy in whch I hd ernd it. I mrrd, t, and
thgh my wf dd yng sh lft m my dr lttl Alc. Evn whn
sh ws jst a bby hr w hnd smd t ld m dwn th rght pth
as nthng els hd evr dn. In a wrd, I trnd ovr a nw lf and
dd my bst t mk up fr th pst. All ws gng wll whn McCrthy
ld hs grp upn m.

“I hd gn up t twn abt an invstmnt, and I mt hm in Rgnt
Strt wth hrdly a ct t hs bck or a bt t hs ft.

“‘Hr w ar, Jck,’ sys h, tchng m on th arm; ‘w’ll b as
gd as a fmly t y. Thr’s tw of us, m and my sn, and y cn
hv th kpng of us. If y dn’t—it’s a fn, lw-abdng cntry
is Englnd, and thr’s alwys a plcmn wthn hl.’

“Wll, dwn thy cm t th wst cntry, thr ws n shkng thm
off, and thr thy hv lvd rnt fr on my bst lnd evr snc.
Thr ws n rst fr m, n pc, n frgtflnss; trn whr I
wld, thr ws hs cnnng, grnnng fc at my elbw. It grw wrs
as Alc grw up, fr h sn sw I ws mr afrd of hr knwng my
pst thn of th plc. Whtvr h wntd h mst hv, and whtvr
it ws I gv hm wtht qstn, lnd, mny, hss, untl at lst
h askd a thng whch I cld nt gv. H askd fr Alc.

“Hs sn, y s, hd grwn up, and s hd my grl, and as I ws knwn
t b in wk hlth, it smd a fn strk t hm tht hs ld
shld stp int th whl prprty. Bt thr I ws frm. I wld nt
hv hs crsd stck mxd wth mn; nt tht I hd any dslk t
th ld, bt hs bld ws in hm, and tht ws engh. I std frm.
McCrthy thrtnd. I brvd hm t d hs wrst. W wr t mt at
th pl mdwy btwn or hss t tlk it ovr.

“Whn I wnt dwn thr I fnd hm tlkng wth hs sn, s I smkd a
cgr and wtd bhnd a tr untl h shld b aln. Bt as I
lstnd t hs tlk all tht ws blck and bttr in m smd t cm
upprmst. H ws urgng hs sn t mrry my dghtr wth as lttl
rgrd fr wht sh mght thnk as if sh wr a slt frm off th
strts. It drv m md t thnk tht I and all tht I hld mst dr
shld b in th pwr of sch a mn as ths. Cld I nt snp th
bnd? I ws alrdy a dyng and a dsprt mn. Thgh clr of mnd
and frly strng of lmb, I knw tht my own ft ws sld. Bt my
mmry and my grl! Bth cld b svd if I cld bt slnc tht
fl tng. I dd it, Mr. Hlms. I wld d it agn. Dply as I
hv snnd, I hv ld a lf of mrtyrdm t atn fr it. Bt tht
my grl shld b entngld in th sm mshs whch hld m ws mr
thn I cld sffr. I strck hm dwn wth n mr cmpnctn thn if
h hd bn sm fl and vnms bst. Hs cry brght bck hs sn;
bt I hd gnd th cvr of th wd, thgh I ws frcd t g bck
t ftch th clk whch I hd drppd in my flght. Tht is th tr
stry, gntlmn, of all tht occrrd.”

“Wll, it is nt fr m t jdg y,” sd Hlms as th old mn
sgnd th sttmnt whch hd bn drwn ot. “I pry tht w my
nvr b expsd t sch a tmpttn.”

“I pry nt, sr. And wht d y intnd t d?”

“In vw of yr hlth, nthng. Y ar yrslf awr tht y wll
sn hv t answr fr yr dd at a hghr crt thn th Asszs. I
wll kp yr cnfssn, and if McCrthy is cndmnd I shll b
frcd t us it. If nt, it shll nvr b sn by mrtl ey; and
yr scrt, whthr y b alv or dd, shll b sf wth us.”

“Frwll, thn,” sd th old mn slmnly. “Yr own dthbds, whn
thy cm, wll b th esr fr th thght of th pc whch y
hv gvn t mn.” Tttrng and shkng in all hs gnt frm, h
stmbld slwly frm th rm.

“Gd hlp us!” sd Hlms aftr a lng slnc. “Why ds ft ply
sch trcks wth pr, hlplss wrms? I nvr hr of sch a cs as
ths tht I d nt thnk of Bxtr’s wrds, and sy, ‘Thr, bt fr
th grc of Gd, gs Shrlck Hlms.’”

Jms McCrthy ws acqttd at th Asszs on th strngth of a nmbr
of objctns whch hd bn drwn ot by Hlms and sbmttd t th
dfndng cnsl. Old Trnr lvd fr svn mnths aftr or
intrvw, bt h is nw dd; and thr is evry prspct tht th sn
and dghtr my cm t lv hpply tgthr in ignrnc of th
blck cld whch rsts upn thr pst.




V. TH FV ORNG PPS


Whn I glnc ovr my nts and rcrds of th Shrlck Hlms css
btwn th yrs ’82 and ’90, I am fcd by s mny whch prsnt
strng and intrstng ftrs tht it is n esy mttr t knw
whch t chs and whch t lv. Sm, hwvr, hv alrdy gnd
pblcty thrgh th pprs, and othrs hv nt offrd a fld fr
ths pclr qlts whch my frnd pssssd in s hgh a dgr,
and whch it is th objct of ths pprs t illstrt. Sm, t,
hv bffld hs anlytcl skll, and wld b, as nrrtvs,
bgnnngs wtht an endng, whl othrs hv bn bt prtlly
clrd up, and hv thr explntns fndd rthr upn cnjctr
and srms thn on tht abslt lgcl prf whch ws s dr t
hm. Thr is, hwvr, on of ths lst whch ws s rmrkbl in
its dtls and s strtlng in its rslts tht I am tmptd t gv
sm accnt of it in spt of th fct tht thr ar pnts in
cnnctn wth it whch nvr hv bn, and prbbly nvr wll b,
entrly clrd up.

Th yr ’87 frnshd us wth a lng srs of css of grtr or
lss intrst, of whch I rtn th rcrds. Amng my hdngs undr
ths on twlv mnths I fnd an accnt of th advntr of th
Prdl Chmbr, of th Amtr Mndcnt Scty, wh hld a lxrs
clb in th lwr vlt of a frntr wrhs, of th fcts
cnnctd wth th lss of th Brtsh brq _Sphy Andrsn_, of th
snglr advntrs of th Grc Ptrsns in th islnd of Uff, and
fnlly of th Cmbrwll psnng cs. In th lttr, as my b
rmmbrd, Shrlck Hlms ws abl, by wndng up th dd mn’s
wtch, t prv tht it hd bn wnd up tw hrs bfr, and tht
thrfr th dcsd hd gn t bd wthn tht tm—a ddctn
whch ws of th grtst imprtnc in clrng up th cs. All ths
I my sktch ot at sm ftr dt, bt nn of thm prsnt sch
snglr ftrs as th strng trn of crcmstncs whch I hv
nw tkn up my pn t dscrb.

It ws in th lttr dys of Sptmbr, and th eqnctl gls hd
st in wth excptnl vlnc. All dy th wnd hd scrmd and th
rn hd btn agnst th wndws, s tht evn hr in th hrt of
grt, hnd-md Lndn w wr frcd t rs or mnds fr th
instnt frm th rtn of lf and t rcgns th prsnc of ths
grt elmntl frcs whch shrk at mnknd thrgh th brs of hs
cvlstn, lk untmd bsts in a cg. As evnng drw in, th
strm grw hghr and ldr, and th wnd crd and sbbd lk a
chld in th chmny. Shrlck Hlms st mdly at on sd of th
frplc crss-indxng hs rcrds of crm, whl I at th othr ws
dp in on of Clrk Rssll’s fn s-strs untl th hwl of th
gl frm wtht smd t blnd wth th txt, and th splsh of th
rn t lngthn ot int th lng swsh of th s wvs. My wf ws
on a vst t hr mthr’s, and fr a fw dys I ws a dwllr onc
mr in my old qrtrs at Bkr Strt.

“Why,” sd I, glncng up at my cmpnn, “tht ws srly th bll.
Wh cld cm t-nght? Sm frnd of yrs, prhps?”

“Excpt yrslf I hv nn,” h answrd. “I d nt encrg
vstrs.”

“A clnt, thn?”

“If s, it is a srs cs. Nthng lss wld brng a mn ot on
sch a dy and at sch an hr. Bt I tk it tht it is mr lkly t
b sm crny of th lndldy’s.”

Shrlck Hlms ws wrng in hs cnjctr, hwvr, fr thr cm a
stp in th pssg and a tppng at th dr. H strtchd ot hs
lng arm t trn th lmp awy frm hmslf and twrds th vcnt
chr upn whch a nwcmr mst st.

“Cm in!” sd h.

Th mn wh entrd ws yng, sm tw-and-twnty at th otsd,
wll-grmd and trmly cld, wth smthng of rfnmnt and dlccy
in hs brng. Th strmng umbrll whch h hld in hs hnd, and
hs lng shnng wtrprf tld of th frc wthr thrgh whch h
hd cm. H lkd abt hm anxsly in th glr of th lmp, and I
cld s tht hs fc ws pl and hs eys hvy, lk ths of a
mn wh is wghd dwn wth sm grt anxty.

“I ow y an aplgy,” h sd, rsng hs gldn pnc-nz t hs
eys. “I trst tht I am nt intrdng. I fr tht I hv brght sm
trcs of th strm and rn int yr sng chmbr.”

“Gv m yr ct and umbrll,” sd Hlms. “Thy my rst hr on
th hk and wll b dry prsntly. Y hv cm up frm th
sth-wst, I s.”

“Ys, frm Hrshm.”

“Tht cly and chlk mxtr whch I s upn yr t cps is qt
dstnctv.”

“I hv cm fr advc.”

“Tht is esly gt.”

“And hlp.”

“Tht is nt alwys s esy.”

“I hv hrd of y, Mr. Hlms. I hrd frm Mjr Prndrgst hw
y svd hm in th Tnkrvll Clb scndl.”

“Ah, of crs. H ws wrngflly accsd of chtng at crds.”

“H sd tht y cld slv anythng.”

“H sd t mch.”

“Tht y ar nvr btn.”

“I hv bn btn fr tms—thr tms by mn, and onc by a
wmn.”

“Bt wht is tht cmprd wth th nmbr of yr sccsss?”

“It is tr tht I hv bn gnrlly sccssfl.”

“Thn y my b s wth m.”

“I bg tht y wll drw yr chr up t th fr and fvr m wth
sm dtls as t yr cs.”

“It is n ordnry on.”

“Nn of ths whch cm t m ar. I am th lst crt of appl.”

“And yt I qstn, sr, whthr, in all yr exprnc, y hv
evr lstnd t a mr mystrs and inxplcbl chn of evnts
thn ths whch hv hppnd in my own fmly.”

“Y fll m wth intrst,” sd Hlms. “Pry gv us th essntl
fcts frm th cmmncmnt, and I cn aftrwrds qstn y as t
ths dtls whch sm t m t b mst imprtnt.”

Th yng mn plld hs chr up and pshd hs wt ft ot twrds
th blz.

“My nm,” sd h, “is Jhn Opnshw, bt my own affrs hv, as fr
as I cn undrstnd, lttl t d wth ths awfl bsnss. It is a
hrdtry mttr; s in ordr t gv y an id of th fcts, I mst
g bck t th cmmncmnt of th affr.

“Y mst knw tht my grndfthr hd tw sns—my uncl Els and my
fthr Jsph. My fthr hd a smll fctry at Cvntry, whch h
enlrgd at th tm of th invntn of bcyclng. H ws a ptnt
of th Opnshw unbrkbl tr, and hs bsnss mt wth sch
sccss tht h ws abl t sll it and t rtr upn a hndsm
cmptnc.

“My uncl Els emgrtd t Amrc whn h ws a yng mn and bcm
a plntr in Flrd, whr h ws rprtd t hv dn vry wll. At
th tm of th wr h fght in Jcksn’s army, and aftrwrds undr
Hd, whr h rs t b a clnl. Whn L ld dwn hs arms my
uncl rtrnd t hs plnttn, whr h rmnd fr thr or fr
yrs. Abt 1869 or 1870 h cm bck t Erp and tk a smll
estt in Sssx, nr Hrshm. H hd md a vry cnsdrbl frtn
in th Stts, and hs rsn fr lvng thm ws hs avrsn t th
ngrs, and hs dslk of th Rpblcn plcy in extndng th
frnchs t thm. H ws a snglr mn, frc and qck-tmprd,
vry fl-mthd whn h ws angry, and of a mst rtrng
dspstn. Drng all th yrs tht h lvd at Hrshm, I dbt if
evr h st ft in th twn. H hd a grdn and tw or thr flds
rnd hs hs, and thr h wld tk hs exrcs, thgh vry
oftn fr wks on end h wld nvr lv hs rm. H drnk a grt
dl of brndy and smkd vry hvly, bt h wld s n scty and
dd nt wnt any frnds, nt evn hs own brthr.

“H ddn’t mnd m; in fct, h tk a fncy t m, fr at th tm
whn h sw m frst I ws a yngstr of twlv or s. Ths wld b
in th yr 1878, aftr h hd bn eght or nn yrs in Englnd. H
bggd my fthr t lt m lv wth hm and h ws vry knd t m in
hs wy. Whn h ws sbr h usd t b fnd of plyng bckgmmn and
drghts wth m, and h wld mk m hs rprsnttv bth wth th
srvnts and wth th trdsppl, s tht by th tm tht I ws
sxtn I ws qt mstr of th hs. I kpt all th kys and cld
g whr I lkd and d wht I lkd, s lng as I dd nt dstrb hm
in hs prvcy. Thr ws on snglr excptn, hwvr, fr h hd a
sngl rm, a lmbr-rm up amng th attcs, whch ws invrbly
lckd, and whch h wld nvr prmt ethr m or anyn els t
entr. Wth a by’s crsty I hv ppd thrgh th kyhl, bt I
ws nvr abl t s mr thn sch a cllctn of old trnks and
bndls as wld b expctd in sch a rm.

“On dy—it ws in Mrch, 1883—a lttr wth a frgn stmp ly upn
th tbl in frnt of th clnl’s plt. It ws nt a cmmn thng
fr hm t rcv lttrs, fr hs blls wr all pd in rdy mny,
and h hd n frnds of any srt. ‘Frm Ind!’ sd h as h tk it
up, ‘Pndchrry pstmrk! Wht cn ths b?’ Opnng it hrrdly, ot
thr jmpd fv lttl drd orng pps, whch pttrd dwn upn
hs plt. I bgn t lgh at ths, bt th lgh ws strck frm my
lps at th sght of hs fc. Hs lp hd flln, hs eys wr
prtrdng, hs skn th clr of ptty, and h glrd at th envlp
whch h stll hld in hs trmblng hnd, ‘K. K. K.!’ h shrkd, and
thn, ‘My Gd, my Gd, my sns hv ovrtkn m!’

“‘Wht is it, uncl?’ I crd.

“‘Dth,’ sd h, and rsng frm th tbl h rtrd t hs rm,
lvng m plpttng wth hrrr. I tk up th envlp and sw
scrwld in rd ink upn th innr flp, jst abv th gm, th lttr
K thr tms rptd. Thr ws nthng els sv th fv drd
pps. Wht cld b th rsn of hs ovrpwrng trrr? I lft th
brkfst-tbl, and as I ascndd th str I mt hm cmng dwn wth
an old rsty ky, whch mst hv blngd t th attc, in on hnd,
and a smll brss bx, lk a cshbx, in th othr.

“‘Thy my d wht thy lk, bt I’ll chckmt thm stll,’ sd h
wth an oth. ‘Tll Mry tht I shll wnt a fr in my rm t-dy,
and snd dwn t Frdhm, th Hrshm lwyr.’

“I dd as h ordrd, and whn th lwyr arrvd I ws askd t stp
up t th rm. Th fr ws brnng brghtly, and in th grt thr
ws a mss of blck, flffy ashs, as of brnd ppr, whl th brss
bx std opn and empty bsd it. As I glncd at th bx I ntcd,
wth a strt, tht upn th ld ws prntd th trbl K whch I hd
rd in th mrnng upn th envlp.

“‘I wsh y, Jhn,’ sd my uncl, ‘t wtnss my wll. I lv my
estt, wth all its advntgs and all its dsdvntgs, t my
brthr, yr fthr, whnc it wll, n dbt, dscnd t y. If y
cn enjy it in pc, wll and gd! If y fnd y cnnt, tk my
advc, my by, and lv it t yr ddlst enmy. I am srry t
gv y sch a tw-edgd thng, bt I cn’t sy wht trn thngs ar
gng t tk. Kndly sgn th ppr whr Mr. Frdhm shws y.’

“I sgnd th ppr as drctd, and th lwyr tk it awy wth hm.
Th snglr incdnt md, as y my thnk, th dpst imprssn
upn m, and I pndrd ovr it and trnd it evry wy in my mnd
wtht bng abl t mk anythng of it. Yt I cld nt shk off
th vg flng of drd whch it lft bhnd, thgh th snstn
grw lss kn as th wks pssd and nthng hppnd t dstrb th
usl rtn of or lvs. I cld s a chng in my uncl, hwvr.
H drnk mr thn evr, and h ws lss inclnd fr any srt of
scty. Mst of hs tm h wld spnd in hs rm, wth th dr
lckd upn th insd, bt smtms h wld emrg in a srt of
drnkn frnzy and wld brst ot of th hs and tr abt th
grdn wth a rvlvr in hs hnd, scrmng ot tht h ws afrd of
n mn, and tht h ws nt t b cpd up, lk a shp in a pn, by
mn or dvl. Whn ths ht fts wr ovr, hwvr, h wld rsh
tmltsly in at th dr and lck and br it bhnd hm, lk a mn
wh cn brzn it ot n lngr agnst th trrr whch ls at th
rts of hs sl. At sch tms I hv sn hs fc, evn on a cld
dy, glstn wth mstr, as thgh it wr nw rsd frm a bsn.

“Wll, t cm t an end of th mttr, Mr. Hlms, and nt t abs
yr ptnc, thr cm a nght whn h md on of ths drnkn
slls frm whch h nvr cm bck. W fnd hm, whn w wnt t
srch fr hm, fc dwnwrd in a lttl grn-scmmd pl, whch ly
at th ft of th grdn. Thr ws n sgn of any vlnc, and th
wtr ws bt tw ft dp, s tht th jry, hvng rgrd t hs
knwn eccntrcty, brght in a vrdct of ‘scd.’ Bt I, wh knw
hw h wncd frm th vry thght of dth, hd mch ad t prsd
myslf tht h hd gn ot of hs wy t mt it. Th mttr pssd,
hwvr, and my fthr entrd int pssssn of th estt, and of
sm £ 14,000, whch ly t hs crdt at th bnk.”

“On mmnt,” Hlms intrpsd, “yr sttmnt is, I frs, on of
th mst rmrkbl t whch I hv evr lstnd. Lt m hv th dt
of th rcptn by yr uncl of th lttr, and th dt of hs
sppsd scd.”

“Th lttr arrvd on Mrch 10, 1883. Hs dth ws svn wks ltr,
upn th nght of My 2nd.”

“Thnk y. Pry prcd.”

“Whn my fthr tk ovr th Hrshm prprty, h, at my rqst, md
a crfl exmntn of th attc, whch hd bn alwys lckd up. W
fnd th brss bx thr, althgh its cntnts hd bn dstryd. On
th insd of th cvr ws a ppr lbl, wth th intls of K. K.
K. rptd upn it, and ‘Lttrs, mmrnd, rcpts, and a rgstr’
wrttn bnth. Ths, w prsm, indctd th ntr of th pprs
whch hd bn dstryd by Clnl Opnshw. Fr th rst, thr ws
nthng of mch imprtnc in th attc sv a grt mny scttrd
pprs and nt-bks brng upn my uncl’s lf in Amrc. Sm of
thm wr of th wr tm and shwd tht h hd dn hs dty wll and
hd brn th rpt of a brv sldr. Othrs wr of a dt drng
th rcnstrctn of th Sthrn stts, and wr mstly cncrnd
wth pltcs, fr h hd evdntly tkn a strng prt in oppsng th
crpt-bg pltcns wh hd bn snt dwn frm th Nrth.

“Wll, it ws th bgnnng of ’84 whn my fthr cm t lv at
Hrshm, and all wnt as wll as pssbl wth us untl th Jnry of
’85. On th frth dy aftr th nw yr I hrd my fthr gv a
shrp cry of srprs as w st tgthr at th brkfst-tbl. Thr
h ws, sttng wth a nwly opnd envlp in on hnd and fv drd
orng pps in th otstrtchd plm of th othr on. H hd alwys
lghd at wht h clld my cck-and-bll stry abt th clnl, bt
h lkd vry scrd and pzzld nw tht th sm thng hd cm upn
hmslf.

“‘Why, wht on erth ds ths mn, Jhn?’ h stmmrd.

“My hrt hd trnd t ld. ‘It is K. K. K.,’ sd I.

“H lkd insd th envlp. ‘S it is,’ h crd. ‘Hr ar th
vry lttrs. Bt wht is ths wrttn abv thm?’

“‘Pt th pprs on th sndl,’ I rd, ppng ovr hs shldr.

“‘Wht pprs? Wht sndl?’ h askd.

“‘Th sndl in th grdn. Thr is n othr,’ sd I; ‘bt th
pprs mst b ths tht ar dstryd.’

“‘Ph!’ sd h, grppng hrd at hs crg. ‘W ar in a cvlsd
lnd hr, and w cn’t hv tmflry of ths knd. Whr ds th
thng cm frm?’

“‘Frm Dnd,’ I answrd, glncng at th pstmrk.

“‘Sm prpstrs prctcl jk,’ sd h. ‘Wht hv I t d wth
sndls and pprs? I shll tk n ntc of sch nnsns.’

“‘I shld crtnly spk t th plc,’ I sd.

“‘And b lghd at fr my pns. Nthng of th srt.’

“‘Thn lt m d s?’

“‘N, I frbd y. I wn’t hv a fss md abt sch nnsns.’

“It ws in vn t arg wth hm, fr h ws a vry obstnt mn. I
wnt abt, hwvr, wth a hrt whch ws fll of frbdngs.

“On th thrd dy aftr th cmng of th lttr my fthr wnt frm
hm t vst an old frnd of hs, Mjr Frbdy, wh is in cmmnd
of on of th frts upn Prtsdwn Hll. I ws gld tht h shld g,
fr it smd t m tht h ws frthr frm dngr whn h ws awy
frm hm. In tht, hwvr, I ws in errr. Upn th scnd dy of hs
absnc I rcvd a tlgrm frm th mjr, implrng m t cm at
onc. My fthr hd flln ovr on of th dp chlk-pts whch abnd
in th nghbrhd, and ws lyng snslss, wth a shttrd skll.
I hrrd t hm, bt h pssd awy wtht hvng evr rcvrd hs
cnscsnss. H hd, as it apprs, bn rtrnng frm Frhm in
th twlght, and as th cntry ws unknwn t hm, and th chlk-pt
unfncd, th jry hd n hsttn in brngng in a vrdct of ‘dth
frm accdntl css.’ Crflly as I exmnd evry fct cnnctd
wth hs dth, I ws unbl t fnd anythng whch cld sggst th
id of mrdr. Thr wr n sgns of vlnc, n ftmrks, n
rbbry, n rcrd of strngrs hvng bn sn upn th rds. And
yt I nd nt tll y tht my mnd ws fr frm at es, and tht I
ws wll-ngh crtn tht sm fl plt hd bn wvn rnd hm.

“In ths snstr wy I cm int my inhrtnc. Y wll ask m why I
dd nt dsps of it? I answr, bcs I ws wll cnvncd tht or
trbls wr in sm wy dpndnt upn an incdnt in my uncl’s
lf, and tht th dngr wld b as prssng in on hs as in
anthr.

“It ws in Jnry, ’85, tht my pr fthr mt hs end, and tw yrs
and eght mnths hv elpsd snc thn. Drng tht tm I hv lvd
hpply at Hrshm, and I hd bgn t hp tht ths crs hd pssd
awy frm th fmly, and tht it hd endd wth th lst gnrtn. I
hd bgn t tk cmfrt t sn, hwvr; ystrdy mrnng th blw
fll in th vry shp in whch it hd cm upn my fthr.”

Th yng mn tk frm hs wstct a crmpld envlp, and trnng
t th tbl h shk ot upn it fv lttl drd orng pps.

“Ths is th envlp,” h cntnd. “Th pstmrk is Lndn—estrn
dvsn. Wthn ar th vry wrds whch wr upn my fthr’s lst
mssg: ‘K. K. K.’; and thn ‘Pt th pprs on th sndl.’”

“Wht hv y dn?” askd Hlms.

“Nthng.”

“Nthng?”

“T tll th trth”—h snk hs fc int hs thn, wht hnds—“I hv
flt hlplss. I hv flt lk on of ths pr rbbts whn th
snk is wrthng twrds it. I sm t b in th grsp of sm
rsstlss, inxrbl evl, whch n frsght and n prctns cn
grd agnst.”

“Tt! tt!” crd Shrlck Hlms. “Y mst act, mn, or y ar lst.
Nthng bt enrgy cn sv y. Ths is n tm fr dspr.”

“I hv sn th plc.”

“Ah!”

“Bt thy lstnd t my stry wth a sml. I am cnvncd tht th
inspctr hs frmd th opnn tht th lttrs ar all prctcl
jks, and tht th dths of my rltns wr rlly accdnts, as
th jry sttd, and wr nt t b cnnctd wth th wrnngs.”

Hlms shk hs clnchd hnds in th ar. “Incrdbl imbclty!” h
crd.

“Thy hv, hwvr, allwd m a plcmn, wh my rmn in th
hs wth m.”

“Hs h cm wth y t-nght?”

“N. Hs ordrs wr t sty in th hs.”

Agn Hlms rvd in th ar.

“Why dd y cm t m?” h sd, “and, abv all, why dd y nt
cm at onc?”

“I dd nt knw. It ws only t-dy tht I spk t Mjr Prndrgst
abt my trbls and ws advsd by hm t cm t y.”

“It is rlly tw dys snc y hd th lttr. W shld hv actd
bfr ths. Y hv n frthr evdnc, I spps, thn tht whch
y hv plcd bfr us—n sggstv dtl whch mght hlp us?”

“Thr is on thng,” sd Jhn Opnshw. H rmmgd in hs ct
pckt, and, drwng ot a pc of dsclrd, bl-tntd ppr, h
ld it ot upn th tbl. “I hv sm rmmbrnc,” sd h, “tht
on th dy whn my uncl brnd th pprs I obsrvd tht th smll,
unbrnd mrgns whch ly amd th ashs wr of ths prtclr
clr. I fnd ths sngl sht upn th flr of hs rm, and I am
inclnd t thnk tht it my b on of th pprs whch hs, prhps,
flttrd ot frm amng th othrs, and in tht wy hs escpd
dstrctn. Bynd th mntn of pps, I d nt s tht it hlps us
mch. I thnk myslf tht it is a pg frm sm prvt dry. Th
wrtng is undbtdly my uncl’s.”

Hlms mvd th lmp, and w bth bnt ovr th sht of ppr, whch
shwd by its rggd edg tht it hd indd bn trn frm a bk. It
ws hdd, “Mrch, 1869,” and bnth wr th fllwng engmtcl
ntcs:

“4th. Hdsn cm. Sm old pltfrm.

“7th. St th pps on McCly, Prmr, and Jhn Swn of St.
Agstn.

“9th. McCly clrd.

“10th. Jhn Swn clrd.

“12th. Vstd Prmr. All wll.”

“Thnk y!” sd Hlms, fldng up th ppr and rtrnng it t or
vstr. “And nw y mst on n accnt ls anthr instnt. W
cnnt spr tm evn t dscss wht y hv tld m. Y mst gt
hm instntly and act.”

“Wht shll I d?”

“Thr is bt on thng t d. It mst b dn at onc. Y mst pt
ths pc of ppr whch y hv shwn us int th brss bx whch
y hv dscrbd. Y mst als pt in a nt t sy tht all th
othr pprs wr brnd by yr uncl, and tht ths is th only on
whch rmns. Y mst assrt tht in sch wrds as wll crry
cnvctn wth thm. Hvng dn ths, y mst at onc pt th bx
ot upn th sndl, as drctd. D y undrstnd?”

“Entrly.”

“D nt thnk of rvng, or anythng of th srt, at prsnt. I thnk
tht w my gn tht by mns of th lw; bt w hv or wb t
wv, whl thrs is alrdy wvn. Th frst cnsdrtn is t
rmv th prssng dngr whch thrtns y. Th scnd is t clr
up th mystry and t pnsh th glty prts.”

“I thnk y,” sd th yng mn, rsng and pllng on hs ovrct.
“Y hv gvn m frsh lf and hp. I shll crtnly d as y
advs.”

“D nt ls an instnt. And, abv all, tk cr of yrslf in th
mnwhl, fr I d nt thnk tht thr cn b a dbt tht y ar
thrtnd by a vry rl and immnnt dngr. Hw d y g bck?”

“By trn frm Wtrl.”

“It is nt yt nn. Th strts wll b crwdd, s I trst tht y
my b in sfty. And yt y cnnt grd yrslf t clsly.”

“I am armd.”

“Tht is wll. T-mrrw I shll st t wrk upn yr cs.”

“I shll s y at Hrshm, thn?”

“N, yr scrt ls in Lndn. It is thr tht I shll sk it.”

“Thn I shll cll upn y in a dy, or in tw dys, wth nws as t
th bx and th pprs. I shll tk yr advc in evry prtclr.”
H shk hnds wth us and tk hs lv. Otsd th wnd stll
scrmd and th rn splshd and pttrd agnst th wndws. Ths
strng, wld stry smd t hv cm t us frm amd th md
elmnts—blwn in upn us lk a sht of s-wd in a gl—and nw t
hv bn rbsrbd by thm onc mr.

Shrlck Hlms st fr sm tm in slnc, wth hs hd snk
frwrd and hs eys bnt upn th rd glw of th fr. Thn h lt
hs pp, and lnng bck in hs chr h wtchd th bl smk-rngs
as thy chsd ech othr up t th clng.

“I thnk, Wtsn,” h rmrkd at lst, “tht of all or css w hv
hd nn mr fntstc thn ths.”

“Sv, prhps, th Sgn of Fr.”

“Wll, ys. Sv, prhps, tht. And yt ths Jhn Opnshw sms t m
t b wlkng amd evn grtr prls thn dd th Shlts.”

“Bt hv y,” I askd, “frmd any dfnt cncptn as t wht
ths prls ar?”

“Thr cn b n qstn as t thr ntr,” h answrd.

“Thn wht ar thy? Wh is ths K. K. K., and why ds h prs ths
unhppy fmly?”

Shrlck Hlms clsd hs eys and plcd hs elbws upn th arms of
hs chr, wth hs fngr-tps tgthr. “Th idl rsnr,” h
rmrkd, “wld, whn h hd onc bn shwn a sngl fct in all its
brngs, ddc frm it nt only all th chn of evnts whch ld up
t it bt als all th rslts whch wld fllw frm it. As Cvr
cld crrctly dscrb a whl anml by th cntmpltn of a
sngl bn, s th obsrvr wh hs thrghly undrstd on lnk in
a srs of incdnts shld b abl t accrtly stt all th othr
ons, bth bfr and aftr. W hv nt yt grspd th rslts whch
th rsn aln cn attn t. Prblms my b slvd in th stdy
whch hv bffld all ths wh hv sght a sltn by th ad of
thr snss. T crry th art, hwvr, t its hghst ptch, it is
ncssry tht th rsnr shld b abl t utls all th fcts
whch hv cm t hs knwldg; and ths in itslf impls, as y
wll rdly s, a pssssn of all knwldg, whch, evn in ths
dys of fr edctn and encyclpæds, is a smwht rr
accmplshmnt. It is nt s impssbl, hwvr, tht a mn shld
pssss all knwldg whch is lkly t b usfl t hm in hs wrk,
and ths I hv endvrd in my cs t d. If I rmmbr rghtly,
y on on occsn, in th erly dys of or frndshp, dfnd my
lmts in a vry prcs fshn.”

“Ys,” I answrd, lghng. “It ws a snglr dcmnt. Phlsphy,
astrnmy, and pltcs wr mrkd at zr, I rmmbr. Btny
vrbl, glgy prfnd as rgrds th md-stns frm any rgn
wthn ffty mls of twn, chmstry eccntrc, antmy unsystmtc,
snstnl ltrtr and crm rcrds unq, vln-plyr, bxr,
swrdsmn, lwyr, and slf-psnr by ccn and tbcc. Ths, I
thnk, wr th mn pnts of my anlyss.”

Hlms grnnd at th lst itm. “Wll,” h sd, “I sy nw, as I sd
thn, tht a mn shld kp hs lttl brn-attc stckd wth all
th frntr tht h is lkly t us, and th rst h cn pt awy in
th lmbr-rm of hs lbrry, whr h cn gt it if h wnts it.
Nw, fr sch a cs as th on whch hs bn sbmttd t us
t-nght, w nd crtnly t mstr all or rsrcs. Kndly hnd m
dwn th lttr K of th _Amrcn Encyclpæd_ whch stnds upn th
shlf bsd y. Thnk y. Nw lt us cnsdr th sttn and s
wht my b ddcd frm it. In th frst plc, w my strt wth a
strng prsmptn tht Clnl Opnshw hd sm vry strng rsn
fr lvng Amrc. Mn at hs tm of lf d nt chng all thr
hbts and exchng wllngly th chrmng clmt of Flrd fr th
lnly lf of an Englsh prvncl twn. Hs extrm lv of sltd
in Englnd sggsts th id tht h ws in fr of smn or
smthng, s w my assm as a wrkng hypthss tht it ws fr of
smn or smthng whch drv hm frm Amrc. As t wht it ws h
frd, w cn only ddc tht by cnsdrng th frmdbl lttrs
whch wr rcvd by hmslf and hs sccssrs. Dd y rmrk th
pstmrks of ths lttrs?”

“Th frst ws frm Pndchrry, th scnd frm Dnd, and th thrd
frm Lndn.”

“Frm Est Lndn. Wht d y ddc frm tht?”

“Thy ar all sprts. Tht th wrtr ws on brd of a shp.”

“Excllnt. W hv alrdy a cl. Thr cn b n dbt tht th
prbblty—th strng prbblty—is tht th wrtr ws on brd of a
shp. And nw lt us cnsdr anthr pnt. In th cs of
Pndchrry, svn wks elpsd btwn th thrt and its flflmnt,
in Dnd it ws only sm thr or fr dys. Ds tht sggst
anythng?”

“A grtr dstnc t trvl.”

“Bt th lttr hd als a grtr dstnc t cm.”

“Thn I d nt s th pnt.”

“Thr is at lst a prsmptn tht th vssl in whch th mn or
mn ar is a slng-shp. It lks as if thy alwys snd thr
snglr wrnng or tkn bfr thm whn strtng upn thr mssn.
Y s hw qckly th dd fllwd th sgn whn it cm frm
Dnd. If thy hd cm frm Pndchrry in a stmr thy wld hv
arrvd almst as sn as thr lttr. Bt, as a mttr of fct, svn
wks elpsd. I thnk tht ths svn wks rprsntd th
dffrnc btwn th ml-bt whch brght th lttr and th
slng vssl whch brght th wrtr.”

“It is pssbl.”

“Mr thn tht. It is prbbl. And nw y s th ddly urgncy of
ths nw cs, and why I urgd yng Opnshw t ctn. Th blw hs
alwys flln at th end of th tm whch it wld tk th sndrs t
trvl th dstnc. Bt ths on cms frm Lndn, and thrfr w
cnnt cnt upn dly.”

“Gd Gd!” I crd. “Wht cn it mn, ths rlntlss prsctn?”

“Th pprs whch Opnshw crrd ar obvsly of vtl imprtnc t
th prsn or prsns in th slng-shp. I thnk tht it is qt
clr tht thr mst b mr thn on of thm. A sngl mn cld nt
hv crrd ot tw dths in sch a wy as t dcv a crnr’s
jry. Thr mst hv bn svrl in it, and thy mst hv bn mn
of rsrc and dtrmntn. Thr pprs thy mn t hv, b th
hldr of thm wh it my. In ths wy y s K. K. K. css t b
th intls of an indvdl and bcms th bdg of a scty.”

“Bt of wht scty?”

“Hv y nvr—” sd Shrlck Hlms, bndng frwrd and snkng hs
vc—“hv y nvr hrd of th K Klx Kln?”

“I nvr hv.”

Hlms trnd ovr th lvs of th bk upn hs kn. “Hr it is,”
sd h prsntly:

“‘K Klx Kln. A nm drvd frm th fncfl rsmblnc t th
snd prdcd by cckng a rfl. Ths trrbl scrt scty ws
frmd by sm ex-Cnfdrt sldrs in th Sthrn stts aftr th
Cvl Wr, and it rpdly frmd lcl brnchs in dffrnt prts of
th cntry, ntbly in Tnnss, Lsn, th Crlns, Grg,
and Flrd. Its pwr ws usd fr pltcl prpss, prncplly fr
th trrrsng of th ngr vtrs and th mrdrng and drvng frm
th cntry of ths wh wr oppsd t its vws. Its otrgs wr
uslly prcdd by a wrnng snt t th mrkd mn in sm fntstc
bt gnrlly rcgnsd shp—a sprg of ok-lvs in sm prts,
mln sds or orng pps in othrs. On rcvng ths th vctm
mght ethr opnly abjr hs frmr wys, or mght fly frm th
cntry. If h brvd th mttr ot, dth wld unflngly cm upn
hm, and uslly in sm strng and unfrsn mnnr. S prfct ws
th orgnstn of th scty, and s systmtc its mthds, tht
thr is hrdly a cs upn rcrd whr any mn sccdd in brvng
it wth impnty, or in whch any of its otrgs wr trcd hm t
th prptrtrs. Fr sm yrs th orgnstn flrshd in spt
of th effrts of th Untd Stts gvrnmnt and of th bttr
clsss of th cmmnty in th Sth. Evntlly, in th yr 1869,
th mvmnt rthr sddnly cllpsd, althgh thr hv bn
sprdc otbrks of th sm srt snc tht dt.’

“Y wll obsrv,” sd Hlms, lyng dwn th vlm, “tht th
sddn brkng up of th scty ws cncdnt wth th dspprnc
of Opnshw frm Amrc wth thr pprs. It my wll hv bn cs
and effct. It is n wndr tht h and hs fmly hv sm of th
mr implcbl sprts upn thr trck. Y cn undrstnd tht ths
rgstr and dry my implct sm of th frst mn in th Sth,
and tht thr my b mny wh wll nt slp esy at nght untl it is
rcvrd.”

“Thn th pg w hv sn—”

“Is sch as w mght expct. It rn, if I rmmbr rght, ‘snt th
pps t A, B, and C’—tht is, snt th scty’s wrnng t thm. Thn
thr ar sccssv entrs tht A and B clrd, or lft th cntry,
and fnlly tht C ws vstd, wth, I fr, a snstr rslt fr C.
Wll, I thnk, Dctr, tht w my lt sm lght int ths drk plc,
and I blv tht th only chnc yng Opnshw hs in th mntm
is t d wht I hv tld hm. Thr is nthng mr t b sd or t
b dn t-nght, s hnd m ovr my vln and lt us try t frgt
fr hlf an hr th msrbl wthr and th stll mr msrbl
wys of or fllw mn.”

It hd clrd in th mrnng, and th sn ws shnng wth a sbdd
brghtnss thrgh th dm vl whch hngs ovr th grt cty.
Shrlck Hlms ws alrdy at brkfst whn I cm dwn.

“Y wll excs m fr nt wtng fr y,” sd h; “I hv, I
frs, a vry bsy dy bfr m in lkng int ths cs of yng
Opnshw’s.”

“Wht stps wll y tk?” I askd.

“It wll vry mch dpnd upn th rslts of my frst inqrs. I my
hv t g dwn t Hrshm, aftr all.”

“Y wll nt g thr frst?”

“N, I shll cmmnc wth th Cty. Jst rng th bll and th md
wll brng up yr cff.”

As I wtd, I lftd th unpnd nwsppr frm th tbl and glncd
my ey ovr it. It rstd upn a hdng whch snt a chll t my
hrt.

“Hlms,” I crd, “y ar t lt.”

“Ah!” sd h, lyng dwn hs cp, “I frd as mch. Hw ws it
dn?” H spk clmly, bt I cld s tht h ws dply mvd.

“My ey cght th nm of Opnshw, and th hdng ‘Trgdy Nr
Wtrl Brdg.’ Hr is th accnt:

“‘Btwn nn and tn lst nght Plc-Cnstbl Ck, of th H
Dvsn, on dty nr Wtrl Brdg, hrd a cry fr hlp and a
splsh in th wtr. Th nght, hwvr, ws extrmly drk and strmy,
s tht, in spt of th hlp of svrl pssrs-by, it ws qt
impssbl t effct a rsc. Th alrm, hwvr, ws gvn, and, by
th ad of th wtr-plc, th bdy ws evntlly rcvrd. It
prvd t b tht of a yng gntlmn whs nm, as it apprs frm
an envlp whch ws fnd in hs pckt, ws Jhn Opnshw, and whs
rsdnc is nr Hrshm. It is cnjctrd tht h my hv bn
hrryng dwn t ctch th lst trn frm Wtrl Sttn, and tht
in hs hst and th extrm drknss h mssd hs pth and wlkd
ovr th edg of on of th smll lndng-plcs fr rvr stmbts.
Th bdy exhbtd n trcs of vlnc, and thr cn b n dbt
tht th dcsd hd bn th vctm of an unfrtnt accdnt, whch
shld hv th effct of cllng th attntn of th athrts t
th cndtn of th rvrsd lndng-stgs.’”

W st in slnc fr sm mnts, Hlms mr dprssd and shkn
thn I hd evr sn hm.

“Tht hrts my prd, Wtsn,” h sd at lst. “It is a ptty flng,
n dbt, bt it hrts my prd. It bcms a prsnl mttr wth m
nw, and, if Gd snds m hlth, I shll st my hnd upn ths gng.
Tht h shld cm t m fr hlp, and tht I shld snd hm awy t
hs dth—!” H sprng frm hs chr and pcd abt th rm in
uncntrllbl agttn, wth a flsh upn hs sllw chks and a
nrvs clspng and unclspng of hs lng thn hnds.

“Thy mst b cnnng dvls,” h exclmd at lst. “Hw cld thy
hv dcyd hm dwn thr? Th Embnkmnt is nt on th drct ln
t th sttn. Th brdg, n dbt, ws t crwdd, evn on sch a
nght, fr thr prps. Wll, Wtsn, w shll s wh wll wn in
th lng rn. I am gng ot nw!”

“T th plc?”

“N; I shll b my own plc. Whn I hv spn th wb thy my tk
th fls, bt nt bfr.”

All dy I ws enggd in my prfssnl wrk, and it ws lt in th
evnng bfr I rtrnd t Bkr Strt. Shrlck Hlms hd nt cm
bck yt. It ws nrly tn o’clck bfr h entrd, lkng pl and
wrn. H wlkd up t th sdbrd, and trng a pc frm th lf
h dvrd it vrcsly, wshng it dwn wth a lng drght of
wtr.

“Y ar hngry,” I rmrkd.

“Strvng. It hd escpd my mmry. I hv hd nthng snc
brkfst.”

“Nthng?”

“Nt a bt. I hd n tm t thnk of it.”

“And hw hv y sccdd?”

“Wll.”

“Y hv a cl?”

“I hv thm in th hllw of my hnd. Yng Opnshw shll nt lng
rmn unvngd. Why, Wtsn, lt us pt thr own dvlsh trd-mrk
upn thm. It is wll thght of!”

“Wht d y mn?”

H tk an orng frm th cpbrd, and trng it t pcs h
sqzd ot th pps upn th tbl. Of ths h tk fv and thrst
thm int an envlp. On th insd of th flp h wrt “S. H. fr J.
O.” Thn h sld it and addrssd it t “Cptn Jms Clhn,
Brq _Ln Str_, Svnnh, Grg.”

“Tht wll awt hm whn h entrs prt,” sd h, chcklng. “It my
gv hm a slplss nght. H wll fnd it as sr a prcrsr of hs
ft as Opnshw dd bfr hm.”

“And wh is ths Cptn Clhn?”

“Th ldr of th gng. I shll hv th othrs, bt h frst.”

“Hw dd y trc it, thn?”

H tk a lrg sht of ppr frm hs pckt, all cvrd wth dts
and nms.

“I hv spnt th whl dy,” sd h, “ovr Llyd’s rgstrs and
fls of th old pprs, fllwng th ftr crr of evry vssl
whch tchd at Pndchrry in Jnry and Fbrry in ’83. Thr wr
thrty-sx shps of fr tnng whch wr rprtd thr drng ths
mnths. Of ths, on, th _Ln Str_, instntly attrctd my
attntn, snc, althgh it ws rprtd as hvng clrd frm
Lndn, th nm is tht whch is gvn t on of th stts of th
Unn.”

“Txs, I thnk.”

“I ws nt and am nt sr whch; bt I knw tht th shp mst hv an
Amrcn orgn.”

“Wht thn?”

“I srchd th Dnd rcrds, and whn I fnd tht th brq _Ln
Str_ ws thr in Jnry, ’85, my sspcn bcm a crtnty. I
thn inqrd as t th vssls whch ly at prsnt in th prt of
Lndn.”

“Ys?”

“Th _Ln Str_ hd arrvd hr lst wk. I wnt dwn t th Albrt
Dck and fnd tht sh hd bn tkn dwn th rvr by th erly td
ths mrnng, hmwrd bnd t Svnnh. I wrd t Grvsnd and
lrnd tht sh hd pssd sm tm ag, and as th wnd is estrly
I hv n dbt tht sh is nw pst th Gdwns and nt vry fr frm
th Isl of Wght.”

“Wht wll y d, thn?”

“Oh, I hv my hnd upn hm. H and th tw mts, ar as I lrn, th
only ntv-brn Amrcns in th shp. Th othrs ar Fnns and
Grmns. I knw, als, tht thy wr all thr awy frm th shp lst
nght. I hd it frm th stvdr wh hs bn ldng thr crg. By
th tm tht thr slng-shp rchs Svnnh th ml-bt wll
hv crrd ths lttr, and th cbl wll hv infrmd th plc
of Svnnh tht ths thr gntlmn ar bdly wntd hr upn a
chrg of mrdr.”

Thr is evr a flw, hwvr, in th bst ld of hmn plns, and th
mrdrrs of Jhn Opnshw wr nvr t rcv th orng pps whch
wld shw thm tht anthr, as cnnng and as rslt as thmslvs,
ws upn thr trck. Vry lng and vry svr wr th eqnctl
gls tht yr. W wtd lng fr nws of th _Ln Str_ of
Svnnh, bt nn evr rchd us. W dd at lst hr tht smwhr
fr ot in th Atlntc a shttrd strn-pst of a bt ws sn
swngng in th trgh of a wv, wth th lttrs “L. S.” crvd upn
it, and tht is all whch w shll evr knw of th ft of th _Ln
Str_.




V. TH MN WTH TH TWSTD LP


Is Whtny, brthr of th lt Els Whtny, D.D., Prncpl of th
Thlgcl Cllg of St. Grg’s, ws mch addctd t opm. Th
hbt grw upn hm, as I undrstnd, frm sm flsh frk whn h
ws at cllg; fr hvng rd D Qncy’s dscrptn of hs drms
and snstns, h hd drnchd hs tbcc wth ldnm in an attmpt
t prdc th sm effcts. H fnd, as s mny mr hv dn, tht
th prctc is esr t attn thn t gt rd of, and fr mny yrs
h cntnd t b a slv t th drg, an objct of mngld hrrr and
pty t hs frnds and rltvs. I cn s hm nw, wth yllw,
psty fc, drpng lds, and pn-pnt ppls, all hddld in a
chr, th wrck and rn of a nbl mn.

On nght—it ws in Jn, ’89—thr cm a rng t my bll, abt th
hr whn a mn gvs hs frst ywn and glncs at th clck. I st up
in my chr, and my wf ld hr ndl-wrk dwn in hr lp and md
a lttl fc of dsppntmnt.

“A ptnt!” sd sh. “Y’ll hv t g ot.”

I grnd, fr I ws nwly cm bck frm a wry dy.

W hrd th dr opn, a fw hrrd wrds, and thn qck stps upn
th lnlm. Or own dr flw opn, and a ldy, cld in sm
drk-clrd stff, wth a blck vl, entrd th rm.

“Y wll excs my cllng s lt,” sh bgn, and thn, sddnly
lsng hr slf-cntrl, sh rn frwrd, thrw hr arms abt my
wf’s nck, and sbbd upn hr shldr. “Oh, I’m in sch trbl!”
sh crd; “I d s wnt a lttl hlp.”

“Why,” sd my wf, pllng up hr vl, “it is Kt Whtny. Hw y
strtld m, Kt! I hd nt an id wh y wr whn y cm in.”

“I ddn’t knw wht t d, s I cm strght t y.” Tht ws alwys
th wy. Flk wh wr in grf cm t my wf lk brds t a
lghths.

“It ws vry swt of y t cm. Nw, y mst hv sm wn and
wtr, and st hr cmfrtbly and tll us all abt it. Or shld y
rthr tht I snt Jms off t bd?”

“Oh, n, n! I wnt th dctr’s advc and hlp, t. It’s abt Is.
H hs nt bn hm fr tw dys. I am s frghtnd abt hm!”

It ws nt th frst tm tht sh hd spkn t us of hr hsbnd’s
trbl, t m as a dctr, t my wf as an old frnd and schl
cmpnn. W sthd and cmfrtd hr by sch wrds as w cld fnd.
Dd sh knw whr hr hsbnd ws? Ws it pssbl tht w cld brng
hm bck t hr?

It sms tht it ws. Sh hd th srst infrmtn tht of lt h
hd, whn th ft ws on hm, md us of an opm dn in th frthst
est of th Cty. Hthrt hs orgs hd alwys bn cnfnd t on
dy, and h hd cm bck, twtchng and shttrd, in th evnng. Bt
nw th spll hd bn upn hm eght-and-frty hrs, and h ly
thr, dbtlss amng th drgs of th dcks, brthng in th psn
or slpng off th effcts. Thr h ws t b fnd, sh ws sr of
it, at th Br of Gld, in Uppr Swndm Ln. Bt wht ws sh t d?
Hw cld sh, a yng and tmd wmn, mk hr wy int sch a plc
and plck hr hsbnd ot frm amng th rffns wh srrndd hm?

Thr ws th cs, and of crs thr ws bt on wy ot of it.
Mght I nt escrt hr t ths plc? And thn, as a scnd thght,
why shld sh cm at all? I ws Is Whtny’s mdcl advsr, and as
sch I hd inflnc ovr hm. I cld mng it bttr if I wr
aln. I prmsd hr on my wrd tht I wld snd hm hm in a cb
wthn tw hrs if h wr indd at th addrss whch sh hd gvn
m. And s in tn mnts I hd lft my armchr and chry
sttng-rm bhnd m, and ws spdng estwrd in a hnsm on a
strng errnd, as it smd t m at th tm, thgh th ftr only
cld shw hw strng it ws t b.

Bt thr ws n grt dffclty in th frst stg of my advntr.
Uppr Swndm Ln is a vl ally lrkng bhnd th hgh whrvs
whch ln th nrth sd of th rvr t th est of Lndn Brdg.
Btwn a slp-shp and a gn-shp, apprchd by a stp flght of
stps ldng dwn t a blck gp lk th mth of a cv, I fnd th
dn of whch I ws in srch. Ordrng my cb t wt, I pssd dwn
th stps, wrn hllw in th cntr by th cslss trd of drnkn
ft; and by th lght of a flckrng ol-lmp abv th dr I fnd
th ltch and md my wy int a lng, lw rm, thck and hvy wth
th brwn opm smk, and trrcd wth wdn brths, lk th
frcstl of an emgrnt shp.

Thrgh th glm on cld dmly ctch a glmps of bds lyng in
strng fntstc pss, bwd shldrs, bnt kns, hds thrwn
bck, and chns pntng upwrd, wth hr and thr a drk,
lck-lstr ey trnd upn th nwcmr. Ot of th blck shdws
thr glmmrd lttl rd crcls of lght, nw brght, nw fnt, as
th brnng psn wxd or wnd in th bwls of th mtl pps. Th
mst ly slnt, bt sm mttrd t thmslvs, and othrs tlkd
tgthr in a strng, lw, mntns vc, thr cnvrstn cmng
in gshs, and thn sddnly tlng off int slnc, ech mmblng
ot hs own thghts and pyng lttl hd t th wrds of hs
nghbr. At th frthr end ws a smll brzr of brnng chrcl,
bsd whch on a thr-lggd wdn stl thr st a tll, thn old
mn, wth hs jw rstng upn hs tw fsts, and hs elbws upn hs
kns, strng int th fr.

As I entrd, a sllw Mly attndnt hd hrrd up wth a pp fr
m and a spply of th drg, bcknng m t an empty brth.

“Thnk y. I hv nt cm t sty,” sd I. “Thr is a frnd of
mn hr, Mr. Is Whtny, and I wsh t spk wth hm.”

Thr ws a mvmnt and an exclmtn frm my rght, and prng
thrgh th glm, I sw Whtny, pl, hggrd, and unkmpt, strng
ot at m.

“My Gd! It’s Wtsn,” sd h. H ws in a ptbl stt of rctn,
wth evry nrv in a twttr. “I sy, Wtsn, wht o’clck is it?”

“Nrly elvn.”

“Of wht dy?”

“Of Frdy, Jn 19th.”

“Gd hvns! I thght it ws Wdnsdy. It is Wdnsdy. Wht d’y
wnt t frghtn a chp fr?” H snk hs fc ont hs arms and bgn
t sb in a hgh trbl ky.

“I tll y tht it is Frdy, mn. Yr wf hs bn wtng ths tw
dys fr y. Y shld b ashmd of yrslf!”

“S I am. Bt y’v gt mxd, Wtsn, fr I hv only bn hr a fw
hrs, thr pps, fr pps—I frgt hw mny. Bt I’ll g hm wth
y. I wldn’t frghtn Kt—pr lttl Kt. Gv m yr hnd! Hv
y a cb?”

“Ys, I hv on wtng.”

“Thn I shll g in it. Bt I mst ow smthng. Fnd wht I ow,
Wtsn. I am all off clr. I cn d nthng fr myslf.”

I wlkd dwn th nrrw pssg btwn th dbl rw of slprs,
hldng my brth t kp ot th vl, stpfyng fms of th drg,
and lkng abt fr th mngr. As I pssd th tll mn wh st by
th brzr I flt a sddn plck at my skrt, and a lw vc
whsprd, “Wlk pst m, and thn lk bck at m.” Th wrds fll
qt dstnctly upn my er. I glncd dwn. Thy cld only hv cm
frm th old mn at my sd, and yt h st nw as absrbd as evr,
vry thn, vry wrnkld, bnt wth ag, an opm pp dnglng dwn
frm btwn hs kns, as thgh it hd drppd in shr lsstd
frm hs fngrs. I tk tw stps frwrd and lkd bck. It tk all
my slf-cntrl t prvnt m frm brkng ot int a cry of
astnshmnt. H hd trnd hs bck s tht nn cld s hm bt I.
Hs frm hd flld ot, hs wrnkls wr gn, th dll eys hd
rgnd thr fr, and thr, sttng by th fr and grnnng at my
srprs, ws nn othr thn Shrlck Hlms. H md a slght mtn
t m t apprch hm, and instntly, as h trnd hs fc hlf rnd
t th cmpny onc mr, sbsdd int a dddrng, ls-lppd
snlty.

“Hlms!” I whsprd, “wht on erth ar y dng in ths dn?”

“As lw as y cn,” h answrd; “I hv excllnt ers. If y wld
hv th grt kndnss t gt rd of tht sttsh frnd of yrs I
shld b excdngly gld t hv a lttl tlk wth y.”

“I hv a cb otsd.”

“Thn pry snd hm hm in it. Y my sfly trst hm, fr h
apprs t b t lmp t gt int any mschf. I shld rcmmnd y
als t snd a nt by th cbmn t yr wf t sy tht y hv
thrwn in yr lt wth m. If y wll wt otsd, I shll b wth
y in fv mnts.”

It ws dffclt t rfs any of Shrlck Hlms’ rqsts, fr thy
wr alwys s excdngly dfnt, and pt frwrd wth sch a qt
ar of mstry. I flt, hwvr, tht whn Whtny ws onc cnfnd in
th cb my mssn ws prctclly accmplshd; and fr th rst, I
cld nt wsh anythng bttr thn t b assctd wth my frnd in
on of ths snglr advntrs whch wr th nrml cndtn of hs
exstnc. In a fw mnts I hd wrttn my nt, pd Whtny’s bll,
ld hm ot t th cb, and sn hm drvn thrgh th drknss. In a
vry shrt tm a dcrpt fgr hd emrgd frm th opm dn, and I
ws wlkng dwn th strt wth Shrlck Hlms. Fr tw strts h
shffld alng wth a bnt bck and an uncrtn ft. Thn, glncng
qckly rnd, h strghtnd hmslf ot and brst int a hrty ft
of lghtr.

“I spps, Wtsn,” sd h, “tht y imgn tht I hv addd
opm-smkng t ccn injctns, and all th othr lttl
wknsss on whch y hv fvrd m wth yr mdcl vws.”

“I ws crtnly srprsd t fnd y thr.”

“Bt nt mr s thn I t fnd y.”

“I cm t fnd a frnd.”

“And I t fnd an enmy.”

“An enmy?”

“Ys; on of my ntrl enms, or, shll I sy, my ntrl pry.
Brfly, Wtsn, I am in th mdst of a vry rmrkbl inqry, and I
hv hpd t fnd a cl in th inchrnt rmblngs of ths sts, as
I hv dn bfr nw. Hd I bn rcgnsd in tht dn my lf wld
nt hv bn wrth an hr’s prchs; fr I hv usd it bfr nw
fr my own prpss, and th rsclly Lscr wh rns it hs swrn t
hv vngnc upn m. Thr is a trp-dr at th bck of tht
bldng, nr th crnr of Pl’s Whrf, whch cld tll sm
strng tls of wht hs pssd thrgh it upn th mnlss nghts.”

“Wht! Y d nt mn bds?”

“Ay, bds, Wtsn. W shld b rch mn if w hd £ 1000 fr evry
pr dvl wh hs bn dn t dth in tht dn. It is th vlst
mrdr-trp on th whl rvrsd, and I fr tht Nvll St. Clr
hs entrd it nvr t lv it mr. Bt or trp shld b hr.” H
pt hs tw frfngrs btwn hs tth and whstld shrlly—a sgnl
whch ws answrd by a smlr whstl frm th dstnc, fllwd
shrtly by th rttl of whls and th clnk of hrss’ hfs.

“Nw, Wtsn,” sd Hlms, as a tll dg-crt dshd up thrgh th
glm, thrwng ot tw gldn tnnls of yllw lght frm its sd
lntrns. “Y’ll cm wth m, wn’t y?”

“If I cn b of us.”

“Oh, a trsty cmrd is alwys of us; and a chrnclr stll mr s.
My rm at Th Cdrs is a dbl-bddd on.”

“Th Cdrs?”

“Ys; tht is Mr. St. Clr’s hs. I am styng thr whl I cndct
th inqry.”

“Whr is it, thn?”

“Nr L, in Knt. W hv a svn-ml drv bfr us.”

“Bt I am all in th drk.”

“Of crs y ar. Y’ll knw all abt it prsntly. Jmp up hr.
All rght, Jhn; w shll nt nd y. Hr’s hlf a crwn. Lk ot
fr m t-mrrw, abt elvn. Gv hr hr hd. S lng, thn!”

H flckd th hrs wth hs whp, and w dshd awy thrgh th
endlss sccssn of smbr and dsrtd strts, whch wdnd
grdlly, untl w wr flyng acrss a brd blstrdd brdg, wth
th mrky rvr flwng slggshly bnth us. Bynd ly anthr dll
wldrnss of brcks and mrtr, its slnc brkn only by th hvy,
rglr ftfll of th plcmn, or th sngs and shts of sm
bltd prty of rvllrs. A dll wrck ws drftng slwly acrss th
sky, and a str or tw twnkld dmly hr and thr thrgh th rfts
of th clds. Hlms drv in slnc, wth hs hd snk upn hs
brst, and th ar of a mn wh is lst in thght, whl I st bsd
hm, crs t lrn wht ths nw qst mght b whch smd t tx
hs pwrs s srly, and yt afrd t brk in upn th crrnt of
hs thghts. W hd drvn svrl mls, and wr bgnnng t gt t
th frng of th blt of sbrbn vlls, whn h shk hmslf,
shrggd hs shldrs, and lt up hs pp wth th ar of a mn wh
hs stsfd hmslf tht h is actng fr th bst.

“Y hv a grnd gft of slnc, Wtsn,” sd h. “It mks y
qt invlbl as a cmpnn. ’Pn my wrd, it is a grt thng fr
m t hv smn t tlk t, fr my own thghts ar nt
ovr-plsnt. I ws wndrng wht I shld sy t ths dr lttl
wmn t-nght whn sh mts m at th dr.”

“Y frgt tht I knw nthng abt it.”

“I shll jst hv tm t tll y th fcts of th cs bfr w gt
t L. It sms absrdly smpl, and yt, smhw I cn gt nthng t
g upn. Thr’s plnty of thrd, n dbt, bt I cn’t gt th end of
it int my hnd. Nw, I’ll stt th cs clrly and cncsly t y,
Wtsn, and myb y cn s a sprk whr all is drk t m.”

“Prcd, thn.”

“Sm yrs ag—t b dfnt, in My, 1884—thr cm t L a
gntlmn, Nvll St. Clr by nm, wh apprd t hv plnty of
mny. H tk a lrg vll, ld ot th grnds vry ncly, and
lvd gnrlly in gd styl. By dgrs h md frnds in th
nghbrhd, and in 1887 h mrrd th dghtr of a lcl brwr,
by whm h nw hs tw chldrn. H hd n occptn, bt ws
intrstd in svrl cmpns and wnt int twn as a rl in th
mrnng, rtrnng by th 5:14 frm Cnnn Strt evry nght. Mr. St.
Clr is nw thrty-svn yrs of ag, is a mn of tmprt hbts, a
gd hsbnd, a vry affctnt fthr, and a mn wh is pplr wth
all wh knw hm. I my add tht hs whl dbts at th prsnt mmnt,
as fr as w hv bn abl t ascrtn, amnt t £ 88 10_s_., whl
h hs £ 220 stndng t hs crdt in th Cptl and Cnts Bnk.
Thr is n rsn, thrfr, t thnk tht mny trbls hv bn
wghng upn hs mnd.

“Lst Mndy Mr. Nvll St. Clr wnt int twn rthr erlr thn
usl, rmrkng bfr h strtd tht h hd tw imprtnt
cmmssns t prfrm, and tht h wld brng hs lttl by hm a
bx of brcks. Nw, by th mrst chnc, hs wf rcvd a tlgrm
upn ths sm Mndy, vry shrtly aftr hs dprtr, t th effct
tht a smll prcl of cnsdrbl vl whch sh hd bn expctng
ws wtng fr hr at th offcs of th Abrdn Shppng Cmpny.
Nw, if y ar wll up in yr Lndn, y wll knw tht th offc
of th cmpny is in Frsn Strt, whch brnchs ot of Uppr Swndm
Ln, whr y fnd m t-nght. Mrs. St. Clr hd hr lnch,
strtd fr th Cty, dd sm shppng, prcdd t th cmpny’s
offc, gt hr pckt, and fnd hrslf at exctly 4:35 wlkng
thrgh Swndm Ln on hr wy bck t th sttn. Hv y fllwd
m s fr?”

“It is vry clr.”

“If y rmmbr, Mndy ws an excdngly ht dy, and Mrs. St. Clr
wlkd slwly, glncng abt in th hp of sng a cb, as sh dd
nt lk th nghbrhd in whch sh fnd hrslf. Whl sh ws
wlkng in ths wy dwn Swndm Ln, sh sddnly hrd an
ejcltn or cry, and ws strck cld t s hr hsbnd lkng dwn
at hr and, as it smd t hr, bcknng t hr frm a scnd-flr
wndw. Th wndw ws opn, and sh dstnctly sw hs fc, whch sh
dscrbs as bng trrbly agttd. H wvd hs hnds frntclly t
hr, and thn vnshd frm th wndw s sddnly tht it smd t
hr tht h hd bn plckd bck by sm irrsstbl frc frm
bhnd. On snglr pnt whch strck hr qck fmnn ey ws tht
althgh h wr sm drk ct, sch as h hd strtd t twn in, h
hd on nthr cllr nr nckt.

“Cnvncd tht smthng ws amss wth hm, sh rshd dwn th
stps—fr th hs ws nn othr thn th opm dn in whch y
fnd m t-nght—and rnnng thrgh th frnt rm sh attmptd t
ascnd th strs whch ld t th frst flr. At th ft of th
strs, hwvr, sh mt ths Lscr scndrl of whm I hv spkn,
wh thrst hr bck and, add by a Dn, wh acts as assstnt thr,
pshd hr ot int th strt. Flld wth th mst mddnng dbts
and frs, sh rshd dwn th ln and, by rr gd-frtn, mt in
Frsn Strt a nmbr of cnstbls wth an inspctr, all on thr
wy t thr bt. Th inspctr and tw mn accmpnd hr bck, and
in spt of th cntnd rsstnc of th prprtr, thy md thr
wy t th rm in whch Mr. St. Clr hd lst bn sn. Thr ws n
sgn of hm thr. In fct, in th whl of tht flr thr ws n on
t b fnd sv a crppld wrtch of hds aspct, wh, it sms,
md hs hm thr. Bth h and th Lscr sttly swr tht n on
els hd bn in th frnt rm drng th aftrnn. S dtrmnd ws
thr dnl tht th inspctr ws stggrd, and hd almst cm t
blv tht Mrs. St. Clr hd bn dldd whn, wth a cry, sh
sprng at a smll dl bx whch ly upn th tbl and tr th ld
frm it. Ot thr fll a cscd of chldrn’s brcks. It ws th ty
whch h hd prmsd t brng hm.

“Ths dscvry, and th evdnt cnfsn whch th crppl shwd,
md th inspctr rls tht th mttr ws srs. Th rms wr
crflly exmnd, and rslts all pntd t an abmnbl crm. Th
frnt rm ws plnly frnshd as a sttng-rm and ld int a smll
bdrm, whch lkd ot upn th bck of on of th whrvs. Btwn
th whrf and th bdrm wndw is a nrrw strp, whch is dry at lw
td bt is cvrd at hgh td wth at lst fr and a hlf ft of
wtr. Th bdrm wndw ws a brd on and opnd frm blw. On
exmntn trcs of bld wr t b sn upn th wndwsll, and
svrl scttrd drps wr vsbl upn th wdn flr of th
bdrm. Thrst awy bhnd a crtn in th frnt rm wr all th
clths of Mr. Nvll St. Clr, wth th excptn of hs ct. Hs
bts, hs scks, hs ht, and hs wtch—all wr thr. Thr wr n
sgns of vlnc upn any of ths grmnts, and thr wr n othr
trcs of Mr. Nvll St. Clr. Ot of th wndw h mst apprntly
hv gn fr n othr ext cld b dscvrd, and th omns
bldstns upn th sll gv lttl prms tht h cld sv
hmslf by swmmng, fr th td ws at its vry hghst at th mmnt
of th trgdy.

“And nw as t th vllns wh smd t b immdtly implctd in
th mttr. Th Lscr ws knwn t b a mn of th vlst antcdnts,
bt as, by Mrs. St. Clr’s stry, h ws knwn t hv bn at th
ft of th str wthn a vry fw scnds of hr hsbnd’s apprnc
at th wndw, h cld hrdly hv bn mr thn an accssry t th
crm. Hs dfnc ws on of abslt ignrnc, and h prtstd tht
h hd n knwldg as t th dngs of Hgh Bn, hs ldgr, and
tht h cld nt accnt in any wy fr th prsnc of th mssng
gntlmn’s clths.

“S mch fr th Lscr mngr. Nw fr th snstr crppl wh lvs
upn th scnd flr of th opm dn, and wh ws crtnly th lst
hmn bng whs eys rstd upn Nvll St. Clr. Hs nm is Hgh
Bn, and hs hds fc is on whch is fmlr t evry mn wh
gs mch t th Cty. H is a prfssnl bggr, thgh in ordr t
avd th plc rgltns h prtnds t a smll trd in wx
vsts. Sm lttl dstnc dwn Thrdndl Strt, upn th
lft-hnd sd, thr is, as y my hv rmrkd, a smll angl in
th wll. Hr it is tht ths crtr tks hs dly st,
crss-lggd wth hs tny stck of mtchs on hs lp, and as h is a
pts spctcl a smll rn of chrty dscnds int th grsy
lthr cp whch ls upn th pvmnt bsd hm. I hv wtchd th
fllw mr thn onc bfr evr I thght of mkng hs prfssnl
acqntnc, and I hv bn srprsd at th hrvst whch h hs
rpd in a shrt tm. Hs apprnc, y s, is s rmrkbl tht
n on cn pss hm wtht obsrvng hm. A shck of orng hr, a
pl fc dsfgrd by a hrrbl scr, whch, by its cntrctn, hs
trnd up th otr edg of hs uppr lp, a blldg chn, and a pr
of vry pntrtng drk eys, whch prsnt a snglr cntrst t th
clr of hs hr, all mrk hm ot frm amd th cmmn crwd of
mndcnts and s, t, ds hs wt, fr h is evr rdy wth a rply
t any pc of chff whch my b thrwn at hm by th pssrs-by.
Ths is th mn whm w nw lrn t hv bn th ldgr at th opm
dn, and t hv bn th lst mn t s th gntlmn of whm w ar
in qst.”

“Bt a crppl!” sd I. “Wht cld h hv dn sngl-hndd agnst
a mn in th prm of lf?”

“H is a crppl in th sns tht h wlks wth a lmp; bt in othr
rspcts h apprs t b a pwrfl and wll-nrtrd mn. Srly yr
mdcl exprnc wld tll y, Wtsn, tht wknss in on lmb is
oftn cmpnstd fr by excptnl strngth in th othrs.”

“Pry cntn yr nrrtv.”

“Mrs. St. Clr hd fntd at th sght of th bld upn th wndw,
and sh ws escrtd hm in a cb by th plc, as hr prsnc cld
b of n hlp t thm in thr invstgtns. Inspctr Brtn, wh
hd chrg of th cs, md a vry crfl exmntn of th
prmss, bt wtht fndng anythng whch thrw any lght upn th
mttr. On mstk hd bn md in nt arrstng Bn instntly, as
h ws allwd sm fw mnts drng whch h mght hv cmmnctd
wth hs frnd th Lscr, bt ths flt ws sn rmdd, and h
ws szd and srchd, wtht anythng bng fnd whch cld
incrmnt hm. Thr wr, it is tr, sm bld-stns upn hs
rght shrt-slv, bt h pntd t hs rng-fngr, whch hd bn
ct nr th nl, and explnd tht th bldng cm frm thr,
addng tht h hd bn t th wndw nt lng bfr, and tht th
stns whch hd bn obsrvd thr cm dbtlss frm th sm
src. H dnd strnsly hvng evr sn Mr. Nvll St. Clr
and swr tht th prsnc of th clths in hs rm ws as mch a
mystry t hm as t th plc. As t Mrs. St. Clr’s assrtn tht
sh hd actlly sn hr hsbnd at th wndw, h dclrd tht sh
mst hv bn ethr md or drmng. H ws rmvd, ldly
prtstng, t th plc-sttn, whl th inspctr rmnd upn
th prmss in th hp tht th ebbng td mght affrd sm frsh
cl.

“And it dd, thgh thy hrdly fnd upn th md-bnk wht thy hd
frd t fnd. It ws Nvll St. Clr’s ct, and nt Nvll St.
Clr, whch ly uncvrd as th td rcdd. And wht d y thnk
thy fnd in th pckts?”

“I cnnt imgn.”

“N, I dn’t thnk y wld gss. Evry pckt stffd wth pnns
and hlf-pnns—421 pnns and 270 hlf-pnns. It ws n wndr
tht it hd nt bn swpt awy by th td. Bt a hmn bdy is a
dffrnt mttr. Thr is a frc eddy btwn th whrf and th
hs. It smd lkly engh tht th wghtd ct hd rmnd whn
th strppd bdy hd bn sckd awy int th rvr.”

“Bt I undrstnd tht all th othr clths wr fnd in th rm.
Wld th bdy b drssd in a ct aln?”

“N, sr, bt th fcts mght b mt spcsly engh. Spps tht
ths mn Bn hd thrst Nvll St. Clr thrgh th wndw, thr
is n hmn ey whch cld hv sn th dd. Wht wld h d thn?
It wld of crs instntly strk hm tht h mst gt rd of th
tll-tl grmnts. H wld sz th ct, thn, and b in th act of
thrwng it ot, whn it wld occr t hm tht it wld swm and nt
snk. H hs lttl tm, fr h hs hrd th scffl dwnstrs whn
th wf trd t frc hr wy up, and prhps h hs alrdy hrd
frm hs Lscr cnfdrt tht th plc ar hrryng up th strt.
Thr is nt an instnt t b lst. H rshs t sm scrt hrd,
whr h hs accmltd th frts of hs bggry, and h stffs all
th cns upn whch h cn ly hs hnds int th pckts t mk sr
of th ct’s snkng. H thrws it ot, and wld hv dn th sm
wth th othr grmnts hd nt h hrd th rsh of stps blw, and
only jst hd tm t cls th wndw whn th plc apprd.”

“It crtnly snds fsbl.”

“Wll, w wll tk it as a wrkng hypthss fr wnt of a bttr.
Bn, as I hv tld y, ws arrstd and tkn t th sttn, bt
it cld nt b shwn tht thr hd evr bfr bn anythng agnst
hm. H hd fr yrs bn knwn as a prfssnl bggr, bt hs lf
apprd t hv bn a vry qt and inncnt on. Thr th mttr
stnds at prsnt, and th qstns whch hv t b slvd—wht
Nvll St. Clr ws dng in th opm dn, wht hppnd t hm whn
thr, whr is h nw, and wht Hgh Bn hd t d wth hs
dspprnc—ar all as fr frm a sltn as evr. I cnfss tht I
cnnt rcll any cs wthn my exprnc whch lkd at th frst
glnc s smpl and yt whch prsntd sch dffclts.”

Whl Shrlck Hlms hd bn dtlng ths snglr srs of
evnts, w hd bn whrlng thrgh th otskrts of th grt twn
untl th lst strgglng hss hd bn lft bhnd, and w rttld
alng wth a cntry hdg upn ethr sd of us. Jst as h fnshd,
hwvr, w drv thrgh tw scttrd vllgs, whr a fw lghts
stll glmmrd in th wndws.

“W ar on th otskrts of L,” sd my cmpnn. “W hv tchd
on thr Englsh cnts in or shrt drv, strtng in Mddlsx,
pssng ovr an angl of Srry, and endng in Knt. S tht lght
amng th trs? Tht is Th Cdrs, and bsd tht lmp sts a wmn
whs anxs ers hv alrdy, I hv lttl dbt, cght th clnk
of or hrs’s ft.”

“Bt why ar y nt cndctng th cs frm Bkr Strt?” I askd.

“Bcs thr ar mny inqrs whch mst b md ot hr. Mrs. St.
Clr hs mst kndly pt tw rms at my dspsl, and y my rst
assrd tht sh wll hv nthng bt a wlcm fr my frnd and
cllg. I ht t mt hr, Wtsn, whn I hv n nws of hr
hsbnd. Hr w ar. Wh, thr, wh!”

W hd plld up in frnt of a lrg vll whch std wthn its own
grnds. A stbl-by hd rn ot t th hrs’s hd, and sprngng
dwn, I fllwd Hlms up th smll, wndng grvl-drv whch ld t
th hs. As w apprchd, th dr flw opn, and a lttl blnd
wmn std in th opnng, cld in sm srt of lght mssln d
s, wth a tch of flffy pnk chffn at hr nck and wrsts. Sh
std wth hr fgr otlnd agnst th fld of lght, on hnd
upn th dr, on hlf-rsd in hr egrnss, hr bdy slghtly
bnt, hr hd and fc prtrdd, wth egr eys and prtd lps, a
stndng qstn.

“Wll?” sh crd, “wll?” And thn, sng tht thr wr tw of us,
sh gv a cry of hp whch snk int a grn as sh sw tht my
cmpnn shk hs hd and shrggd hs shldrs.

“N gd nws?”

“Nn.”

“N bd?”

“N.”

“Thnk Gd fr tht. Bt cm in. Y mst b wry, fr y hv hd a
lng dy.”

“Ths is my frnd, Dr. Wtsn. H hs bn of mst vtl us t m in
svrl of my css, and a lcky chnc hs md it pssbl fr m t
brng hm ot and assct hm wth ths invstgtn.”

“I am dlghtd t s y,” sd sh, prssng my hnd wrmly. “Y
wll, I am sr, frgv anythng tht my b wntng in or
arrngmnts, whn y cnsdr th blw whch hs cm s sddnly
upn us.”

“My dr mdm,” sd I, “I am an old cmpgnr, and if I wr nt I
cn vry wll s tht n aplgy is ndd. If I cn b of any
assstnc, ethr t y or t my frnd hr, I shll b indd
hppy.”

“Nw, Mr. Shrlck Hlms,” sd th ldy as w entrd a wll-lt
dnng-rm, upn th tbl of whch a cld sppr hd bn ld ot,
“I shld vry mch lk t ask y on or tw pln qstns, t
whch I bg tht y wll gv a pln answr.”

“Crtnly, mdm.”

“D nt trbl abt my flngs. I am nt hystrcl, nr gvn t
fntng. I smply wsh t hr yr rl, rl opnn.”

“Upn wht pnt?”

“In yr hrt of hrts, d y thnk tht Nvll is alv?”

Shrlck Hlms smd t b embrrssd by th qstn. “Frnkly,
nw!” sh rptd, stndng upn th rg and lkng knly dwn at
hm as h lnd bck in a bskt-chr.

“Frnkly, thn, mdm, I d nt.”

“Y thnk tht h is dd?”

“I d.”

“Mrdrd?”

“I dn’t sy tht. Prhps.”

“And on wht dy dd h mt hs dth?”

“On Mndy.”

“Thn prhps, Mr. Hlms, y wll b gd engh t expln hw it is
tht I hv rcvd a lttr frm hm t-dy.”

Shrlck Hlms sprng ot of hs chr as if h hd bn glvnsd.

“Wht!” h rrd.

“Ys, t-dy.” Sh std smlng, hldng up a lttl slp of ppr in
th ar.

“My I s it?”

“Crtnly.”

H sntchd it frm hr in hs egrnss, and smthng it ot upn th
tbl h drw ovr th lmp and exmnd it intntly. I hd lft my
chr and ws gzng at it ovr hs shldr. Th envlp ws a vry
crs on and ws stmpd wth th Grvsnd pstmrk and wth th
dt of tht vry dy, or rthr of th dy bfr, fr it ws
cnsdrbly aftr mdnght.

“Crs wrtng,” mrmrd Hlms. “Srly ths is nt yr hsbnd’s
wrtng, mdm.”

“N, bt th enclsr is.”

“I prcv als tht whvr addrssd th envlp hd t g and
inqr as t th addrss.”

“Hw cn y tll tht?”

“Th nm, y s, is in prfctly blck ink, whch hs drd itslf.
Th rst is of th grysh clr, whch shws tht blttng-ppr hs
bn usd. If it hd bn wrttn strght off, and thn blttd, nn
wld b of a dp blck shd. Ths mn hs wrttn th nm, and
thr hs thn bn a ps bfr h wrt th addrss, whch cn only
mn tht h ws nt fmlr wth it. It is, of crs, a trfl, bt
thr is nthng s imprtnt as trfls. Lt us nw s th lttr.
H! thr hs bn an enclsr hr!”

“Ys, thr ws a rng. Hs sgnt-rng.”

“And y ar sr tht ths is yr hsbnd’s hnd?”

“On of hs hnds.”

“On?”

“Hs hnd whn h wrt hrrdly. It is vry unlk hs usl wrtng,
and yt I knw it wll.”

“‘Drst d nt b frghtnd. All wll cm wll. Thr is a hg
errr whch it my tk sm lttl tm t rctfy. Wt in
ptnc.—NVLL.’ Wrttn in pncl upn th fly-lf of a bk,
octv sz, n wtr-mrk. Hm! Pstd t-dy in Grvsnd by a mn
wth a drty thmb. H! And th flp hs bn gmmd, if I am nt vry
mch in errr, by a prsn wh hd bn chwng tbcc. And y hv
n dbt tht it is yr hsbnd’s hnd, mdm?”

“Nn. Nvll wrt ths wrds.”

“And thy wr pstd t-dy at Grvsnd. Wll, Mrs. St. Clr, th
clds lghtn, thgh I shld nt vntr t sy tht th dngr is
ovr.”

“Bt h mst b alv, Mr. Hlms.”

“Unlss ths is a clvr frgry t pt us on th wrng scnt. Th
rng, aftr all, prvs nthng. It my hv bn tkn frm hm.”

“N, n; it is, it is hs vry own wrtng!”

“Vry wll. It my, hwvr, hv bn wrttn on Mndy and only
pstd t-dy.”

“Tht is pssbl.”

“If s, mch my hv hppnd btwn.”

“Oh, y mst nt dscrg m, Mr. Hlms. I knw tht all is wll
wth hm. Thr is s kn a sympthy btwn us tht I shld knw if
evl cm upn hm. On th vry dy tht I sw hm lst h ct hmslf
in th bdrm, and yt I in th dnng-rm rshd upstrs instntly
wth th utmst crtnty tht smthng hd hppnd. D y thnk
tht I wld rspnd t sch a trfl and yt b ignrnt of hs
dth?”

“I hv sn t mch nt t knw tht th imprssn of a wmn my b
mr vlbl thn th cnclsn of an anlytcl rsnr. And in
ths lttr y crtnly hv a vry strng pc of evdnc t
crrbrt yr vw. Bt if yr hsbnd is alv and abl t wrt
lttrs, why shld h rmn awy frm y?”

“I cnnt imgn. It is unthnkbl.”

“And on Mndy h md n rmrks bfr lvng y?”

“N.”

“And y wr srprsd t s hm in Swndm Ln?”

“Vry mch s.”

“Ws th wndw opn?”

“Ys.”

“Thn h mght hv clld t y?”

“H mght.”

“H only, as I undrstnd, gv an inrtclt cry?”

“Ys.”

“A cll fr hlp, y thght?”

“Ys. H wvd hs hnds.”

“Bt it mght hv bn a cry of srprs. Astnshmnt at th
unxpctd sght of y mght cs hm t thrw up hs hnds?”

“It is pssbl.”

“And y thght h ws plld bck?”

“H dspprd s sddnly.”

“H mght hv lpd bck. Y dd nt s anyn els in th rm?”

“N, bt ths hrrbl mn cnfssd t hvng bn thr, and th
Lscr ws at th ft of th strs.”

“Qt s. Yr hsbnd, as fr as y cld s, hd hs ordnry
clths on?”

“Bt wtht hs cllr or t. I dstnctly sw hs br thrt.”

“Hd h evr spkn of Swndm Ln?”

“Nvr.”

“Hd h evr shwd any sgns of hvng tkn opm?”

“Nvr.”

“Thnk y, Mrs. St. Clr. Ths ar th prncpl pnts abt whch
I wshd t b absltly clr. W shll nw hv a lttl sppr and
thn rtr, fr w my hv a vry bsy dy t-mrrw.”

A lrg and cmfrtbl dbl-bddd rm hd bn plcd at or
dspsl, and I ws qckly btwn th shts, fr I ws wry aftr
my nght of advntr. Shrlck Hlms ws a mn, hwvr, wh, whn h
hd an unslvd prblm upn hs mnd, wld g fr dys, and evn fr
a wk, wtht rst, trnng it ovr, rrrngng hs fcts, lkng
at it frm evry pnt of vw untl h hd ethr fthmd it or
cnvncd hmslf tht hs dt wr insffcnt. It ws sn evdnt
t m tht h ws nw prprng fr an all-nght sttng. H tk off
hs ct and wstct, pt on a lrg bl drssng-gwn, and thn
wndrd abt th rm cllctng pllws frm hs bd and cshns
frm th sf and armchrs. Wth ths h cnstrctd a srt of
Estrn dvn, upn whch h prchd hmslf crss-lggd, wth an
onc of shg tbcc and a bx of mtchs ld ot in frnt of hm. In
th dm lght of th lmp I sw hm sttng thr, an old brr pp
btwn hs lps, hs eys fxd vcntly upn th crnr of th
clng, th bl smk crlng up frm hm, slnt, mtnlss, wth
th lght shnng upn hs strng-st aqln ftrs. S h st as I
drppd off t slp, and s h st whn a sddn ejcltn csd m
t wk up, and I fnd th smmr sn shnng int th aprtmnt. Th
pp ws stll btwn hs lps, th smk stll crld upwrd, and th
rm ws fll of a dns tbcc hz, bt nthng rmnd of th hp
of shg whch I hd sn upn th prvs nght.

“Awk, Wtsn?” h askd.

“Ys.”

“Gm fr a mrnng drv?”

“Crtnly.”

“Thn drss. N on is strrng yt, bt I knw whr th stbl-by
slps, and w shll sn hv th trp ot.” H chckld t hmslf as
h spk, hs eys twnkld, and h smd a dffrnt mn t th
smbr thnkr of th prvs nght.

As I drssd I glncd at my wtch. It ws n wndr tht n on ws
strrng. It ws twnty-fv mnts pst fr. I hd hrdly fnshd
whn Hlms rtrnd wth th nws tht th by ws pttng in th
hrs.

“I wnt t tst a lttl thry of mn,” sd h, pllng on hs
bts. “I thnk, Wtsn, tht y ar nw stndng in th prsnc of
on of th mst abslt fls in Erp. I dsrv t b kckd frm
hr t Chrng Crss. Bt I thnk I hv th ky of th affr nw.”

“And whr is it?” I askd, smlng.

“In th bthrm,” h answrd. “Oh, ys, I am nt jkng,” h
cntnd, sng my lk of incrdlty. “I hv jst bn thr, and
I hv tkn it ot, and I hv gt it in ths Gldstn bg. Cm on,
my by, and w shll s whthr it wll nt ft th lck.”

W md or wy dwnstrs as qtly as pssbl, and ot int th
brght mrnng snshn. In th rd std or hrs and trp, wth th
hlf-cld stbl-by wtng at th hd. W bth sprng in, and awy
w dshd dwn th Lndn Rd. A fw cntry crts wr strrng,
brng in vgtbls t th mtrpls, bt th lns of vlls on
ethr sd wr as slnt and lflss as sm cty in a drm.

“It hs bn in sm pnts a snglr cs,” sd Hlms, flckng th
hrs on int a gllp. “I cnfss tht I hv bn as blnd as a ml,
bt it is bttr t lrn wsdm lt thn nvr t lrn it at all.”

In twn th erlst rsrs wr jst bgnnng t lk slply frm
thr wndws as w drv thrgh th strts of th Srry sd.
Pssng dwn th Wtrl Brdg Rd w crssd ovr th rvr, and
dshng up Wllngtn Strt whld shrply t th rght and fnd
orslvs in Bw Strt. Shrlck Hlms ws wll knwn t th frc,
and th tw cnstbls at th dr sltd hm. On of thm hld th
hrs’s hd whl th othr ld us in.

“Wh is on dty?” askd Hlms.

“Inspctr Brdstrt, sr.”

“Ah, Brdstrt, hw ar y?” A tll, stt offcl hd cm dwn th
stn-flggd pssg, in a pkd cp and frggd jckt. “I wsh t
hv a qt wrd wth y, Brdstrt.”

“Crtnly, Mr. Hlms. Stp int my rm hr.”

It ws a smll, offc-lk rm, wth a hg ldgr upn th tbl,
and a tlphn prjctng frm th wll. Th inspctr st dwn at hs
dsk.

“Wht cn I d fr y, Mr. Hlms?”

“I clld abt tht bggrmn, Bn—th on wh ws chrgd wth
bng cncrnd in th dspprnc of Mr. Nvll St. Clr, of L.”

“Ys. H ws brght up and rmndd fr frthr inqrs.”

“S I hrd. Y hv hm hr?”

“In th clls.”

“Is h qt?”

“Oh, h gvs n trbl. Bt h is a drty scndrl.”

“Drty?”

“Ys, it is all w cn d t mk hm wsh hs hnds, and hs fc is
as blck as a tnkr’s. Wll, whn onc hs cs hs bn sttld, h
wll hv a rglr prsn bth; and I thnk, if y sw hm, y wld
agr wth m tht h ndd it.”

“I shld lk t s hm vry mch.”

“Wld y? Tht is esly dn. Cm ths wy. Y cn lv yr
bg.”

“N, I thnk tht I’ll tk it.”

“Vry gd. Cm ths wy, if y pls.” H ld us dwn a pssg,
opnd a brrd dr, pssd dwn a wndng str, and brght us t a
whtwshd crrdr wth a ln of drs on ech sd.

“Th thrd on th rght is hs,” sd th inspctr. “Hr it is!” H
qtly sht bck a pnl in th uppr prt of th dr and glncd
thrgh.

“H is aslp,” sd h. “Y cn s hm vry wll.”

W bth pt or eys t th grtng. Th prsnr ly wth hs fc
twrds us, in a vry dp slp, brthng slwly and hvly. H ws
a mddl-szd mn, crsly cld as bcm hs cllng, wth a
clrd shrt prtrdng thrgh th rnt in hs tttrd ct. H
ws, as th inspctr hd sd, extrmly drty, bt th grm whch
cvrd hs fc cld nt cncl its rplsv uglnss. A brd
whl frm an old scr rn rght acrss it frm ey t chn, and by its
cntrctn hd trnd up on sd of th uppr lp, s tht thr
tth wr expsd in a prptl snrl. A shck of vry brght rd
hr grw lw ovr hs eys and frhd.

“H’s a bty, isn’t h?” sd th inspctr.

“H crtnly nds a wsh,” rmrkd Hlms. “I hd an id tht h
mght, and I tk th lbrty of brngng th tls wth m.” H opnd
th Gldstn bg as h spk, and tk ot, t my astnshmnt, a vry
lrg bth-spng.

“H! h! Y ar a fnny on,” chckld th inspctr.

“Nw, if y wll hv th grt gdnss t opn tht dr vry
qtly, w wll sn mk hm ct a mch mr rspctbl fgr.”

“Wll, I dn’t knw why nt,” sd th inspctr. “H dsn’t lk a
crdt t th Bw Strt clls, ds h?” H slppd hs ky int th
lck, and w all vry qtly entrd th cll. Th slpr hlf
trnd, and thn sttld dwn onc mr int a dp slmbr. Hlms
stpd t th wtr-jg, mstnd hs spng, and thn rbbd it
twc vgrsly acrss and dwn th prsnr’s fc.

“Lt m intrdc y,” h shtd, “t Mr. Nvll St. Clr, of L,
in th cnty of Knt.”

Nvr in my lf hv I sn sch a sght. Th mn’s fc pld off
undr th spng lk th brk frm a tr. Gn ws th crs brwn
tnt! Gn, t, ws th hrrd scr whch hd smd it acrss, and
th twstd lp whch hd gvn th rplsv snr t th fc! A
twtch brght awy th tngld rd hr, and thr, sttng up in hs
bd, ws a pl, sd-fcd, rfnd-lkng mn, blck-hrd and
smth-sknnd, rbbng hs eys and strng abt hm wth slpy
bwldrmnt. Thn sddnly rlsng th expsr, h brk int a
scrm and thrw hmslf dwn wth hs fc t th pllw.

“Grt hvns!” crd th inspctr, “it is, indd, th mssng mn.
I knw hm frm th phtgrph.”

Th prsnr trnd wth th rcklss ar of a mn wh abndns hmslf
t hs dstny. “B it s,” sd h. “And pry wht am I chrgd wth?”

“Wth mkng awy wth Mr. Nvll St.— Oh, cm, y cn’t b chrgd
wth tht unlss thy mk a cs of attmptd scd of it,” sd th
inspctr wth a grn. “Wll, I hv bn twnty-svn yrs in th
frc, bt ths rlly tks th ck.”

“If I am Mr. Nvll St. Clr, thn it is obvs tht n crm hs
bn cmmttd, and tht, thrfr, I am illglly dtnd.”

“N crm, bt a vry grt errr hs bn cmmttd,” sd Hlms.
“Y wld hv dn bttr t hv trstd yr wf.”

“It ws nt th wf; it ws th chldrn,” grnd th prsnr. “Gd
hlp m, I wld nt hv thm ashmd of thr fthr. My Gd! Wht an
expsr! Wht cn I d?”

Shrlck Hlms st dwn bsd hm on th cch and pttd hm kndly
on th shldr.

“If y lv it t a crt of lw t clr th mttr up,” sd h,
“of crs y cn hrdly avd pblcty. On th othr hnd, if y
cnvnc th plc athrts tht thr is n pssbl cs agnst
y, I d nt knw tht thr is any rsn tht th dtls shld
fnd thr wy int th pprs. Inspctr Brdstrt wld, I am sr,
mk nts upn anythng whch y mght tll us and sbmt it t th
prpr athrts. Th cs wld thn nvr g int crt at all.”

“Gd blss y!” crd th prsnr pssntly. “I wld hv endrd
imprsnmnt, ay, evn exctn, rthr thn hv lft my msrbl
scrt as a fmly blt t my chldrn.

“Y ar th frst wh hv evr hrd my stry. My fthr ws a
schlmstr in Chstrfld, whr I rcvd an excllnt edctn.
I trvlld in my yth, tk t th stg, and fnlly bcm a
rprtr on an evnng ppr in Lndn. On dy my edtr wshd t
hv a srs of artcls upn bggng in th mtrpls, and I
vlntrd t spply thm. Thr ws th pnt frm whch all my
advntrs strtd. It ws only by tryng bggng as an amtr tht I
cld gt th fcts upn whch t bs my artcls. Whn an actr I
hd, of crs, lrnd all th scrts of mkng up, and hd bn
fms in th grn-rm fr my skll. I tk advntg nw of my
attnmnts. I pntd my fc, and t mk myslf as ptbl as
pssbl I md a gd scr and fxd on sd of my lp in a twst by
th ad of a smll slp of flsh-clrd plstr. Thn wth a rd hd
of hr, and an apprprt drss, I tk my sttn in th bsnss
prt of th cty, ostnsbly as a mtch-sllr bt rlly as a bggr.
Fr svn hrs I pld my trd, and whn I rtrnd hm in th
evnng I fnd t my srprs tht I hd rcvd n lss thn 26_s_.
4_d_.

“I wrt my artcls and thght lttl mr of th mttr untl, sm
tm ltr, I bckd a bll fr a frnd and hd a wrt srvd upn m
fr £ 25. I ws at my wt’s end whr t gt th mny, bt a sddn
id cm t m. I bggd a frtnght’s grc frm th crdtr, askd
fr a hldy frm my emplyrs, and spnt th tm in bggng in th
Cty undr my dsgs. In tn dys I hd th mny and hd pd th
dbt.

“Wll, y cn imgn hw hrd it ws t sttl dwn t ards wrk
at £ 2 a wk whn I knw tht I cld ern as mch in a dy by
smrng my fc wth a lttl pnt, lyng my cp on th grnd, and
sttng stll. It ws a lng fght btwn my prd and th mny, bt
th dllrs wn at lst, and I thrw up rprtng and st dy aftr dy
in th crnr whch I hd frst chsn, insprng pty by my ghstly
fc and fllng my pckts wth cpprs. Only on mn knw my scrt.
H ws th kpr of a lw dn in whch I usd t ldg in Swndm
Ln, whr I cld evry mrnng emrg as a sqld bggr and in th
evnngs trnsfrm myslf int a wll-drssd mn abt twn. Ths
fllw, a Lscr, ws wll pd by m fr hs rms, s tht I knw
tht my scrt ws sf in hs pssssn.

“Wll, vry sn I fnd tht I ws svng cnsdrbl sms of mny.
I d nt mn tht any bggr in th strts of Lndn cld ern £ 700
a yr—whch is lss thn my avrg tkngs—bt I hd excptnl
advntgs in my pwr of mkng up, and als in a fclty of
rprt, whch imprvd by prctc and md m qt a rcgnsd
chrctr in th Cty. All dy a strm of pnns, vrd by slvr,
prd in upn m, and it ws a vry bd dy in whch I fld t tk
£ 2.

“As I grw rchr I grw mr ambts, tk a hs in th cntry,
and evntlly mrrd, wtht anyn hvng a sspcn as t my rl
occptn. My dr wf knw tht I hd bsnss in th Cty. Sh
lttl knw wht.

“Lst Mndy I hd fnshd fr th dy and ws drssng in my rm
abv th opm dn whn I lkd ot of my wndw and sw, t my
hrrr and astnshmnt, tht my wf ws stndng in th strt, wth
hr eys fxd fll upn m. I gv a cry of srprs, thrw up my arms
t cvr my fc, and, rshng t my cnfdnt, th Lscr, entrtd
hm t prvnt anyn frm cmng up t m. I hrd hr vc
dwnstrs, bt I knw tht sh cld nt ascnd. Swftly I thrw off
my clths, plld on ths of a bggr, and pt on my pgmnts and
wg. Evn a wf’s eys cld nt prc s cmplt a dsgs. Bt
thn it occrrd t m tht thr mght b a srch in th rm, and
tht th clths mght btry m. I thrw opn th wndw, rpnng by
my vlnc a smll ct whch I hd inflctd upn myslf in th
bdrm tht mrnng. Thn I szd my ct, whch ws wghtd by th
cpprs whch I hd jst trnsfrrd t it frm th lthr bg in
whch I crrd my tkngs. I hrld it ot of th wndw, and it
dspprd int th Thms. Th othr clths wld hv fllwd, bt
at tht mmnt thr ws a rsh of cnstbls up th str, and a fw
mnts aftr I fnd, rthr, I cnfss, t my rlf, tht instd of
bng idntfd as Mr. Nvll St. Clr, I ws arrstd as hs
mrdrr.

“I d nt knw tht thr is anythng els fr m t expln. I ws
dtrmnd t prsrv my dsgs as lng as pssbl, and hnc my
prfrnc fr a drty fc. Knwng tht my wf wld b trrbly
anxs, I slppd off my rng and cnfdd it t th Lscr at a
mmnt whn n cnstbl ws wtchng m, tgthr wth a hrrd
scrwl, tllng hr tht sh hd n cs t fr.”

“Tht nt only rchd hr ystrdy,” sd Hlms.

“Gd Gd! Wht a wk sh mst hv spnt!”

“Th plc hv wtchd ths Lscr,” sd Inspctr Brdstrt, “and
I cn qt undrstnd tht h mght fnd it dffclt t pst a lttr
unbsrvd. Prbbly h hndd it t sm slr cstmr of hs, wh
frgt all abt it fr sm dys.”

“Tht ws it,” sd Hlms, nddng apprvngly; “I hv n dbt of
it. Bt hv y nvr bn prsctd fr bggng?”

“Mny tms; bt wht ws a fn t m?”

“It mst stp hr, hwvr,” sd Brdstrt. “If th plc ar t
hsh ths thng up, thr mst b n mr of Hgh Bn.”

“I hv swrn it by th mst slmn oths whch a mn cn tk.”

“In tht cs I thnk tht it is prbbl tht n frthr stps my b
tkn. Bt if y ar fnd agn, thn all mst cm ot. I am sr,
Mr. Hlms, tht w ar vry mch indbtd t y fr hvng clrd
th mttr up. I wsh I knw hw y rch yr rslts.”

“I rchd ths on,” sd my frnd, “by sttng upn fv pllws and
cnsmng an onc of shg. I thnk, Wtsn, tht if w drv t Bkr
Strt w shll jst b in tm fr brkfst.”




V. TH ADVNTR OF TH BL CRBNCL


I hd clld upn my frnd Shrlck Hlms upn th scnd mrnng
aftr Chrstms, wth th intntn of wshng hm th cmplmnts of
th ssn. H ws lngng upn th sf in a prpl drssng-gwn, a
pp-rck wthn hs rch upn th rght, and a pl of crmpld
mrnng pprs, evdntly nwly stdd, nr at hnd. Bsd th cch
ws a wdn chr, and on th angl of th bck hng a vry sdy and
dsrptbl hrd-flt ht, mch th wrs fr wr, and crckd in
svrl plcs. A lns and a frcps lyng upn th st of th chr
sggstd tht th ht hd bn sspndd in ths mnnr fr th
prps of exmntn.

“Y ar enggd,” sd I; “prhps I intrrpt y.”

“Nt at all. I am gld t hv a frnd wth whm I cn dscss my
rslts. Th mttr is a prfctly trvl on”—h jrkd hs thmb in
th drctn of th old ht—“bt thr ar pnts in cnnctn wth
it whch ar nt entrly dvd of intrst and evn of instrctn.”

I std myslf in hs armchr and wrmd my hnds bfr hs
crcklng fr, fr a shrp frst hd st in, and th wndws wr
thck wth th ic crystls. “I spps,” I rmrkd, “tht, hmly as
it lks, ths thng hs sm ddly stry lnkd on t it—tht it is
th cl whch wll gd y in th sltn of sm mystry and th
pnshmnt of sm crm.”

“N, n. N crm,” sd Shrlck Hlms, lghng. “Only on of ths
whmscl lttl incdnts whch wll hppn whn y hv fr mlln
hmn bngs all jstlng ech othr wthn th spc of a fw sqr
mls. Amd th actn and rctn of s dns a swrm of hmnty,
evry pssbl cmbntn of evnts my b expctd t tk plc, and
mny a lttl prblm wll b prsntd whch my b strkng and
bzrr wtht bng crmnl. W hv alrdy hd exprnc of
sch.”

“S mch s,” I rmrkd, “tht of th lst sx css whch I hv
addd t my nts, thr hv bn entrly fr of any lgl crm.”

“Prcsly. Y alld t my attmpt t rcvr th Irn Adlr pprs,
t th snglr cs of Mss Mry Sthrlnd, and t th advntr of
th mn wth th twstd lp. Wll, I hv n dbt tht ths smll
mttr wll fll int th sm inncnt ctgry. Y knw Ptrsn,
th cmmssnr?”

“Ys.”

“It is t hm tht ths trphy blngs.”

“It is hs ht.”

“N, n, h fnd it. Its ownr is unknwn. I bg tht y wll lk
upn it nt as a bttrd bllycck bt as an intllctl prblm.
And, frst, as t hw it cm hr. It arrvd upn Chrstms mrnng,
in cmpny wth a gd ft gs, whch is, I hv n dbt, rstng
at ths mmnt in frnt of Ptrsn’s fr. Th fcts ar ths: abt
fr o’clck on Chrstms mrnng, Ptrsn, wh, as y knw, is a
vry hnst fllw, ws rtrnng frm sm smll jllfctn and ws
mkng hs wy hmwrd dwn Tttnhm Crt Rd. In frnt of hm h
sw, in th gslght, a tllsh mn, wlkng wth a slght stggr, and
crryng a wht gs slng ovr hs shldr. As h rchd th
crnr of Gdg Strt, a rw brk ot btwn ths strngr and a
lttl knt of rghs. On of th lttr knckd off th mn’s ht, on
whch h rsd hs stck t dfnd hmslf and, swngng it ovr hs
hd, smshd th shp wndw bhnd hm. Ptrsn hd rshd frwrd
t prtct th strngr frm hs asslnts; bt th mn, shckd at
hvng brkn th wndw, and sng an offcl-lkng prsn in
unfrm rshng twrds hm, drppd hs gs, tk t hs hls, and
vnshd amd th lbyrnth of smll strts whch l at th bck of
Tttnhm Crt Rd. Th rghs hd als fld at th apprnc of
Ptrsn, s tht h ws lft in pssssn of th fld of bttl, and
als of th spls of vctry in th shp of ths bttrd ht and a
mst unmpchbl Chrstms gs.”

“Whch srly h rstrd t thr ownr?”

“My dr fllw, thr ls th prblm. It is tr tht ‘Fr Mrs.
Hnry Bkr’ ws prntd upn a smll crd whch ws td t th brd’s
lft lg, and it is als tr tht th intls ‘H. B.’ ar lgbl
upn th lnng of ths ht, bt as thr ar sm thsnds of Bkrs,
and sm hndrds of Hnry Bkrs in ths cty of ors, it is nt esy
t rstr lst prprty t any on of thm.”

“Wht, thn, dd Ptrsn d?”

“H brght rnd bth ht and gs t m on Chrstms mrnng,
knwng tht evn th smllst prblms ar of intrst t m. Th
gs w rtnd untl ths mrnng, whn thr wr sgns tht, in
spt of th slght frst, it wld b wll tht it shld b etn
wtht unncssry dly. Its fndr hs crrd it off, thrfr, t
flfl th ultmt dstny of a gs, whl I cntn t rtn th
ht of th unknwn gntlmn wh lst hs Chrstms dnnr.”

“Dd h nt advrts?”

“N.”

“Thn, wht cl cld y hv as t hs idntty?”

“Only as mch as w cn ddc.”

“Frm hs ht?”

“Prcsly.”

“Bt y ar jkng. Wht cn y gthr frm ths old bttrd flt?”

“Hr is my lns. Y knw my mthds. Wht cn y gthr yrslf as
t th indvdlty of th mn wh hs wrn ths artcl?”

I tk th tttrd objct in my hnds and trnd it ovr rthr
rflly. It ws a vry ordnry blck ht of th usl rnd shp,
hrd and mch th wrs fr wr. Th lnng hd bn of rd slk, bt
ws a gd dl dsclrd. Thr ws n mkr’s nm; bt, as Hlms
hd rmrkd, th intls “H. B.” wr scrwld upn on sd. It ws
prcd in th brm fr a ht-scrr, bt th elstc ws mssng. Fr
th rst, it ws crckd, excdngly dsty, and spttd in svrl
plcs, althgh thr smd t hv bn sm attmpt t hd th
dsclrd ptchs by smrng thm wth ink.

“I cn s nthng,” sd I, hndng it bck t my frnd.

“On th cntrry, Wtsn, y cn s evrythng. Y fl, hwvr, t
rsn frm wht y s. Y ar t tmd in drwng yr
infrncs.”

“Thn, pry tll m wht it is tht y cn infr frm ths ht?”

H pckd it up and gzd at it in th pclr intrspctv fshn
whch ws chrctrstc of hm. “It is prhps lss sggstv thn it
mght hv bn,” h rmrkd, “and yt thr ar a fw infrncs
whch ar vry dstnct, and a fw othrs whch rprsnt at lst a
strng blnc of prbblty. Tht th mn ws hghly intllctl is
of crs obvs upn th fc of it, and als tht h ws frly
wll-t-d wthn th lst thr yrs, althgh h hs nw flln upn
evl dys. H hd frsght, bt hs lss nw thn frmrly, pntng
t a mrl rtrgrssn, whch, whn tkn wth th dcln of hs
frtns, sms t indct sm evl inflnc, prbbly drnk, at
wrk upn hm. Ths my accnt als fr th obvs fct tht hs wf
hs csd t lv hm.”

“My dr Hlms!”

“H hs, hwvr, rtnd sm dgr of slf-rspct,” h cntnd,
dsrgrdng my rmnstrnc. “H is a mn wh lds a sdntry lf,
gs ot lttl, is ot of trnng entrly, is mddl-agd, hs
grzzld hr whch h hs hd ct wthn th lst fw dys, and whch
h annts wth lm-crm. Ths ar th mr ptnt fcts whch ar
t b ddcd frm hs ht. Als, by th wy, tht it is extrmly
imprbbl tht h hs gs ld on in hs hs.”

“Y ar crtnly jkng, Hlms.”

“Nt in th lst. Is it pssbl tht evn nw, whn I gv y ths
rslts, y ar unbl t s hw thy ar attnd?”

“I hv n dbt tht I am vry stpd, bt I mst cnfss tht I am
unbl t fllw y. Fr exmpl, hw dd y ddc tht ths mn ws
intllctl?”

Fr answr Hlms clppd th ht upn hs hd. It cm rght ovr th
frhd and sttld upn th brdg of hs ns. “It is a qstn of
cbc cpcty,” sd h; “a mn wth s lrg a brn mst hv
smthng in it.”

“Th dcln of hs frtns, thn?”

“Ths ht is thr yrs old. Ths flt brms crld at th edg cm
in thn. It is a ht of th vry bst qlty. Lk at th bnd of
rbbd slk and th excllnt lnng. If ths mn cld affrd t by
s expnsv a ht thr yrs ag, and hs hd n ht snc, thn h
hs assrdly gn dwn in th wrld.”

“Wll, tht is clr engh, crtnly. Bt hw abt th frsght and
th mrl rtrgrssn?”

Shrlck Hlms lghd. “Hr is th frsght,” sd h pttng hs
fngr upn th lttl dsc and lp of th ht-scrr. “Thy ar
nvr sld upn hts. If ths mn ordrd on, it is a sgn of a
crtn amnt of frsght, snc h wnt ot of hs wy t tk ths
prctn agnst th wnd. Bt snc w s tht h hs brkn th
elstc and hs nt trbld t rplc it, it is obvs tht h hs
lss frsght nw thn frmrly, whch is a dstnct prf of a
wknng ntr. On th othr hnd, h hs endvrd t cncl sm
of ths stns upn th flt by dbng thm wth ink, whch is a sgn
tht h hs nt entrly lst hs slf-rspct.”

“Yr rsnng is crtnly plsbl.”

“Th frthr pnts, tht h is mddl-agd, tht hs hr is grzzld,
tht it hs bn rcntly ct, and tht h uss lm-crm, ar all t
b gthrd frm a cls exmntn of th lwr prt of th lnng.
Th lns dsclss a lrg nmbr of hr-ends, cln ct by th
scssrs of th brbr. Thy all appr t b adhsv, and thr is a
dstnct odr of lm-crm. Ths dst, y wll obsrv, is nt th
grtty, gry dst of th strt bt th flffy brwn dst of th hs,
shwng tht it hs bn hng up indrs mst of th tm, whl th
mrks of mstr upn th insd ar prf pstv tht th wrr
prsprd vry frly, and cld thrfr, hrdly b in th bst of
trnng.”

“Bt hs wf—y sd tht sh hd csd t lv hm.”

“Ths ht hs nt bn brshd fr wks. Whn I s y, my dr
Wtsn, wth a wk’s accmltn of dst upn yr ht, and whn yr
wf allws y t g ot in sch a stt, I shll fr tht y als
hv bn unfrtnt engh t ls yr wf’s affctn.”

“Bt h mght b a bchlr.”

“Ny, h ws brngng hm th gs as a pc-offrng t hs wf.
Rmmbr th crd upn th brd’s lg.”

“Y hv an answr t evrythng. Bt hw on erth d y ddc tht
th gs is nt ld on in hs hs?”

“On tllw stn, or evn tw, mght cm by chnc; bt whn I s n
lss thn fv, I thnk tht thr cn b lttl dbt tht th
indvdl mst b brght int frqnt cntct wth brnng
tllw—wlks upstrs at nght prbbly wth hs ht in on hnd and a
gttrng cndl in th othr. Anyhw, h nvr gt tllw-stns frm
a gs-jt. Ar y stsfd?”

“Wll, it is vry ingns,” sd I, lghng; “bt snc, as y sd
jst nw, thr hs bn n crm cmmttd, and n hrm dn sv th
lss of a gs, all ths sms t b rthr a wst of enrgy.”

Shrlck Hlms hd opnd hs mth t rply, whn th dr flw opn,
and Ptrsn, th cmmssnr, rshd int th aprtmnt wth
flshd chks and th fc of a mn wh is dzd wth astnshmnt.

“Th gs, Mr. Hlms! Th gs, sr!” h gspd.

“Eh? Wht of it, thn? Hs it rtrnd t lf and flppd off thrgh
th ktchn wndw?” Hlms twstd hmslf rnd upn th sf t gt
a frr vw of th mn’s exctd fc.

“S hr, sr! S wht my wf fnd in its crp!” H hld ot hs
hnd and dsplyd upn th cntr of th plm a brllntly
scntlltng bl stn, rthr smllr thn a bn in sz, bt of
sch prty and rdnc tht it twnkld lk an elctrc pnt in th
drk hllw of hs hnd.

Shrlck Hlms st up wth a whstl. “By Jv, Ptrsn!” sd h,
“ths is trsr trv indd. I spps y knw wht y hv gt?”

“A dmnd, sr? A prcs stn. It cts int glss as thgh it wr
ptty.”

“It’s mr thn a prcs stn. It is _th_ prcs stn.”

“Nt th Cntss of Mrcr’s bl crbncl!” I ejcltd.

“Prcsly s. I oght t knw its sz and shp, sng tht I hv
rd th advrtsmnt abt it in _Th Tms_ evry dy ltly. It is
absltly unq, and its vl cn only b cnjctrd, bt th
rwrd offrd of £ 1000 is crtnly nt wthn a twntth prt of
th mrkt prc.”

“A thsnd pnds! Grt Lrd of mrcy!” Th cmmssnr plmpd
dwn int a chr and strd frm on t th othr of us.

“Tht is th rwrd, and I hv rsn t knw tht thr ar
sntmntl cnsdrtns in th bckgrnd whch wld indc th
Cntss t prt wth hlf hr frtn if sh cld bt rcvr th
gm.”

“It ws lst, if I rmmbr arght, at th Htl Csmpltn,” I
rmrkd.

“Prcsly s, on Dcmbr 22nd, jst fv dys ag. Jhn Hrnr, a
plmbr, ws accsd of hvng abstrctd it frm th ldy’s
jwl-cs. Th evdnc agnst hm ws s strng tht th cs hs
bn rfrrd t th Asszs. I hv sm accnt of th mttr hr, I
blv.” H rmmgd amd hs nwspprs, glncng ovr th dts,
untl at lst h smthd on ot, dbld it ovr, and rd th
fllwng prgrph:

“Htl Csmpltn Jwl Rbbry. Jhn Hrnr, 26, plmbr, ws
brght up upn th chrg of hvng upn th 22nd inst., abstrctd
frm th jwl-cs of th Cntss of Mrcr th vlbl gm knwn as
th bl crbncl. Jms Rydr, uppr-attndnt at th htl, gv hs
evdnc t th effct tht h hd shwn Hrnr up t th drssng-rm
of th Cntss of Mrcr upn th dy of th rbbry in ordr tht h
mght sldr th scnd br of th grt, whch ws ls. H hd
rmnd wth Hrnr sm lttl tm, bt hd fnlly bn clld
awy. On rtrnng, h fnd tht Hrnr hd dspprd, tht th
br hd bn frcd opn, and tht th smll mrcc cskt in
whch, as it aftrwrds trnsprd, th Cntss ws accstmd t kp
hr jwl, ws lyng empty upn th drssng-tbl. Rydr instntly
gv th alrm, and Hrnr ws arrstd th sm evnng; bt th stn
cld nt b fnd ethr upn hs prsn or in hs rms. Cthrn
Csck, md t th Cntss, dpsd t hvng hrd Rydr’s cry of
dsmy on dscvrng th rbbry, and t hvng rshd int th rm,
whr sh fnd mttrs as dscrbd by th lst wtnss. Inspctr
Brdstrt, B dvsn, gv evdnc as t th arrst of Hrnr, wh
strggld frntclly, and prtstd hs inncnc in th strngst
trms. Evdnc of a prvs cnvctn fr rbbry hvng bn gvn
agnst th prsnr, th mgstrt rfsd t dl smmrly wth th
offnc, bt rfrrd it t th Asszs. Hrnr, wh hd shwn sgns of
intns emtn drng th prcdngs, fntd awy at th cnclsn
and ws crrd ot of crt.”

“Hm! S mch fr th plc-crt,” sd Hlms thghtflly, tssng
asd th ppr. “Th qstn fr us nw t slv is th sqnc of
evnts ldng frm a rfld jwl-cs at on end t th crp of a
gs in Tttnhm Crt Rd at th othr. Y s, Wtsn, or lttl
ddctns hv sddnly assmd a mch mr imprtnt and lss
inncnt aspct. Hr is th stn; th stn cm frm th gs, and
th gs cm frm Mr. Hnry Bkr, th gntlmn wth th bd ht and
all th othr chrctrstcs wth whch I hv brd y. S nw w
mst st orslvs vry srsly t fndng ths gntlmn and
ascrtnng wht prt h hs plyd in ths lttl mystry. T d
ths, w mst try th smplst mns frst, and ths l undbtdly
in an advrtsmnt in all th evnng pprs. If ths fl, I shll
hv rcrs t othr mthds.”

“Wht wll y sy?”

“Gv m a pncl and tht slp of ppr. Nw, thn: ‘Fnd at th
crnr of Gdg Strt, a gs and a blck flt ht. Mr. Hnry Bkr
cn hv th sm by applyng at 6:30 ths evnng at 221B, Bkr
Strt.’ Tht is clr and cncs.”

“Vry. Bt wll h s it?”

“Wll, h is sr t kp an ey on th pprs, snc, t a pr mn,
th lss ws a hvy on. H ws clrly s scrd by hs mschnc in
brkng th wndw and by th apprch of Ptrsn tht h thght of
nthng bt flght, bt snc thn h mst hv bttrly rgrttd th
impls whch csd hm t drp hs brd. Thn, agn, th
intrdctn of hs nm wll cs hm t s it, fr evryn wh
knws hm wll drct hs attntn t it. Hr y ar, Ptrsn, rn
dwn t th advrtsng agncy and hv ths pt in th evnng
pprs.”

“In whch, sr?”

“Oh, in th _Glb_, _Str_, _Pll Mll_, _St. Jms’s Gztt_,
_Evnng Nws_, _Stndrd_, _Ech_, and any othrs tht occr t y.”

“Vry wll, sr. And ths stn?”

“Ah, ys, I shll kp th stn. Thnk y. And, I sy, Ptrsn, jst
by a gs on yr wy bck and lv it hr wth m, fr w mst
hv on t gv t ths gntlmn in plc of th on whch yr
fmly is nw dvrng.”

Whn th cmmssnr hd gn, Hlms tk up th stn and hld it
agnst th lght. “It’s a bnny thng,” sd h. “Jst s hw it
glnts and sprkls. Of crs it is a ncls and fcs of crm.
Evry gd stn is. Thy ar th dvl’s pt bts. In th lrgr and
oldr jwls evry fct my stnd fr a bldy dd. Ths stn is nt
yt twnty yrs old. It ws fnd in th bnks of th Amy Rvr in
sthrn Chn and is rmrkbl in hvng evry chrctrstc of th
crbncl, sv tht it is bl in shd instd of rby rd. In spt
of its yth, it hs alrdy a snstr hstry. Thr hv bn tw
mrdrs, a vtrl-thrwng, a scd, and svrl rbbrs brght
abt fr th sk of ths frty-grn wght of crystllsd chrcl.
Wh wld thnk tht s prtty a ty wld b a prvyr t th gllws
and th prsn? I’ll lck it up in my strng bx nw and drp a ln t
th Cntss t sy tht w hv it.”

“D y thnk tht ths mn Hrnr is inncnt?”

“I cnnt tll.”

“Wll, thn, d y imgn tht ths othr on, Hnry Bkr, hd
anythng t d wth th mttr?”

“It is, I thnk, mch mr lkly tht Hnry Bkr is an absltly
inncnt mn, wh hd n id tht th brd whch h ws crryng ws
of cnsdrbly mr vl thn if it wr md of sld gld. Tht,
hwvr, I shll dtrmn by a vry smpl tst if w hv an answr
t or advrtsmnt.”

“And y cn d nthng untl thn?”

“Nthng.”

“In tht cs I shll cntn my prfssnl rnd. Bt I shll cm
bck in th evnng at th hr y hv mntnd, fr I shld lk
t s th sltn of s tngld a bsnss.”

“Vry gld t s y. I dn at svn. Thr is a wdcck, I blv.
By th wy, in vw of rcnt occrrncs, prhps I oght t ask Mrs.
Hdsn t exmn its crp.”

I hd bn dlyd at a cs, and it ws a lttl aftr hlf-pst sx
whn I fnd myslf in Bkr Strt onc mr. As I apprchd th
hs I sw a tll mn in a Sctch bnnt wth a ct whch ws
bttnd up t hs chn wtng otsd in th brght smcrcl whch
ws thrwn frm th fnlght. Jst as I arrvd th dr ws opnd,
and w wr shwn up tgthr t Hlms’ rm.

“Mr. Hnry Bkr, I blv,” sd h, rsng frm hs armchr and
grtng hs vstr wth th esy ar of gnlty whch h cld s
rdly assm. “Pry tk ths chr by th fr, Mr. Bkr. It is a
cld nght, and I obsrv tht yr crcltn is mr adptd fr
smmr thn fr wntr. Ah, Wtsn, y hv jst cm at th rght
tm. Is tht yr ht, Mr. Bkr?”

“Ys, sr, tht is undbtdly my ht.”

H ws a lrg mn wth rndd shldrs, a mssv hd, and a brd,
intllgnt fc, slpng dwn t a pntd brd of grzzld brwn. A
tch of rd in ns and chks, wth a slght trmr of hs extndd
hnd, rclld Hlms’ srms as t hs hbts. Hs rsty blck
frck-ct ws bttnd rght up in frnt, wth th cllr trnd up,
and hs lnk wrsts prtrdd frm hs slvs wtht a sgn of cff
or shrt. H spk in a slw stcct fshn, chsng hs wrds wth
cr, and gv th imprssn gnrlly of a mn of lrnng and
lttrs wh hd hd ill-usg at th hnds of frtn.

“W hv rtnd ths thngs fr sm dys,” sd Hlms, “bcs w
expctd t s an advrtsmnt frm y gvng yr addrss. I am at
a lss t knw nw why y dd nt advrts.”

Or vstr gv a rthr shmfcd lgh. “Shllngs hv nt bn s
plntfl wth m as thy onc wr,” h rmrkd. “I hd n dbt tht
th gng of rghs wh assltd m hd crrd off bth my ht and th
brd. I dd nt cr t spnd mr mny in a hplss attmpt at
rcvrng thm.”

“Vry ntrlly. By th wy, abt th brd, w wr cmplld t et
it.”

“T et it!” Or vstr hlf rs frm hs chr in hs exctmnt.

“Ys, it wld hv bn of n us t anyn hd w nt dn s. Bt I
prsm tht ths othr gs upn th sdbrd, whch is abt th
sm wght and prfctly frsh, wll answr yr prps eqlly
wll?”

“Oh, crtnly, crtnly,” answrd Mr. Bkr wth a sgh of rlf.

“Of crs, w stll hv th fthrs, lgs, crp, and s on of yr
own brd, s if y wsh—”

Th mn brst int a hrty lgh. “Thy mght b usfl t m as
rlcs of my advntr,” sd h, “bt bynd tht I cn hrdly s
wht us th _dsjct mmbr_ of my lt acqntnc ar gng t b
t m. N, sr, I thnk tht, wth yr prmssn, I wll cnfn my
attntns t th excllnt brd whch I prcv upn th sdbrd.”

Shrlck Hlms glncd shrply acrss at m wth a slght shrg of hs
shldrs.

“Thr is yr ht, thn, and thr yr brd,” sd h. “By th wy,
wld it br y t tll m whr y gt th othr on frm? I am
smwht of a fwl fncr, and I hv sldm sn a bttr grwn
gs.”

“Crtnly, sr,” sd Bkr, wh hd rsn and tckd hs nwly gnd
prprty undr hs arm. “Thr ar a fw of us wh frqnt th Alph
Inn, nr th Msm—w ar t b fnd in th Msm itslf drng th
dy, y undrstnd. Ths yr or gd hst, Wndgt by nm,
instttd a gs clb, by whch, on cnsdrtn of sm fw pnc
evry wk, w wr ech t rcv a brd at Chrstms. My pnc wr
dly pd, and th rst is fmlr t y. I am mch indbtd t y,
sr, fr a Sctch bnnt is fttd nthr t my yrs nr my grvty.”
Wth a cmcl pmpsty of mnnr h bwd slmnly t bth of us and
strd off upn hs wy.

“S mch fr Mr. Hnry Bkr,” sd Hlms whn h hd clsd th dr
bhnd hm. “It is qt crtn tht h knws nthng whtvr abt
th mttr. Ar y hngry, Wtsn?”

“Nt prtclrly.”

“Thn I sggst tht w trn or dnnr int a sppr and fllw up
ths cl whl it is stll ht.”

“By all mns.”

It ws a bttr nght, s w drw on or ulstrs and wrppd crvts
abt or thrts. Otsd, th strs wr shnng cldly in a
cldlss sky, and th brth of th pssrs-by blw ot int smk
lk s mny pstl shts. Or ftflls rng ot crsply and ldly as
w swng thrgh th dctrs’ qrtr, Wmpl Strt, Hrly Strt,
and s thrgh Wgmr Strt int Oxfrd Strt. In a qrtr of an
hr w wr in Blmsbry at th Alph Inn, whch is a smll
pblc-hs at th crnr of on of th strts whch rns dwn int
Hlbrn. Hlms pshd opn th dr of th prvt br and ordrd tw
glsss of br frm th rddy-fcd, wht-aprnd lndlrd.

“Yr br shld b excllnt if it is as gd as yr gs,” sd
h.

“My gs!” Th mn smd srprsd.

“Ys. I ws spkng only hlf an hr ag t Mr. Hnry Bkr, wh ws
a mmbr of yr gs clb.”

“Ah! ys, I s. Bt y s, sr, thm’s nt _or_ gs.”

“Indd! Whs, thn?”

“Wll, I gt th tw dzn frm a slsmn in Cvnt Grdn.”

“Indd? I knw sm of thm. Whch ws it?”

“Brcknrdg is hs nm.”

“Ah! I dn’t knw hm. Wll, hr’s yr gd hlth lndlrd, and
prsprty t yr hs. Gd-nght.”

“Nw fr Mr. Brcknrdg,” h cntnd, bttnng up hs ct as w
cm ot int th frsty ar. “Rmmbr, Wtsn tht thgh w hv s
hmly a thng as a gs at on end of ths chn, w hv at th
othr a mn wh wll crtnly gt svn yrs’ pnl srvtd unlss
w cn estblsh hs inncnc. It is pssbl tht or inqry my bt
cnfrm hs glt; bt, in any cs, w hv a ln of invstgtn
whch hs bn mssd by th plc, and whch a snglr chnc hs
plcd in or hnds. Lt us fllw it ot t th bttr end. Fcs t
th sth, thn, and qck mrch!”

W pssd acrss Hlbrn, dwn Endll Strt, and s thrgh a zgzg
of slms t Cvnt Grdn Mrkt. On of th lrgst stlls br th
nm of Brcknrdg upn it, and th prprtr a hrsy-lkng mn,
wth a shrp fc and trm sd-whskrs ws hlpng a by t pt up
th shttrs.

“Gd-evnng. It’s a cld nght,” sd Hlms.

Th slsmn nddd and sht a qstnng glnc at my cmpnn.

“Sld ot of gs, I s,” cntnd Hlms, pntng at th br
slbs of mrbl.

“Lt y hv fv hndrd t-mrrw mrnng.”

“Tht’s n gd.”

“Wll, thr ar sm on th stll wth th gs-flr.”

“Ah, bt I ws rcmmndd t y.”

“Wh by?”

“Th lndlrd of th Alph.”

“Oh, ys; I snt hm a cpl of dzn.”

“Fn brds thy wr, t. Nw whr dd y gt thm frm?”

T my srprs th qstn prvkd a brst of angr frm th
slsmn.

“Nw, thn, mstr,” sd h, wth hs hd cckd and hs arms akmb,
“wht ar y drvng at? Lt’s hv it strght, nw.”

“It is strght engh. I shld lk t knw wh sld y th gs
whch y sppld t th Alph.”

“Wll thn, I shn’t tll y. S nw!”

“Oh, it is a mttr of n imprtnc; bt I dn’t knw why y shld
b s wrm ovr sch a trfl.”

“Wrm! Y’d b as wrm, myb, if y wr as pstrd as I am. Whn I
py gd mny fr a gd artcl thr shld b an end of th
bsnss; bt it’s ‘Whr ar th gs?’ and ‘Wh dd y sll th
gs t?’ and ‘Wht wll y tk fr th gs?’ On wld thnk thy
wr th only gs in th wrld, t hr th fss tht is md ovr
thm.”

“Wll, I hv n cnnctn wth any othr ppl wh hv bn mkng
inqrs,” sd Hlms crlssly. “If y wn’t tll us th bt is
off, tht is all. Bt I’m alwys rdy t bck my opnn on a mttr
of fwls, and I hv a fvr on it tht th brd I at is cntry
brd.”

“Wll, thn, y’v lst yr fvr, fr it’s twn brd,” snppd th
slsmn.

“It’s nthng of th knd.”

“I sy it is.”

“I dn’t blv it.”

“D’y thnk y knw mr abt fwls thn I, wh hv hndld thm
evr snc I ws a nppr? I tll y, all ths brds tht wnt t th
Alph wr twn brd.”

“Y’ll nvr prsd m t blv tht.”

“Wll y bt, thn?”

“It’s mrly tkng yr mny, fr I knw tht I am rght. Bt I’ll
hv a svrgn on wth y, jst t tch y nt t b obstnt.”

Th slsmn chckld grmly. “Brng m th bks, Bll,” sd h.

Th smll by brght rnd a smll thn vlm and a grt
grsy-bckd on, lyng thm ot tgthr bnth th hngng lmp.

“Nw thn, Mr. Ccksr,” sd th slsmn, “I thght tht I ws ot
of gs, bt bfr I fnsh y’ll fnd tht thr is stll on lft
in my shp. Y s ths lttl bk?”

“Wll?”

“Tht’s th lst of th flk frm whm I by. D’y s? Wll, thn,
hr on ths pg ar th cntry flk, and th nmbrs aftr thr
nms ar whr thr accnts ar in th bg ldgr. Nw, thn! Y
s ths othr pg in rd ink? Wll, tht is a lst of my twn
spplrs. Nw, lk at tht thrd nm. Jst rd it ot t m.”

“Mrs. Okshtt, 117, Brxtn Rd—249,” rd Hlms.

“Qt s. Nw trn tht up in th ldgr.”

Hlms trnd t th pg indctd. “Hr y ar, ‘Mrs. Okshtt,
117, Brxtn Rd, egg and pltry spplr.’”

“Nw, thn, wht’s th lst entry?”

“‘Dcmbr 22nd. Twnty-fr gs at 7_s_. 6_d_.’”

“Qt s. Thr y ar. And undrnth?”

“‘Sld t Mr. Wndgt of th Alph, at 12_s_.’”

“Wht hv y t sy nw?”

Shrlck Hlms lkd dply chgrnd. H drw a svrgn frm hs
pckt and thrw it dwn upn th slb, trnng awy wth th ar of a
mn whs dsgst is t dp fr wrds. A fw yrds off h stppd
undr a lmp-pst and lghd in th hrty, nslss fshn whch
ws pclr t hm.

“Whn y s a mn wth whskrs of tht ct and th ‘Pnk ’un’
prtrdng ot of hs pckt, y cn alwys drw hm by a bt,” sd
h. “I drsy tht if I hd pt £ 100 dwn in frnt of hm, tht mn
wld nt hv gvn m sch cmplt infrmtn as ws drwn frm hm
by th id tht h ws dng m on a wgr. Wll, Wtsn, w ar, I
fncy, nrng th end of or qst, and th only pnt whch rmns
t b dtrmnd is whthr w shld g on t ths Mrs. Okshtt
t-nght, or whthr w shld rsrv it fr t-mrrw. It is clr
frm wht tht srly fllw sd tht thr ar othrs bsds
orslvs wh ar anxs abt th mttr, and I shld—”

Hs rmrks wr sddnly ct shrt by a ld hbbb whch brk ot
frm th stll whch w hd jst lft. Trnng rnd w sw a lttl
rt-fcd fllw stndng in th cntr of th crcl of yllw lght
whch ws thrwn by th swngng lmp, whl Brcknrdg, th
slsmn, frmd in th dr of hs stll, ws shkng hs fsts
frcly at th crngng fgr.

“I’v hd engh of y and yr gs,” h shtd. “I wsh y wr
all at th dvl tgthr. If y cm pstrng m any mr wth yr
slly tlk I’ll st th dg at y. Y brng Mrs. Okshtt hr and
I’ll answr hr, bt wht hv y t d wth it? Dd I by th gs
off y?”

“N; bt on of thm ws mn all th sm,” whnd th lttl mn.

“Wll, thn, ask Mrs. Okshtt fr it.”

“Sh tld m t ask y.”

“Wll, y cn ask th Kng of Prs, fr all I cr. I’v hd engh
of it. Gt ot of ths!” H rshd frcly frwrd, and th inqrr
flttd awy int th drknss.

“H! ths my sv us a vst t Brxtn Rd,” whsprd Hlms. “Cm
wth m, and w wll s wht is t b md of ths fllw.” Strdng
thrgh th scttrd knts of ppl wh lngd rnd th flrng
stlls, my cmpnn spdly ovrtk th lttl mn and tchd hm
upn th shldr. H sprng rnd, and I cld s in th gs-lght
tht evry vstg of clr hd bn drvn frm hs fc.

“Wh ar y, thn? Wht d y wnt?” h askd in a qvrng vc.

“Y wll excs m,” sd Hlms blndly, “bt I cld nt hlp
ovrhrng th qstns whch y pt t th slsmn jst nw. I
thnk tht I cld b of assstnc t y.”

“Y? Wh ar y? Hw cld y knw anythng of th mttr?”

“My nm is Shrlck Hlms. It is my bsnss t knw wht othr
ppl dn’t knw.”

“Bt y cn knw nthng of ths?”

“Excs m, I knw evrythng of it. Y ar endvrng t trc sm
gs whch wr sld by Mrs. Okshtt, of Brxtn Rd, t a slsmn
nmd Brcknrdg, by hm in trn t Mr. Wndgt, of th Alph, and
by hm t hs clb, of whch Mr. Hnry Bkr is a mmbr.”

“Oh, sr, y ar th vry mn whm I hv lngd t mt,” crd th
lttl fllw wth otstrtchd hnds and qvrng fngrs. “I cn
hrdly expln t y hw intrstd I am in ths mttr.”

Shrlck Hlms hld a fr-whlr whch ws pssng. “In tht cs
w hd bttr dscss it in a csy rm rthr thn in ths wnd-swpt
mrkt-plc,” sd h. “Bt pry tll m, bfr w g frthr, wh it
is tht I hv th plsr of assstng.”

Th mn hsttd fr an instnt. “My nm is Jhn Rbnsn,” h
answrd wth a sdlng glnc.

“N, n; th rl nm,” sd Hlms swtly. “It is alwys awkwrd
dng bsnss wth an als.”

A flsh sprng t th wht chks of th strngr. “Wll thn,” sd
h, “my rl nm is Jms Rydr.”

“Prcsly s. Hd attndnt at th Htl Csmpltn. Pry stp int
th cb, and I shll sn b abl t tll y evrythng whch y
wld wsh t knw.”

Th lttl mn std glncng frm on t th othr of us wth
hlf-frghtnd, hlf-hpfl eys, as on wh is nt sr whthr h
is on th vrg of a wndfll or of a ctstrph. Thn h stppd int
th cb, and in hlf an hr w wr bck in th sttng-rm at Bkr
Strt. Nthng hd bn sd drng or drv, bt th hgh, thn
brthng of or nw cmpnn, and th clspngs and unclspngs of
hs hnds, spk of th nrvs tnsn wthn hm.

“Hr w ar!” sd Hlms chrly as w fld int th rm. “Th
fr lks vry ssnbl in ths wthr. Y lk cld, Mr. Rydr.
Pry tk th bskt-chr. I wll jst pt on my slpprs bfr w
sttl ths lttl mttr of yrs. Nw, thn! Y wnt t knw wht
bcm of ths gs?”

“Ys, sr.”

“Or rthr, I fncy, of tht gs. It ws on brd, I imgn in whch
y wr intrstd—wht, wth a blck br acrss th tl.”

Rydr qvrd wth emtn. “Oh, sr,” h crd, “cn y tll m
whr it wnt t?”

“It cm hr.”

“Hr?”

“Ys, and a mst rmrkbl brd it prvd. I dn’t wndr tht y
shld tk an intrst in it. It ld an egg aftr it ws dd—th
bnnst, brghtst lttl bl egg tht evr ws sn. I hv it hr
in my msm.”

Or vstr stggrd t hs ft and cltchd th mntlpc wth hs
rght hnd. Hlms unlckd hs strng-bx and hld up th bl
crbncl, whch shn ot lk a str, wth a cld, brllnt,
mny-pntd rdnc. Rydr std glrng wth a drwn fc, uncrtn
whthr t clm or t dswn it.

“Th gm’s up, Rydr,” sd Hlms qtly. “Hld up, mn, or y’ll
b int th fr! Gv hm an arm bck int hs chr, Wtsn. H’s nt
gt bld engh t g in fr flny wth impnty. Gv hm a dsh of
brndy. S! Nw h lks a lttl mr hmn. Wht a shrmp it is, t
b sr!”

Fr a mmnt h hd stggrd and nrly flln, bt th brndy brght
a tng of clr int hs chks, and h st strng wth frghtnd
eys at hs accsr.

“I hv almst evry lnk in my hnds, and all th prfs whch I cld
pssbly nd, s thr is lttl whch y nd tll m. Stll, tht
lttl my as wll b clrd up t mk th cs cmplt. Y hd
hrd, Rydr, of ths bl stn of th Cntss of Mrcr’s?”

“It ws Cthrn Csck wh tld m of it,” sd h in a crcklng
vc.

“I s—hr ldyshp’s wtng-md. Wll, th tmpttn of sddn
wlth s esly acqrd ws t mch fr y, as it hs bn fr
bttr mn bfr y; bt y wr nt vry scrpls in th mns
y usd. It sms t m, Rydr, tht thr is th mkng of a vry
prtty vlln in y. Y knw tht ths mn Hrnr, th plmbr, hd
bn cncrnd in sm sch mttr bfr, and tht sspcn wld
rst th mr rdly upn hm. Wht dd y d, thn? Y md sm
smll jb in my ldy’s rm—y and yr cnfdrt Csck—and y
mngd tht h shld b th mn snt fr. Thn, whn h hd lft, y
rfld th jwl-cs, rsd th alrm, and hd ths unfrtnt mn
arrstd. Y thn—”

Rydr thrw hmslf dwn sddnly upn th rg and cltchd at my
cmpnn’s kns. “Fr Gd’s sk, hv mrcy!” h shrkd. “Thnk of
my fthr! Of my mthr! It wld brk thr hrts. I nvr wnt
wrng bfr! I nvr wll agn. I swr it. I’ll swr it on a Bbl.
Oh, dn’t brng it int crt! Fr Chrst’s sk, dn’t!”

“Gt bck int yr chr!” sd Hlms strnly. “It is vry wll t
crng and crwl nw, bt y thght lttl engh of ths pr Hrnr
in th dck fr a crm of whch h knw nthng.”

“I wll fly, Mr. Hlms. I wll lv th cntry, sr. Thn th chrg
agnst hm wll brk dwn.”

“Hm! W wll tlk abt tht. And nw lt us hr a tr accnt of
th nxt act. Hw cm th stn int th gs, and hw cm th gs
int th opn mrkt? Tll us th trth, fr thr ls yr only hp
of sfty.”

Rydr pssd hs tng ovr hs prchd lps. “I wll tll y it jst
as it hppnd, sr,” sd h. “Whn Hrnr hd bn arrstd, it
smd t m tht it wld b bst fr m t gt awy wth th stn at
onc, fr I dd nt knw at wht mmnt th plc mght nt tk it
int thr hds t srch m and my rm. Thr ws n plc abt th
htl whr it wld b sf. I wnt ot, as if on sm cmmssn, and
I md fr my sstr’s hs. Sh hd mrrd a mn nmd Okshtt, and
lvd in Brxtn Rd, whr sh fttnd fwls fr th mrkt. All th
wy thr evry mn I mt smd t m t b a plcmn or a
dtctv; and, fr all tht it ws a cld nght, th swt ws prng
dwn my fc bfr I cm t th Brxtn Rd. My sstr askd m wht
ws th mttr, and why I ws s pl; bt I tld hr tht I hd bn
upst by th jwl rbbry at th htl. Thn I wnt int th bck yrd
and smkd a pp and wndrd wht it wld b bst t d.

“I hd a frnd onc clld Mdsly, wh wnt t th bd, and hs jst
bn srvng hs tm in Pntnvll. On dy h hd mt m, and fll
int tlk abt th wys of thvs, and hw thy cld gt rd of wht
thy stl. I knw tht h wld b tr t m, fr I knw on or tw
thngs abt hm; s I md up my mnd t g rght on t Klbrn, whr
h lvd, and tk hm int my cnfdnc. H wld shw m hw t trn
th stn int mny. Bt hw t gt t hm in sfty? I thght of th
agns I hd gn thrgh in cmng frm th htl. I mght at any
mmnt b szd and srchd, and thr wld b th stn in my
wstct pckt. I ws lnng agnst th wll at th tm and
lkng at th gs whch wr wddlng abt rnd my ft, and
sddnly an id cm int my hd whch shwd m hw I cld bt th
bst dtctv tht evr lvd.

“My sstr hd tld m sm wks bfr tht I mght hv th pck of
hr gs fr a Chrstms prsnt, and I knw tht sh ws alwys as
gd as hr wrd. I wld tk my gs nw, and in it I wld crry my
stn t Klbrn. Thr ws a lttl shd in th yrd, and bhnd ths
I drv on of th brds—a fn bg on, wht, wth a brrd tl. I
cght it, and pryng its bll opn, I thrst th stn dwn its thrt
as fr as my fngr cld rch. Th brd gv a glp, and I flt th
stn pss alng its gllt and dwn int its crp. Bt th crtr
flppd and strggld, and ot cm my sstr t knw wht ws th
mttr. As I trnd t spk t hr th brt brk ls and flttrd
off amng th othrs.

“‘Whtvr wr y dng wth tht brd, Jm?’ sys sh.

“‘Wll,’ sd I, ‘y sd y’d gv m on fr Chrstms, and I ws
flng whch ws th fttst.’

“‘Oh,’ sys sh, ‘w’v st yrs asd fr y—Jm’s brd, w cll it.
It’s th bg wht on ovr yndr. Thr’s twnty-sx of thm, whch
mks on fr y, and on fr us, and tw dzn fr th mrkt.’

“‘Thnk y, Mgg,’ sys I; ‘bt if it is all th sm t y, I’d
rthr hv tht on I ws hndlng jst nw.’

“‘Th othr is a gd thr pnd hvr,’ sd sh, ‘and w fttnd
it exprssly fr y.’

“‘Nvr mnd. I’ll hv th othr, and I’ll tk it nw,’ sd I.

“‘Oh, jst as y lk,’ sd sh, a lttl hffd. ‘Whch is it y
wnt, thn?’

“‘Tht wht on wth th brrd tl, rght in th mddl of th
flck.’

“‘Oh, vry wll. Kll it and tk it wth y.’

“Wll, I dd wht sh sd, Mr. Hlms, and I crrd th brd all th
wy t Klbrn. I tld my pl wht I hd dn, fr h ws a mn tht it
ws esy t tll a thng lk tht t. H lghd untl h chkd, and
w gt a knf and opnd th gs. My hrt trnd t wtr, fr
thr ws n sgn of th stn, and I knw tht sm trrbl mstk
hd occrrd. I lft th brd, rshd bck t my sstr’s, and hrrd
int th bck yrd. Thr ws nt a brd t b sn thr.

“‘Whr ar thy all, Mgg?’ I crd.

“‘Gn t th dlr’s, Jm.’

“‘Whch dlr’s?’

“‘Brcknrdg, of Cvnt Grdn.’

“‘Bt ws thr anthr wth a brrd tl?’ I askd, ‘th sm as th
on I chs?’

“‘Ys, Jm; thr wr tw brrd-tld ons, and I cld nvr tll
thm aprt.’

“Wll, thn, of crs I sw it all, and I rn off as hrd as my ft
wld crry m t ths mn Brcknrdg; bt h hd sld th lt at
onc, and nt on wrd wld h tll m as t whr thy hd gn. Y
hrd hm yrslvs t-nght. Wll, h hs alwys answrd m lk
tht. My sstr thnks tht I am gng md. Smtms I thnk tht I am
myslf. And nw—and nw I am myslf a brndd thf, wtht evr
hvng tchd th wlth fr whch I sld my chrctr. Gd hlp m!
Gd hlp m!” H brst int cnvlsv sbbng, wth hs fc brd in
hs hnds.

Thr ws a lng slnc, brkn only by hs hvy brthng and by th
msrd tppng of Shrlck Hlms’ fngr-tps upn th edg of th
tbl. Thn my frnd rs and thrw opn th dr.

“Gt ot!” sd h.

“Wht, sr! Oh, Hvn blss y!”

“N mr wrds. Gt ot!”

And n mr wrds wr ndd. Thr ws a rsh, a clttr upn th
strs, th bng of a dr, and th crsp rttl of rnnng ftflls
frm th strt.

“Aftr all, Wtsn,” sd Hlms, rchng up hs hnd fr hs cly
pp, “I am nt rtnd by th plc t spply thr dfcncs. If
Hrnr wr in dngr it wld b anthr thng; bt ths fllw wll
nt appr agnst hm, and th cs mst cllps. I spps tht I am
cmmtng a flny, bt it is jst pssbl tht I am svng a sl.
Ths fllw wll nt g wrng agn; h is t trrbly frghtnd.
Snd hm t gl nw, and y mk hm a gl-brd fr lf. Bsds,
it is th ssn of frgvnss. Chnc hs pt in or wy a mst
snglr and whmscl prblm, and its sltn is its own rwrd. If
y wll hv th gdnss t tch th bll, Dctr, w wll bgn
anthr invstgtn, in whch, als a brd wll b th chf
ftr.”




V. TH ADVNTR OF TH SPCKLD BND


On glncng ovr my nts of th svnty odd css in whch I hv
drng th lst eght yrs stdd th mthds of my frnd Shrlck
Hlms, I fnd mny trgc, sm cmc, a lrg nmbr mrly strng,
bt nn cmmnplc; fr, wrkng as h dd rthr fr th lv of hs
art thn fr th acqrmnt of wlth, h rfsd t assct hmslf
wth any invstgtn whch dd nt tnd twrds th unsl, and evn
th fntstc. Of all ths vrd css, hwvr, I cnnt rcll any
whch prsntd mr snglr ftrs thn tht whch ws assctd
wth th wll-knwn Srry fmly of th Ryltts of Stk Mrn. Th
evnts in qstn occrrd in th erly dys of my assctn wth
Hlms, whn w wr shrng rms as bchlrs in Bkr Strt. It is
pssbl tht I mght hv plcd thm upn rcrd bfr, bt a
prms of scrcy ws md at th tm, frm whch I hv only bn
frd drng th lst mnth by th untmly dth of th ldy t whm
th pldg ws gvn. It is prhps as wll tht th fcts shld nw
cm t lght, fr I hv rsns t knw tht thr ar wdsprd
rmrs as t th dth of Dr. Grmsby Ryltt whch tnd t mk th
mttr evn mr trrbl thn th trth.

It ws erly in Aprl in th yr ’83 tht I wk on mrnng t fnd
Shrlck Hlms stndng, flly drssd, by th sd of my bd. H ws
a lt rsr, as a rl, and as th clck on th mntlpc shwd m
tht it ws only a qrtr-pst svn, I blnkd up at hm in sm
srprs, and prhps jst a lttl rsntmnt, fr I ws myslf
rglr in my hbts.

“Vry srry t knck y up, Wtsn,” sd h, “bt it’s th cmmn lt
ths mrnng. Mrs. Hdsn hs bn knckd up, sh rtrtd upn m,
and I on y.”

“Wht is it, thn—a fr?”

“N; a clnt. It sms tht a yng ldy hs arrvd in a cnsdrbl
stt of exctmnt, wh inssts upn sng m. Sh is wtng nw in
th sttng-rm. Nw, whn yng lds wndr abt th mtrpls at
ths hr of th mrnng, and knck slpy ppl up ot of thr bds,
I prsm tht it is smthng vry prssng whch thy hv t
cmmnct. Shld it prv t b an intrstng cs, y wld, I am
sr, wsh t fllw it frm th otst. I thght, at any rt, tht I
shld cll y and gv y th chnc.”

“My dr fllw, I wld nt mss it fr anythng.”

I hd n knr plsr thn in fllwng Hlms in hs prfssnl
invstgtns, and in admrng th rpd ddctns, as swft as
inttns, and yt alwys fndd on a lgcl bss wth whch h
unrvlld th prblms whch wr sbmttd t hm. I rpdly thrw on
my clths and ws rdy in a fw mnts t accmpny my frnd dwn
t th sttng-rm. A ldy drssd in blck and hvly vld, wh
hd bn sttng in th wndw, rs as w entrd.

“Gd-mrnng, mdm,” sd Hlms chrly. “My nm is Shrlck
Hlms. Ths is my intmt frnd and assct, Dr. Wtsn, bfr
whm y cn spk as frly as bfr myslf. H! I am gld t s
tht Mrs. Hdsn hs hd th gd sns t lght th fr. Pry drw up
t it, and I shll ordr y a cp of ht cff, fr I obsrv tht
y ar shvrng.”

“It is nt cld whch mks m shvr,” sd th wmn in a lw vc,
chngng hr st as rqstd.

“Wht, thn?”

“It is fr, Mr. Hlms. It is trrr.” Sh rsd hr vl as sh
spk, and w cld s tht sh ws indd in a ptbl stt of
agttn, hr fc all drwn and gry, wth rstlss frghtnd eys,
lk ths of sm hntd anml. Hr ftrs and fgr wr ths of
a wmn of thrty, bt hr hr ws sht wth prmtr gry, and hr
exprssn ws wry and hggrd. Shrlck Hlms rn hr ovr wth on
of hs qck, all-cmprhnsv glncs.

“Y mst nt fr,” sd h sthngly, bndng frwrd and pttng
hr frrm. “W shll sn st mttrs rght, I hv n dbt. Y
hv cm in by trn ths mrnng, I s.”

“Y knw m, thn?”

“N, bt I obsrv th scnd hlf of a rtrn tckt in th plm of
yr lft glv. Y mst hv strtd erly, and yt y hd a gd
drv in a dg-crt, alng hvy rds, bfr y rchd th
sttn.”

Th ldy gv a vlnt strt and strd in bwldrmnt at my
cmpnn.

“Thr is n mystry, my dr mdm,” sd h, smlng. “Th lft arm
of yr jckt is spttrd wth md in n lss thn svn plcs. Th
mrks ar prfctly frsh. Thr is n vhcl sv a dg-crt whch
thrws up md in tht wy, and thn only whn y st on th lft-hnd
sd of th drvr.”

“Whtvr yr rsns my b, y ar prfctly crrct,” sd sh. “I
strtd frm hm bfr sx, rchd Lthrhd at twnty pst, and
cm in by th frst trn t Wtrl. Sr, I cn stnd ths strn n
lngr; I shll g md if it cntns. I hv n on t trn t—nn,
sv only on, wh crs fr m, and h, pr fllw, cn b of lttl
ad. I hv hrd of y, Mr. Hlms; I hv hrd of y frm Mrs.
Frntsh, whm y hlpd in th hr of hr sr nd. It ws frm
hr tht I hd yr addrss. Oh, sr, d y nt thnk tht y cld
hlp m, t, and at lst thrw a lttl lght thrgh th dns
drknss whch srrnds m? At prsnt it is ot of my pwr t rwrd
y fr yr srvcs, bt in a mnth or sx wks I shll b mrrd,
wth th cntrl of my own incm, and thn at lst y shll nt fnd
m ungrtfl.”

Hlms trnd t hs dsk and, unlckng it, drw ot a smll
cs-bk, whch h cnsltd.

“Frntsh,” sd h. “Ah ys, I rcll th cs; it ws cncrnd wth
an opl tr. I thnk it ws bfr yr tm, Wtsn. I cn only sy,
mdm, tht I shll b hppy t dvt th sm cr t yr cs as I
dd t tht of yr frnd. As t rwrd, my prfssn is its own
rwrd; bt y ar at lbrty t dfry whtvr expnss I my b pt
t, at th tm whch sts y bst. And nw I bg tht y wll ly
bfr us evrythng tht my hlp us in frmng an opnn upn th
mttr.”

“Als!” rpld or vstr, “th vry hrrr of my sttn ls in
th fct tht my frs ar s vg, and my sspcns dpnd s
entrly upn smll pnts, whch mght sm trvl t anthr, tht
evn h t whm of all othrs I hv a rght t lk fr hlp and
advc lks upn all tht I tll hm abt it as th fncs of a
nrvs wmn. H ds nt sy s, bt I cn rd it frm hs sthng
answrs and avrtd eys. Bt I hv hrd, Mr. Hlms, tht y cn
s dply int th mnfld wckdnss of th hmn hrt. Y my
advs m hw t wlk amd th dngrs whch encmpss m.”

“I am all attntn, mdm.”

“My nm is Hln Stnr, and I am lvng wth my stpfthr, wh is
th lst srvvr of on of th oldst Sxn fmls in Englnd, th
Ryltts of Stk Mrn, on th wstrn brdr of Srry.”

Hlms nddd hs hd. “Th nm is fmlr t m,” sd h.

“Th fmly ws at on tm amng th rchst in Englnd, and th
estts extndd ovr th brdrs int Brkshr in th nrth, and
Hmpshr in th wst. In th lst cntry, hwvr, fr sccssv
hrs wr of a dsslt and wstfl dspstn, and th fmly rn
ws evntlly cmpltd by a gmblr in th dys of th Rgncy.
Nthng ws lft sv a fw acrs of grnd, and th
tw-hndrd-yr-old hs, whch is itslf crshd undr a hvy
mrtgg. Th lst sqr drggd ot hs exstnc thr, lvng th
hrrbl lf of an arstcrtc ppr; bt hs only sn, my
stpfthr, sng tht h mst adpt hmslf t th nw cndtns,
obtnd an advnc frm a rltv, whch enbld hm t tk a
mdcl dgr and wnt ot t Clctt, whr, by hs prfssnl
skll and hs frc of chrctr, h estblshd a lrg prctc. In a
ft of angr, hwvr, csd by sm rbbrs whch hd bn
prptrtd in th hs, h bt hs ntv btlr t dth and
nrrwly escpd a cptl sntnc. As it ws, h sffrd a lng trm
of imprsnmnt and aftrwrds rtrnd t Englnd a mrs and
dsppntd mn.

“Whn Dr. Ryltt ws in Ind h mrrd my mthr, Mrs. Stnr, th
yng wdw of Mjr-Gnrl Stnr, of th Bngl Artllry. My sstr
Jl and I wr twns, and w wr only tw yrs old at th tm of
my mthr’s r-mrrg. Sh hd a cnsdrbl sm of mny—nt lss
thn £ 1000 a yr—and ths sh bqthd t Dr. Ryltt entrly
whl w rsdd wth hm, wth a prvsn tht a crtn annl sm
shld b allwd t ech of us in th evnt of or mrrg. Shrtly
aftr or rtrn t Englnd my mthr dd—sh ws klld eght yrs
ag in a rlwy accdnt nr Crw. Dr. Ryltt thn abndnd hs
attmpts t estblsh hmslf in prctc in Lndn and tk us t lv
wth hm in th old ancstrl hs at Stk Mrn. Th mny whch my
mthr hd lft ws engh fr all or wnts, and thr smd t b n
obstcl t or hppnss.

“Bt a trrbl chng cm ovr or stpfthr abt ths tm.
Instd of mkng frnds and exchngng vsts wth or nghbrs,
wh hd at frst bn ovrjyd t s a Ryltt of Stk Mrn bck in
th old fmly st, h sht hmslf up in hs hs and sldm cm
ot sv t indlg in frcs qrrls wth whvr mght crss hs
pth. Vlnc of tmpr apprchng t mn hs bn hrdtry in
th mn of th fmly, and in my stpfthr’s cs it hd, I blv,
bn intnsfd by hs lng rsdnc in th trpcs. A srs of
dsgrcfl brwls tk plc, tw of whch endd in th plc-crt,
untl at lst h bcm th trrr of th vllg, and th flks wld
fly at hs apprch, fr h is a mn of immns strngth, and
absltly uncntrllbl in hs angr.

“Lst wk h hrld th lcl blcksmth ovr a prpt int a strm,
and it ws only by pyng ovr all th mny whch I cld gthr
tgthr tht I ws abl t avrt anthr pblc expsr. H hd n
frnds at all sv th wndrng gpss, and h wld gv ths
vgbnds lv t encmp upn th fw acrs of brmbl-cvrd lnd
whch rprsnt th fmly estt, and wld accpt in rtrn th
hsptlty of thr tnts, wndrng awy wth thm smtms fr
wks on end. H hs a pssn als fr Indn anmls, whch ar snt
ovr t hm by a crrspndnt, and h hs at ths mmnt a chth and
a bbn, whch wndr frly ovr hs grnds and ar frd by th
vllgrs almst as mch as thr mstr.

“Y cn imgn frm wht I sy tht my pr sstr Jl and I hd n
grt plsr in or lvs. N srvnt wld sty wth us, and fr a
lng tm w dd all th wrk of th hs. Sh ws bt thrty at th
tm of hr dth, and yt hr hr hd alrdy bgn t whtn, evn
as mn hs.”

“Yr sstr is dd, thn?”

“Sh dd jst tw yrs ag, and it is of hr dth tht I wsh t
spk t y. Y cn undrstnd tht, lvng th lf whch I hv
dscrbd, w wr lttl lkly t s anyn of or own ag and
pstn. W hd, hwvr, an ant, my mthr’s mdn sstr, Mss
Hnr Wstphl, wh lvs nr Hrrw, and w wr occsnlly
allwd t py shrt vsts at ths ldy’s hs. Jl wnt thr at
Chrstms tw yrs ag, and mt thr a hlf-py mjr of mrns, t
whm sh bcm enggd. My stpfthr lrnd of th enggmnt whn
my sstr rtrnd and offrd n objctn t th mrrg; bt wthn
a frtnght of th dy whch hd bn fxd fr th wddng, th
trrbl evnt occrrd whch hs dprvd m of my only cmpnn.”

Shrlck Hlms hd bn lnng bck in hs chr wth hs eys clsd
and hs hd snk in a cshn, bt h hlf opnd hs lds nw and
glncd acrss at hs vstr.

“Pry b prcs as t dtls,” sd h.

“It is esy fr m t b s, fr evry evnt of tht drdfl tm is
srd int my mmry. Th mnr-hs is, as I hv alrdy sd, vry
old, and only on wng is nw inhbtd. Th bdrms in ths wng ar
on th grnd flr, th sttng-rms bng in th cntrl blck of
th bldngs. Of ths bdrms th frst is Dr. Ryltt’s, th scnd
my sstr’s, and th thrd my own. Thr is n cmmnctn btwn
thm, bt thy all opn ot int th sm crrdr. D I mk myslf
pln?”

“Prfctly s.”

“Th wndws of th thr rms opn ot upn th lwn. Tht ftl
nght Dr. Ryltt hd gn t hs rm erly, thgh w knw tht h
hd nt rtrd t rst, fr my sstr ws trbld by th smll of th
strng Indn cgrs whch it ws hs cstm t smk. Sh lft hr
rm, thrfr, and cm int mn, whr sh st fr sm tm,
chttng abt hr apprchng wddng. At elvn o’clck sh rs t
lv m, bt sh psd at th dr and lkd bck.

“‘Tll m, Hln,’ sd sh, ‘hv y evr hrd anyn whstl in th
dd of th nght?’

“‘Nvr,’ sd I.

“‘I spps tht y cld nt pssbly whstl, yrslf, in yr
slp?’

“‘Crtnly nt. Bt why?’

“‘Bcs drng th lst fw nghts I hv alwys, abt thr in th
mrnng, hrd a lw, clr whstl. I am a lght slpr, and it hs
awknd m. I cnnt tll whr it cm frm—prhps frm th nxt
rm, prhps frm th lwn. I thght tht I wld jst ask y
whthr y hd hrd it.’

“‘N, I hv nt. It mst b ths wrtchd gpss in th plnttn.’

“‘Vry lkly. And yt if it wr on th lwn, I wndr tht y dd
nt hr it als.’

“‘Ah, bt I slp mr hvly thn y.’

“‘Wll, it is of n grt cnsqnc, at any rt.’ Sh smld bck at
m, clsd my dr, and a fw mmnts ltr I hrd hr ky trn in th
lck.”

“Indd,” sd Hlms. “Ws it yr cstm alwys t lck yrslvs in
at nght?”

“Alwys.”

“And why?”

“I thnk tht I mntnd t y tht th Dctr kpt a chth and a
bbn. W hd n flng of scrty unlss or drs wr lckd.”

“Qt s. Pry prcd wth yr sttmnt.”

“I cld nt slp tht nght. A vg flng of impndng msfrtn
imprssd m. My sstr and I, y wll rcllct, wr twns, and y
knw hw sbtl ar th lnks whch bnd tw sls whch ar s clsly
alld. It ws a wld nght. Th wnd ws hwlng otsd, and th rn
ws btng and splshng agnst th wndws. Sddnly, amd all th
hbbb of th gl, thr brst frth th wld scrm of a trrfd
wmn. I knw tht it ws my sstr’s vc. I sprng frm my bd,
wrppd a shwl rnd m, and rshd int th crrdr. As I opnd my
dr I smd t hr a lw whstl, sch as my sstr dscrbd, and a
fw mmnts ltr a clngng snd, as if a mss of mtl hd flln.
As I rn dwn th pssg, my sstr’s dr ws unlckd, and rvlvd
slwly upn its hngs. I strd at it hrrr-strckn, nt knwng
wht ws abt t iss frm it. By th lght of th crrdr-lmp I
sw my sstr appr at th opnng, hr fc blnchd wth trrr, hr
hnds grpng fr hlp, hr whl fgr swyng t and fr lk tht
of a drnkrd. I rn t hr and thrw my arms rnd hr, bt at tht
mmnt hr kns smd t gv wy and sh fll t th grnd. Sh
wrthd as on wh is in trrbl pn, and hr lmbs wr drdflly
cnvlsd. At frst I thght tht sh hd nt rcgnsd m, bt as I
bnt ovr hr sh sddnly shrkd ot in a vc whch I shll nvr
frgt, ‘Oh, my Gd! Hln! It ws th bnd! Th spckld bnd!’ Thr
ws smthng els whch sh wld fn hv sd, and sh stbbd wth
hr fngr int th ar in th drctn of th Dctr’s rm, bt a
frsh cnvlsn szd hr and chkd hr wrds. I rshd ot, cllng
ldly fr my stpfthr, and I mt hm hstnng frm hs rm in hs
drssng-gwn. Whn h rchd my sstr’s sd sh ws uncnscs,
and thgh h prd brndy dwn hr thrt and snt fr mdcl ad
frm th vllg, all effrts wr in vn, fr sh slwly snk and
dd wtht hvng rcvrd hr cnscsnss. Sch ws th drdfl
end of my blvd sstr.”

“On mmnt,” sd Hlms, “ar y sr abt ths whstl and
mtllc snd? Cld y swr t it?”

“Tht ws wht th cnty crnr askd m at th inqry. It is my
strng imprssn tht I hrd it, and yt, amng th crsh of th gl
and th crkng of an old hs, I my pssbly hv bn dcvd.”

“Ws yr sstr drssd?”

“N, sh ws in hr nght-drss. In hr rght hnd ws fnd th
chrrd stmp of a mtch, and in hr lft a mtch-bx.”

“Shwng tht sh hd strck a lght and lkd abt hr whn th
alrm tk plc. Tht is imprtnt. And wht cnclsns dd th
crnr cm t?”

“H invstgtd th cs wth grt cr, fr Dr. Ryltt’s cndct
hd lng bn ntrs in th cnty, bt h ws unbl t fnd any
stsfctry cs of dth. My evdnc shwd tht th dr hd bn
fstnd upn th innr sd, and th wndws wr blckd by
old-fshnd shttrs wth brd irn brs, whch wr scrd evry
nght. Th wlls wr crflly sndd, and wr shwn t b qt
sld all rnd, and th flrng ws als thrghly exmnd, wth
th sm rslt. Th chmny is wd, bt is brrd up by fr lrg
stpls. It is crtn, thrfr, tht my sstr ws qt aln whn
sh mt hr end. Bsds, thr wr n mrks of any vlnc upn
hr.”

“Hw abt psn?”

“Th dctrs exmnd hr fr it, bt wtht sccss.”

“Wht d y thnk tht ths unfrtnt ldy dd of, thn?”

“It is my blf tht sh dd of pr fr and nrvs shck, thgh
wht it ws tht frghtnd hr I cnnt imgn.”

“Wr thr gpss in th plnttn at th tm?”

“Ys, thr ar nrly alwys sm thr.”

“Ah, and wht dd y gthr frm ths allsn t a bnd—a spckld
bnd?”

“Smtms I hv thght tht it ws mrly th wld tlk of dlrm,
smtms tht it my hv rfrrd t sm bnd of ppl, prhps t
ths vry gpss in th plnttn. I d nt knw whthr th spttd
hndkrchfs whch s mny of thm wr ovr thr hds mght hv
sggstd th strng adjctv whch sh usd.”

Hlms shk hs hd lk a mn wh is fr frm bng stsfd.

“Ths ar vry dp wtrs,” sd h; “pry g on wth yr
nrrtv.”

“Tw yrs hv pssd snc thn, and my lf hs bn untl ltly
lnlr thn evr. A mnth ag, hwvr, a dr frnd, whm I hv
knwn fr mny yrs, hs dn m th hnr t ask my hnd in
mrrg. Hs nm is Armtg—Prcy Armtg—th scnd sn of Mr.
Armtg, of Crn Wtr, nr Rdng. My stpfthr hs offrd n
oppstn t th mtch, and w ar t b mrrd in th crs of th
sprng. Tw dys ag sm rprs wr strtd in th wst wng of th
bldng, and my bdrm wll hs bn prcd, s tht I hv hd t
mv int th chmbr in whch my sstr dd, and t slp in th vry
bd in whch sh slpt. Imgn, thn, my thrll of trrr whn lst
nght, as I ly awk, thnkng ovr hr trrbl ft, I sddnly
hrd in th slnc of th nght th lw whstl whch hd bn th
hrld of hr own dth. I sprng up and lt th lmp, bt nthng ws
t b sn in th rm. I ws t shkn t g t bd agn, hwvr,
s I drssd, and as sn as it ws dylght I slppd dwn, gt a
dg-crt at th Crwn Inn, whch is oppst, and drv t Lthrhd,
frm whnc I hv cm on ths mrnng wth th on objct of sng
y and askng yr advc.”

“Y hv dn wsly,” sd my frnd. “Bt hv y tld m all?”

“Ys, all.”

“Mss Ryltt, y hv nt. Y ar scrnng yr stpfthr.”

“Why, wht d y mn?”

Fr answr Hlms pshd bck th frll of blck lc whch frngd th
hnd tht ly upn or vstr’s kn. Fv lttl lvd spts, th
mrks of fr fngrs and a thmb, wr prntd upn th wht wrst.

“Y hv bn crlly usd,” sd Hlms.

Th ldy clrd dply and cvrd ovr hr injrd wrst. “H is a
hrd mn,” sh sd, “and prhps h hrdly knws hs own strngth.”

Thr ws a lng slnc, drng whch Hlms lnd hs chn upn hs
hnds and strd int th crcklng fr.

“Ths is a vry dp bsnss,” h sd at lst. “Thr ar a thsnd
dtls whch I shld dsr t knw bfr I dcd upn or crs
of actn. Yt w hv nt a mmnt t ls. If w wr t cm t
Stk Mrn t-dy, wld it b pssbl fr us t s ovr ths rms
wtht th knwldg of yr stpfthr?”

“As it hppns, h spk of cmng int twn t-dy upn sm mst
imprtnt bsnss. It is prbbl tht h wll b awy all dy, and
tht thr wld b nthng t dstrb y. W hv a hskpr nw,
bt sh is old and flsh, and I cld esly gt hr ot of th wy.”

“Excllnt. Y ar nt avrs t ths trp, Wtsn?”

“By n mns.”

“Thn w shll bth cm. Wht ar y gng t d yrslf?”

“I hv on or tw thngs whch I wld wsh t d nw tht I am in
twn. Bt I shll rtrn by th twlv o’clck trn, s as t b thr
in tm fr yr cmng.”

“And y my expct us erly in th aftrnn. I hv myslf sm smll
bsnss mttrs t attnd t. Wll y nt wt and brkfst?”

“N, I mst g. My hrt is lghtnd alrdy snc I hv cnfdd my
trbl t y. I shll lk frwrd t sng y agn ths
aftrnn.” Sh drppd hr thck blck vl ovr hr fc and gldd
frm th rm.

“And wht d y thnk of it all, Wtsn?” askd Shrlck Hlms,
lnng bck in hs chr.

“It sms t m t b a mst drk and snstr bsnss.”

“Drk engh and snstr engh.”

“Yt if th ldy is crrct in syng tht th flrng and wlls ar
snd, and tht th dr, wndw, and chmny ar impssbl, thn hr
sstr mst hv bn undbtdly aln whn sh mt hr mystrs
end.”

“Wht bcms, thn, of ths nctrnl whstls, and wht of th vry
pclr wrds of th dyng wmn?”

“I cnnt thnk.”

“Whn y cmbn th ids of whstls at nght, th prsnc of a
bnd of gpss wh ar on intmt trms wth ths old dctr, th
fct tht w hv evry rsn t blv tht th dctr hs an
intrst in prvntng hs stpdghtr’s mrrg, th dyng allsn
t a bnd, and, fnlly, th fct tht Mss Hln Stnr hrd a
mtllc clng, whch mght hv bn csd by on of ths mtl brs
tht scrd th shttrs fllng bck int its plc, I thnk tht
thr is gd grnd t thnk tht th mystry my b clrd alng
ths lns.”

“Bt wht, thn, dd th gpss d?”

“I cnnt imgn.”

“I s mny objctns t any sch thry.”

“And s d I. It is prcsly fr tht rsn tht w ar gng t
Stk Mrn ths dy. I wnt t s whthr th objctns ar ftl,
or if thy my b explnd awy. Bt wht in th nm of th dvl!”

Th ejcltn hd bn drwn frm my cmpnn by th fct tht or
dr hd bn sddnly dshd opn, and tht a hg mn hd frmd
hmslf in th aprtr. Hs cstm ws a pclr mxtr of th
prfssnl and of th agrcltrl, hvng a blck tp-ht, a lng
frck-ct, and a pr of hgh gtrs, wth a hntng-crp swngng in
hs hnd. S tll ws h tht hs ht actlly brshd th crss br of
th drwy, and hs brdth smd t spn it acrss frm sd t
sd. A lrg fc, srd wth a thsnd wrnkls, brnd yllw wth
th sn, and mrkd wth evry evl pssn, ws trnd frm on t th
othr of us, whl hs dp-st, bl-sht eys, and hs hgh, thn,
flshlss ns, gv hm smwht th rsmblnc t a frc old brd
of pry.

“Whch of y is Hlms?” askd ths apprtn.

“My nm, sr; bt y hv th advntg of m,” sd my cmpnn
qtly.

“I am Dr. Grmsby Ryltt, of Stk Mrn.”

“Indd, Dctr,” sd Hlms blndly. “Pry tk a st.”

“I wll d nthng of th knd. My stpdghtr hs bn hr. I hv
trcd hr. Wht hs sh bn syng t y?”

“It is a lttl cld fr th tm of th yr,” sd Hlms.

“Wht hs sh bn syng t y?” scrmd th old mn frsly.

“Bt I hv hrd tht th crcss prms wll,” cntnd my
cmpnn imprtrbbly.

“H! Y pt m off, d y?” sd or nw vstr, tkng a stp
frwrd and shkng hs hntng-crp. “I knw y, y scndrl! I
hv hrd of y bfr. Y ar Hlms, th mddlr.”

My frnd smld.

“Hlms, th bsybdy!”

Hs sml brdnd.

“Hlms, th Sctlnd Yrd Jck-in-offc!”

Hlms chckld hrtly. “Yr cnvrstn is mst entrtnng,”
sd h. “Whn y g ot cls th dr, fr thr is a dcdd
drght.”

“I wll g whn I hv hd my sy. Dn’t y dr t mddl wth my
affrs. I knw tht Mss Stnr hs bn hr. I trcd hr! I am a
dngrs mn t fll fl of! S hr.” H stppd swftly frwrd,
szd th pkr, and bnt it int a crv wth hs hg brwn hnds.

“S tht y kp yrslf ot of my grp,” h snrld, and hrlng
th twstd pkr int th frplc h strd ot of th rm.

“H sms a vry ambl prsn,” sd Hlms, lghng. “I am nt
qt s blky, bt if h hd rmnd I mght hv shwn hm tht my
grp ws nt mch mr fbl thn hs own.” As h spk h pckd up
th stl pkr and, wth a sddn effrt, strghtnd it ot agn.

“Fncy hs hvng th inslnc t cnfnd m wth th offcl
dtctv frc! Ths incdnt gvs zst t or invstgtn,
hwvr, and I only trst tht or lttl frnd wll nt sffr frm
hr imprdnc in allwng ths brt t trc hr. And nw, Wtsn, w
shll ordr brkfst, and aftrwrds I shll wlk dwn t Dctrs’
Cmmns, whr I hp t gt sm dt whch my hlp us in ths
mttr.”

It ws nrly on o’clck whn Shrlck Hlms rtrnd frm hs
excrsn. H hld in hs hnd a sht of bl ppr, scrwld ovr
wth nts and fgrs.

“I hv sn th wll of th dcsd wf,” sd h. “T dtrmn its
exct mnng I hv bn oblgd t wrk ot th prsnt prcs of th
invstmnts wth whch it is cncrnd. Th ttl incm, whch at th
tm of th wf’s dth ws lttl shrt of £ 1,100, is nw, thrgh
th fll in agrcltrl prcs, nt mr thn £ 750. Ech dghtr cn
clm an incm of £ 250, in cs of mrrg. It is evdnt,
thrfr, tht if bth grls hd mrrd, ths bty wld hv hd a
mr pttnc, whl evn on of thm wld crppl hm t a vry
srs extnt. My mrnng’s wrk hs nt bn wstd, snc it hs
prvd tht h hs th vry strngst mtvs fr stndng in th wy
of anythng of th srt. And nw, Wtsn, ths is t srs fr
dwdlng, espclly as th old mn is awr tht w ar intrstng
orslvs in hs affrs; s if y ar rdy, w shll cll a cb and
drv t Wtrl. I shld b vry mch oblgd if y wld slp yr
rvlvr int yr pckt. An Ely’s N. 2 is an excllnt argmnt
wth gntlmn wh cn twst stl pkrs int knts. Tht and a
tth-brsh ar, I thnk, all tht w nd.”

At Wtrl w wr frtnt in ctchng a trn fr Lthrhd,
whr w hrd a trp at th sttn inn and drv fr fr or fv
mls thrgh th lvly Srry lns. It ws a prfct dy, wth a
brght sn and a fw flcy clds in th hvns. Th trs and
wysd hdgs wr jst thrwng ot thr frst grn shts, and th
ar ws fll of th plsnt smll of th mst erth. T m at lst
thr ws a strng cntrst btwn th swt prms of th sprng
and ths snstr qst upn whch w wr enggd. My cmpnn st in
th frnt of th trp, hs arms fldd, hs ht plld dwn ovr hs
eys, and hs chn snk upn hs brst, brd in th dpst thght.
Sddnly, hwvr, h strtd, tppd m on th shldr, and pntd
ovr th mdws.

“Lk thr!” sd h.

A hvly tmbrd prk strtchd up in a gntl slp, thcknng int
a grv at th hghst pnt. Frm amd th brnchs thr jttd ot
th gry gbls and hgh rf-tr of a vry old mnsn.

“Stk Mrn?” sd h.

“Ys, sr, tht b th hs of Dr. Grmsby Ryltt,” rmrkd th
drvr.

“Thr is sm bldng gng on thr,” sd Hlms; “tht is whr w
ar gng.”

“Thr’s th vllg,” sd th drvr, pntng t a clstr of rfs
sm dstnc t th lft; “bt if y wnt t gt t th hs, y’ll
fnd it shrtr t gt ovr ths stl, and s by th ftpth ovr th
flds. Thr it is, whr th ldy is wlkng.”

“And th ldy, I fncy, is Mss Stnr,” obsrvd Hlms, shdng hs
eys. “Ys, I thnk w hd bttr d as y sggst.”

W gt off, pd or fr, and th trp rttld bck on its wy t
Lthrhd.

“I thght it as wll,” sd Hlms as w clmbd th stl, “tht ths
fllw shld thnk w hd cm hr as archtcts, or on sm dfnt
bsnss. It my stp hs gssp. Gd-aftrnn, Mss Stnr. Y s
tht w hv bn as gd as or wrd.”

Or clnt of th mrnng hd hrrd frwrd t mt us wth a fc
whch spk hr jy. “I hv bn wtng s egrly fr y,” sh
crd, shkng hnds wth us wrmly. “All hs trnd ot splnddly.
Dr. Ryltt hs gn t twn, and it is unlkly tht h wll b bck
bfr evnng.”

“W hv hd th plsr of mkng th Dctr’s acqntnc,” sd
Hlms, and in a fw wrds h sktchd ot wht hd occrrd. Mss
Stnr trnd wht t th lps as sh lstnd.

“Gd hvns!” sh crd, “h hs fllwd m, thn.”

“S it apprs.”

“H is s cnnng tht I nvr knw whn I am sf frm hm. Wht wll
h sy whn h rtrns?”

“H mst grd hmslf, fr h my fnd tht thr is smn mr
cnnng thn hmslf upn hs trck. Y mst lck yrslf up frm hm
t-nght. If h is vlnt, w shll tk y awy t yr ant’s at
Hrrw. Nw, w mst mk th bst us of or tm, s kndly tk us
at onc t th rms whch w ar t exmn.”

Th bldng ws of gry, lchn-bltchd stn, wth a hgh cntrl
prtn and tw crvng wngs, lk th clws of a crb, thrwn ot on
ech sd. In on of ths wngs th wndws wr brkn and blckd
wth wdn brds, whl th rf ws prtly cvd in, a pctr of
rn. Th cntrl prtn ws in lttl bttr rpr, bt th
rght-hnd blck ws cmprtvly mdrn, and th blnds in th
wndws, wth th bl smk crlng up frm th chmnys, shwd tht
ths ws whr th fmly rsdd. Sm scffldng hd bn erctd
agnst th end wll, and th stn-wrk hd bn brkn int, bt
thr wr n sgns of any wrkmn at th mmnt of or vst. Hlms
wlkd slwly up and dwn th ill-trmmd lwn and exmnd wth dp
attntn th otsds of th wndws.

“Ths, I tk it, blngs t th rm in whch y usd t slp, th
cntr on t yr sstr’s, and th on nxt t th mn bldng t
Dr. Ryltt’s chmbr?”

“Exctly s. Bt I am nw slpng in th mddl on.”

“Pndng th altrtns, as I undrstnd. By th wy, thr ds nt
sm t b any vry prssng nd fr rprs at tht end wll.”

“Thr wr nn. I blv tht it ws an excs t mv m frm my
rm.”

“Ah! tht is sggstv. Nw, on th othr sd of ths nrrw wng
rns th crrdr frm whch ths thr rms opn. Thr ar wndws
in it, of crs?”

“Ys, bt vry smll ons. T nrrw fr anyn t pss thrgh.”

“As y bth lckd yr drs at nght, yr rms wr unpprchbl
frm tht sd. Nw, wld y hv th kndnss t g int yr rm
and br yr shttrs?”

Mss Stnr dd s, and Hlms, aftr a crfl exmntn thrgh th
opn wndw, endvrd in evry wy t frc th shttr opn, bt
wtht sccss. Thr ws n slt thrgh whch a knf cld b
pssd t rs th br. Thn wth hs lns h tstd th hngs, bt
thy wr of sld irn, blt frmly int th mssv msnry. “Hm!”
sd h, scrtchng hs chn in sm prplxty, “my thry crtnly
prsnts sm dffclts. N on cld pss ths shttrs if thy
wr bltd. Wll, w shll s if th insd thrws any lght upn th
mttr.”

A smll sd dr ld int th whtwshd crrdr frm whch th
thr bdrms opnd. Hlms rfsd t exmn th thrd chmbr, s
w pssd at onc t th scnd, tht in whch Mss Stnr ws nw
slpng, and in whch hr sstr hd mt wth hr ft. It ws a
hmly lttl rm, wth a lw clng and a gpng frplc, aftr
th fshn of old cntry-hss. A brwn chst of drwrs std in
on crnr, a nrrw wht-cntrpnd bd in anthr, and a
drssng-tbl on th lft-hnd sd of th wndw. Ths artcls,
wth tw smll wckr-wrk chrs, md up all th frntr in th
rm sv fr a sqr of Wltn crpt in th cntr. Th brds rnd
and th pnllng of th wlls wr of brwn, wrm-etn ok, s old
and dsclrd tht it my hv dtd frm th orgnl bldng of
th hs. Hlms drw on of th chrs int a crnr and st slnt,
whl hs eys trvlld rnd and rnd and up and dwn, tkng in
evry dtl of th aprtmnt.

“Whr ds tht bll cmmnct wth?” h askd at lst pntng t a
thck bll-rp whch hng dwn bsd th bd, th tssl actlly
lyng upn th pllw.

“It gs t th hskpr’s rm.”

“It lks nwr thn th othr thngs?”

“Ys, it ws only pt thr a cpl of yrs ag.”

“Yr sstr askd fr it, I spps?”

“N, I nvr hrd of hr usng it. W usd alwys t gt wht w
wntd fr orslvs.”

“Indd, it smd unncssry t pt s nc a bll-pll thr. Y
wll excs m fr a fw mnts whl I stsfy myslf as t ths
flr.” H thrw hmslf dwn upn hs fc wth hs lns in hs hnd
and crwld swftly bckwrd and frwrd, exmnng mntly th crcks
btwn th brds. Thn h dd th sm wth th wd-wrk wth whch
th chmbr ws pnlld. Fnlly h wlkd ovr t th bd and spnt
sm tm in strng at it and in rnnng hs ey up and dwn th wll.
Fnlly h tk th bll-rp in hs hnd and gv it a brsk tg.

“Why, it’s a dmmy,” sd h.

“Wn’t it rng?”

“N, it is nt evn attchd t a wr. Ths is vry intrstng. Y
cn s nw tht it is fstnd t a hk jst abv whr th lttl
opnng fr th vntltr is.”

“Hw vry absrd! I nvr ntcd tht bfr.”

“Vry strng!” mttrd Hlms, pllng at th rp. “Thr ar on or
tw vry snglr pnts abt ths rm. Fr exmpl, wht a fl a
bldr mst b t opn a vntltr int anthr rm, whn, wth th
sm trbl, h mght hv cmmnctd wth th otsd ar!”

“Tht is als qt mdrn,” sd th ldy.

“Dn abt th sm tm as th bll-rp?” rmrkd Hlms.

“Ys, thr wr svrl lttl chngs crrd ot abt tht tm.”

“Thy sm t hv bn of a mst intrstng chrctr—dmmy
bll-rps, and vntltrs whch d nt vntlt. Wth yr
prmssn, Mss Stnr, w shll nw crry or rsrchs int th
innr aprtmnt.”

Dr. Grmsby Ryltt’s chmbr ws lrgr thn tht of hs
stp-dghtr, bt ws as plnly frnshd. A cmp-bd, a smll wdn
shlf fll of bks, mstly of a tchncl chrctr, an armchr
bsd th bd, a pln wdn chr agnst th wll, a rnd tbl,
and a lrg irn sf wr th prncpl thngs whch mt th ey.
Hlms wlkd slwly rnd and exmnd ech and all of thm wth th
knst intrst.

“Wht’s in hr?” h askd, tppng th sf.

“My stpfthr’s bsnss pprs.”

“Oh! y hv sn insd, thn?”

“Only onc, sm yrs ag. I rmmbr tht it ws fll of pprs.”

“Thr isn’t a ct in it, fr exmpl?”

“N. Wht a strng id!”

“Wll, lk at ths!” H tk up a smll scr of mlk whch std on
th tp of it.

“N; w dn’t kp a ct. Bt thr is a chth and a bbn.”

“Ah, ys, of crs! Wll, a chth is jst a bg ct, and yt a
scr of mlk ds nt g vry fr in stsfyng its wnts, I drsy.
Thr is on pnt whch I shld wsh t dtrmn.” H sqttd dwn
in frnt of th wdn chr and exmnd th st of it wth th
grtst attntn.

“Thnk y. Tht is qt sttld,” sd h, rsng and pttng hs
lns in hs pckt. “Hll! Hr is smthng intrstng!”

Th objct whch hd cght hs ey ws a smll dg lsh hng on on
crnr of th bd. Th lsh, hwvr, ws crld upn itslf and td
s as t mk a lp of whpcrd.

“Wht d y mk of tht, Wtsn?”

“It’s a cmmn engh lsh. Bt I dn’t knw why it shld b td.”

“Tht is nt qt s cmmn, is it? Ah, m! it’s a wckd wrld, and
whn a clvr mn trns hs brns t crm it is th wrst of all. I
thnk tht I hv sn engh nw, Mss Stnr, and wth yr
prmssn w shll wlk ot upn th lwn.”

I hd nvr sn my frnd’s fc s grm or hs brw s drk as it ws
whn w trnd frm th scn of ths invstgtn. W hd wlkd
svrl tms up and dwn th lwn, nthr Mss Stnr nr myslf
lkng t brk in upn hs thghts bfr h rsd hmslf frm hs
rvr.

“It is vry essntl, Mss Stnr,” sd h, “tht y shld
absltly fllw my advc in evry rspct.”

“I shll mst crtnly d s.”

“Th mttr is t srs fr any hsttn. Yr lf my dpnd
upn yr cmplnc.”

“I assr y tht I am in yr hnds.”

“In th frst plc, bth my frnd and I mst spnd th nght in yr
rm.”

Bth Mss Stnr and I gzd at hm in astnshmnt.

“Ys, it mst b s. Lt m expln. I blv tht tht is th vllg
inn ovr thr?”

“Ys, tht is th Crwn.”

“Vry gd. Yr wndws wld b vsbl frm thr?”

“Crtnly.”

“Y mst cnfn yrslf t yr rm, on prtnc of a hdch,
whn yr stpfthr cms bck. Thn whn y hr hm rtr fr th
nght, y mst opn th shttrs of yr wndw, und th hsp, pt
yr lmp thr as a sgnl t us, and thn wthdrw qtly wth
evrythng whch y ar lkly t wnt int th rm whch y usd t
occpy. I hv n dbt tht, in spt of th rprs, y cld mng
thr fr on nght.”

“Oh, ys, esly.”

“Th rst y wll lv in or hnds.”

“Bt wht wll y d?”

“W shll spnd th nght in yr rm, and w shll invstgt th
cs of ths ns whch hs dstrbd y.”

“I blv, Mr. Hlms, tht y hv alrdy md up yr mnd,” sd
Mss Stnr, lyng hr hnd upn my cmpnn’s slv.

“Prhps I hv.”

“Thn, fr pty’s sk, tll m wht ws th cs of my sstr’s
dth.”

“I shld prfr t hv clrr prfs bfr I spk.”

“Y cn at lst tll m whthr my own thght is crrct, and if sh
dd frm sm sddn frght.”

“N, I d nt thnk s. I thnk tht thr ws prbbly sm mr
tngbl cs. And nw, Mss Stnr, w mst lv y fr if Dr.
Ryltt rtrnd and sw us or jrny wld b in vn. Gd-by, and
b brv, fr if y wll d wht I hv tld y, y my rst assrd
tht w shll sn drv awy th dngrs tht thrtn y.”

Shrlck Hlms and I hd n dffclty in enggng a bdrm and
sttng-rm at th Crwn Inn. Thy wr on th uppr flr, and frm
or wndw w cld cmmnd a vw of th avn gt, and of th
inhbtd wng of Stk Mrn Mnr Hs. At dsk w sw Dr. Grmsby
Ryltt drv pst, hs hg frm lmng up bsd th lttl fgr
of th ld wh drv hm. Th by hd sm slght dffclty in undng
th hvy irn gts, and w hrd th hrs rr of th Dctr’s
vc and sw th fry wth whch h shk hs clnchd fsts at hm.
Th trp drv on, and a fw mnts ltr w sw a sddn lght sprng
up amng th trs as th lmp ws lt in on of th sttng-rms.

“D y knw, Wtsn,” sd Hlms as w st tgthr in th gthrng
drknss, “I hv rlly sm scrpls as t tkng y t-nght. Thr
is a dstnct elmnt of dngr.”

“Cn I b of assstnc?”

“Yr prsnc mght b invlbl.”

“Thn I shll crtnly cm.”

“It is vry knd of y.”

“Y spk of dngr. Y hv evdntly sn mr in ths rms thn
ws vsbl t m.”

“N, bt I fncy tht I my hv ddcd a lttl mr. I imgn tht
y sw all tht I dd.”

“I sw nthng rmrkbl sv th bll-rp, and wht prps tht
cld answr I cnfss is mr thn I cn imgn.”

“Y sw th vntltr, t?”

“Ys, bt I d nt thnk tht it is sch a vry unsl thng t hv a
smll opnng btwn tw rms. It ws s smll tht a rt cld
hrdly pss thrgh.”

“I knw tht w shld fnd a vntltr bfr evr w cm t Stk
Mrn.”

“My dr Hlms!”

“Oh, ys, I dd. Y rmmbr in hr sttmnt sh sd tht hr sstr
cld smll Dr. Ryltt’s cgr. Nw, of crs tht sggstd at onc
tht thr mst b a cmmnctn btwn th tw rms. It cld only
b a smll on, or it wld hv bn rmrkd upn at th crnr’s
inqry. I ddcd a vntltr.”

“Bt wht hrm cn thr b in tht?”

“Wll, thr is at lst a crs cncdnc of dts. A vntltr
is md, a crd is hng, and a ldy wh slps in th bd ds. Ds
nt tht strk y?”

“I cnnt as yt s any cnnctn.”

“Dd y obsrv anythng vry pclr abt tht bd?”

“N.”

“It ws clmpd t th flr. Dd y evr s a bd fstnd lk tht
bfr?”

“I cnnt sy tht I hv.”

“Th ldy cld nt mv hr bd. It mst alwys b in th sm
rltv pstn t th vntltr and t th rp—or s w my cll
it, snc it ws clrly nvr mnt fr a bll-pll.”

“Hlms,” I crd, “I sm t s dmly wht y ar hntng at. W ar
only jst in tm t prvnt sm sbtl and hrrbl crm.”

“Sbtl engh and hrrbl engh. Whn a dctr ds g wrng h is
th frst of crmnls. H hs nrv and h hs knwldg. Plmr and
Prtchrd wr amng th hds of thr prfssn. Ths mn strks
evn dpr, bt I thnk, Wtsn, tht w shll b abl t strk
dpr stll. Bt w shll hv hrrrs engh bfr th nght is
ovr; fr gdnss’ sk lt us hv a qt pp and trn or mnds
fr a fw hrs t smthng mr chrfl.”

Abt nn o’clck th lght amng th trs ws extngshd, and all
ws drk in th drctn of th Mnr Hs. Tw hrs pssd slwly
awy, and thn, sddnly, jst at th strk of elvn, a sngl brght
lght shn ot rght in frnt of us.

“Tht is or sgnl,” sd Hlms, sprngng t hs ft; “it cms
frm th mddl wndw.”

As w pssd ot h exchngd a fw wrds wth th lndlrd, explnng
tht w wr gng on a lt vst t an acqntnc, and tht it ws
pssbl tht w mght spnd th nght thr. A mmnt ltr w wr
ot on th drk rd, a chll wnd blwng in or fcs, and on yllw
lght twnklng in frnt of us thrgh th glm t gd us on or
smbr errnd.

Thr ws lttl dffclty in entrng th grnds, fr unrprd
brchs gpd in th old prk wll. Mkng or wy amng th trs, w
rchd th lwn, crssd it, and wr abt t entr thrgh th
wndw whn ot frm a clmp of lrl bshs thr drtd wht smd
t b a hds and dstrtd chld, wh thrw itslf upn th grss
wth wrthng lmbs and thn rn swftly acrss th lwn int th
drknss.

“My Gd!” I whsprd; “dd y s it?”

Hlms ws fr th mmnt as strtld as I. Hs hnd clsd lk a vc
upn my wrst in hs agttn. Thn h brk int a lw lgh and pt
hs lps t my er.

“It is a nc hshld,” h mrmrd. “Tht is th bbn.”

I hd frgttn th strng pts whch th Dctr affctd. Thr ws a
chth, t; prhps w mght fnd it upn or shldrs at any
mmnt. I cnfss tht I flt esr in my mnd whn, aftr fllwng
Hlms’ exmpl and slppng off my shs, I fnd myslf insd th
bdrm. My cmpnn nslssly clsd th shttrs, mvd th lmp
ont th tbl, and cst hs eys rnd th rm. All ws as w hd
sn it in th dytm. Thn crpng up t m and mkng a trmpt of
hs hnd, h whsprd int my er agn s gntly tht it ws all tht
I cld d t dstngsh th wrds:

“Th lst snd wld b ftl t or plns.”

I nddd t shw tht I hd hrd.

“W mst st wtht lght. H wld s it thrgh th vntltr.”

I nddd agn.

“D nt g aslp; yr vry lf my dpnd upn it. Hv yr pstl
rdy in cs w shld nd it. I wll st on th sd of th bd, and
y in tht chr.”

I tk ot my rvlvr and ld it on th crnr of th tbl.

Hlms hd brght up a lng thn cn, and ths h plcd upn th bd
bsd hm. By it h ld th bx of mtchs and th stmp of a cndl.
Thn h trnd dwn th lmp, and w wr lft in drknss.

Hw shll I evr frgt tht drdfl vgl? I cld nt hr a snd,
nt evn th drwng of a brth, and yt I knw tht my cmpnn st
opn-eyd, wthn a fw ft of m, in th sm stt of nrvs
tnsn in whch I ws myslf. Th shttrs ct off th lst ry of
lght, and w wtd in abslt drknss.

Frm otsd cm th occsnl cry of a nght-brd, and onc at or
vry wndw a lng drwn ctlk whn, whch tld us tht th chth
ws indd at lbrty. Fr awy w cld hr th dp tns of th
prsh clck, whch bmd ot evry qrtr of an hr. Hw lng thy
smd, ths qrtrs! Twlv strck, and on and tw and thr, and
stll w st wtng slntly fr whtvr mght bfll.

Sddnly thr ws th mmntry glm of a lght up in th drctn
of th vntltr, whch vnshd immdtly, bt ws sccdd by a
strng smll of brnng ol and htd mtl. Smn in th nxt rm
hd lt a drk-lntrn. I hrd a gntl snd of mvmnt, and thn
all ws slnt onc mr, thgh th smll grw strngr. Fr hlf an
hr I st wth strnng ers. Thn sddnly anthr snd bcm
adbl—a vry gntl, sthng snd, lk tht of a smll jt of
stm escpng cntnlly frm a kttl. Th instnt tht w hrd it,
Hlms sprng frm th bd, strck a mtch, and lshd frsly wth
hs cn at th bll-pll.

“Y s it, Wtsn?” h ylld. “Y s it?”

Bt I sw nthng. At th mmnt whn Hlms strck th lght I hrd a
lw, clr whstl, bt th sddn glr flshng int my wry eys
md it impssbl fr m t tll wht it ws at whch my frnd lshd
s svgly. I cld, hwvr, s tht hs fc ws ddly pl and
flld wth hrrr and lthng. H hd csd t strk and ws gzng
up at th vntltr whn sddnly thr brk frm th slnc of th
nght th mst hrrbl cry t whch I hv evr lstnd. It swlld
up ldr and ldr, a hrs yll of pn and fr and angr all
mngld in th on drdfl shrk. Thy sy tht awy dwn in th
vllg, and evn in th dstnt prsng, tht cry rsd th
slprs frm thr bds. It strck cld t or hrts, and I std
gzng at Hlms, and h at m, untl th lst echs of it hd dd
awy int th slnc frm whch it rs.

“Wht cn it mn?” I gspd.

“It mns tht it is all ovr,” Hlms answrd. “And prhps, aftr
all, it is fr th bst. Tk yr pstl, and w wll entr Dr.
Ryltt’s rm.”

Wth a grv fc h lt th lmp and ld th wy dwn th crrdr.
Twc h strck at th chmbr dr wtht any rply frm wthn. Thn
h trnd th hndl and entrd, I at hs hls, wth th cckd
pstl in my hnd.

It ws a snglr sght whch mt or eys. On th tbl std a
drk-lntrn wth th shttr hlf opn, thrwng a brllnt bm of
lght upn th irn sf, th dr of whch ws ajr. Bsd ths
tbl, on th wdn chr, st Dr. Grmsby Ryltt cld in a lng
gry drssng-gwn, hs br ankls prtrdng bnth, and hs ft
thrst int rd hllss Trksh slpprs. Acrss hs lp ly th shrt
stck wth th lng lsh whch w hd ntcd drng th dy. Hs chn
ws cckd upwrd and hs eys wr fxd in a drdfl, rgd str at
th crnr of th clng. Rnd hs brw h hd a pclr yllw
bnd, wth brwnsh spckls, whch smd t b bnd tghtly rnd
hs hd. As w entrd h md nthr snd nr mtn.

“Th bnd! th spckld bnd!” whsprd Hlms.

I tk a stp frwrd. In an instnt hs strng hdgr bgn t
mv, and thr rrd itslf frm amng hs hr th sqt
dmnd-shpd hd and pffd nck of a lthsm srpnt.

“It is a swmp addr!” crd Hlms; “th ddlst snk in Ind. H
hs dd wthn tn scnds of bng bttn. Vlnc ds, in trth,
rcl upn th vlnt, and th schmr flls int th pt whch h
dgs fr anthr. Lt us thrst ths crtr bck int its dn, and w
cn thn rmv Mss Stnr t sm plc of shltr and lt th cnty
plc knw wht hs hppnd.”

As h spk h drw th dg-whp swftly frm th dd mn’s lp, and
thrwng th ns rnd th rptl’s nck h drw it frm its hrrd
prch and, crryng it at arm’s lngth, thrw it int th irn sf,
whch h clsd upn it.

Sch ar th tr fcts of th dth of Dr. Grmsby Ryltt, of Stk
Mrn. It is nt ncssry tht I shld prlng a nrrtv whch hs
alrdy rn t t grt a lngth by tllng hw w brk th sd nws
t th trrfd grl, hw w cnvyd hr by th mrnng trn t th
cr of hr gd ant at Hrrw, of hw th slw prcss of offcl
inqry cm t th cnclsn tht th dctr mt hs ft whl
indscrtly plyng wth a dngrs pt. Th lttl whch I hd yt
t lrn of th cs ws tld m by Shrlck Hlms as w trvlld
bck nxt dy.

“I hd,” sd h, “cm t an entrly errns cnclsn whch
shws, my dr Wtsn, hw dngrs it alwys is t rsn frm
insffcnt dt. Th prsnc of th gpss, and th us of th wrd
‘bnd,’ whch ws usd by th pr grl, n dbt, t expln th
apprnc whch sh hd cght a hrrd glmps of by th lght of
hr mtch, wr sffcnt t pt m upn an entrly wrng scnt. I
cn only clm th mrt tht I instntly rcnsdrd my pstn
whn, hwvr, it bcm clr t m tht whtvr dngr thrtnd an
occpnt of th rm cld nt cm ethr frm th wndw or th dr.
My attntn ws spdly drwn, as I hv alrdy rmrkd t y, t
ths vntltr, and t th bll-rp whch hng dwn t th bd. Th
dscvry tht ths ws a dmmy, and tht th bd ws clmpd t th
flr, instntly gv rs t th sspcn tht th rp ws thr as
a brdg fr smthng pssng thrgh th hl and cmng t th bd.
Th id of a snk instntly occrrd t m, and whn I cpld it
wth my knwldg tht th dctr ws frnshd wth a spply of
crtrs frm Ind, I flt tht I ws prbbly on th rght trck.
Th id of usng a frm of psn whch cld nt pssbly b
dscvrd by any chmcl tst ws jst sch a on as wld occr t a
clvr and rthlss mn wh hd hd an Estrn trnng. Th rpdty
wth whch sch a psn wld tk effct wld als, frm hs pnt
of vw, b an advntg. It wld b a shrp-eyd crnr, indd, wh
cld dstngsh th tw lttl drk pnctrs whch wld shw whr
th psn fngs hd dn thr wrk. Thn I thght of th whstl. Of
crs h mst rcll th snk bfr th mrnng lght rvld it t
th vctm. H hd trnd it, prbbly by th us of th mlk whch w
sw, t rtrn t hm whn smmnd. H wld pt it thrgh ths
vntltr at th hr tht h thght bst, wth th crtnty tht it
wld crwl dwn th rp and lnd on th bd. It mght or mght nt
bt th occpnt, prhps sh mght escp evry nght fr a wk, bt
snr or ltr sh mst fll a vctm.

“I hd cm t ths cnclsns bfr evr I hd entrd hs rm. An
inspctn of hs chr shwd m tht h hd bn in th hbt of
stndng on it, whch of crs wld b ncssry in ordr tht h
shld rch th vntltr. Th sght of th sf, th scr of mlk,
and th lp of whpcrd wr engh t fnlly dspl any dbts whch
my hv rmnd. Th mtllc clng hrd by Mss Stnr ws
obvsly csd by hr stpfthr hstly clsng th dr of hs sf
upn its trrbl occpnt. Hvng onc md up my mnd, y knw th
stps whch I tk in ordr t pt th mttr t th prf. I hrd th
crtr hss as I hv n dbt tht y dd als, and I instntly lt
th lght and attckd it.”

“Wth th rslt of drvng it thrgh th vntltr.”

“And als wth th rslt of csng it t trn upn its mstr at th
othr sd. Sm of th blws of my cn cm hm and rsd its
snksh tmpr, s tht it flw upn th frst prsn it sw. In ths
wy I am n dbt indrctly rspnsbl fr Dr. Grmsby Ryltt’s
dth, and I cnnt sy tht it is lkly t wgh vry hvly upn my
cnscnc.”




IX. TH ADVNTR OF TH ENGNR’S THMB


Of all th prblms whch hv bn sbmttd t my frnd, Mr.
Shrlck Hlms, fr sltn drng th yrs of or intmcy, thr
wr only tw whch I ws th mns of intrdcng t hs ntc—tht
of Mr. Hthrly’s thmb, and tht of Clnl Wrbrtn’s mdnss. Of
ths th lttr my hv affrdd a fnr fld fr an act and
orgnl obsrvr, bt th othr ws s strng in its incptn and s
drmtc in its dtls tht it my b th mr wrthy of bng plcd
upn rcrd, evn if it gv my frnd fwr opnngs fr ths
ddctv mthds of rsnng by whch h achvd sch rmrkbl
rslts. Th stry hs, I blv, bn tld mr thn onc in th
nwspprs, bt, lk all sch nrrtvs, its effct is mch lss
strkng whn st frth _en blc_ in a sngl hlf-clmn of prnt thn
whn th fcts slwly evlv bfr yr own eys, and th mystry
clrs grdlly awy as ech nw dscvry frnshs a stp whch
lds on t th cmplt trth. At th tm th crcmstncs md a
dp imprssn upn m, and th lps of tw yrs hs hrdly srvd
t wkn th effct.

It ws in th smmr of ’89, nt lng aftr my mrrg, tht th
evnts occrrd whch I am nw abt t smmrs. I hd rtrnd t
cvl prctc and hd fnlly abndnd Hlms in hs Bkr Strt
rms, althgh I cntnlly vstd hm and occsnlly evn
prsdd hm t frg hs Bhmn hbts s fr as t cm and vst
us. My prctc hd stdly incrsd, and as I hppnd t lv at n
vry grt dstnc frm Pddngtn Sttn, I gt a fw ptnts frm
amng th offcls. On of ths, whm I hd crd of a pnfl and
lngrng dss, ws nvr wry of advrtsng my vrts and of
endvrng t snd m on evry sffrr ovr whm h mght hv any
inflnc.

On mrnng, at a lttl bfr svn o’clck, I ws awknd by th
md tppng at th dr t annnc tht tw mn hd cm frm
Pddngtn and wr wtng in th cnsltng-rm. I drssd
hrrdly, fr I knw by exprnc tht rlwy css wr sldm
trvl, and hstnd dwnstrs. As I dscndd, my old ally, th
grd, cm ot of th rm and clsd th dr tghtly bhnd hm.

“I’v gt hm hr,” h whsprd, jrkng hs thmb ovr hs shldr;
“h’s all rght.”

“Wht is it, thn?” I askd, fr hs mnnr sggstd tht it ws sm
strng crtr whch h hd cgd up in my rm.

“It’s a nw ptnt,” h whsprd. “I thght I’d brng hm rnd
myslf; thn h cldn’t slp awy. Thr h is, all sf and snd. I
mst g nw, Dctr; I hv my dts, jst th sm as y.” And off
h wnt, ths trsty tt, wtht evn gvng m tm t thnk hm.

I entrd my cnsltng-rm and fnd a gntlmn std by th tbl.
H ws qtly drssd in a st of hthr twd wth a sft clth cp
whch h hd ld dwn upn my bks. Rnd on of hs hnds h hd a
hndkrchf wrppd, whch ws mttld all ovr wth bldstns. H
ws yng, nt mr thn fv-and-twnty, I shld sy, wth a strng,
mscln fc; bt h ws excdngly pl and gv m th imprssn
of a mn wh ws sffrng frm sm strng agttn, whch it tk
all hs strngth of mnd t cntrl.

“I am srry t knck y up s erly, Dctr,” sd h, “bt I hv hd
a vry srs accdnt drng th nght. I cm in by trn ths
mrnng, and on inqrng at Pddngtn as t whr I mght fnd a
dctr, a wrthy fllw vry kndly escrtd m hr. I gv th md a
crd, bt I s tht sh hs lft it upn th sd-tbl.”

I tk it up and glncd at it. “Mr. Vctr Hthrly, hydrlc
engnr, 16A, Vctr Strt (3rd flr).” Tht ws th nm, styl,
and abd of my mrnng vstr. “I rgrt tht I hv kpt y
wtng,” sd I, sttng dwn in my lbrry-chr. “Y ar frsh frm
a nght jrny, I undrstnd, whch is in itslf a mntns
occptn.”

“Oh, my nght cld nt b clld mntns,” sd h, and lghd. H
lghd vry hrtly, wth a hgh, rngng nt, lnng bck in hs
chr and shkng hs sds. All my mdcl instncts rs up agnst
tht lgh.

“Stp it!” I crd; “pll yrslf tgthr!” and I prd ot sm
wtr frm a crff.

It ws uslss, hwvr. H ws off in on of ths hystrcl
otbrsts whch cm upn a strng ntr whn sm grt crss is
ovr and gn. Prsntly h cm t hmslf onc mr, vry wry and
pl-lkng.

“I hv bn mkng a fl of myslf,” h gspd.

“Nt at all. Drnk ths.” I dshd sm brndy int th wtr, and th
clr bgn t cm bck t hs bldlss chks.

“Tht’s bttr!” sd h. “And nw, Dctr, prhps y wld kndly
attnd t my thmb, or rthr t th plc whr my thmb usd t b.”

H unwnd th hndkrchf and hld ot hs hnd. It gv evn my
hrdnd nrvs a shddr t lk at it. Thr wr fr prtrdng
fngrs and a hrrd rd, spngy srfc whr th thmb shld hv
bn. It hd bn hckd or trn rght ot frm th rts.

“Gd hvns!” I crd, “ths is a trrbl injry. It mst hv bld
cnsdrbly.”

“Ys, it dd. I fntd whn it ws dn, and I thnk tht I mst hv
bn snslss fr a lng tm. Whn I cm t I fnd tht it ws
stll bldng, s I td on end of my hndkrchf vry tghtly rnd
th wrst and brcd it up wth a twg.”

“Excllnt! Y shld hv bn a srgn.”

“It is a qstn of hydrlcs, y s, and cm wthn my own
prvnc.”

“Ths hs bn dn,” sd I, exmnng th wnd, “by a vry hvy and
shrp instrmnt.”

“A thng lk a clvr,” sd h.

“An accdnt, I prsm?”

“By n mns.”

“Wht! a mrdrs attck?”

“Vry mrdrs indd.”

“Y hrrfy m.”

I spngd th wnd, clnd it, drssd it, and fnlly cvrd it
ovr wth cttn wddng and crblsd bndgs. H ly bck wtht
wncng, thgh h bt hs lp frm tm t tm.

“Hw is tht?” I askd whn I hd fnshd.

“Cptl! Btwn yr brndy and yr bndg, I fl a nw mn. I ws
vry wk, bt I hv hd a gd dl t g thrgh.”

“Prhps y hd bttr nt spk of th mttr. It is evdntly tryng
t yr nrvs.”

“Oh, n, nt nw. I shll hv t tll my tl t th plc; bt,
btwn orslvs, if it wr nt fr th cnvncng evdnc of ths
wnd of mn, I shld b srprsd if thy blvd my sttmnt, fr
it is a vry extrrdnry on, and I hv nt mch in th wy of prf
wth whch t bck it up; and, evn if thy blv m, th cls whch
I cn gv thm ar s vg tht it is a qstn whthr jstc wll
b dn.”

“H!” crd I, “if it is anythng in th ntr of a prblm whch y
dsr t s slvd, I shld strngly rcmmnd y t cm t my
frnd, Mr. Shrlck Hlms, bfr y g t th offcl plc.”

“Oh, I hv hrd of tht fllw,” answrd my vstr, “and I shld
b vry gld if h wld tk th mttr up, thgh of crs I mst
us th offcl plc as wll. Wld y gv m an intrdctn t
hm?”

“I’ll d bttr. I’ll tk y rnd t hm myslf.”

“I shld b immnsly oblgd t y.”

“W’ll cll a cb and g tgthr. W shll jst b in tm t hv a
lttl brkfst wth hm. D y fl eql t it?”

“Ys; I shll nt fl esy untl I hv tld my stry.”

“Thn my srvnt wll cll a cb, and I shll b wth y in an
instnt.” I rshd upstrs, explnd th mttr shrtly t my wf,
and in fv mnts ws insd a hnsm, drvng wth my nw
acqntnc t Bkr Strt.

Shrlck Hlms ws, as I expctd, lngng abt hs sttng-rm in
hs drssng-gwn, rdng th agny clmn of _Th Tms_ and smkng
hs bfr-brkfst pp, whch ws cmpsd of all th plgs and
dttls lft frm hs smks of th dy bfr, all crflly drd and
cllctd on th crnr of th mntlpc. H rcvd us in hs
qtly gnl fshn, ordrd frsh rshrs and eggs, and jnd us
in a hrty ml. Whn it ws cncldd h sttld or nw acqntnc
upn th sf, plcd a pllw bnth hs hd, and ld a glss of
brndy and wtr wthn hs rch.

“It is esy t s tht yr exprnc hs bn n cmmn on, Mr.
Hthrly,” sd h. “Pry, l dwn thr and mk yrslf absltly
at hm. Tll us wht y cn, bt stp whn y ar trd and kp up
yr strngth wth a lttl stmlnt.”

“Thnk y,” sd my ptnt, “bt I hv flt anthr mn snc th
dctr bndgd m, and I thnk tht yr brkfst hs cmpltd th
cr. I shll tk up as lttl of yr vlbl tm as pssbl, s I
shll strt at onc upn my pclr exprncs.”

Hlms st in hs bg armchr wth th wry, hvy-lddd exprssn
whch vld hs kn and egr ntr, whl I st oppst t hm,
and w lstnd in slnc t th strng stry whch or vstr
dtld t us.

“Y mst knw,” sd h, “tht I am an orphn and a bchlr, rsdng
aln in ldgngs in Lndn. By prfssn I am a hydrlc engnr,
and I hv hd cnsdrbl exprnc of my wrk drng th svn
yrs tht I ws apprntcd t Vnnr & Mthsn, th wll-knwn frm,
of Grnwch. Tw yrs ag, hvng srvd my tm, and hvng als
cm int a fr sm of mny thrgh my pr fthr’s dth, I
dtrmnd t strt in bsnss fr myslf and tk prfssnl
chmbrs in Vctr Strt.

“I spps tht evryn fnds hs frst indpndnt strt in bsnss
a drry exprnc. T m it hs bn excptnlly s. Drng tw
yrs I hv hd thr cnslttns and on smll jb, and tht is
absltly all tht my prfssn hs brght m. My grss tkngs
amnt t £ 27 10_s_. Evry dy, frm nn in th mrnng untl fr in
th aftrnn, I wtd in my lttl dn, untl at lst my hrt bgn
t snk, and I cm t blv tht I shld nvr hv any prctc at
all.

“Ystrdy, hwvr, jst as I ws thnkng of lvng th offc, my
clrk entrd t sy thr ws a gntlmn wtng wh wshd t s m
upn bsnss. H brght up a crd, t, wth th nm of ‘Clnl
Lysndr Strk’ engrvd upn it. Cls at hs hls cm th clnl
hmslf, a mn rthr ovr th mddl sz, bt of an excdng
thnnss. I d nt thnk tht I hv evr sn s thn a mn. Hs whl
fc shrpnd awy int ns and chn, and th skn of hs chks ws
drwn qt tns ovr hs otstndng bns. Yt ths emctn
smd t b hs ntrl hbt, and d t n dss, fr hs ey ws
brght, hs stp brsk, and hs brng assrd. H ws plnly bt
ntly drssd, and hs ag, I shld jdg, wld b nrr frty thn
thrty.

“‘Mr. Hthrly?’ sd h, wth smthng of a Grmn accnt. ‘Y hv
bn rcmmndd t m, Mr. Hthrly, as bng a mn wh is nt only
prfcnt in hs prfssn bt is als dscrt and cpbl of
prsrvng a scrt.’

“I bwd, flng as flttrd as any yng mn wld at sch an
addrss. ‘My I ask wh it ws wh gv m s gd a chrctr?’

“‘Wll, prhps it is bttr tht I shld nt tll y tht jst at
ths mmnt. I hv it frm th sm src tht y ar bth an orphn
and a bchlr and ar rsdng aln in Lndn.’

“‘Tht is qt crrct,’ I answrd; ‘bt y wll excs m if I sy
tht I cnnt s hw all ths brs upn my prfssnl
qlfctns. I undrstnd tht it ws on a prfssnl mttr tht
y wshd t spk t m?’

“‘Undbtdly s. Bt y wll fnd tht all I sy is rlly t th
pnt. I hv a prfssnl cmmssn fr y, bt abslt scrcy
is qt essntl—abslt scrcy, y undrstnd, and of crs w
my expct tht mr frm a mn wh is aln thn frm on wh lvs in
th bsm of hs fmly.’

“‘If I prms t kp a scrt,’ sd I, ‘y my absltly dpnd
upn my dng s.’

“H lkd vry hrd at m as I spk, and it smd t m tht I hd
nvr sn s sspcs and qstnng an ey.

“‘D y prms, thn?’ sd h at lst.

“‘Ys, I prms.’

“‘Abslt and cmplt slnc bfr, drng, and aftr? N rfrnc
t th mttr at all, ethr in wrd or wrtng?’

“‘I hv alrdy gvn y my wrd.’

“‘Vry gd.’ H sddnly sprng up, and drtng lk lghtnng acrss
th rm h flng opn th dr. Th pssg otsd ws empty.

“‘Tht’s all rght,’ sd h, cmng bck. ‘I knw tht clrks ar
smtms crs as t thr mstr’s affrs. Nw w cn tlk in
sfty.’ H drw up hs chr vry cls t mn and bgn t str at
m agn wth th sm qstnng and thghtfl lk.

“A flng of rplsn, and of smthng akn t fr hd bgn t
rs wthn m at th strng antcs of ths flshlss mn. Evn my
drd of lsng a clnt cld nt rstrn m frm shwng my
imptnc.

“‘I bg tht y wll stt yr bsnss, sr,’ sd I; ‘my tm is of
vl.’ Hvn frgv m fr tht lst sntnc, bt th wrds cm t
my lps.

“‘Hw wld ffty gns fr a nght’s wrk st y?’ h askd.

“‘Mst admrbly.’

“‘I sy a nght’s wrk, bt an hr’s wld b nrr th mrk. I
smply wnt yr opnn abt a hydrlc stmpng mchn whch hs
gt ot of gr. If y shw us wht is wrng w shll sn st it
rght orslvs. Wht d y thnk of sch a cmmssn as tht?’

“‘Th wrk apprs t b lght and th py mnfcnt.’

“‘Prcsly s. W shll wnt y t cm t-nght by th lst trn.’

“‘Whr t?’

“‘T Eyfrd, in Brkshr. It is a lttl plc nr th brdrs of
Oxfrdshr, and wthn svn mls of Rdng. Thr is a trn frm
Pddngtn whch wld brng y thr at abt 11:15.’

“‘Vry gd.’

“‘I shll cm dwn in a crrg t mt y.’

“‘Thr is a drv, thn?’

“‘Ys, or lttl plc is qt ot in th cntry. It is a gd svn
mls frm Eyfrd Sttn.’

“‘Thn w cn hrdly gt thr bfr mdnght. I spps thr wld
b n chnc of a trn bck. I shld b cmplld t stp th nght.’

“‘Ys, w cld esly gv y a shk-dwn.’

“‘Tht is vry awkwrd. Cld I nt cm at sm mr cnvnnt hr?’

“‘W hv jdgd it bst tht y shld cm lt. It is t rcmpns
y fr any incnvnnc tht w ar pyng t y, a yng and
unknwn mn, a f whch wld by an opnn frm th vry hds of
yr prfssn. Stll, of crs, if y wld lk t drw ot of th
bsnss, thr is plnty of tm t d s.’

“I thght of th ffty gns, and of hw vry usfl thy wld b
t m. ‘Nt at all,’ sd I, ‘I shll b vry hppy t accmmdt
myslf t yr wshs. I shld lk, hwvr, t undrstnd a lttl
mr clrly wht it is tht y wsh m t d.’

“‘Qt s. It is vry ntrl tht th pldg of scrcy whch w hv
exctd frm y shld hv arsd yr crsty. I hv n wsh t
cmmt y t anythng wtht yr hvng it all ld bfr y. I
spps tht w ar absltly sf frm evsdrpprs?’

“‘Entrly.’

“‘Thn th mttr stnds ths. Y ar prbbly awr tht
fllr’s-erth is a vlbl prdct, and tht it is only fnd in on
or tw plcs in Englnd?’

“‘I hv hrd s.’

“‘Sm lttl tm ag I bght a smll plc—a vry smll plc—wthn
tn mls of Rdng. I ws frtnt engh t dscvr tht thr ws
a dpst of fllr’s-erth in on of my flds. On exmnng it,
hwvr, I fnd tht ths dpst ws a cmprtvly smll on, and
tht it frmd a lnk btwn tw vry mch lrgr ons upn th rght
and lft—bth of thm, hwvr, in th grnds of my nghbrs. Ths
gd ppl wr absltly ignrnt tht thr lnd cntnd tht
whch ws qt as vlbl as a gld-mn. Ntrlly, it ws t my
intrst t by thr lnd bfr thy dscvrd its tr vl, bt
unfrtntly I hd n cptl by whch I cld d ths. I tk a fw
of my frnds int th scrt, hwvr, and thy sggstd tht w
shld qtly and scrtly wrk or own lttl dpst and tht in
ths wy w shld ern th mny whch wld enbl us t by th
nghbrng flds. Ths w hv nw bn dng fr sm tm, and in
ordr t hlp us in or oprtns w erctd a hydrlc prss. Ths
prss, as I hv alrdy explnd, hs gt ot of ordr, and w wsh
yr advc upn th sbjct. W grd or scrt vry jlsly,
hwvr, and if it onc bcm knwn tht w hd hydrlc engnrs
cmng t or lttl hs, it wld sn rs inqry, and thn, if
th fcts cm ot, it wld b gd-by t any chnc of gttng ths
flds and crryng ot or plns. Tht is why I hv md y prms
m tht y wll nt tll a hmn bng tht y ar gng t Eyfrd
t-nght. I hp tht I mk it all pln?’

“‘I qt fllw y,’ sd I. ‘Th only pnt whch I cld nt qt
undrstnd ws wht us y cld mk of a hydrlc prss in
excvtng fllr’s-erth, whch, as I undrstnd, is dg ot lk
grvl frm a pt.’

“‘Ah!’ sd h crlssly, ‘w hv or own prcss. W cmprss th
erth int brcks, s as t rmv thm wtht rvlng wht thy
ar. Bt tht is a mr dtl. I hv tkn y flly int my
cnfdnc nw, Mr. Hthrly, and I hv shwn y hw I trst y.’
H rs as h spk. ‘I shll expct y, thn, at Eyfrd at 11:15.’

“‘I shll crtnly b thr.’

“‘And nt a wrd t a sl.’ H lkd at m wth a lst lng,
qstnng gz, and thn, prssng my hnd in a cld, dnk grsp, h
hrrd frm th rm.

“Wll, whn I cm t thnk it all ovr in cl bld I ws vry mch
astnshd, as y my bth thnk, at ths sddn cmmssn whch hd
bn intrstd t m. On th on hnd, of crs, I ws gld, fr th
f ws at lst tnfld wht I shld hv askd hd I st a prc
upn my own srvcs, and it ws pssbl tht ths ordr mght ld t
othr ons. On th othr hnd, th fc and mnnr of my ptrn hd
md an unplsnt imprssn upn m, and I cld nt thnk tht hs
explntn of th fllr’s-erth ws sffcnt t expln th
ncssty fr my cmng at mdnght, and hs extrm anxty lst I
shld tll anyn of my errnd. Hwvr, I thrw all frs t th
wnds, at a hrty sppr, drv t Pddngtn, and strtd off,
hvng obyd t th lttr th injnctn as t hldng my tng.

“At Rdng I hd t chng nt only my crrg bt my sttn.
Hwvr, I ws in tm fr th lst trn t Eyfrd, and I rchd th
lttl dm-lt sttn aftr elvn o’clck. I ws th only pssngr
wh gt ot thr, and thr ws n on upn th pltfrm sv a sngl
slpy prtr wth a lntrn. As I pssd ot thrgh th wckt gt,
hwvr, I fnd my acqntnc of th mrnng wtng in th shdw
upn th othr sd. Wtht a wrd h grspd my arm and hrrd m
int a crrg, th dr of whch ws stndng opn. H drw up th
wndws on ethr sd, tppd on th wd-wrk, and awy w wnt as
fst as th hrs cld g.”

“On hrs?” intrjctd Hlms.

“Ys, only on.”

“Dd y obsrv th clr?”

“Ys, I sw it by th sd-lghts whn I ws stppng int th
crrg. It ws a chstnt.”

“Trd-lkng or frsh?”

“Oh, frsh and glssy.”

“Thnk y. I am srry t hv intrrptd y. Pry cntn yr mst
intrstng sttmnt.”

“Awy w wnt thn, and w drv fr at lst an hr. Clnl Lysndr
Strk hd sd tht it ws only svn mls, bt I shld thnk, frm
th rt tht w smd t g, and frm th tm tht w tk, tht it
mst hv bn nrr twlv. H st at my sd in slnc all th
tm, and I ws awr, mr thn onc whn I glncd in hs drctn,
tht h ws lkng at m wth grt intnsty. Th cntry rds sm
t b nt vry gd in tht prt of th wrld, fr w lrchd and
jltd trrbly. I trd t lk ot of th wndws t s smthng of
whr w wr, bt thy wr md of frstd glss, and I cld mk
ot nthng sv th occsnl brght blr of a pssng lght. Nw and
thn I hzrdd sm rmrk t brk th mntny of th jrny, bt
th clnl answrd only in mnsyllbls, and th cnvrstn sn
flggd. At lst, hwvr, th bmpng of th rd ws exchngd fr
th crsp smthnss of a grvl-drv, and th crrg cm t a
stnd. Clnl Lysndr Strk sprng ot, and, as I fllwd aftr hm,
plld m swftly int a prch whch gpd in frnt of us. W stppd,
as it wr, rght ot of th crrg and int th hll, s tht I
fld t ctch th mst fltng glnc of th frnt of th hs. Th
instnt tht I hd crssd th thrshld th dr slmmd hvly
bhnd us, and I hrd fntly th rttl of th whls as th crrg
drv awy.

“It ws ptch drk insd th hs, and th clnl fmbld abt
lkng fr mtchs and mttrng undr hs brth. Sddnly a dr
opnd at th othr end of th pssg, and a lng, gldn br of lght
sht ot in or drctn. It grw brdr, and a wmn apprd wth a
lmp in hr hnd, whch sh hld abv hr hd, pshng hr fc
frwrd and prng at us. I cld s tht sh ws prtty, and frm
th glss wth whch th lght shn upn hr drk drss I knw tht it
ws a rch mtrl. Sh spk a fw wrds in a frgn tng in a
tn as thgh askng a qstn, and whn my cmpnn answrd in a
grff mnsyllbl sh gv sch a strt tht th lmp nrly fll frm
hr hnd. Clnl Strk wnt up t hr, whsprd smthng in hr er,
and thn, pshng hr bck int th rm frm whnc sh hd cm, h
wlkd twrds m agn wth th lmp in hs hnd.

“‘Prhps y wll hv th kndnss t wt in ths rm fr a fw
mnts,’ sd h, thrwng opn anthr dr. It ws a qt, lttl,
plnly frnshd rm, wth a rnd tbl in th cntr, on whch
svrl Grmn bks wr scttrd. Clnl Strk ld dwn th lmp
on th tp of a hrmnm bsd th dr. ‘I shll nt kp y
wtng an instnt,’ sd h, and vnshd int th drknss.

“I glncd at th bks upn th tbl, and in spt of my ignrnc of
Grmn I cld s tht tw of thm wr trtss on scnc, th
othrs bng vlms of ptry. Thn I wlkd acrss t th wndw,
hpng tht I mght ctch sm glmps of th cntry-sd, bt an ok
shttr, hvly brrd, ws fldd acrss it. It ws a wndrflly
slnt hs. Thr ws an old clck tckng ldly smwhr in th
pssg, bt othrws evrythng ws ddly stll. A vg flng of
unsnss bgn t stl ovr m. Wh wr ths Grmn ppl, and
wht wr thy dng lvng in ths strng, ot-of-th-wy plc? And
whr ws th plc? I ws tn mls or s frm Eyfrd, tht ws all I
knw, bt whthr nrth, sth, est, or wst I hd n id. Fr tht
mttr, Rdng, and pssbly othr lrg twns, wr wthn tht
rds, s th plc mght nt b s scldd, aftr all. Yt it ws
qt crtn, frm th abslt stllnss, tht w wr in th
cntry. I pcd up and dwn th rm, hmmng a tn undr my brth
t kp up my sprts and flng tht I ws thrghly ernng my
ffty-gn f.

“Sddnly, wtht any prlmnry snd in th mdst of th uttr
stllnss, th dr of my rm swng slwly opn. Th wmn ws
stndng in th aprtr, th drknss of th hll bhnd hr, th
yllw lght frm my lmp btng upn hr egr and btfl fc. I
cld s at a glnc tht sh ws sck wth fr, and th sght snt a
chll t my own hrt. Sh hld up on shkng fngr t wrn m t b
slnt, and sh sht a fw whsprd wrds of brkn Englsh at m, hr
eys glncng bck, lk ths of a frghtnd hrs, int th glm
bhnd hr.

“‘I wld g,’ sd sh, tryng hrd, as it smd t m, t spk
clmly; ‘I wld g. I shld nt sty hr. Thr is n gd fr y
t d.’

“‘Bt, mdm,’ sd I, ‘I hv nt yt dn wht I cm fr. I cnnt
pssbly lv untl I hv sn th mchn.’

“‘It is nt wrth yr whl t wt,’ sh wnt on. ‘Y cn pss
thrgh th dr; n on hndrs.’ And thn, sng tht I smld and
shk my hd, sh sddnly thrw asd hr cnstrnt and md a stp
frwrd, wth hr hnds wrng tgthr. ‘Fr th lv of Hvn!’ sh
whsprd, ‘gt awy frm hr bfr it is t lt!’

“Bt I am smwht hdstrng by ntr, and th mr rdy t engg
in an affr whn thr is sm obstcl in th wy. I thght of my
ffty-gn f, of my wrsm jrny, and of th unplsnt nght
whch smd t b bfr m. Ws it all t g fr nthng? Why shld
I slnk awy wtht hvng crrd ot my cmmssn, and wtht th
pymnt whch ws my d? Ths wmn mght, fr all I knw, b a
mnmnc. Wth a stt brng, thrfr, thgh hr mnnr hd
shkn m mr thn I crd t cnfss, I stll shk my hd and
dclrd my intntn of rmnng whr I ws. Sh ws abt t rnw
hr entrts whn a dr slmmd ovrhd, and th snd of svrl
ftstps ws hrd upn th strs. Sh lstnd fr an instnt, thrw
up hr hnds wth a dsprng gstr, and vnshd as sddnly and as
nslssly as sh hd cm.

“Th nwcmrs wr Clnl Lysndr Strk and a shrt thck mn wth a
chnchll brd grwng ot of th crss of hs dbl chn, wh ws
intrdcd t m as Mr. Frgsn.

“‘Ths is my scrtry and mngr,’ sd th clnl. ‘By th wy, I
ws undr th imprssn tht I lft ths dr sht jst nw. I fr
tht y hv flt th drght.’

“‘On th cntrry,’ sd I, ‘I opnd th dr myslf bcs I flt
th rm t b a lttl cls.’

“H sht on of hs sspcs lks at m. ‘Prhps w hd bttr
prcd t bsnss, thn,’ sd h. ‘Mr. Frgsn and I wll tk y
up t s th mchn.’

“‘I hd bttr pt my ht on, I spps.’

“‘Oh, n, it is in th hs.’

“‘Wht, y dg fllr’s-erth in th hs?’

“‘N, n. Ths is only whr w cmprss it. Bt nvr mnd tht. All
w wsh y t d is t exmn th mchn and t lt us knw wht is
wrng wth it.’

“W wnt upstrs tgthr, th clnl frst wth th lmp, th ft
mngr and I bhnd hm. It ws a lbyrnth of an old hs, wth
crrdrs, pssgs, nrrw wndng strcss, and lttl lw drs,
th thrshlds of whch wr hllwd ot by th gnrtns wh hd
crssd thm. Thr wr n crpts and n sgns of any frntr abv
th grnd flr, whl th plstr ws plng off th wlls, and th
dmp ws brkng thrgh in grn, unhlthy bltchs. I trd t pt
on as uncncrnd an ar as pssbl, bt I hd nt frgttn th
wrnngs of th ldy, evn thgh I dsrgrdd thm, and I kpt a kn
ey upn my tw cmpnns. Frgsn apprd t b a mrs and slnt
mn, bt I cld s frm th lttl tht h sd tht h ws at lst
a fllw-cntrymn.

“Clnl Lysndr Strk stppd at lst bfr a lw dr, whch h
unlckd. Wthn ws a smll, sqr rm, in whch th thr of us
cld hrdly gt at on tm. Frgsn rmnd otsd, and th
clnl ushrd m in.

“‘W ar nw,’ sd h, ‘actlly wthn th hydrlc prss, and it
wld b a prtclrly unplsnt thng fr us if anyn wr t trn
it on. Th clng of ths smll chmbr is rlly th end of th
dscndng pstn, and it cms dwn wth th frc of mny tns upn
ths mtl flr. Thr ar smll ltrl clmns of wtr otsd
whch rcv th frc, and whch trnsmt and mltply it in th
mnnr whch is fmlr t y. Th mchn gs rdly engh, bt
thr is sm stffnss in th wrkng of it, and it hs lst a lttl
of its frc. Prhps y wll hv th gdnss t lk it ovr and t
shw us hw w cn st it rght.’

“I tk th lmp frm hm, and I exmnd th mchn vry thrghly.
It ws indd a ggntc on, and cpbl of exrcsng enrms
prssr. Whn I pssd otsd, hwvr, and prssd dwn th lvrs
whch cntrlld it, I knw at onc by th whshng snd tht thr
ws a slght lkg, whch allwd a rgrgttn of wtr thrgh
on of th sd cylndrs. An exmntn shwd tht on of th
ind-rbbr bnds whch ws rnd th hd of a drvng-rd hd shrnk
s as nt qt t fll th sckt alng whch it wrkd. Ths ws
clrly th cs of th lss of pwr, and I pntd it ot t my
cmpnns, wh fllwd my rmrks vry crflly and askd svrl
prctcl qstns as t hw thy shld prcd t st it rght. Whn
I hd md it clr t thm, I rtrnd t th mn chmbr of th
mchn and tk a gd lk at it t stsfy my own crsty. It ws
obvs at a glnc tht th stry of th fllr’s-erth ws th mrst
fbrctn, fr it wld b absrd t spps tht s pwrfl an
engn cld b dsgnd fr s indqt a prps. Th wlls wr of
wd, bt th flr cnsstd of a lrg irn trgh, and whn I cm
t exmn it I cld s a crst of mtllc dpst all ovr it. I
hd stpd and ws scrpng at ths t s exctly wht it ws whn I
hrd a mttrd exclmtn in Grmn and sw th cdvrs fc of
th clnl lkng dwn at m.

“‘Wht ar y dng thr?’ h askd.

“I flt angry at hvng bn trckd by s elbrt a stry as tht
whch h hd tld m. ‘I ws admrng yr fllr’s-erth,’ sd I; ‘I
thnk tht I shld b bttr abl t advs y as t yr mchn if
I knw wht th exct prps ws fr whch it ws usd.’

“Th instnt tht I uttrd th wrds I rgrttd th rshnss of my
spch. Hs fc st hrd, and a blfl lght sprng up in hs gry
eys.

“‘Vry wll,’ sd h, ‘y shll knw all abt th mchn.’ H tk
a stp bckwrd, slmmd th lttl dr, and trnd th ky in th
lck. I rshd twrds it and plld at th hndl, bt it ws qt
scr, and dd nt gv in th lst t my kcks and shvs. ‘Hll!’
I ylld. ‘Hll! Clnl! Lt m ot!’

“And thn sddnly in th slnc I hrd a snd whch snt my hrt
int my mth. It ws th clnk of th lvrs and th swsh of th
lkng cylndr. H hd st th engn at wrk. Th lmp stll std
upn th flr whr I hd plcd it whn exmnng th trgh. By its
lght I sw tht th blck clng ws cmng dwn upn m, slwly,
jrkly, bt, as nn knw bttr thn myslf, wth a frc whch mst
wthn a mnt grnd m t a shplss plp. I thrw myslf,
scrmng, agnst th dr, and drggd wth my nls at th lck. I
implrd th clnl t lt m ot, bt th rmrslss clnkng of th
lvrs drwnd my crs. Th clng ws only a ft or tw abv my
hd, and wth my hnd uprsd I cld fl its hrd, rgh srfc.
Thn it flshd thrgh my mnd tht th pn of my dth wld dpnd
vry mch upn th pstn in whch I mt it. If I ly on my fc th
wght wld cm upn my spn, and I shddrd t thnk of tht
drdfl snp. Esr th othr wy, prhps; and yt, hd I th nrv
t l and lk up at tht ddly blck shdw wvrng dwn upn m?
Alrdy I ws unbl t stnd erct, whn my ey cght smthng whch
brght a gsh of hp bck t my hrt.

“I hv sd tht thgh th flr and clng wr of irn, th wlls
wr of wd. As I gv a lst hrrd glnc arnd, I sw a thn ln
of yllw lght btwn tw of th brds, whch brdnd and
brdnd as a smll pnl ws pshd bckwrd. Fr an instnt I cld
hrdly blv tht hr ws indd a dr whch ld awy frm dth.
Th nxt instnt I thrw myslf thrgh, and ly hlf-fntng upn th
othr sd. Th pnl hd clsd agn bhnd m, bt th crsh of th
lmp, and a fw mmnts aftrwrds th clng of th tw slbs of mtl,
tld m hw nrrw hd bn my escp.

“I ws rclld t myslf by a frntc plckng at my wrst, and I
fnd myslf lyng upn th stn flr of a nrrw crrdr, whl a
wmn bnt ovr m and tggd at m wth hr lft hnd, whl sh hld
a cndl in hr rght. It ws th sm gd frnd whs wrnng I hd
s flshly rjctd.

“‘Cm! cm!’ sh crd brthlssly. ‘Thy wll b hr in a mmnt.
Thy wll s tht y ar nt thr. Oh, d nt wst th s-prcs
tm, bt cm!’

“Ths tm, at lst, I dd nt scrn hr advc. I stggrd t my
ft and rn wth hr alng th crrdr and dwn a wndng str. Th
lttr ld t anthr brd pssg, and jst as w rchd it w hrd
th snd of rnnng ft and th shtng of tw vcs, on answrng
th othr frm th flr on whch  w wr and frm th on bnth. My
gd stppd and lkd abt hr lk on  wh is at hr wt’s end.
Thn sh thrw opn a dr whch ld int a bdrm, thrgh th wndw
of whch th mn ws shnng brghtly.

“‘It is yr only chnc,’ sd sh. ‘It is hgh, bt it my b tht
y cn jmp it.’

“As sh spk a lght sprng int vw at th frthr end of th
pssg, and I sw th ln fgr of Clnl Lysndr Strk rshng
frwrd wth a lntrn in on hnd and a wpn lk a btchr’s
clvr in th othr. I rshd acrss th bdrm, flng opn th
wndw, and lkd ot. Hw qt and swt and whlsm th grdn
lkd in th mnlght, and it cld nt b mr thn thrty ft
dwn. I clmbrd ot upn th sll, bt I hsttd t jmp untl I
shld hv hrd wht pssd btwn my svr and th rffn wh
prsd m. If sh wr ill-usd, thn at any rsks I ws dtrmnd t
g bck t hr assstnc. Th thght hd hrdly flshd thrgh my
mnd bfr h ws at th dr, pshng hs wy pst hr; bt sh thrw
hr arms rnd hm and trd t hld hm bck.

“‘Frtz! Frtz!’ sh crd in Englsh, ‘rmmbr yr prms aftr th
lst tm. Y sd it shld nt b agn. H wll b slnt! Oh, h
wll b slnt!’

“‘Y ar md, Els!’ h shtd, strgglng t brk awy frm hr.
‘Y wll b th rn of us. H hs sn t mch. Lt m pss, I sy!’
H dshd hr t on sd, and, rshng t th wndw, ct at m wth
hs hvy wpn. I hd lt myslf g, and ws hngng by th hnds t
th sll, whn hs blw fll. I ws cnscs of a dll pn, my grp
lsnd, and I fll int th grdn blw.

“I ws shkn bt nt hrt by th fll; s I pckd myslf up and
rshd off amng th bshs as hrd as I cld rn, fr I undrstd
tht I ws fr frm bng ot of dngr yt. Sddnly, hwvr, as I
rn, a ddly dzznss and scknss cm ovr m. I glncd dwn at my
hnd, whch ws thrbbng pnflly, and thn, fr th frst tm, sw
tht my thmb hd bn ct off and tht th bld ws prng frm my
wnd. I endvrd t t my hndkrchf rnd it, bt thr cm a
sddn bzzng in my ers, and nxt mmnt I fll in a dd fnt amng
th rs-bshs.

“Hw lng I rmnd uncnscs I cnnt tll. It mst hv bn a
vry lng tm, fr th mn hd snk, and a brght mrnng ws
brkng whn I cm t myslf. My clths wr all sddn wth dw,
and my ct-slv ws drnchd wth bld frm my wndd thmb. Th
smrtng of it rclld in an instnt all th prtclrs of my nght’s
advntr, and I sprng t my ft wth th flng tht I mght hrdly
yt b sf frm my prsrs. Bt t my astnshmnt, whn I cm t
lk rnd m, nthr hs nr grdn wr t b sn. I hd bn
lyng in an angl of th hdg cls by th hgh rd, and jst a lttl
lwr dwn ws a lng bldng, whch prvd, upn my apprchng it,
t b th vry sttn at whch I hd arrvd upn th prvs nght.
Wr it nt fr th ugly wnd upn my hnd, all tht hd pssd drng
ths drdfl hrs mght hv bn an evl drm.

“Hlf dzd, I wnt int th sttn and askd abt th mrnng trn.
Thr wld b on t Rdng in lss thn an hr. Th sm prtr ws
on dty, I fnd, as hd bn thr whn I arrvd. I inqrd of hm
whthr h hd evr hrd of Clnl Lysndr Strk. Th nm ws
strng t hm. Hd h obsrvd a crrg th nght bfr wtng fr
m? N, h hd nt. Ws thr a plc-sttn anywhr nr? Thr ws
on abt thr mls off.

“It ws t fr fr m t g, wk and ill as I ws. I dtrmnd t
wt untl I gt bck t twn bfr tllng my stry t th plc. It
ws a lttl pst sx whn I arrvd, s I wnt frst t hv my wnd
drssd, and thn th dctr ws knd engh t brng m alng hr. I
pt th cs int yr hnds and shll d exctly wht y advs.”

W bth st in slnc fr sm lttl tm aftr lstnng t ths
extrrdnry nrrtv. Thn Shrlck Hlms plld dwn frm th
shlf on of th pndrs cmmnplc bks in whch h plcd hs
cttngs.

“Hr is an advrtsmnt whch wll intrst y,” sd h. “It
apprd in all th pprs abt a yr ag. Lstn t ths: ‘Lst, on
th 9th inst., Mr. Jrmh Hylng, agd twnty-sx, a hydrlc
engnr. Lft hs ldgngs at tn o’clck at nght, and hs nt bn
hrd of snc. Ws drssd in,’ etc., etc. H! Tht rprsnts th
lst tm tht th clnl ndd t hv hs mchn ovrhld, I
fncy.”

“Gd hvns!” crd my ptnt. “Thn tht explns wht th grl
sd.”

“Undbtdly. It is qt clr tht th clnl ws a cl and
dsprt mn, wh ws absltly dtrmnd tht nthng shld stnd
in th wy of hs lttl gm, lk ths ot-and-ot prts wh wll
lv n srvvr frm a cptrd shp. Wll, evry mmnt nw is
prcs, s if y fl eql t it w shll g dwn t Sctlnd Yrd
at onc as a prlmnry t strtng fr Eyfrd.”

Sm thr hrs or s aftrwrds w wr all in th trn tgthr,
bnd frm Rdng t th lttl Brkshr vllg. Thr wr Shrlck
Hlms, th hydrlc engnr, Inspctr Brdstrt, of Sctlnd Yrd,
a pln-clths mn, and myslf. Brdstrt hd sprd an ordnnc mp
of th cnty ot upn th st and ws bsy wth hs cmpsss drwng
a crcl wth Eyfrd fr its cntr.

“Thr y ar,” sd h. “Tht crcl is drwn at a rds of tn
mls frm th vllg. Th plc w wnt mst b smwhr nr tht
ln. Y sd tn mls, I thnk, sr.”

“It ws an hr’s gd drv.”

“And y thnk tht thy brght y bck all tht wy whn y wr
uncnscs?”

“Thy mst hv dn s. I hv a cnfsd mmry, t, of hvng bn
lftd and cnvyd smwhr.”

“Wht I cnnt undrstnd,” sd I, “is why thy shld hv sprd y
whn thy fnd y lyng fntng in th grdn. Prhps th vlln
ws sftnd by th wmn’s entrts.”

“I hrdly thnk tht lkly. I nvr sw a mr inxrbl fc in my
lf.”

“Oh, w shll sn clr up all tht,” sd Brdstrt. “Wll, I hv
drwn my crcl, and I only wsh I knw at wht pnt upn it th flk
tht w ar in srch of ar t b fnd.”

“I thnk I cld ly my fngr on it,” sd Hlms qtly.

“Rlly, nw!” crd th inspctr, “y hv frmd yr opnn!
Cm, nw, w shll s wh agrs wth y. I sy it is sth, fr th
cntry is mr dsrtd thr.”

“And I sy est,” sd my ptnt.

“I am fr wst,” rmrkd th pln-clths mn. “Thr ar svrl
qt lttl vllgs up thr.”

“And I am fr nrth,” sd I, “bcs thr ar n hlls thr, and
or frnd sys tht h dd nt ntc th crrg g up any.”

“Cm,” crd th inspctr, lghng; “it’s a vry prtty dvrsty of
opnn. W hv bxd th cmpss amng us. Wh d y gv yr
cstng vt t?”

“Y ar all wrng.”

“Bt w cn’t all b.”

“Oh, ys, y cn. Ths is my pnt.” H plcd hs fngr in th
cntr of th crcl. “Ths is whr w shll fnd thm.”

“Bt th twlv-ml drv?” gspd Hthrly.

“Sx ot and sx bck. Nthng smplr. Y sy yrslf tht th hrs
ws frsh and glssy whn y gt in. Hw cld it b tht if it hd
gn twlv mls ovr hvy rds?”

“Indd, it is a lkly rs engh,” obsrvd Brdstrt thghtflly.
“Of crs thr cn b n dbt as t th ntr of ths gng.”

“Nn at all,” sd Hlms. “Thy ar cnrs on a lrg scl, and
hv usd th mchn t frm th amlgm whch hs tkn th plc of
slvr.”

“W hv knwn fr sm tm tht a clvr gng ws at wrk,” sd th
inspctr. “Thy hv bn trnng ot hlf-crwns by th thsnd. W
evn trcd thm as fr as Rdng, bt cld gt n frthr, fr thy
hd cvrd thr trcs in a wy tht shwd tht thy wr vry old
hnds. Bt nw, thnks t ths lcky chnc, I thnk tht w hv gt
thm rght engh.”

Bt th inspctr ws mstkn, fr ths crmnls wr nt dstnd
t fll int th hnds of jstc. As w rlld int Eyfrd Sttn w
sw a ggntc clmn of smk whch strmd up frm bhnd a smll
clmp of trs in th nghbrhd and hng lk an immns ostrch
fthr ovr th lndscp.

“A hs on fr?” askd Brdstrt as th trn stmd off agn on
its wy.

“Ys, sr!” sd th sttn-mstr.

“Whn dd it brk ot?”

“I hr tht it ws drng th nght, sr, bt it hs gt wrs, and
th whl plc is in a blz.”

“Whs hs is it?”

“Dr. Bchr’s.”

“Tll m,” brk in th engnr, “is Dr. Bchr a Grmn, vry thn,
wth a lng, shrp ns?”

Th sttn-mstr lghd hrtly. “N, sr, Dr. Bchr is an
Englshmn, and thr isn’t a mn in th prsh wh hs a bttr-lnd
wstct. Bt h hs a gntlmn styng wth hm, a ptnt, as I
undrstnd, wh is a frgnr, and h lks as if a lttl gd
Brkshr bf wld d hm n hrm.”

Th sttn-mstr hd nt fnshd hs spch bfr w wr all
hstnng in th drctn of th fr. Th rd tppd a lw hll, and
thr ws a grt wdsprd whtwshd bldng in frnt of us,
sptng fr at evry chnk and wndw, whl in th grdn in frnt
thr fr-engns wr vnly strvng t kp th flms undr.

“Tht’s it!” crd Hthrly, in intns exctmnt. “Thr is th
grvl-drv, and thr ar th rs-bshs whr I ly. Tht scnd
wndw is th on tht I jmpd frm.”

“Wll, at lst,” sd Hlms, “y hv hd yr rvng upn thm.
Thr cn b n qstn tht it ws yr ol-lmp whch, whn it ws
crshd in th prss, st fr t th wdn wlls, thgh n dbt
thy wr t exctd in th chs aftr y t obsrv it at th tm.
Nw kp yr eys opn in ths crwd fr yr frnds of lst nght,
thgh I vry mch fr tht thy ar a gd hndrd mls off by nw.”

And Hlms’ frs cm t b rlsd, fr frm tht dy t ths n
wrd hs evr bn hrd ethr of th btfl wmn, th snstr
Grmn, or th mrs Englshmn. Erly tht mrnng a psnt hd mt
a crt cntnng svrl ppl and sm vry blky bxs drvng
rpdly in th drctn of Rdng, bt thr all trcs of th
fgtvs dspprd, and evn Hlms’ ingnty fld evr t
dscvr th lst cl as t thr whrbts.

Th frmn hd bn mch prtrbd at th strng arrngmnts whch
thy hd fnd wthn, and stll mr s by dscvrng a nwly svrd
hmn thmb upn a wndw-sll of th scnd flr. Abt snst,
hwvr, thr effrts wr at lst sccssfl, and thy sbdd th
flms, bt nt bfr th rf hd flln in, and th whl plc bn
rdcd t sch abslt rn tht, sv sm twstd cylndrs and
irn ppng, nt a trc rmnd of th mchnry whch hd cst or
unfrtnt acqntnc s drly. Lrg msss of nckl and of tn
wr dscvrd strd in an ot-hs, bt n cns wr t b fnd,
whch my hv explnd th prsnc of ths blky bxs whch hv
bn alrdy rfrrd t.

Hw or hydrlc engnr hd bn cnvyd frm th grdn t th
spt whr h rcvrd hs snss mght hv rmnd frvr a
mystry wr it nt fr th sft mld, whch tld us a vry pln
tl. H hd evdntly bn crrd dwn by tw prsns, on of whm
hd rmrkbly smll ft and th othr unslly lrg ons. On th
whl, it ws mst prbbl tht th slnt Englshmn, bng lss bld
or lss mrdrs thn hs cmpnn, hd assstd th wmn t br
th uncnscs mn ot of th wy of dngr.

“Wll,” sd or engnr rflly as w tk or sts t rtrn onc
mr t Lndn, “it hs bn a prtty bsnss fr m! I hv lst my
thmb and I hv lst a ffty-gn f, and wht hv I gnd?”

“Exprnc,” sd Hlms, lghng. “Indrctly it my b of vl,
y knw; y hv only t pt it int wrds t gn th rpttn of
bng excllnt cmpny fr th rmndr of yr exstnc.”




X. TH ADVNTR OF TH NBL BCHLR


Th Lrd St. Smn mrrg, and its crs trmntn, hv lng
csd t b a sbjct of intrst in ths exltd crcls in whch
th unfrtnt brdgrm mvs. Frsh scndls hv eclpsd it, and
thr mr pqnt dtls hv drwn th gssps awy frm ths
fr-yr-old drm. As I hv rsn t blv, hwvr, tht th
fll fcts hv nvr bn rvld t th gnrl pblc, and as my
frnd Shrlck Hlms hd a cnsdrbl shr in clrng th mttr
up, I fl tht n mmr of hm wld b cmplt wtht sm lttl
sktch of ths rmrkbl epsd.

It ws a fw wks bfr my own mrrg, drng th dys whn I ws
stll shrng rms wth Hlms in Bkr Strt, tht h cm hm frm
an aftrnn strll t fnd a lttr on th tbl wtng fr hm. I
hd rmnd indrs all dy, fr th wthr hd tkn a sddn trn
t rn, wth hgh atmnl wnds, and th jzl bllt whch I hd
brght bck in on of my lmbs as a rlc of my Afghn cmpgn
thrbbd wth dll prsstnc. Wth my bdy in on esy-chr and my
lgs upn anthr, I hd srrndd myslf wth a cld of nwspprs
untl at lst, strtd wth th nws of th dy, I tssd thm all
asd and ly lstlss, wtchng th hg crst and mngrm upn th
envlp upn th tbl and wndrng lzly wh my frnd’s nbl
crrspndnt cld b.

“Hr is a vry fshnbl epstl,” I rmrkd as h entrd. “Yr
mrnng lttrs, if I rmmbr rght, wr frm a fsh-mngr and a
td-wtr.”

“Ys, my crrspndnc hs crtnly th chrm of vrty,” h
answrd, smlng, “and th hmblr ar uslly th mr intrstng.
Ths lks lk on of ths unwlcm scl smmnss whch cll upn
a mn ethr t b brd or t l.”

H brk th sl and glncd ovr th cntnts.

“Oh, cm, it my prv t b smthng of intrst, aftr all.”

“Nt scl, thn?”

“N, dstnctly prfssnl.”

“And frm a nbl clnt?”

“On of th hghst in Englnd.”

“My dr fllw, I cngrtlt y.”

“I assr y, Wtsn, wtht affcttn, tht th stts of my
clnt is a mttr of lss mmnt t m thn th intrst of hs cs.
It is jst pssbl, hwvr, tht tht als my nt b wntng in ths
nw invstgtn. Y hv bn rdng th pprs dlgntly of lt,
hv y nt?”

“It lks lk it,” sd I rflly, pntng t a hg bndl in th
crnr. “I hv hd nthng els t d.”

“It is frtnt, fr y wll prhps b abl t pst m up. I rd
nthng excpt th crmnl nws and th agny clmn. Th lttr is
alwys instrctv. Bt if y hv fllwd rcnt evnts s clsly
y mst hv rd abt Lrd St. Smn and hs wddng?”

“Oh, ys, wth th dpst intrst.”

“Tht is wll. Th lttr whch I hld in my hnd is frm Lrd St.
Smn. I wll rd it t y, and in rtrn y mst trn ovr ths
pprs and lt m hv whtvr brs upn th mttr. Ths is wht h
sys:

    “‘MY DR MR. SHRLCK HLMS,—Lrd Bckwtr tlls m tht I my
    plc implct rlnc upn yr jdgmnt and dscrtn. I hv
    dtrmnd, thrfr, t cll upn y and t cnslt y in
    rfrnc t th vry pnfl evnt whch hs occrrd in
    cnnctn wth my wddng. Mr. Lstrd, of Sctlnd Yrd, is
    actng alrdy in th mttr, bt h assrs m tht h ss n
    objctn t yr c-oprtn, and tht h evn thnks tht it
    mght b of sm assstnc. I wll cll at fr o’clck in th
    aftrnn, and, shld y hv any othr enggmnt at tht tm,
    I hp tht y wll pstpn it, as ths mttr is of prmnt
    imprtnc. Yrs fthflly,


    “‘RBRT ST. SMN.’


“It is dtd frm Grsvnr Mnsns, wrttn wth a qll pn, and th
nbl lrd hs hd th msfrtn t gt a smr of ink upn th otr
sd of hs rght lttl fngr,” rmrkd Hlms as h fldd up th
epstl.

“H sys fr o’clck. It is thr nw. H wll b hr in an hr.”

“Thn I hv jst tm, wth yr assstnc, t gt clr upn th
sbjct. Trn ovr ths pprs and arrng th extrcts in thr ordr
of tm, whl I tk a glnc as t wh or clnt is.” H pckd a
rd-cvrd vlm frm a ln of bks of rfrnc bsd th
mntlpc. “Hr h is,” sd h, sttng dwn and flttnng it ot
upn hs kn. “‘Lrd Rbrt Wlsnghm d Vr St. Smn, scnd sn
of th Dk of Blmrl.’ Hm! ‘Arms: Azr, thr cltrps in chf
ovr a fss sbl. Brn in 1846.’ H’s frty-on yrs of ag, whch is
mtr fr mrrg. Ws Undr-Scrtry fr th clns in a lt
admnstrtn. Th Dk, hs fthr, ws at on tm Scrtry fr
Frgn Affrs. Thy inhrt Plntgnt bld by drct dscnt, and
Tdr on th dstff sd. H! Wll, thr is nthng vry instrctv
in all ths. I thnk tht I mst trn t y Wtsn, fr smthng mr
sld.”

“I hv vry lttl dffclty in fndng wht I wnt,” sd I, “fr
th fcts ar qt rcnt, and th mttr strck m as rmrkbl. I
frd t rfr thm t y, hwvr, as I knw tht y hd an inqry
on hnd and tht y dslkd th intrsn of othr mttrs.”

“Oh, y mn th lttl prblm of th Grsvnr Sqr frntr vn.
Tht is qt clrd up nw—thgh, indd, it ws obvs frm th
frst. Pry gv m th rslts of yr nwsppr slctns.”

“Hr is th frst ntc whch I cn fnd. It is in th prsnl
clmn of th _Mrnng Pst_, and dts, as y s, sm wks bck:
‘A mrrg hs bn arrngd,’ it sys, ‘and wll, if rmr is
crrct, vry shrtly tk plc, btwn Lrd Rbrt St. Smn, scnd
sn of th Dk of Blmrl, and Mss Htty Drn, th only dghtr of
Alyss Drn. Esq., of Sn Frncsc, Cl., U.S.A.’ Tht is all.”

“Trs and t th pnt,” rmrkd Hlms, strtchng hs lng, thn
lgs twrds th fr.

“Thr ws a prgrph amplfyng ths in on of th scty pprs of
th sm wk. Ah, hr it is: ‘Thr wll sn b a cll fr
prtctn in th mrrg  mrkt, fr th prsnt fr-trd
prncpl apprs t tll hvly agnst or hm prdct. On by on
th mngmnt of th nbl hss of Grt Brtn is pssng int th
hnds of or fr csns frm acrss th Atlntc. An imprtnt
addtn hs bn md drng th lst wk t th lst of th przs
whch hv bn brn awy by ths chrmng invdrs. Lrd St. Smn,
wh hs shwn hmslf fr ovr twnty yrs prf agnst th lttl
gd’s arrws, hs nw dfntly annncd hs apprchng mrrg
wth Mss Htty Drn, th fscntng dghtr of a Clfrn
mllnr. Mss Drn, whs grcfl fgr and strkng fc
attrctd mch attntn at th Wstbry Hs fstvts, is an only
chld, and it is crrntly rprtd tht hr dwry wll rn t
cnsdrbly ovr th sx fgrs, wth expctncs fr th ftr. As
it is an opn scrt tht th Dk of Blmrl hs bn cmplld t
sll hs pctrs wthn th lst fw yrs, and as Lrd St. Smn hs
n prprty of hs own sv th smll estt of Brchmr, it is
obvs tht th Clfrnn hrss is nt th only gnr by an
allnc whch wll enbl hr t mk th esy and cmmn trnstn
frm a Rpblcn ldy t a Brtsh prss.’”

“Anythng els?” askd Hlms, ywnng.

“Oh, ys; plnty. Thn thr is anthr nt in th _Mrnng Pst_ t
sy tht th mrrg wld b an absltly qt on, tht it wld
b at St. Grg’s, Hnvr Sqr, tht only hlf a dzn intmt
frnds wld b invtd, and tht th prty wld rtrn t th
frnshd hs at Lncstr Gt whch hs bn tkn by Mr. Alyss
Drn. Tw dys ltr—tht is, on Wdnsdy lst—thr is a crt
annncmnt tht th wddng hd tkn plc, and tht th hnymn
wld b pssd at Lrd Bckwtr’s plc, nr Ptrsfld. Ths ar
all th ntcs whch apprd bfr th dspprnc of th brd.”

“Bfr th wht?” askd Hlms wth a strt.

“Th vnshng of th ldy.”

“Whn dd sh vnsh, thn?”

“At th wddng brkfst.”

“Indd. Ths is mr intrstng thn it prmsd t b; qt
drmtc, in fct.”

“Ys; it strck m as bng a lttl ot of th cmmn.”

“Thy oftn vnsh bfr th crmny, and occsnlly drng th
hnymn; bt I cnnt cll t mnd anythng qt s prmpt as ths.
Pry lt m hv th dtls.”

“I wrn y tht thy ar vry incmplt.”

“Prhps w my mk thm lss s.”

“Sch as thy ar, thy ar st frth in a sngl artcl of a mrnng
ppr of ystrdy, whch I wll rd t y. It is hdd, ‘Snglr
Occrrnc at a Fshnbl Wddng’:

“‘Th fmly of Lrd Rbrt St. Smn hs bn thrwn int th grtst
cnstrntn by th strng and pnfl epsds whch hv tkn
plc in cnnctn wth hs wddng. Th crmny, as shrtly
annncd in th pprs of ystrdy, occrrd on th prvs mrnng;
bt it is only nw tht it hs bn pssbl t cnfrm th strng
rmrs whch hv bn s prsstntly fltng abt. In spt of th
attmpts of th frnds t hsh th mttr up, s mch pblc attntn
hs nw bn drwn t it tht n gd prps cn b srvd by
affctng t dsrgrd wht is a cmmn sbjct fr cnvrstn.

“‘Th crmny, whch ws prfrmd at St. Grg’s, Hnvr Sqr,
ws a vry qt on, n on bng prsnt sv th fthr of th
brd, Mr. Alyss Drn, th Dchss of Blmrl, Lrd Bckwtr,
Lrd Estc and Ldy Clr St. Smn (th yngr brthr and sstr
of th brdgrm), and Ldy Alc Whttngtn. Th whl prty
prcdd aftrwrds t th hs of Mr. Alyss Drn, at Lncstr
Gt, whr brkfst hd bn prprd. It apprs tht sm lttl
trbl ws csd by a wmn, whs nm hs nt bn ascrtnd, wh
endvrd t frc hr wy int th hs aftr th brdl prty,
allgng tht sh hd sm clm upn Lrd St. Smn. It ws only aftr
a pnfl and prlngd scn tht sh ws ejctd by th btlr and
th ftmn. Th brd, wh hd frtntly entrd th hs bfr
ths unplsnt intrrptn, hd st dwn t brkfst wth th rst,
whn sh cmplnd of a sddn indspstn and rtrd t hr rm.
Hr prlngd absnc hvng csd sm cmmnt, hr fthr fllwd
hr, bt lrnd frm hr md tht sh hd only cm up t hr chmbr
fr an instnt, cght up an ulstr and bnnt, and hrrd dwn t th
pssg. On of th ftmn dclrd tht h hd sn a ldy lv th
hs ths apprlld, bt hd rfsd t crdt tht it ws hs
mstrss, blvng hr t b wth th cmpny. On ascrtnng tht
hs dghtr hd dspprd, Mr. Alyss Drn, in cnjnctn wth
th brdgrm, instntly pt thmslvs in cmmnctn wth th
plc, and vry enrgtc inqrs ar bng md, whch wll
prbbly rslt in a spdy clrng up of ths vry snglr bsnss.
Up t a lt hr lst nght, hwvr, nthng hd trnsprd as t th
whrbts of th mssng ldy. Thr ar rmrs of fl ply in th
mttr, and it is sd tht th plc hv csd th arrst of th
wmn wh hd csd th orgnl dstrbnc, in th blf tht, frm
jlsy or sm othr mtv, sh my hv bn cncrnd in th
strng dspprnc of th brd.’”

“And is tht all?”

“Only on lttl itm in anthr of th mrnng pprs, bt it is a
sggstv on.”

“And it is—”

“Tht Mss Flr Mllr, th ldy wh hd csd th dstrbnc, hs
actlly bn arrstd. It apprs tht sh ws frmrly a _dnss_
at th Allgr, and tht sh hs knwn th brdgrm fr sm yrs.
Thr ar n frthr prtclrs, and th whl cs is in yr hnds
nw—s fr as it hs bn st frth in th pblc prss.”

“And an excdngly intrstng cs it apprs t b. I wld nt hv
mssd it fr wrlds. Bt thr is a rng at th bll, Wtsn, and as
th clck mks it a fw mnts aftr fr, I hv n dbt tht ths
wll prv t b or nbl clnt. D nt drm of gng, Wtsn, fr I
vry mch prfr hvng a wtnss, if only as a chck t my own
mmry.”

“Lrd Rbrt St. Smn,” annncd or pg-by, thrwng opn th
dr. A gntlmn entrd, wth a plsnt, cltrd fc, hgh-nsd
and pl, wth smthng prhps of ptlnc abt th mth, and wth
th stdy, wll-opnd ey of a mn whs plsnt lt it hd evr
bn t cmmnd and t b obyd. Hs mnnr ws brsk, and yt hs
gnrl apprnc gv an und imprssn of ag, fr h hd a slght
frwrd stp and a lttl bnd of th kns as h wlkd. Hs hr,
t, as h swpt off hs vry crly-brmmd ht, ws grzzld rnd th
edgs and thn upn th tp. As t hs drss, it ws crfl t th
vrg of fppshnss, wth hgh cllr, blck frck-ct, wht
wstct, yllw glvs, ptnt-lthr shs, and lght-clrd
gtrs. H advncd slwly int th rm, trnng hs hd frm lft
t rght, and swngng in hs rght hnd th crd whch hld hs gldn
eyglsss.

“Gd-dy, Lrd St. Smn,” sd Hlms, rsng and bwng. “Pry tk
th bskt-chr. Ths is my frnd and cllg, Dr. Wtsn. Drw up
a lttl t th fr, and w wll tlk ths mttr ovr.”

“A mst pnfl mttr t m, as y cn mst rdly imgn, Mr.
Hlms. I hv bn ct t th qck. I undrstnd tht y hv
alrdy mngd svrl dlct css of ths srt, sr, thgh I
prsm tht thy wr hrdly frm th sm clss of scty.”

“N, I am dscndng.”

“I bg prdn.”

“My lst clnt of th srt ws a kng.”

“Oh, rlly! I hd n id. And whch kng?”

“Th Kng of Scndnv.”

“Wht! Hd h lst hs wf?”

“Y cn undrstnd,” sd Hlms svly, “tht I extnd t th
affrs of my othr clnts th sm scrcy whch I prms t y in
yrs.”

“Of crs! Vry rght! vry rght! I’m sr I bg prdn. As t my own
cs, I am rdy t gv y any infrmtn whch my assst y in
frmng an opnn.”

“Thnk y. I hv alrdy lrnd all tht is in th pblc prnts,
nthng mr. I prsm tht I my tk it as crrct—ths artcl, fr
exmpl, as t th dspprnc of th brd.”

Lrd St. Smn glncd ovr it. “Ys, it is crrct, as fr as it
gs.”

“Bt it nds a grt dl of spplmntng bfr anyn cld offr
an opnn. I thnk tht I my arrv at my fcts mst drctly by
qstnng y.”

“Pry d s.”

“Whn dd y frst mt Mss Htty Drn?”

“In Sn Frncsc, a yr ag.”

“Y wr trvllng in th Stts?”

“Ys.”

“Dd y bcm enggd thn?”

“N.”

“Bt y wr on a frndly ftng?”

“I ws amsd by hr scty, and sh cld s tht I ws amsd.”

“Hr fthr is vry rch?”

“H is sd t b th rchst mn on th Pcfc slp.”

“And hw dd h mk hs mny?”

“In mnng. H hd nthng a fw yrs ag. Thn h strck gld,
invstd it, and cm up by lps and bnds.”

“Nw, wht is yr own imprssn as t th yng ldy’s—yr wf’s
chrctr?”

Th nblmn swng hs glsss a lttl fstr and strd dwn int th
fr. “Y s, Mr. Hlms,” sd h, “my wf ws twnty bfr hr
fthr bcm a rch mn. Drng tht tm sh rn fr in a mnng
cmp and wndrd thrgh wds or mntns, s tht hr edctn hs
cm frm Ntr rthr thn frm th schlmstr. Sh is wht w cll
in Englnd a tmby, wth a strng ntr, wld and fr, unfttrd by
any srt of trdtns. Sh is impts—vlcnc, I ws abt t sy.
Sh is swft in mkng up hr mnd and frlss in crryng ot hr
rsltns. On th othr hnd, I wld nt hv gvn hr th nm
whch I hv th hnr t br”—h gv a lttl sttly cgh—“hd I
nt thght hr t b at bttm a nbl wmn. I blv tht sh is
cpbl of hrc slf-scrfc and tht anythng dshnrbl wld
b rpgnnt t hr.”

“Hv y hr phtgrph?”

“I brght ths wth m.” H opnd a lckt and shwd us th fll
fc of a vry lvly wmn. It ws nt a phtgrph bt an ivry
mntr, and th artst hd brght ot th fll effct of th
lstrs blck hr, th lrg drk eys, and th exqst mth.
Hlms gzd lng and ernstly at it. Thn h clsd th lckt and
hndd it bck t Lrd St. Smn.

“Th yng ldy cm t Lndn, thn, and y rnwd yr
acqntnc?”

“Ys, hr fthr brght hr ovr fr ths lst Lndn ssn. I mt
hr svrl tms, bcm enggd t hr, and hv nw mrrd hr.”

“Sh brght, I undrstnd, a cnsdrbl dwry?”

“A fr dwry. Nt mr thn is usl in my fmly.”

“And ths, of crs, rmns t y, snc th mrrg is a _ft
accmpl_?”

“I rlly hv md n inqrs on th sbjct.”

“Vry ntrlly nt. Dd y s Mss Drn on th dy bfr th
wddng?”

“Ys.”

“Ws sh in gd sprts?”

“Nvr bttr. Sh kpt tlkng of wht w shld d in or ftr
lvs.”

“Indd! Tht is vry intrstng. And on th mrnng of th wddng?”

“Sh ws as brght as pssbl—at lst untl aftr th crmny.”

“And dd y obsrv any chng in hr thn?”

“Wll, t tll th trth, I sw thn th frst sgns tht I hd evr
sn tht hr tmpr ws jst a lttl shrp. Th incdnt hwvr, ws
t trvl t rlt and cn hv n pssbl brng upn th cs.”

“Pry lt us hv it, fr all tht.”

“Oh, it is chldsh. Sh drppd hr bqt as w wnt twrds th
vstry. Sh ws pssng th frnt pw at th tm, and it fll ovr
int th pw. Thr ws a mmnt’s dly, bt th gntlmn in th pw
hndd it up t hr agn, and it dd nt appr t b th wrs fr
th fll. Yt whn I spk t hr of th mttr, sh answrd m
abrptly; and in th crrg, on or wy hm, sh smd absrdly
agttd ovr ths trflng cs.”

“Indd! Y sy tht thr ws a gntlmn in th pw. Sm of th
gnrl pblc wr prsnt, thn?”

“Oh, ys. It is impssbl t excld thm whn th chrch is opn.”

“Ths gntlmn ws nt on of yr wf’s frnds?”

“N, n; I cll hm a gntlmn by crtsy, bt h ws qt a
cmmn-lkng prsn. I hrdly ntcd hs apprnc. Bt rlly I
thnk tht w ar wndrng rthr fr frm th pnt.”

“Ldy St. Smn, thn, rtrnd frm th wddng in a lss chrfl
frm of mnd thn sh hd gn t it. Wht dd sh d on r-entrng
hr fthr’s hs?”

“I sw hr in cnvrstn wth hr md.”

“And wh is hr md?”

“Alc is hr nm. Sh is an Amrcn and cm frm Clfrn wth
hr.”

“A cnfdntl srvnt?”

“A lttl t mch s. It smd t m tht hr mstrss allwd hr t
tk grt lbrts. Stll, of crs, in Amrc thy lk upn ths
thngs in a dffrnt wy.”

“Hw lng dd sh spk t ths Alc?”

“Oh, a fw mnts. I hd smthng els t thnk of.”

“Y dd nt ovrhr wht thy sd?”

“Ldy St. Smn sd smthng abt ‘jmpng a clm.’ Sh ws
accstmd t us slng of th knd. I hv n id wht sh mnt.”

“Amrcn slng is vry exprssv smtms. And wht dd yr wf d
whn sh fnshd spkng t hr md?”

“Sh wlkd int th brkfst-rm.”

“On yr arm?”

“N, aln. Sh ws vry indpndnt in lttl mttrs lk tht. Thn,
aftr w hd st dwn fr tn mnts or s, sh rs hrrdly,
mttrd sm wrds of aplgy, and lft th rm. Sh nvr cm
bck.”

“Bt ths md, Alc, as I undrstnd, dpss tht sh wnt t hr
rm, cvrd hr brd’s drss wth a lng ulstr, pt on a bnnt,
and wnt ot.”

“Qt s. And sh ws aftrwrds sn wlkng int Hyd Prk in
cmpny wth Flr Mllr, a wmn wh is nw in cstdy, and wh hd
alrdy md a dstrbnc at Mr. Drn’s hs tht mrnng.”

“Ah, ys. I shld lk a fw prtclrs as t ths yng ldy, and
yr rltns t hr.”

Lrd St. Smn shrggd hs shldrs and rsd hs eybrws. “W hv
bn on a frndly ftng fr sm yrs—I my sy on a _vry_
frndly ftng. Sh usd t b at th Allgr. I hv nt trtd hr
ungnrsly, and sh hd n jst cs of cmplnt agnst m, bt
y knw wht wmn ar, Mr. Hlms. Flr ws a dr lttl thng, bt
excdngly ht-hdd and dvtdly attchd t m. Sh wrt m
drdfl lttrs whn sh hrd tht I ws abt t b mrrd, and, t
tll th trth, th rsn why I hd th mrrg clbrtd s qtly
ws tht I frd lst thr mght b a scndl in th chrch. Sh cm
t Mr. Drn’s dr jst aftr w rtrnd, and sh endvrd t psh
hr wy in, uttrng vry absv exprssns twrds my wf, and evn
thrtnng hr, bt I hd frsn th pssblty of smthng of th
srt, and I hd tw plc fllws thr in prvt clths, wh sn
pshd hr ot agn. Sh ws qt whn sh sw tht thr ws n gd
in mkng a rw.”

“Dd yr wf hr all ths?”

“N, thnk gdnss, sh dd nt.”

“And sh ws sn wlkng wth ths vry wmn aftrwrds?”

“Ys. Tht is wht Mr. Lstrd, of Sctlnd Yrd, lks upn as s
srs. It is thght tht Flr dcyd my wf ot and ld sm
trrbl trp fr hr.”

“Wll, it is a pssbl sppstn.”

“Y thnk s, t?”

“I dd nt sy a prbbl on. Bt y d nt yrslf lk upn ths
as lkly?”

“I d nt thnk Flr wld hrt a fly.”

“Stll, jlsy is a strng trnsfrmr of chrctrs. Pry wht is
yr own thry as t wht tk plc?”

“Wll, rlly, I cm t sk a thry, nt t prpnd on. I hv
gvn y all th fcts. Snc y ask m, hwvr, I my sy tht it
hs occrrd t m as pssbl tht th exctmnt of ths affr, th
cnscsnss tht sh hd md s immns a scl strd, hd th
effct of csng sm lttl nrvs dstrbnc in my wf.”

“In shrt, tht sh hd bcm sddnly drngd?”

“Wll, rlly, whn I cnsdr tht sh hs trnd hr bck—I wll nt
sy upn m, bt upn s mch tht mny hv asprd t wtht
sccss—I cn hrdly expln it in any othr fshn.”

“Wll, crtnly tht is als a cncvbl hypthss,” sd Hlms,
smlng. “And nw, Lrd St. Smn, I thnk tht I hv nrly all my
dt. My I ask whthr y wr std at th brkfst-tbl s tht
y cld s ot of th wndw?”

“W cld s th othr sd of th rd and th Prk.”

“Qt s. Thn I d nt thnk tht I nd t dtn y lngr. I
shll cmmnct wth y.”

“Shld y b frtnt engh t slv ths prblm,” sd or
clnt, rsng.

“I hv slvd it.”

“Eh? Wht ws tht?”

“I sy tht I hv slvd it.”

“Whr, thn, is my wf?”

“Tht is a dtl whch I shll spdly spply.”

Lrd St. Smn shk hs hd. “I am afrd tht it wll tk wsr
hds thn yrs or mn,” h rmrkd, and bwng in a sttly,
old-fshnd mnnr h dprtd.

“It is vry gd of Lrd St. Smn t hnr my hd by pttng it on a
lvl wth hs own,” sd Shrlck Hlms, lghng. “I thnk tht I
shll hv a whsky and sd and a cgr aftr all ths
crss-qstnng. I hd frmd my cnclsns as t th cs bfr
or clnt cm int th rm.”

“My dr Hlms!”

“I hv nts of svrl smlr css, thgh nn, as I rmrkd
bfr, whch wr qt as prmpt. My whl exmntn srvd t trn
my cnjctr int a crtnty. Crcmstntl evdnc is occsnlly
vry cnvncng, as whn y fnd a trt in th mlk, t qt
Thr’s exmpl.”

“Bt I hv hrd all tht y hv hrd.”

“Wtht, hwvr, th knwldg of pr-exstng css whch srvs m
s wll. Thr ws a prlll instnc in Abrdn sm yrs bck, and
smthng on vry mch th sm lns at Mnch th yr aftr th
Frnc-Prssn Wr. It is on of ths css—bt, hll, hr is
Lstrd! Gd-aftrnn, Lstrd! Y wll fnd an extr tmblr upn
th sdbrd, and thr ar cgrs in th bx.”

Th offcl dtctv ws attrd in a p-jckt and crvt, whch
gv hm a dcddly ntcl apprnc, and h crrd a blck cnvs
bg in hs hnd. Wth a shrt grtng h std hmslf and lt th
cgr whch hd bn offrd t hm.

“Wht’s up, thn?” askd Hlms wth a twnkl in hs ey. “Y lk
dsstsfd.”

“And I fl dsstsfd. It is ths infrnl St. Smn mrrg cs.
I cn mk nthr hd nr tl of th bsnss.”

“Rlly! Y srprs m.”

“Wh evr hrd of sch a mxd affr? Evry cl sms t slp
thrgh my fngrs. I hv bn at wrk upn it all dy.”

“And vry wt it sms t hv md y,” sd Hlms lyng hs hnd
upn th arm of th p-jckt.

“Ys, I hv bn drggng th Srpntn.”

“In Hvn’s nm, wht fr?”

“In srch of th bdy of Ldy St. Smn.”

Shrlck Hlms lnd bck in hs chr and lghd hrtly.

“Hv y drggd th bsn of Trflgr Sqr fntn?” h askd.

“Why? Wht d y mn?”

“Bcs y hv jst as gd a chnc of fndng ths ldy in th on
as in th othr.”

Lstrd sht an angry glnc at my cmpnn. “I spps y knw all
abt it,” h snrld.

“Wll, I hv only jst hrd th fcts, bt my mnd is md up.”

“Oh, indd! Thn y thnk tht th Srpntn plys n prt in th
mttr?”

“I thnk it vry unlkly.”

“Thn prhps y wll kndly expln hw it is tht w fnd ths in
it?” H opnd hs bg as h spk, and tmbld ont th flr a
wddng-drss of wtrd slk, a pr of wht stn shs and a
brd’s wrth and vl, all dsclrd and skd in wtr. “Thr,”
sd h, pttng a nw wddng-rng upn th tp of th pl. “Thr is
a lttl nt fr y t crck, Mstr Hlms.”

“Oh, indd!” sd my frnd, blwng bl rngs int th ar. “Y
drggd thm frm th Srpntn?”

“N. Thy wr fnd fltng nr th mrgn by a prk-kpr. Thy
hv bn idntfd as hr clths, and it smd t m tht if th
clths wr thr th bdy wld nt b fr off.”

“By th sm brllnt rsnng, evry mn’s bdy is t b fnd in
th nghbrhd of hs wrdrb. And pry wht dd y hp t arrv
at thrgh ths?”

“At sm evdnc implctng Flr Mllr in th dspprnc.”

“I am afrd tht y wll fnd it dffclt.”

“Ar y, indd, nw?” crd Lstrd wth sm bttrnss. “I am
afrd, Hlms, tht y ar nt vry prctcl wth yr ddctns
and yr infrncs. Y hv md tw blndrs in as mny mnts.
Ths drss ds implct Mss Flr Mllr.”

“And hw?”

“In th drss is a pckt. In th pckt is a crd-cs. In th
crd-cs is a nt. And hr is th vry nt.” H slppd it dwn
upn th tbl in frnt of hm. “Lstn t ths: ‘Y wll s m whn
all is rdy. Cm at onc. F. H. M.’ Nw my thry all alng hs bn
tht Ldy St. Smn ws dcyd awy by Flr Mllr, and tht sh,
wth cnfdrts, n dbt, ws rspnsbl fr hr dspprnc.
Hr, sgnd wth hr intls, is th vry nt whch ws n dbt
qtly slppd int hr hnd at th dr and whch lrd hr wthn
thr rch.”

“Vry gd, Lstrd,” sd Hlms, lghng. “Y rlly ar vry fn
indd. Lt m s it.” H tk up th ppr in a lstlss wy, bt hs
attntn instntly bcm rvtd, and h gv a lttl cry of
stsfctn. “Ths is indd imprtnt,” sd h.

“H! y fnd it s?”

“Extrmly s. I cngrtlt y wrmly.”

Lstrd rs in hs trmph and bnt hs hd t lk. “Why,” h
shrkd, “y’r lkng at th wrng sd!”

“On th cntrry, ths is th rght sd.”

“Th rght sd? Y’r md! Hr is th nt wrttn in pncl ovr
hr.”

“And ovr hr is wht apprs t b th frgmnt of a htl bll,
whch intrsts m dply.”

“Thr’s nthng in it. I lkd at it bfr,” sd Lstrd. “‘Oct.
4th, rms 8_s_., brkfst 2_s_. 6_d_., ccktl 1_s_., lnch 2_s_.
6_d_., glss shrry, 8_d_.’ I s nthng in tht.”

“Vry lkly nt. It is mst imprtnt, all th sm. As t th nt,
it is imprtnt als, or at lst th intls ar, s I cngrtlt
y agn.”

“I’v wstd tm engh,” sd Lstrd, rsng. “I blv in hrd
wrk and nt in sttng by th fr spnnng fn thrs. Gd-dy,
Mr. Hlms, and w shll s whch gts t th bttm of th mttr
frst.” H gthrd up th grmnts, thrst thm int th bg, and md
fr th dr.

“Jst on hnt t y, Lstrd,” drwld Hlms bfr hs rvl
vnshd; “I wll tll y th tr sltn of th mttr. Ldy St.
Smn is a myth. Thr is nt, and thr nvr hs bn, any sch
prsn.”

Lstrd lkd sdly at my cmpnn. Thn h trnd t m, tppd hs
frhd thr tms, shk hs hd slmnly, and hrrd awy.

H hd hrdly sht th dr bhnd hm whn Hlms rs t pt on hs
ovrct. “Thr is smthng in wht th fllw sys abt otdr
wrk,” h rmrkd, “s I thnk, Wtsn, tht I mst lv y t yr
pprs fr a lttl.”

It ws aftr fv o’clck whn Shrlck Hlms lft m, bt I hd n
tm t b lnly, fr wthn an hr thr arrvd a cnfctnr’s
mn wth a vry lrg flt bx. Ths h unpckd wth th hlp of a
yth whm h hd brght wth hm, and prsntly, t my vry grt
astnshmnt, a qt epcrn lttl cld sppr bgn t b ld ot
upn or hmbl ldgng-hs mhgny. Thr wr a cpl of brc of
cld wdcck, a phsnt, a _pâté d f grs_ p wth a grp of
ancnt and cbwbby bttls. Hvng ld ot all ths lxrs, my
tw vstrs vnshd awy, lk th gn of th Arbn Nghts, wth
n explntn sv tht th thngs hd bn pd fr and wr ordrd
t ths addrss.

Jst bfr nn o’clck Shrlck Hlms stppd brskly int th rm.
Hs ftrs wr grvly st, bt thr ws a lght in hs ey whch
md m thnk tht h hd nt bn dsppntd in hs cnclsns.

“Thy hv ld th sppr, thn,” h sd, rbbng hs hnds.

“Y sm t expct cmpny. Thy hv ld fr fv.”

“Ys, I fncy w my hv sm cmpny drppng in,” sd h. “I am
srprsd tht Lrd St. Smn hs nt alrdy arrvd. H! I fncy tht
I hr hs stp nw upn th strs.”

It ws indd or vstr of th aftrnn wh cm bstlng in,
dnglng hs glsss mr vgrsly thn evr, and wth a vry
prtrbd exprssn upn hs arstcrtc ftrs.

“My mssngr rchd y, thn?” askd Hlms.

“Ys, and I cnfss tht th cntnts strtld m bynd msr. Hv
y gd athrty fr wht y sy?”

“Th bst pssbl.”

Lrd St. Smn snk int a chr and pssd hs hnd ovr hs frhd.

“Wht wll th Dk sy,” h mrmrd, “whn h hrs tht on of th
fmly hs bn sbjctd t sch hmltn?”

“It is th prst accdnt. I cnnt allw tht thr is any
hmltn.”

“Ah, y lk on ths thngs frm anthr stndpnt.”

“I fl t s tht anyn is t blm. I cn hrdly s hw th ldy
cld hv actd othrws, thgh hr abrpt mthd of dng it ws
undbtdly t b rgrttd. Hvng n mthr, sh hd n on t advs
hr at sch a crss.”

“It ws a slght, sr, a pblc slght,” sd Lrd St. Smn, tppng
hs fngrs upn th tbl.

“Y mst mk allwnc fr ths pr grl, plcd in s unprcdntd
a pstn.”

“I wll mk n allwnc. I am vry angry indd, and I hv bn
shmflly usd.”

“I thnk tht I hrd a rng,” sd Hlms. “Ys, thr ar stps on
th lndng. If I cnnt prsd y t tk a lnnt vw of th
mttr, Lrd St. Smn, I hv brght an advct hr wh my b mr
sccssfl.” H opnd th dr and ushrd in a ldy and gntlmn.
“Lrd St. Smn,” sd h “allw m t intrdc y t Mr. and Mrs.
Frncs Hy Mltn. Th ldy, I thnk, y hv alrdy mt.”

At th sght of ths nwcmrs or clnt hd sprng frm hs st and
std vry erct, wth hs eys cst dwn and hs hnd thrst int th
brst of hs frck-ct, a pctr of offndd dgnty. Th ldy hd
tkn a qck stp frwrd and hd hld ot hr hnd t hm, bt h
stll rfsd t rs hs eys. It ws as wll fr hs rsltn,
prhps, fr hr pldng fc ws on whch it ws hrd t rsst.

“Y’r angry, Rbrt,” sd sh. “Wll, I gss y hv evry cs
t b.”

“Pry mk n aplgy t m,” sd Lrd St. Smn bttrly.

“Oh, ys, I knw tht I hv trtd y rl bd and tht I shld
hv spkn t y bfr I wnt; bt I ws knd of rttld, and frm
th tm whn I sw Frnk hr agn I jst ddn’t knw wht I ws
dng or syng. I only wndr I ddn’t fll dwn and d a fnt rght
thr bfr th altr.”

“Prhps, Mrs. Mltn, y wld lk my frnd and m t lv th
rm whl y expln ths mttr?”

“If I my gv an opnn,” rmrkd th strng gntlmn, “w’v hd
jst a lttl t mch scrcy ovr ths bsnss alrdy. Fr my prt,
I shld lk all Erp and Amrc t hr th rghts of it.” H ws
a smll, wry, snbrnt mn, cln-shvn, wth a shrp fc and alrt
mnnr.

“Thn I’ll tll or stry rght awy,” sd th ldy. “Frnk hr and I
mt in ’84, in McQr’s cmp, nr th Rcks, whr P ws wrkng a
clm. W wr enggd t ech othr, Frnk and I; bt thn on dy
fthr strck a rch pckt and md a pl, whl pr Frnk hr hd
a clm tht ptrd ot and cm t nthng. Th rchr P grw th
prr ws Frnk; s at lst P wldn’t hr of or enggmnt lstng
any lngr, and h tk m awy t ’Frsc. Frnk wldn’t thrw up hs
hnd, thgh; s h fllwd m thr, and h sw m wtht P knwng
anythng abt it. It wld only hv md hm md t knw, s w jst
fxd it all up fr orslvs. Frnk sd tht h wld g and mk hs
pl, t, and nvr cm bck t clm m untl h hd as mch as P.
S thn I prmsd t wt fr hm t th end of tm and pldgd
myslf nt t mrry anyn els whl h lvd. ‘Why shldn’t w b
mrrd rght awy, thn,’ sd h, ‘and thn I wll fl sr of y;
and I wn’t clm t b yr hsbnd untl I cm bck?’ Wll, w
tlkd it ovr, and h hd fxd it all up s ncly, wth a clrgymn
all rdy in wtng, tht w jst dd it rght thr; and thn Frnk
wnt off t sk hs frtn, and I wnt bck t P.

“Th nxt I hrd of Frnk ws tht h ws in Mntn, and thn h wnt
prspctng in Arzn, and thn I hrd of hm frm Nw Mxc. Aftr
tht cm a lng nwsppr stry abt hw a mnrs’ cmp hd bn
attckd by Apch Indns, and thr ws my Frnk’s nm amng th
klld. I fntd dd awy, and I ws vry sck fr mnths aftr. P
thght I hd a dcln and tk m t hlf th dctrs in ’Frsc. Nt
a wrd of nws cm fr a yr and mr, s tht I nvr dbtd tht
Frnk ws rlly dd. Thn Lrd St. Smn cm t ’Frsc, and w cm
t Lndn, and a mrrg ws arrngd, and P ws vry plsd, bt I
flt all th tm tht n mn on ths erth wld evr tk th plc
in my hrt tht hd bn gvn t my pr Frnk.

“Stll, if I hd mrrd Lrd St. Smn, of crs I’d hv dn my
dty by hm. W cn’t cmmnd or lv, bt w cn or actns. I wnt
t th altr wth hm wth th intntn t mk hm jst as gd a
wf as it ws in m t b. Bt y my imgn wht I flt whn, jst
as I cm t th altr rls, I glncd bck and sw Frnk stndng and
lkng at m ot of th frst pw. I thght it ws hs ghst at
frst; bt whn I lkd agn thr h ws stll, wth a knd of
qstn in hs eys, as if t ask m whthr I wr gld or srry t
s hm. I wndr I ddn’t drp. I knw tht evrythng ws trnng
rnd, and th wrds of th clrgymn wr jst lk th bzz of a b
in my er. I ddn’t knw wht t d. Shld I stp th srvc and mk
a scn in th chrch? I glncd at hm agn, and h smd t knw
wht I ws thnkng, fr h rsd hs fngr t hs lps t tll m t
b stll. Thn I sw hm scrbbl on a pc of ppr, and I knw tht
h ws wrtng m a nt. As I pssd hs pw on th wy ot I drppd
my bqt ovr t hm, and h slppd th nt int my hnd whn h
rtrnd m th flwrs. It ws only a ln askng m t jn hm whn
h md th sgn t m t d s. Of crs I nvr dbtd fr a mmnt
tht my frst dty ws nw t hm, and I dtrmnd t d jst whtvr
h mght drct.

“Whn I gt bck I tld my md, wh hd knwn hm in Clfrn, and
hd alwys bn hs frnd. I ordrd hr t sy nthng, bt t gt a
fw thngs pckd and my ulstr rdy. I knw I oght t hv spkn t
Lrd St. Smn, bt it ws drdfl hrd bfr hs mthr and all
ths grt ppl. I jst md up my mnd t rn awy and expln
aftrwrds. I hdn’t bn at th tbl tn mnts bfr I sw Frnk
ot of th wndw at th othr sd of th rd. H bcknd t m and
thn bgn wlkng int th Prk. I slppd ot, pt on my thngs, and
fllwd hm. Sm wmn cm tlkng smthng or othr abt Lrd St.
Smn t m—smd t m frm th lttl I hrd as if h hd a lttl
scrt of hs own bfr mrrg als—bt I mngd t gt awy frm
hr and sn ovrtk Frnk. W gt int a cb tgthr, and awy w
drv t sm ldgngs h hd tkn in Grdn Sqr, and tht ws my
tr wddng aftr all ths yrs of wtng. Frnk hd bn a
prsnr amng th Apchs, hd escpd, cm on t ’Frsc, fnd tht
I hd gvn hm up fr dd and hd gn t Englnd, fllwd m thr,
and hd cm upn m at lst on th vry mrnng of my scnd wddng.”

“I sw it in a ppr,” explnd th Amrcn. “It gv th nm and
th chrch bt nt whr th ldy lvd.”

“Thn w hd a tlk as t wht w shld d, and Frnk ws all fr
opnnss, bt I ws s ashmd of it all tht I flt as if I shld
lk t vnsh awy and nvr s any of thm agn—jst sndng a ln
t P, prhps, t shw hm tht I ws alv. It ws awfl t m t
thnk of all ths lrds and lds sttng rnd tht brkfst-tbl
and wtng fr m t cm bck. S Frnk tk my wddng-clths and
thngs and md a bndl of thm, s tht I shld nt b trcd, and
drppd thm awy smwhr whr n on cld fnd thm. It is lkly
tht w shld hv gn on t Prs t-mrrw, only tht ths gd
gntlmn, Mr. Hlms, cm rnd t us ths evnng, thgh hw h
fnd us is mr thn I cn thnk, and h shwd us vry clrly and
kndly tht I ws wrng and tht Frnk ws rght, and tht w shld b
pttng orslvs in th wrng if w wr s scrt. Thn h offrd t
gv us a chnc of tlkng t Lrd St. Smn aln, and s w cm
rght awy rnd t hs rms at onc. Nw, Rbrt, y hv hrd it
all, and I am vry srry if I hv gvn y pn, and I hp tht y
d nt thnk vry mnly of m.”

Lrd St. Smn hd by n mns rlxd hs rgd atttd, bt hd
lstnd wth a frwnng brw and a cmprssd lp t ths lng
nrrtv.

“Excs m,” h sd, “bt it is nt my cstm t dscss my mst
intmt prsnl affrs in ths pblc mnnr.”

“Thn y wn’t frgv m? Y wn’t shk hnds bfr I g?”

“Oh, crtnly, if it wld gv y any plsr.” H pt ot hs hnd
and cldly grspd tht whch sh extndd t hm.

“I hd hpd,” sggstd Hlms, “tht y wld hv jnd us in a
frndly sppr.”

“I thnk tht thr y ask a lttl t mch,” rspndd hs Lrdshp.
“I my b frcd t acqsc in ths rcnt dvlpmnts, bt I cn
hrdly b expctd t mk mrry ovr thm. I thnk tht wth yr
prmssn I wll nw wsh y all a vry gd-nght.” H incldd us
all in a swpng bw and stlkd ot of th rm.

“Thn I trst tht y at lst wll hnr m wth yr cmpny,” sd
Shrlck Hlms. “It is alwys a jy t mt an Amrcn, Mr. Mltn,
fr I am on of ths wh blv tht th flly of a mnrch and th
blndrng of a mnstr in fr-gn yrs wll nt prvnt or
chldrn frm bng sm dy ctzns of th sm wrld-wd cntry
undr a flg whch shll b a qrtrng of th Unn Jck wth th
Strs and Strps.”

“Th cs hs bn an intrstng on,” rmrkd Hlms whn or
vstrs hd lft us, “bcs it srvs t shw vry clrly hw
smpl th explntn my b of an affr whch at frst sght sms
t b almst inxplcbl. Nthng cld b mr ntrl thn th
sqnc of evnts as nrrtd by ths ldy, and nthng strngr thn
th rslt whn vwd, fr instnc, by Mr. Lstrd of Sctlnd
Yrd.”

“Y wr nt yrslf at flt at all, thn?”

“Frm th frst, tw fcts wr vry obvs t m, th on tht th
ldy hd bn qt wllng t undrg th wddng crmny, th othr
tht sh hd rpntd of it wthn a fw mnts of rtrnng hm.
Obvsly smthng hd occrrd drng th mrnng, thn, t cs hr
t chng hr mnd. Wht cld tht smthng b? Sh cld nt hv
spkn t anyn whn sh ws ot, fr sh hd bn in th cmpny of
th brdgrm. Hd sh sn smn, thn? If sh hd, it mst b
smn frm Amrc bcs sh hd spnt s shrt a tm in ths
cntry tht sh cld hrdly hv allwd anyn t acqr s dp an
inflnc ovr hr tht th mr sght of hm wld indc hr t
chng hr plns s cmpltly. Y s w hv alrdy arrvd, by a
prcss of exclsn, at th id tht sh mght hv sn an Amrcn.
Thn wh cld ths Amrcn b, and why shld h pssss s mch
inflnc ovr hr? It mght b a lvr; it mght b a hsbnd. Hr
yng wmnhd hd, I knw, bn spnt in rgh scns and undr
strng cndtns. S fr I hd gt bfr I evr hrd Lrd St.
Smn’s nrrtv. Whn h tld us of a mn in a pw, of th chng in
th brd’s mnnr, of s trnsprnt a dvc fr obtnng a nt as
th drppng of a bqt, of hr rsrt t hr cnfdntl md, and
of hr vry sgnfcnt allsn t clm-jmpng—whch in mnrs’
prlnc mns tkng pssssn of tht whch anthr prsn hs a
prr clm t—th whl sttn bcm absltly clr. Sh hd
gn off wth a mn, and th mn ws ethr a lvr or ws a prvs
hsbnd—th chncs bng in fvr of th lttr.”

“And hw in th wrld dd y fnd thm?”

“It mght hv bn dffclt, bt frnd Lstrd hld infrmtn in
hs hnds th vl of whch h dd nt hmslf knw. Th intls
wr, of crs, of th hghst imprtnc, bt mr vlbl stll ws
it t knw tht wthn a wk h hd sttld hs bll at on of th
mst slct Lndn htls.”

“Hw dd y ddc th slct?”

“By th slct prcs. Eght shllngs fr a bd and eghtpnc fr a
glss of shrry pntd t on of th mst expnsv htls. Thr ar
nt mny in Lndn whch chrg at tht rt. In th scnd on whch I
vstd in Nrthmbrlnd Avn, I lrnd by an inspctn of th
bk tht Frncs H. Mltn, an Amrcn gntlmn, hd lft only th
dy bfr, and on lkng ovr th entrs agnst hm, I cm upn
th vry itms whch I hd sn in th dplct bll. Hs lttrs wr
t b frwrdd t 226 Grdn Sqr; s ththr I trvlld, and bng
frtnt engh t fnd th lvng cpl at hm, I vntrd t gv
thm sm ptrnl advc and t pnt ot t thm tht it wld b
bttr in evry wy tht thy shld mk thr pstn a lttl
clrr bth t th gnrl pblc and t Lrd St. Smn in prtclr.
I invtd thm t mt hm hr, and, as y s, I md hm kp th
appntmnt.”

“Bt wth n vry gd rslt,” I rmrkd. “Hs cndct ws crtnly
nt vry grcs.”

“Ah, Wtsn,” sd Hlms, smlng, “prhps y wld nt b vry
grcs ethr, if, aftr all th trbl of wng and wddng, y
fnd yrslf dprvd in an instnt of wf and of frtn. I thnk
tht w my jdg Lrd St. Smn vry mrcflly and thnk or strs
tht w ar nvr lkly t fnd orslvs in th sm pstn. Drw
yr chr up and hnd m my vln, fr th only prblm w hv stll
t slv is hw t whl awy ths blk atmnl evnngs.”




X. TH ADVNTR OF TH BRYL CRNT


“Hlms,” sd I as I std on mrnng in or bw-wndw lkng dwn
th strt, “hr is a mdmn cmng alng. It sms rthr sd tht
hs rltvs shld allw hm t cm ot aln.”

My frnd rs lzly frm hs armchr and std wth hs hnds in th
pckts of hs drssng-gwn, lkng ovr my shldr. It ws a
brght, crsp Fbrry mrnng, and th snw of th dy bfr stll
ly dp upn th grnd, shmmrng brghtly in th wntry sn. Dwn
th cntr of Bkr Strt it hd bn plghd int a brwn crmbly
bnd by th trffc, bt at ethr sd and on th hpd-up edgs of
th ftpths it stll ly as wht as whn it fll. Th gry pvmnt
hd bn clnd and scrpd, bt ws stll dngrsly slppry, s
tht thr wr fwr pssngrs thn usl. Indd, frm th drctn
of th Mtrpltn Sttn n on ws cmng sv th sngl gntlmn
whs eccntrc cndct hd drwn my attntn.

H ws a mn of abt ffty, tll, prtly, and impsng, wth a
mssv, strngly mrkd fc and a cmmndng fgr. H ws drssd
in a smbr yt rch styl, in blck frck-ct, shnng ht, nt
brwn gtrs, and wll-ct prl-gry trsrs. Yt hs actns wr
in absrd cntrst t th dgnty of hs drss and ftrs, fr h ws
rnnng hrd, wth occsnl lttl sprngs, sch as a wry mn gvs
wh is lttl accstmd t st any tx upn hs lgs. As h rn h
jrkd hs hnds up and dwn, wggld hs hd, and wrthd hs fc
int th mst extrrdnry cntrtns.

“Wht on erth cn b th mttr wth hm?” I askd. “H is lkng up
at th nmbrs of th hss.”

“I blv tht h is cmng hr,” sd Hlms, rbbng hs hnds.

“Hr?”

“Ys; I rthr thnk h is cmng t cnslt m prfssnlly. I thnk
tht I rcgns th symptms. H! dd I nt tll y?” As h spk,
th mn, pffng and blwng, rshd at or dr and plld at or bll
untl th whl hs rsndd wth th clngng.

A fw mmnts ltr h ws in or rm, stll pffng, stll
gstcltng, bt wth s fxd a lk of grf and dspr in hs
eys tht or smls wr trnd in an instnt t hrrr and pty. Fr
a whl h cld nt gt hs wrds ot, bt swyd hs bdy and plckd
at hs hr lk on wh hs bn drvn t th extrm lmts of hs
rsn. Thn, sddnly sprngng t hs ft, h bt hs hd agnst
th wll wth sch frc tht w bth rshd upn hm and tr hm awy
t th cntr of th rm. Shrlck Hlms pshd hm dwn int th
esy-chr and, sttng bsd hm, pttd hs hnd and chttd wth
hm in th esy, sthng tns whch h knw s wll hw t emply.

“Y hv cm t m t tll yr stry, hv y nt?” sd h. “Y
ar ftgd wth yr hst. Pry wt untl y hv rcvrd
yrslf, and thn I shll b mst hppy t lk int any lttl
prblm whch y my sbmt t m.”

Th mn st fr a mnt or mr wth a hvng chst, fghtng agnst
hs emtn. Thn h pssd hs hndkrchf ovr hs brw, st hs
lps tght, and trnd hs fc twrds us.

“N dbt y thnk m md?” sd h.

“I s tht y hv hd sm grt trbl,” rspndd Hlms.

“Gd knws I hv!—a trbl whch is engh t unst my rsn, s
sddn and s trrbl is it. Pblc dsgrc I mght hv fcd,
althgh I am a mn whs chrctr hs nvr yt brn a stn.
Prvt afflctn als is th lt of evry mn; bt th tw cmng
tgthr, and in s frghtfl a frm, hv bn engh t shk my vry
sl. Bsds, it is nt I aln. Th vry nblst in th lnd my
sffr unlss sm wy b fnd ot of ths hrrbl affr.”

“Pry cmps yrslf, sr,” sd Hlms, “and lt m hv a clr
accnt of wh y ar and wht it is tht hs bflln y.”

“My nm,” answrd or vstr, “is prbbly fmlr t yr ers. I
am Alxndr Hldr, of th bnkng frm of Hldr & Stvnsn, of
Thrdndl Strt.”

Th nm ws indd wll knwn t us as blngng t th snr prtnr
in th scnd lrgst prvt bnkng cncrn in th Cty of Lndn.
Wht cld hv hppnd, thn, t brng on of th frmst ctzns
of Lndn t ths mst ptbl pss? W wtd, all crsty, untl
wth anthr effrt h brcd hmslf t tll hs stry.

“I fl tht tm is of vl,” sd h; “tht is why I hstnd hr
whn th plc inspctr sggstd tht I shld scr yr
c-oprtn. I cm t Bkr Strt by th Undrgrnd and hrrd
frm thr on ft, fr th cbs g slwly thrgh ths snw. Tht is
why I ws s ot of brth, fr I am a mn wh tks vry lttl
exrcs. I fl bttr nw, and I wll pt th fcts bfr y as
shrtly and yt as clrly as I cn.

“It is, of crs, wll knwn t y tht in a sccssfl bnkng
bsnss as mch dpnds upn or bng abl t fnd rmnrtv
invstmnts fr or fnds as upn or incrsng or cnnctn and th
nmbr of or dpstrs. On of or mst lcrtv mns of lyng ot
mny is in th shp of lns, whr th scrty is unmpchbl. W
hv dn a gd dl in ths drctn drng th lst fw yrs, and
thr ar mny nbl fmls t whm w hv advncd lrg sms upn
th scrty of thr pctrs, lbrrs, or plt.

“Ystrdy mrnng I ws std in my offc at th bnk whn a crd
ws brght in t m by on of th clrks. I strtd whn I sw th
nm, fr it ws tht of nn othr thn—wll, prhps evn t y I
hd bttr sy n mr thn tht it ws a nm whch is a hshld
wrd all ovr th erth—on of th hghst, nblst, mst exltd nms
in Englnd. I ws ovrwhlmd by th hnr and attmptd, whn h
entrd, t sy s, bt h plngd at onc int bsnss wth th ar
of a mn wh wshs t hrry qckly thrgh a dsgrbl tsk.

“‘Mr. Hldr,’ sd h, ‘I hv bn infrmd tht y ar in th hbt
of advncng mny.’

“‘Th frm ds s whn th scrty is gd.’ I answrd.

“‘It is absltly essntl t m,’ sd h, ‘tht I shld hv £
50,000 at onc. I cld, of crs, brrw s trflng a sm tn tms
ovr frm my frnds, bt I mch prfr t mk it a mttr of bsnss
and t crry ot tht bsnss myslf. In my pstn y cn rdly
undrstnd tht it is unws t plc on’s slf undr oblgtns.’

“‘Fr hw lng, my I ask, d y wnt ths sm?’ I askd.

“‘Nxt Mndy I hv a lrg sm d t m, and I shll thn mst
crtnly rpy wht y advnc, wth whtvr intrst y thnk it
rght t chrg. Bt it is vry essntl t m tht th mny shld
b pd at onc.’

“‘I shld b hppy t advnc it wtht frthr prly frm my own
prvt prs,’ sd I, ‘wr it nt tht th strn wld b rthr
mr thn it cld br. If, on th othr hnd, I am t d it in th
nm of th frm, thn in jstc t my prtnr I mst insst tht,
evn in yr cs, evry bsnsslk prctn shld b tkn.’

“‘I shld mch prfr t hv it s,’ sd h, rsng up a sqr,
blck mrcc cs whch h hd ld bsd hs chr. ‘Y hv
dbtlss hrd of th Bryl Crnt?’

“‘On of th mst prcs pblc pssssns of th empr,’ sd I.

“‘Prcsly.’ H opnd th cs, and thr, imbddd in sft,
flsh-clrd vlvt, ly th mgnfcnt pc of jwllry whch h
hd nmd. ‘Thr ar thrty-nn enrms bryls,’ sd h, ‘and th
prc of th gld chsng is inclclbl. Th lwst estmt wld
pt th wrth of th crnt at dbl th sm whch I hv askd. I am
prprd t lv it wth y as my scrty.’

“I tk th prcs cs int my hnds and lkd in sm prplxty
frm it t my illstrs clnt.

“‘Y dbt its vl?’ h askd.

“‘Nt at all. I only dbt—’

“‘Th prprty of my lvng it. Y my st yr mnd at rst abt
tht. I shld nt drm of dng s wr it nt absltly crtn
tht I shld b abl in fr dys t rclm it. It is a pr mttr
of frm. Is th scrty sffcnt?’

“‘Ampl.’

“‘Y undrstnd, Mr. Hldr, tht I am gvng y a strng prf of
th cnfdnc whch I hv in y, fndd upn all tht I hv hrd
of y. I rly upn y nt only t b dscrt and t rfrn frm all
gssp upn th mttr bt, abv all, t prsrv ths crnt wth
evry pssbl prctn bcs I nd nt sy tht a grt pblc
scndl wld b csd if any hrm wr t bfll it. Any injry t it
wld b almst as srs as its cmplt lss, fr thr ar n
bryls in th wrld t mtch ths, and it wld b impssbl t
rplc thm. I lv it wth y, hwvr, wth evry cnfdnc, and
I shll cll fr it in prsn on Mndy mrnng.’

“Sng tht my clnt ws anxs t lv, I sd n mr bt,
cllng fr my cshr, I ordrd hm t py ovr ffty £ 1000 nts.
Whn I ws aln onc mr, hwvr, wth th prcs cs lyng upn
th tbl in frnt of m, I cld nt bt thnk wth sm msgvngs of
th immns rspnsblty whch it entld upn m. Thr cld b n
dbt tht, as it ws a ntnl pssssn, a hrrbl scndl wld
ens if any msfrtn shld occr t it. I alrdy rgrttd hvng
evr cnsntd t tk chrg of it. Hwvr, it ws t lt t altr
th mttr nw, s I lckd it up in my prvt sf and trnd onc
mr t my wrk.

“Whn evnng cm I flt tht it wld b an imprdnc t lv s
prcs a thng in th offc bhnd m. Bnkrs’ sfs hd bn
frcd bfr nw, and why shld nt mn b? If s, hw trrbl
wld b th pstn in whch I shld fnd myslf! I dtrmnd,
thrfr, tht fr th nxt fw dys I wld alwys crry th cs
bckwrd and frwrd wth m, s tht it mght nvr b rlly ot of
my rch. Wth ths intntn, I clld a cb and drv ot t my hs
at Strthm, crryng th jwl wth m. I dd nt brth frly
untl I hd tkn it upstrs and lckd it in th br of my
drssng-rm.

“And nw a wrd as t my hshld, Mr. Hlms, fr I wsh y t
thrghly undrstnd th sttn. My grm and my pg slp ot of
th hs, and my b st asd altgthr. I hv thr md-srvnts
wh hv bn wth m a nmbr of yrs and whs abslt rlblty
is qt abv sspcn. Anthr, Lcy Prr, th scnd wtng-md,
hs only bn in my srvc a fw mnths. Sh cm wth an excllnt
chrctr, hwvr, and hs alwys gvn m stsfctn. Sh is a vry
prtty grl and hs attrctd admrrs wh hv occsnlly hng abt
th plc. Tht is th only drwbck whch w hv fnd t hr, bt w
blv hr t b a thrghly gd grl in evry wy.

“S mch fr th srvnts. My fmly itslf is s smll tht it wll
nt tk m lng t dscrb it. I am a wdwr and hv an only sn,
Arthr. H hs bn a dsppntmnt t m, Mr. Hlms—a grvs
dsppntmnt. I hv n dbt tht I am myslf t blm. Ppl tll
m tht I hv spld hm. Vry lkly I hv. Whn my dr wf dd
I flt tht h ws all I hd t lv. I cld nt br t s th sml
fd evn fr a mmnt frm hs fc. I hv nvr dnd hm a wsh.
Prhps it wld hv bn bttr fr bth of us hd I bn strnr,
bt I mnt it fr th bst.

“It ws ntrlly my intntn tht h shld sccd m in my
bsnss, bt h ws nt of a bsnss trn. H ws wld, wywrd, and,
t spk th trth, I cld nt trst hm in th hndlng of lrg sms
of mny. Whn h ws yng h bcm a mmbr of an arstcrtc clb,
and thr, hvng chrmng mnnrs, h ws sn th intmt of a
nmbr of mn wth lng prss and expnsv hbts. H lrnd t ply
hvly at crds and t sqndr mny on th trf, untl h hd agn
and agn t cm t m and implr m t gv hm an advnc upn hs
allwnc, tht h mght sttl hs dbts of hnr. H trd mr thn
onc t brk awy frm th dngrs cmpny whch h ws kpng, bt
ech tm th inflnc of hs frnd, Sr Grg Brnwll, ws engh
t drw hm bck agn.

“And, indd, I cld nt wndr tht sch a mn as Sr Grg Brnwll
shld gn an inflnc ovr hm, fr h hs frqntly brght hm t
my hs, and I hv fnd myslf tht I cld hrdly rsst th
fscntn of hs mnnr. H is oldr thn Arthr, a mn of th wrld
t hs fngr-tps, on wh hd bn evrywhr, sn evrythng, a
brllnt tlkr, and a mn of grt prsnl bty. Yt whn I thnk
of hm in cld bld, fr awy frm th glmr of hs prsnc, I am
cnvncd frm hs cyncl spch and th lk whch I hv cght in
hs eys tht h is on wh shld b dply dstrstd. S I thnk,
and s, t, thnks my lttl Mry, wh hs a wmn’s qck insght
int chrctr.

“And nw thr is only sh t b dscrbd. Sh is my nc; bt whn
my brthr dd fv yrs ag and lft hr aln in th wrld I
adptd hr, and hv lkd upn hr evr snc as my dghtr. Sh is
a snbm in my hs—swt, lvng, btfl, a wndrfl mngr and
hskpr, yt as tndr and qt and gntl as a wmn cld b.
Sh is my rght hnd. I d nt knw wht I cld d wtht hr. In
only on mttr hs sh evr gn agnst my wshs. Twc my by hs
askd hr t mrry hm, fr h lvs hr dvtdly, bt ech tm sh
hs rfsd hm. I thnk tht if anyn cld hv drwn hm int th
rght pth it wld hv bn sh, and tht hs mrrg mght hv
chngd hs whl lf; bt nw, als! it is t lt—frvr t lt!

“Nw, Mr. Hlms, y knw th ppl wh lv undr my rf, and I
shll cntn wth my msrbl stry.

“Whn w wr tkng cff in th drwng-rm tht nght aftr
dnnr, I tld Arthr and Mry my exprnc, and of th prcs
trsr whch w hd undr or rf, spprssng only th nm of my
clnt. Lcy Prr, wh hd brght in th cff, hd, I am sr, lft
th rm; bt I cnnt swr tht th dr ws clsd. Mry and Arthr
wr mch intrstd and wshd t s th fms crnt, bt I
thght it bttr nt t dstrb it.

“‘Whr hv y pt it?’ askd Arthr.

“‘In my own br.’

“‘Wll, I hp t gdnss th hs wn’t b brgld drng th
nght.’ sd h.

“‘It is lckd up,’ I answrd.

“‘Oh, any old ky wll ft tht br. Whn I ws a yngstr I hv
opnd it myslf wth th ky of th bx-rm cpbrd.’

“H oftn hd a wld wy of tlkng, s tht I thght lttl of wht
h sd. H fllwd m t my rm, hwvr, tht nght wth a vry
grv fc.

“‘Lk hr, dd,’ sd h wth hs eys cst dwn, ‘cn y lt m
hv £ 200?’

“‘N, I cnnt!’ I answrd shrply. ‘I hv bn fr t gnrs wth
y in mny mttrs.’

“‘Y hv bn vry knd,’ sd h, ‘bt I mst hv ths mny, or
els I cn nvr shw my fc insd th clb agn.’

“‘And a vry gd thng, t!’ I crd.

“‘Ys, bt y wld nt hv m lv it a dshnrd mn,’ sd h.
‘I cld nt br th dsgrc. I mst rs th mny in sm wy, and
if y wll nt lt m hv it, thn I mst try othr mns.’

“I ws vry angry, fr ths ws th thrd dmnd drng th mnth. ‘Y
shll nt hv a frthng frm m,’ I crd, on whch h bwd and lft
th rm wtht anthr wrd.

“Whn h ws gn I unlckd my br, md sr tht my trsr ws
sf, and lckd it agn. Thn I strtd t g rnd th hs t s
tht all ws scr—a dty whch I uslly lv t Mry bt whch I
thght it wll t prfrm myslf tht nght. As I cm dwn th strs
I sw Mry hrslf at th sd wndw of th hll, whch sh clsd and
fstnd as I apprchd.

“‘Tll m, dd,’ sd sh, lkng, I thght, a lttl dstrbd, ‘dd
y gv Lcy, th md, lv t g ot t-nght?’

“‘Crtnly nt.’

“‘Sh cm in jst nw by th bck dr. I hv n dbt tht sh hs
only bn t th sd gt t s smn, bt I thnk tht it is
hrdly sf and shld b stppd.’

“‘Y mst spk t hr in th mrnng, or I wll if y prfr it. Ar
y sr tht evrythng is fstnd?’

“‘Qt sr, dd.’

“‘Thn, gd-nght.’ I kssd hr and wnt up t my bdrm agn,
whr I ws sn aslp.

“I am endvrng t tll y evrythng, Mr. Hlms, whch my hv
any brng upn th cs, bt I bg tht y wll qstn m upn any
pnt whch I d nt mk clr.”

“On th cntrry, yr sttmnt is snglrly lcd.”

“I cm t a prt of my stry nw in whch I shld wsh t b
prtclrly s. I am nt a vry hvy slpr, and th anxty in my
mnd tndd, n dbt, t mk m evn lss s thn usl. Abt tw in
th mrnng, thn, I ws awknd by sm snd in th hs. It hd
csd er I ws wd awk, bt it hd lft an imprssn bhnd it as
thgh a wndw hd gntly clsd smwhr. I ly lstnng wth all
my ers. Sddnly, t my hrrr, thr ws a dstnct snd of
ftstps mvng sftly in th nxt rm. I slppd ot of bd, all
plpttng wth fr, and ppd rnd th crnr of my drssng-rm
dr.

“‘Arthr!’ I scrmd, ‘y vlln! y thf! Hw dr y tch tht
crnt?’

“Th gs ws hlf up, as I hd lft it, and my unhppy by, drssd
only in hs shrt and trsrs, ws stndng bsd th lght, hldng
th crnt in hs hnds. H apprd t b wrnchng at it, or bndng
it wth all hs strngth. At my cry h drppd it frm hs grsp and
trnd as pl as dth. I sntchd it up and exmnd it. On of th
gld crnrs, wth thr of th bryls in it, ws mssng.

“‘Y blckgrd!’ I shtd, bsd myslf wth rg. ‘Y hv
dstryd it! Y hv dshnrd m frvr! Whr ar th jwls
whch y hv stln?’

“‘Stln!’ h crd.

“‘Ys, thf!’ I rrd, shkng hm by th shldr.

“‘Thr ar nn mssng. Thr cnnt b any mssng,’ sd h.

“‘Thr ar thr mssng. And y knw whr thy ar. Mst I cll y
a lr as wll as a thf? Dd I nt s y tryng t tr off anthr
pc?’

“‘Y hv clld m nms engh,’ sd h, ‘I wll nt stnd it any
lngr. I shll nt sy anthr wrd abt ths bsnss, snc y
hv chsn t inslt m. I wll lv yr hs in th mrnng and
mk my own wy in th wrld.’

“‘Y shll lv it in th hnds of th plc!’ I crd hlf-md wth
grf and rg. ‘I shll hv ths mttr prbd t th bttm.’

“‘Y shll lrn nthng frm m,’ sd h wth a pssn sch as I
shld nt hv thght ws in hs ntr. ‘If y chs t cll th
plc, lt th plc fnd wht thy cn.’

“By ths tm th whl hs ws astr, fr I hd rsd my vc in
my angr. Mry ws th frst t rsh int my rm, and, at th sght of
th crnt and of Arthr’s fc, sh rd th whl stry and, wth a
scrm, fll dwn snslss on th grnd. I snt th hsmd fr th
plc and pt th invstgtn int thr hnds at onc. Whn th
inspctr and a cnstbl entrd th hs, Arthr, wh hd std
sllnly wth hs arms fldd, askd m whthr it ws my intntn t
chrg hm wth thft. I answrd tht it hd csd t b a prvt
mttr, bt hd bcm a pblc on, snc th rnd crnt ws
ntnl prprty. I ws dtrmnd tht th lw shld hv its wy in
evrythng.

“‘At lst,’ sd h, ‘y wll nt hv m arrstd at onc. It wld
b t yr advntg as wll as mn if I mght lv th hs fr
fv mnts.’

“‘Tht y my gt awy, or prhps tht y my cncl wht y hv
stln,’ sd I. And thn, rlsng th drdfl pstn in whch I
ws plcd, I implrd hm t rmmbr tht nt only my hnr bt tht
of on wh ws fr grtr thn I ws at stk; and tht h thrtnd
t rs a scndl whch wld cnvls th ntn. H mght avrt it
all if h wld bt tll m wht h hd dn wth th thr mssng
stns.

“‘Y my as wll fc th mttr,’ sd I; ‘y hv bn cght in
th act, and n cnfssn cld mk yr glt mr hns. If y
bt mk sch rprtn as is in yr pwr, by tllng us whr th
bryls ar, all shll b frgvn and frgttn.’

“‘Kp yr frgvnss fr ths wh ask fr it,’ h answrd, trnng
awy frm m wth a snr. I sw tht h ws t hrdnd fr any wrds
of mn t inflnc hm. Thr ws bt on wy fr it. I clld in th
inspctr and gv hm int cstdy. A srch ws md at onc nt only
of hs prsn bt of hs rm and of evry prtn of th hs whr
h cld pssbly hv cncld th gms; bt n trc of thm cld
b fnd, nr wld th wrtchd by opn hs mth fr all or
prssns and or thrts. Ths mrnng h ws rmvd t a cll, and
I, aftr gng thrgh all th plc frmlts, hv hrrd rnd
t y t implr y t us yr skll in unrvllng th mttr. Th
plc hv opnly cnfssd tht thy cn at prsnt mk nthng of
it. Y my g t any expns whch y thnk ncssry. I hv alrdy
offrd a rwrd of £ 1000. My Gd, wht shll I d! I hv lst my
hnr, my gms, and my sn in on nght. Oh, wht shll I d!”

H pt a hnd on ethr sd of hs hd and rckd hmslf t and fr,
drnng t hmslf lk a chld whs grf hs gt bynd wrds.

Shrlck Hlms st slnt fr sm fw mnts, wth hs brws knttd
and hs eys fxd upn th fr.

“D y rcv mch cmpny?” h askd.

“Nn sv my prtnr wth hs fmly and an occsnl frnd of
Arthr’s. Sr Grg Brnwll hs bn svrl tms ltly. N on
els, I thnk.”

“D y g ot mch in scty?”

“Arthr ds. Mry and I sty at hm. W nthr of us cr fr it.”

“Tht is unsl in a yng grl.”

“Sh is of a qt ntr. Bsds, sh is nt s vry yng. Sh is
fr-and-twnty.”

“Ths mttr, frm wht y sy, sms t hv bn a shck t hr
als.”

“Trrbl! Sh is evn mr affctd thn I.”

“Y hv nthr of y any dbt as t yr sn’s glt?”

“Hw cn w hv whn I sw hm wth my own eys wth th crnt in
hs hnds.”

“I hrdly cnsdr tht a cnclsv prf. Ws th rmndr of th
crnt at all injrd?”

“Ys, it ws twstd.”

“D y nt thnk, thn, tht h mght hv bn tryng t strghtn
it?”

“Gd blss y! Y ar dng wht y cn fr hm and fr m. Bt it
is t hvy a tsk. Wht ws h dng thr at all? If hs prps
wr inncnt, why dd h nt sy s?”

“Prcsly. And if it wr glty, why dd h nt invnt a l? Hs
slnc apprs t m t ct bth wys. Thr ar svrl snglr
pnts abt th cs. Wht dd th plc thnk of th ns whch
awk y frm yr slp?”

“Thy cnsdrd tht it mght b csd by Arthr’s clsng hs
bdrm dr.”

“A lkly stry! As if a mn bnt on flny wld slm hs dr s as
t wk a hshld. Wht dd thy sy, thn, of th dspprnc of
ths gms?”

“Thy ar stll sndng th plnkng and prbng th frntr in th
hp of fndng thm.”

“Hv thy thght of lkng otsd th hs?”

“Ys, thy hv shwn extrrdnry enrgy. Th whl grdn hs
alrdy bn mntly exmnd.”

“Nw, my dr sr,” sd Hlms, “is it nt obvs t y nw tht
ths mttr rlly strks vry mch dpr thn ethr y or th
plc wr at frst inclnd t thnk? It apprd t y t b a
smpl cs; t m it sms excdngly cmplx. Cnsdr wht is
invlvd by yr thry. Y spps tht yr sn cm dwn frm hs
bd, wnt, at grt rsk, t yr drssng-rm, opnd yr br,
tk ot yr crnt, brk off by mn frc a smll prtn of it,
wnt off t sm othr plc, cncld thr gms ot of th
thrty-nn, wth sch skll tht nbdy cn fnd thm, and thn
rtrnd wth th othr thrty-sx int th rm in whch h expsd
hmslf t th grtst dngr of bng dscvrd. I ask y nw, is
sch a thry tnbl?”

“Bt wht othr is thr?” crd th bnkr wth a gstr of dspr.
“If hs mtvs wr inncnt, why ds h nt expln thm?”

“It is or tsk t fnd tht ot,” rpld Hlms; “s nw, if y
pls, Mr. Hldr, w wll st off fr Strthm tgthr, and dvt
an hr t glncng a lttl mr clsly int dtls.”

My frnd insstd upn my accmpnyng thm in thr expdtn, whch
I ws egr engh t d, fr my crsty and sympthy wr dply
strrd by th stry t whch w hd lstnd. I cnfss tht th glt
of th bnkr’s sn apprd t m t b as obvs as it dd t hs
unhppy fthr, bt stll I hd sch fth in Hlms’ jdgmnt tht I
flt tht thr mst b sm grnds fr hp as lng as h ws
dsstsfd wth th accptd explntn. H hrdly spk a wrd th
whl wy ot t th sthrn sbrb, bt st wth hs chn upn hs
brst and hs ht drwn ovr hs eys, snk in th dpst thght.
Or clnt apprd t hv tkn frsh hrt at th lttl glmps of
hp whch hd bn prsntd t hm, and h evn brk int a
dsltry cht wth m ovr hs bsnss affrs. A shrt rlwy
jrny and a shrtr wlk brght us t Frbnk, th mdst rsdnc
of th grt fnncr.

Frbnk ws a gd-szd sqr hs of wht stn, stndng bck a
lttl frm th rd. A dbl crrg-swp, wth a snw-cld lwn,
strtchd dwn in frnt t tw lrg irn gts whch clsd th
entrnc. On th rght sd ws a smll wdn thckt, whch ld int
a nrrw pth btwn tw nt hdgs strtchng frm th rd t th
ktchn dr, and frmng th trdsmn’s entrnc. On th lft rn a
ln whch ld t th stbls, and ws nt itslf wthn th grnds at
all, bng a pblc, thgh lttl usd, thrghfr. Hlms lft us
stndng at th dr and wlkd slwly all rnd th hs, acrss th
frnt, dwn th trdsmn’s pth, and s rnd by th grdn bhnd
int th stbl ln. S lng ws h tht Mr. Hldr and I wnt int
th dnng-rm and wtd by th fr untl h shld rtrn. W wr
sttng thr in slnc whn th dr opnd and a yng ldy cm in.
Sh ws rthr abv th mddl hght, slm, wth drk hr and eys,
whch smd th drkr agnst th abslt pllr of hr skn. I d
nt thnk tht I hv evr sn sch ddly plnss in a wmn’s fc.
Hr lps, t, wr bldlss, bt hr eys wr flshd wth cryng.
As sh swpt slntly int th rm sh imprssd m wth a grtr
sns of grf thn th bnkr hd dn in th mrnng, and it ws th
mr strkng in hr as sh ws evdntly a wmn of strng chrctr,
wth immns cpcty fr slf-rstrnt. Dsrgrdng my prsnc, sh
wnt strght t hr uncl and pssd hr hnd ovr hs hd wth a
swt wmnly crss.

“Y hv gvn ordrs tht Arthr shld b lbrtd, hv y nt,
dd?” sh askd.

“N, n, my grl, th mttr mst b prbd t th bttm.”

“Bt I am s sr tht h is inncnt. Y knw wht wmn’s instncts
ar. I knw tht h hs dn n hrm and tht y wll b srry fr
hvng actd s hrshly.”

“Why is h slnt, thn, if h is inncnt?”

“Wh knws? Prhps bcs h ws s angry tht y shld sspct
hm.”

“Hw cld I hlp sspctng hm, whn I actlly sw hm wth th
crnt in hs hnd?”

“Oh, bt h hd only pckd it up t lk at it. Oh, d, d tk my
wrd fr it tht h is inncnt. Lt th mttr drp and sy n mr.
It is s drdfl t thnk of or dr Arthr in prsn!”

“I shll nvr lt it drp untl th gms ar fnd—nvr, Mry! Yr
affctn fr Arthr blnds y as t th awfl cnsqncs t m. Fr
frm hshng th thng up, I hv brght a gntlmn dwn frm Lndn
t inqr mr dply int it.”

“Ths gntlmn?” sh askd, fcng rnd t m.

“N, hs frnd. H wshd us t lv hm aln. H is rnd in th
stbl ln nw.”

“Th stbl ln?” Sh rsd hr drk eybrws. “Wht cn h hp t
fnd thr? Ah! ths, I spps, is h. I trst, sr, tht y wll
sccd in prvng, wht I fl sr is th trth, tht my csn
Arthr is inncnt of ths crm.”

“I flly shr yr opnn, and I trst, wth y, tht w my prv
it,” rtrnd Hlms, gng bck t th mt t knck th snw frm hs
shs. “I blv I hv th hnr of addrssng Mss Mry Hldr.
Mght I ask y a qstn or tw?”

“Pry d, sr, if it my hlp t clr ths hrrbl affr up.”

“Y hrd nthng yrslf lst nght?”

“Nthng, untl my uncl hr bgn t spk ldly. I hrd tht, and
I cm dwn.”

“Y sht up th wndws and drs th nght bfr. Dd y fstn all
th wndws?”

“Ys.”

“Wr thy all fstnd ths mrnng?”

“Ys.”

“Y hv a md wh hs a swthrt? I thnk tht y rmrkd t
yr uncl lst nght tht sh hd bn ot t s hm?”

“Ys, and sh ws th grl wh wtd in th drwng-rm, and wh my
hv hrd uncl’s rmrks abt th crnt.”

“I s. Y infr tht sh my hv gn ot t tll hr swthrt,
and tht th tw my hv plnnd th rbbry.”

“Bt wht is th gd of all ths vg thrs,” crd th bnkr
imptntly, “whn I hv tld y tht I sw Arthr wth th crnt
in hs hnds?”

“Wt a lttl, Mr. Hldr. W mst cm bck t tht. Abt ths grl,
Mss Hldr. Y sw hr rtrn by th ktchn dr, I prsm?”

“Ys; whn I wnt t s if th dr ws fstnd fr th nght I mt
hr slppng in. I sw th mn, t, in th glm.”

“D y knw hm?”

“Oh, ys! h is th grngrcr wh brngs or vgtbls rnd. Hs
nm is Frncs Prspr.”

“H std,” sd Hlms, “t th lft of th dr—tht is t sy,
frthr up th pth thn is ncssry t rch th dr?”

“Ys, h dd.”

“And h is a mn wth a wdn lg?”

Smthng lk fr sprng up in th yng ldy’s exprssv blck
eys. “Why, y ar lk a mgcn,” sd sh. “Hw d y knw tht?”
Sh smld, bt thr ws n answrng sml in Hlms’ thn, egr
fc.

“I shld b vry gld nw t g upstrs,” sd h. “I shll prbbly
wsh t g ovr th otsd of th hs agn. Prhps I hd bttr
tk a lk at th lwr wndws bfr I g up.”

H wlkd swftly rnd frm on t th othr, psng only at th
lrg on whch lkd frm th hll ont th stbl ln. Ths h
opnd and md a vry crfl exmntn of th sll wth hs
pwrfl mgnfyng lns. “Nw w shll g upstrs,” sd h at lst.

Th bnkr’s drssng-rm ws a plnly frnshd lttl chmbr, wth
a gry crpt, a lrg br, and a lng mrrr. Hlms wnt t th
br frst and lkd hrd at th lck.

“Whch ky ws usd t opn it?” h askd.

“Tht whch my sn hmslf indctd—tht of th cpbrd of th
lmbr-rm.”

“Hv y it hr?”

“Tht is it on th drssng-tbl.”

Shrlck Hlms tk it up and opnd th br.

“It is a nslss lck,” sd h. “It is n wndr tht it dd nt
wk y. Ths cs, I prsm, cntns th crnt. W mst hv a
lk at it.” H opnd th cs, and tkng ot th ddm h ld it
upn th tbl. It ws a mgnfcnt spcmn of th jwllr’s art,
and th thrty-sx stns wr th fnst tht I hv evr sn. At on
sd of th crnt ws a crckd edg, whr a crnr hldng thr
gms hd bn trn awy.

“Nw, Mr. Hldr,” sd Hlms, “hr is th crnr whch crrspnds
t tht whch hs bn s unfrtntly lst. Mght I bg tht y wll
brk it off.”

Th bnkr rcld in hrrr. “I shld nt drm of tryng,” sd h.

“Thn I wll.” Hlms sddnly bnt hs strngth upn it, bt wtht
rslt. “I fl it gv a lttl,” sd h; “bt, thgh I am
excptnlly strng in th fngrs, it wld tk m all my tm t
brk it. An ordnry mn cld nt d it. Nw, wht d y thnk wld
hppn if I dd brk it, Mr. Hldr? Thr wld b a ns lk a
pstl sht. D y tll m tht all ths hppnd wthn a fw yrds
of yr bd and tht y hrd nthng of it?”

“I d nt knw wht t thnk. It is all drk t m.”

“Bt prhps it my grw lghtr as w g. Wht d y thnk, Mss
Hldr?”

“I cnfss tht I stll shr my uncl’s prplxty.”

“Yr sn hd n shs or slpprs on whn y sw hm?”

“H hd nthng on sv only hs trsrs and shrt.”

“Thnk y. W hv crtnly bn fvrd wth extrrdnry lck
drng ths inqry, and it wll b entrly or own flt if w d nt
sccd in clrng th mttr up. Wth yr prmssn, Mr. Hldr, I
shll nw cntn my invstgtns otsd.”

H wnt aln, at hs own rqst, fr h explnd tht any
unncssry ftmrks mght mk hs tsk mr dffclt. Fr an hr
or mr h ws at wrk, rtrnng at lst wth hs ft hvy wth snw
and hs ftrs as inscrtbl as evr.

“I thnk tht I hv sn nw all tht thr is t s, Mr. Hldr,”
sd h; “I cn srv y bst by rtrnng t my rms.”

“Bt th gms, Mr. Hlms. Whr ar thy?”

“I cnnt tll.”

Th bnkr wrng hs hnds. “I shll nvr s thm agn!” h crd.
“And my sn? Y gv m hps?”

“My opnn is in n wy altrd.”

“Thn, fr Gd’s sk, wht ws ths drk bsnss whch ws actd in
my hs lst nght?”

“If y cn cll upn m at my Bkr Strt rms t-mrrw mrnng
btwn nn and tn I shll b hppy t d wht I cn t mk it
clrr. I undrstnd tht y gv m _crt blnch_ t act fr y,
prvdd only tht I gt bck th gms, and tht y plc n lmt on
th sm I my drw.”

“I wld gv my frtn t hv thm bck.”

“Vry gd. I shll lk int th mttr btwn ths and thn.
Gd-by; it is jst pssbl tht I my hv t cm ovr hr agn
bfr evnng.”

It ws obvs t m tht my cmpnn’s mnd ws nw md up abt th
cs, althgh wht hs cnclsns wr ws mr thn I cld evn
dmly imgn. Svrl tms drng or hmwrd jrny I endvrd
t snd hm upn th pnt, bt h alwys gldd awy t sm othr
tpc, untl at lst I gv it ovr in dspr. It ws nt yt thr
whn w fnd orslvs in or rms onc mr. H hrrd t hs
chmbr and ws dwn agn in a fw mnts drssd as a cmmn lfr.
Wth hs cllr trnd up, hs shny, sdy ct, hs rd crvt, and
hs wrn bts, h ws a prfct smpl of th clss.

“I thnk tht ths shld d,” sd h, glncng int th glss abv
th frplc. “I only wsh tht y cld cm wth m, Wtsn, bt I
fr tht it wn’t d. I my b on th trl in ths mttr, or I my
b fllwng a wll-o’-th-wsp, bt I shll sn knw whch it is. I
hp tht I my b bck in a fw hrs.” H ct a slc of bf frm
th jnt upn th sdbrd, sndwchd it btwn tw rnds of
brd, and thrstng ths rd ml int hs pckt h strtd off upn
hs expdtn.

I hd jst fnshd my t whn h rtrnd, evdntly in excllnt
sprts, swngng an old elstc-sdd bt in hs hnd. H chckd it
dwn int a crnr and hlpd hmslf t a cp of t.

“I only lkd in as I pssd,” sd h. “I am gng rght on.”

“Whr t?”

“Oh, t th othr sd of th Wst End. It my b sm tm bfr I
gt bck. Dn’t wt up fr m in cs I shld b lt.”

“Hw ar y gttng on?”

“Oh, s s. Nthng t cmpln of. I hv bn ot t Strthm snc
I sw y lst, bt I dd nt cll at th hs. It is a vry swt
lttl prblm, and I wld nt hv mssd it fr a gd dl.
Hwvr, I mst nt st gsspng hr, bt mst gt ths dsrptbl
clths off and rtrn t my hghly rspctbl slf.”

I cld s by hs mnnr tht h hd strngr rsns fr stsfctn
thn hs wrds aln wld imply. Hs eys twnkld, and thr ws evn
a tch of clr upn hs sllw chks. H hstnd upstrs, and a
fw mnts ltr I hrd th slm of th hll dr, whch tld m tht
h ws off onc mr upn hs cngnl hnt.

I wtd untl mdnght, bt thr ws n sgn of hs rtrn, s I
rtrd t my rm. It ws n uncmmn thng fr hm t b awy fr
dys and nghts on end whn h ws ht upn a scnt, s tht hs
ltnss csd m n srprs. I d nt knw at wht hr h cm in,
bt whn I cm dwn t brkfst in th mrnng thr h ws wth a
cp of cff in on hnd and th ppr in th othr, as frsh and trm
as pssbl.

“Y wll excs my bgnnng wtht y, Wtsn,” sd h, “bt y
rmmbr tht or clnt hs rthr an erly appntmnt ths mrnng.”

“Why, it is aftr nn nw,” I answrd. “I shld nt b srprsd if
tht wr h. I thght I hrd a rng.”

It ws, indd, or frnd th fnncr. I ws shckd by th chng
whch hd cm ovr hm, fr hs fc whch ws ntrlly of a brd
and mssv mld, ws nw pnchd and flln in, whl hs hr smd
t m at lst a shd whtr. H entrd wth a wrnss and lthrgy
whch ws evn mr pnfl thn hs vlnc of th mrnng bfr,
and h drppd hvly int th armchr whch I pshd frwrd fr
hm.

“I d nt knw wht I hv dn t b s svrly trd,” sd h.
“Only tw dys ag I ws a hppy and prsprs mn, wtht a cr in
th wrld. Nw I am lft t a lnly and dshnrd ag. On srrw
cms cls upn th hls of anthr. My nc, Mry, hs dsrtd
m.”

“Dsrtd y?”

“Ys. Hr bd ths mrnng hd nt bn slpt in, hr rm ws empty,
and a nt fr m ly upn th hll tbl. I hd sd t hr lst
nght, in srrw and nt in angr, tht if sh hd mrrd my by all
mght hv bn wll wth hm. Prhps it ws thghtlss of m t sy
s. It is t tht rmrk tht sh rfrs in ths nt:

    “‘MY DRST UNCL,—I fl tht I hv brght trbl upn y,
    and tht if I hd actd dffrntly ths trrbl msfrtn mght
    nvr hv occrrd. I cnnt, wth ths thght in my mnd, evr
    agn b hppy undr yr rf, and I fl tht I mst lv y
    frvr. D nt wrry abt my ftr, fr tht is prvdd fr;
    and, abv all, d nt srch fr m, fr it wll b frtlss
    lbr and an ill-srvc t m. In lf or in dth, I am evr
    yr lvng,


    “‘MRY.’


“Wht cld sh mn by tht nt, Mr. Hlms? D y thnk it pnts
t scd?”

“N, n, nthng of th knd. It is prhps th bst pssbl sltn.
I trst, Mr. Hldr, tht y ar nrng th end of yr trbls.”

“H! Y sy s! Y hv hrd smthng, Mr. Hlms; y hv lrnd
smthng! Whr ar th gms?”

“Y wld nt thnk £ 1000 apc an excssv sm fr thm?”

“I wld py tn.”

“Tht wld b unncssry. Thr thsnd wll cvr th mttr. And
thr is a lttl rwrd, I fncy. Hv y yr chq-bk? Hr is a
pn. Bttr mk it ot fr £ 4000.”

Wth a dzd fc th bnkr md ot th rqrd chck. Hlms wlkd
ovr t hs dsk, tk ot a lttl trnglr pc of gld wth thr
gms in it, and thrw it dwn upn th tbl.

Wth a shrk of jy or clnt cltchd it up.

“Y hv it!” h gspd. “I am svd! I am svd!”

Th rctn of jy ws as pssnt as hs grf hd bn, and h
hggd hs rcvrd gms t hs bsm.

“Thr is on othr thng y ow, Mr. Hldr,” sd Shrlck Hlms
rthr strnly.

“Ow!” H cght up a pn. “Nm th sm, and I wll py it.”

“N, th dbt is nt t m. Y ow a vry hmbl aplgy t tht nbl
ld, yr sn, wh hs crrd hmslf in ths mttr as I shld b
prd t s my own sn d, shld I evr chnc t hv on.”

“Thn it ws nt Arthr wh tk thm?”

“I tld y ystrdy, and I rpt t-dy, tht it ws nt.”

“Y ar sr of it! Thn lt us hrry t hm at onc t lt hm knw
tht th trth is knwn.”

“H knws it alrdy. Whn I hd clrd it all up I hd an intrvw
wth hm, and fndng tht h wld nt tll m th stry, I tld it t
hm, on whch h hd t cnfss tht I ws rght and t add th vry
fw dtls whch wr nt yt qt clr t m. Yr nws of ths
mrnng, hwvr, my opn hs lps.”

“Fr Hvn’s sk, tll m, thn, wht is ths extrrdnry mystry!”

“I wll d s, and I wll shw y th stps by whch I rchd it. And
lt m sy t y, frst, tht whch it is hrdst fr m t sy and
fr y t hr: thr hs bn an undrstndng btwn Sr Grg
Brnwll and yr nc Mry. Thy hv nw fld tgthr.”

“My Mry? Impssbl!”

“It is unfrtntly mr thn pssbl; it is crtn. Nthr y nr
yr sn knw th tr chrctr of ths mn whn y admttd hm int
yr fmly crcl. H is on of th mst dngrs mn in Englnd—a
rnd gmblr, an absltly dsprt vlln, a mn wtht hrt or
cnscnc. Yr nc knw nthng of sch mn. Whn h brthd hs
vws t hr, as h hd dn t a hndrd bfr hr, sh flttrd
hrslf tht sh aln hd tchd hs hrt. Th dvl knws bst wht
h sd, bt at lst sh bcm hs tl and ws in th hbt of
sng hm nrly evry evnng.”

“I cnnt, and I wll nt, blv it!” crd th bnkr wth an ashn
fc.

“I wll tll y, thn, wht occrrd in yr hs lst nght. Yr
nc, whn y hd, as sh thght, gn t yr rm, slppd dwn
and tlkd t hr lvr thrgh th wndw whch lds int th stbl
ln. Hs ftmrks hd prssd rght thrgh th snw, s lng hd h
std thr. Sh tld hm of th crnt. Hs wckd lst fr gld
kndld at th nws, and h bnt hr t hs wll. I hv n dbt tht
sh lvd y, bt thr ar wmn in whm th lv of a lvr
extngshs all othr lvs, and I thnk tht sh mst hv bn on.
Sh hd hrdly lstnd t hs instrctns whn sh sw y cmng
dwnstrs, on whch sh clsd th wndw rpdly and tld y abt
on of th srvnts’ escpd wth hr wdn-lggd lvr, whch ws
all prfctly tr.

“Yr by, Arthr, wnt t bd aftr hs intrvw wth y bt h
slpt bdly on accnt of hs unsnss abt hs clb dbts. In th
mddl of th nght h hrd a sft trd pss hs dr, s h rs
and, lkng ot, ws srprsd t s hs csn wlkng vry
stlthly alng th pssg untl sh dspprd int yr
drssng-rm. Ptrfd wth astnshmnt, th ld slppd on sm
clths and wtd thr in th drk t s wht wld cm of ths
strng affr. Prsntly sh emrgd frm th rm agn, and in th
lght of th pssg-lmp yr sn sw tht sh crrd th prcs
crnt in hr hnds. Sh pssd dwn th strs, and h, thrllng
wth hrrr, rn alng and slppd bhnd th crtn nr yr dr,
whnc h cld s wht pssd in th hll bnth. H sw hr
stlthly opn th wndw, hnd ot th crnt t smn in th
glm, and thn clsng it onc mr hrry bck t hr rm, pssng
qt cls t whr h std hd bhnd th crtn.

“As lng as sh ws on th scn h cld nt tk any actn wtht a
hrrbl expsr of th wmn whm h lvd. Bt th instnt tht sh
ws gn h rlsd hw crshng a msfrtn ths wld b fr y,
and hw all-imprtnt it ws t st it rght. H rshd dwn, jst as
h ws, in hs br ft, opnd th wndw, sprng ot int th snw,
and rn dwn th ln, whr h cld s a drk fgr in th
mnlght. Sr Grg Brnwll trd t gt awy, bt Arthr cght
hm, and thr ws a strggl btwn thm, yr ld tggng at on
sd of th crnt, and hs oppnnt at th othr. In th scffl,
yr sn strck Sr Grg and ct hm ovr th ey. Thn smthng
sddnly snppd, and yr sn, fndng tht h hd th crnt in hs
hnds, rshd bck, clsd th wndw, ascndd t yr rm, and hd
jst obsrvd tht th crnt hd bn twstd in th strggl and ws
endvrng t strghtn it whn y apprd upn th scn.”

“Is it pssbl?” gspd th bnkr.

“Y thn rsd hs angr by cllng hm nms at a mmnt whn h
flt tht h hd dsrvd yr wrmst thnks. H cld nt expln th
tr stt of affrs wtht btryng on wh crtnly dsrvd
lttl engh cnsdrtn at hs hnds. H tk th mr chvlrs
vw, hwvr, and prsrvd hr scrt.”

“And tht ws why sh shrkd and fntd whn sh sw th crnt,”
crd Mr. Hldr. “Oh, my Gd! wht a blnd fl I hv bn! And hs
askng t b allwd t g ot fr fv mnts! Th dr fllw wntd
t s if th mssng pc wr at th scn of th strggl. Hw
crlly I hv msjdgd hm!”

“Whn I arrvd at th hs,” cntnd Hlms, “I at onc wnt vry
crflly rnd it t obsrv if thr wr any trcs in th snw
whch mght hlp m. I knw tht nn hd flln snc th evnng
bfr, and als tht thr hd bn a strng frst t prsrv
imprssns. I pssd alng th trdsmn’s pth, bt fnd it all
trmpld dwn and indstngshbl. Jst bynd it, hwvr, at th
fr sd of th ktchn dr, a wmn hd std and tlkd wth a mn,
whs rnd imprssns on on sd shwd tht h hd a wdn lg. I
cld evn tll tht thy hd bn dstrbd, fr th wmn hd rn
bck swftly t th dr, as ws shwn by th dp t and lght hl
mrks, whl Wdn-lg hd wtd a lttl, and thn hd gn awy. I
thght at th tm tht ths mght b th md and hr swthrt, of
whm y hd alrdy spkn t m, and inqry shwd it ws s. I
pssd rnd th grdn wtht sng anythng mr thn rndm
trcks, whch I tk t b th plc; bt whn I gt int th stbl
ln a vry lng and cmplx stry ws wrttn in th snw in frnt of
m.

“Thr ws a dbl ln of trcks of a btd mn, and a scnd dbl
ln whch I sw wth dlght blngd t a mn wth nkd ft. I ws
at onc cnvncd frm wht y hd tld m tht th lttr ws yr
sn. Th frst hd wlkd bth wys, bt th othr hd rn swftly, and
as hs trd ws mrkd in plcs ovr th dprssn of th bt, it
ws obvs tht h hd pssd aftr th othr. I fllwd thm up and
fnd thy ld t th hll wndw, whr Bts hd wrn all th snw
awy whl wtng. Thn I wlkd t th othr end, whch ws a hndrd
yrds or mr dwn th ln. I sw whr Bts hd fcd rnd, whr
th snw ws ct up as thgh thr hd bn a strggl, and, fnlly,
whr a fw drps of bld hd flln, t shw m tht I ws nt
mstkn. Bts hd thn rn dwn th ln, and anthr lttl smdg
of bld shwd tht it ws h wh hd bn hrt. Whn h cm t th
hgh rd at th othr end, I fnd tht th pvmnt hd bn clrd,
s thr ws an end t tht cl.

“On entrng th hs, hwvr, I exmnd, as y rmmbr, th sll
and frmwrk of th hll wndw wth my lns, and I cld at onc s
tht smn hd pssd ot. I cld dstngsh th otln of an
instp whr th wt ft hd bn plcd in cmng in. I ws thn
bgnnng t b abl t frm an opnn as t wht hd occrrd. A mn
hd wtd otsd th wndw; smn hd brght th gms; th dd
hd bn ovrsn by yr sn; h hd prsd th thf; hd strggld
wth hm; thy hd ech tggd at th crnt, thr untd strngth
csng injrs whch nthr aln cld hv effctd. H hd
rtrnd wth th prz, bt hd lft a frgmnt in th grsp of hs
oppnnt. S fr I ws clr. Th qstn nw ws, wh ws th mn, and
wh ws it brght hm th crnt?

“It is an old mxm of mn tht whn y hv excldd th impssbl,
whtvr rmns, hwvr imprbbl, mst b th trth. Nw, I knw
tht it ws nt y wh hd brght it dwn, s thr only rmnd
yr nc and th mds. Bt if it wr th mds, why shld yr sn
allw hmslf t b accsd in thr plc? Thr cld b n pssbl
rsn. As h lvd hs csn, hwvr, thr ws an excllnt
explntn why h shld rtn hr scrt—th mr s as th scrt
ws a dsgrcfl on. Whn I rmmbrd tht y hd sn hr at tht
wndw, and hw sh hd fntd on sng th crnt agn, my
cnjctr bcm a crtnty.

“And wh cld it b wh ws hr cnfdrt? A lvr evdntly, fr
wh els cld otwgh th lv and grttd whch sh mst fl t
y? I knw tht y wnt ot lttl, and tht yr crcl of frnds
ws a vry lmtd on. Bt amng thm ws Sr Grg Brnwll. I hd
hrd of hm bfr as bng a mn of evl rpttn amng wmn. It
mst hv bn h wh wr ths bts and rtnd th mssng gms.
Evn thgh h knw tht Arthr hd dscvrd hm, h mght stll
flttr hmslf tht h ws sf, fr th ld cld nt sy a wrd
wtht cmprmsng hs own fmly.

“Wll, yr own gd sns wll sggst wht msrs I tk nxt. I
wnt in th shp of a lfr t Sr Grg’s hs, mngd t pck up
an acqntnc wth hs vlt, lrnd tht hs mstr hd ct hs
hd th nght bfr, and, fnlly, at th expns of sx shllngs,
md all sr by byng a pr of hs cst-off shs. Wth ths I
jrnyd dwn t Strthm and sw tht thy exctly fttd th
trcks.”

“I sw an ill-drssd vgbnd in th ln ystrdy evnng,” sd Mr.
Hldr.

“Prcsly. It ws I. I fnd tht I hd my mn, s I cm hm and
chngd my clths. It ws a dlct prt whch I hd t ply thn,
fr I sw tht a prsctn mst b avdd t avrt scndl, and I
knw tht s astt a vlln wld s tht or hnds wr td in th
mttr. I wnt and sw hm. At frst, of crs, h dnd evrythng.
Bt whn I gv hm evry prtclr tht hd occrrd, h trd t
blstr and tk dwn a lf-prsrvr frm th wll. I knw my mn,
hwvr, and I clppd a pstl t hs hd bfr h cld strk.
Thn h bcm a lttl mr rsnbl. I tld hm tht w wld gv
hm a prc fr th stns h hld—£ 1000 apc. Tht brght ot th
frst sgns of grf tht h hd shwn. ‘Why, dsh it all!’ sd h,
‘I’v lt thm g at sx hndrd fr th thr!’ I sn mngd t gt
th addrss of th rcvr wh hd thm, on prmsng hm tht thr
wld b n prsctn. Off I st t hm, and aftr mch chffrng I
gt or stns at £ 1000 apc. Thn I lkd in upn yr sn, tld
hm tht all ws rght, and evntlly gt t my bd abt tw o’clck,
aftr wht I my cll a rlly hrd dy’s wrk.”

“A dy whch hs svd Englnd frm a grt pblc scndl,” sd th
bnkr, rsng. “Sr, I cnnt fnd wrds t thnk y, bt y shll
nt fnd m ungrtfl fr wht y hv dn. Yr skll hs indd
excdd all tht I hv hrd of it. And nw I mst fly t my dr by
t aplgs t hm fr th wrng whch I hv dn hm. As t wht y
tll m of pr Mry, it gs t my vry hrt. Nt evn yr skll cn
infrm m whr sh is nw.”

“I thnk tht w my sfly sy,” rtrnd Hlms, “tht sh is
whrvr Sr Grg Brnwll is. It is eqlly crtn, t, tht
whtvr hr sns ar, thy wll sn rcv a mr thn sffcnt
pnshmnt.”




X. TH ADVNTR OF TH CPPR BCHS


“T th mn wh lvs art fr its own sk,” rmrkd Shrlck Hlms,
tssng asd th advrtsmnt sht of _Th Dly Tlgrph_, “it is
frqntly in its lst imprtnt and lwlst mnfsttns tht th
knst plsr is t b drvd. It is plsnt t m t obsrv,
Wtsn, tht y hv s fr grspd ths trth tht in ths lttl
rcrds of or css whch y hv bn gd engh t drw up, and, I
am bnd t sy, occsnlly t embllsh, y hv gvn prmnnc
nt s mch t th mny _css célèbrs_ and snstnl trls in
whch I hv fgrd bt rthr t ths incdnts whch my hv bn
trvl in thmslvs, bt whch hv gvn rm fr ths fclts of
ddctn and of lgcl synthss whch I hv md my spcl
prvnc.”

“And yt,” sd I, smlng, “I cnnt qt hld myslf abslvd frm
th chrg of snstnlsm whch hs bn urgd agnst my rcrds.”

“Y hv errd, prhps,” h obsrvd, tkng up a glwng cndr wth
th tngs and lghtng wth it th lng chrry-wd pp whch ws wnt
t rplc hs cly whn h ws in a dsptts rthr thn a
mdttv md—“y hv errd prhps in attmptng t pt clr and
lf int ech of yr sttmnts instd of cnfnng yrslf t th
tsk of plcng upn rcrd tht svr rsnng frm cs t effct
whch is rlly th only ntbl ftr abt th thng.”

“It sms t m tht I hv dn y fll jstc in th mttr,” I
rmrkd wth sm cldnss, fr I ws rplld by th egtsm whch I
hd mr thn onc obsrvd t b a strng fctr in my frnd’s
snglr chrctr.

“N, it is nt slfshnss or cnct,” sd h, answrng, as ws hs
wnt, my thghts rthr thn my wrds. “If I clm fll jstc fr my
art, it is bcs it is an imprsnl thng—a thng bynd myslf.
Crm is cmmn. Lgc is rr. Thrfr it is upn th lgc rthr
thn upn th crm tht y shld dwll. Y hv dgrdd wht
shld hv bn a crs of lctrs int a srs of tls.”

It ws a cld mrnng of th erly sprng, and w st aftr brkfst
on ethr sd of a chry fr in th old rm at Bkr Strt. A
thck fg rlld dwn btwn th lns of dn-clrd hss, and th
oppsng wndws lmd lk drk, shplss blrs thrgh th hvy
yllw wrths. Or gs ws lt and shn on th wht clth and
glmmr of chn and mtl, fr th tbl hd nt bn clrd yt.
Shrlck Hlms hd bn slnt all th mrnng, dppng cntnsly
int th advrtsmnt clmns of a sccssn of pprs untl at lst,
hvng apprntly gvn up hs srch, h hd emrgd in n vry swt
tmpr t lctr m upn my ltrry shrtcmngs.

“At th sm tm,” h rmrkd aftr a ps, drng whch h hd st
pffng at hs lng pp and gzng dwn int th fr, “y cn hrdly
b opn t a chrg of snstnlsm, fr ot of ths css whch y
hv bn s knd as t intrst yrslf in, a fr prprtn d nt
trt of crm, in its lgl sns, at all. Th smll mttr in whch I
endvrd t hlp th Kng of Bhm, th snglr exprnc of
Mss Mry Sthrlnd, th prblm cnnctd wth th mn wth th
twstd lp, and th incdnt of th nbl bchlr, wr all mttrs
whch ar otsd th pl of th lw. Bt in avdng th snstnl,
I fr tht y my hv brdrd on th trvl.”

“Th end my hv bn s,” I answrd, “bt th mthds I hld t hv
bn nvl and of intrst.”

“Pshw, my dr fllw, wht d th pblc, th grt unbsrvnt
pblc, wh cld hrdly tll a wvr by hs tth or a cmpstr by
hs lft thmb, cr abt th fnr shds of anlyss and ddctn!
Bt, indd, if y ar trvl, I cnnt blm y, fr th dys of
th grt css ar pst. Mn, or at lst crmnl mn, hs lst all
entrprs and orgnlty. As t my own lttl prctc, it sms t
b dgnrtng int an agncy fr rcvrng lst ld pncls and
gvng advc t yng lds frm brdng-schls. I thnk tht I
hv tchd bttm at lst, hwvr. Ths nt I hd ths mrnng
mrks my zr-pnt, I fncy. Rd it!” H tssd a crmpld lttr
acrss t m.

It ws dtd frm Mntg Plc upn th prcdng evnng, and rn
ths:

    “DR MR. HLMS,—I am vry anxs t cnslt y as t whthr I
    shld or shld nt accpt a sttn whch hs bn offrd t
    m as gvrnss. I shll cll at hlf-pst tn t-mrrw if I d
    nt incnvnnc y. Yrs fthflly,


    “VLT HNTR.”


“D y knw th yng ldy?” I askd.

“Nt I.”

“It is hlf-pst tn nw.”

“Ys, and I hv n dbt tht is hr rng.”

“It my trn ot t b of mr intrst thn y thnk. Y rmmbr
tht th affr of th bl crbncl, whch apprd t b a mr whm
at frst, dvlpd int a srs invstgtn. It my b s in ths
cs, als.”

“Wll, lt us hp s. Bt or dbts wll vry sn b slvd, fr
hr, unlss I am mch mstkn, is th prsn in qstn.”

As h spk th dr opnd and a yng ldy entrd th rm. Sh ws
plnly bt ntly drssd, wth a brght, qck fc, frckld lk a
plvr’s egg, and wth th brsk mnnr of a wmn wh hs hd hr own
wy t mk in th wrld.

“Y wll excs my trblng y, I am sr,” sd sh, as my
cmpnn rs t grt hr, “bt I hv hd a vry strng exprnc,
and as I hv n prnts or rltns of any srt frm whm I cld ask
advc, I thght tht prhps y wld b knd engh t tll m wht
I shld d.”

“Pry tk a st, Mss Hntr. I shll b hppy t d anythng tht I
cn t srv y.”

I cld s tht Hlms ws fvrbly imprssd by th mnnr and
spch of hs nw clnt. H lkd hr ovr in hs srchng fshn,
and thn cmpsd hmslf, wth hs lds drpng and hs fngr-tps
tgthr, t lstn t hr stry.

“I hv bn a gvrnss fr fv yrs,” sd sh, “in th fmly of
Clnl Spnc Mnr, bt tw mnths ag th clnl rcvd an
appntmnt at Hlfx, in Nv Sct, and tk hs chldrn ovr t
Amrc wth hm, s tht I fnd myslf wtht a sttn. I
advrtsd, and I answrd advrtsmnts, bt wtht sccss. At lst
th lttl mny whch I hd svd bgn t rn shrt, and I ws at my
wt’s end as t wht I shld d.

“Thr is a wll-knwn agncy fr gvrnsss in th Wst End clld
Wstwy’s, and thr I usd t cll abt onc a wk in ordr t s
whthr anythng hd trnd up whch mght st m. Wstwy ws th
nm of th fndr of th bsnss, bt it is rlly mngd by Mss
Stpr. Sh sts in hr own lttl offc, and th lds wh ar
skng emplymnt wt in an antrm, and ar thn shwn in on by
on, whn sh cnslts hr ldgrs and ss whthr sh hs anythng
whch wld st thm.

“Wll, whn I clld lst wk I ws shwn int th lttl offc as
usl, bt I fnd tht Mss Stpr ws nt aln. A prdgsly stt
mn wth a vry smlng fc and a grt hvy chn whch rlld dwn
in fld upn fld ovr hs thrt st at hr elbw wth a pr of
glsss on hs ns, lkng vry ernstly at th lds wh entrd.
As I cm in h gv qt a jmp in hs chr and trnd qckly t
Mss Stpr.

“‘Tht wll d,’ sd h; ‘I cld nt ask fr anythng bttr.
Cptl! cptl!’ H smd qt enthsstc and rbbd hs hnds
tgthr in th mst gnl fshn. H ws sch a cmfrtbl-lkng
mn tht it ws qt a plsr t lk at hm.

“‘Y ar lkng fr a sttn, mss?’ h askd.

“‘Ys, sr.’

“‘As gvrnss?’

“‘Ys, sr.’

“‘And wht slry d y ask?’

“‘I hd £ 4 a mnth in my lst plc wth Clnl Spnc Mnr.’

“‘Oh, tt, tt! swtng—rnk swtng!’ h crd, thrwng hs ft
hnds ot int th ar lk a mn wh is in a blng pssn. ‘Hw
cld anyn offr s ptfl a sm t a ldy wth sch attrctns and
accmplshmnts?’

“‘My accmplshmnts, sr, my b lss thn y imgn,’ sd I. ‘A
lttl Frnch, a lttl Grmn, msc, and drwng—’

“‘Tt, tt!’ h crd. ‘Ths is all qt bsd th qstn. Th
pnt is, hv y or hv y nt th brng and dprtmnt of a
ldy? Thr it is in a ntshll. If y hv nt, y ar nt fttd
fr th rrng of a chld wh my sm dy ply a cnsdrbl prt in
th hstry of th cntry. Bt if y hv, why, thn, hw cld any
gntlmn ask y t cndscnd t accpt anythng undr th thr
fgrs? Yr slry wth m, mdm, wld cmmnc at £ 100 a yr.’

“Y my imgn, Mr. Hlms, tht t m, dsttt as I ws, sch an
offr smd almst t gd t b tr. Th gntlmn, hwvr, sng
prhps th lk of incrdlty upn my fc, opnd a pckt-bk and
tk ot a nt.

“‘It is als my cstm,’ sd h, smlng in th mst plsnt fshn
untl hs eys wr jst tw lttl shnng slts amd th wht
crss of hs fc, ‘t advnc t my yng lds hlf thr slry
bfrhnd, s tht thy my mt any lttl expnss of thr jrny
and thr wrdrb.’

“It smd t m tht I hd nvr mt s fscntng and s thghtfl
a mn. As I ws alrdy in dbt t my trdsmn, th advnc ws a
grt cnvnnc, and yt thr ws smthng unntrl abt th
whl trnsctn whch md m wsh t knw a lttl mr bfr I
qt cmmttd myslf.

“‘My I ask whr y lv, sr?’ sd I.

“‘Hmpshr. Chrmng rrl plc. Th Cppr Bchs, fv mls on
th fr sd of Wnchstr. It is th mst lvly cntry, my dr
yng ldy, and th drst old cntry-hs.’

“‘And my dts, sr? I shld b gld t knw wht thy wld b.’

“‘On chld—on dr lttl rmpr jst sx yrs old. Oh, if y cld
s hm kllng cckrchs wth a slppr! Smck! smck! smck! Thr
gn bfr y cld wnk!’ H lnd bck in hs chr and lghd
hs eys int hs hd agn.

“I ws a lttl strtld at th ntr of th chld’s amsmnt, bt
th fthr’s lghtr md m thnk tht prhps h ws jkng.

“‘My sl dts, thn,’ I askd, ‘ar t tk chrg of a sngl
chld?’

“‘N, n, nt th sl, nt th sl, my dr yng ldy,’ h crd.
‘Yr dty wld b, as I am sr yr gd sns wld sggst, t
oby any lttl cmmnds my wf mght gv, prvdd alwys tht thy
wr sch cmmnds as a ldy mght wth prprty oby. Y s n
dffclty, hh?’

“‘I shld b hppy t mk myslf usfl.’

“‘Qt s. In drss nw, fr exmpl. W ar fddy ppl, y
knw—fddy bt knd-hrtd. If y wr askd t wr any drss whch
w mght gv y, y wld nt objct t or lttl whm. Hh?’

“‘N,’ sd I, cnsdrbly astnshd at hs wrds.

“‘Or t st hr, or st thr, tht wld nt b offnsv t y?’

“‘Oh, n.’

“‘Or t ct yr hr qt shrt bfr y cm t us?’

“I cld hrdly blv my ers. As y my obsrv, Mr. Hlms, my
hr is smwht lxrnt, and of a rthr pclr tnt of chstnt.
It hs bn cnsdrd artstc. I cld nt drm of scrfcng it in
ths offhnd fshn.

“‘I am afrd tht tht is qt impssbl,’ sd I. H hd bn
wtchng m egrly ot of hs smll eys, and I cld s a shdw
pss ovr hs fc as I spk.

“‘I am afrd tht it is qt essntl,’ sd h. ‘It is a lttl
fncy of my wf’s, and lds’ fncs, y knw, mdm, lds’
fncs mst b cnsltd. And s y wn’t ct yr hr?’

“‘N, sr, I rlly cld nt,’ I answrd frmly.

“‘Ah, vry wll; thn tht qt sttls th mttr. It is a pty,
bcs in othr rspcts y wld rlly hv dn vry ncly. In
tht cs, Mss Stpr, I hd bst inspct a fw mr of yr yng
lds.’

“Th mngrss hd st all ths whl bsy wth hr pprs wtht a
wrd t ethr of us, bt sh glncd at m nw wth s mch annync
upn hr fc tht I cld nt hlp sspctng tht sh hd lst a
hndsm cmmssn thrgh my rfsl.

“‘D y dsr yr nm t b kpt upn th bks?’ sh askd.

“‘If y pls, Mss Stpr.’

“‘Wll, rlly, it sms rthr uslss, snc y rfs th mst
excllnt offrs in ths fshn,’ sd sh shrply. ‘Y cn hrdly
expct us t exrt orslvs t fnd anthr sch opnng fr y.
Gd-dy t y, Mss Hntr.’ Sh strck a gng upn th tbl, and I
ws shwn ot by th pg.

“Wll, Mr. Hlms, whn I gt bck t my ldgngs and fnd lttl
engh in th cpbrd, and tw or thr blls upn th tbl, I bgn
t ask myslf whthr I hd nt dn a vry flsh thng. Aftr all,
if ths ppl hd strng fds and expctd obdnc on th mst
extrrdnry mttrs, thy wr at lst rdy t py fr thr
eccntrcty. Vry fw gvrnsss in Englnd ar gttng £ 100 a yr.
Bsds, wht us ws my hr t m? Mny ppl ar imprvd by
wrng it shrt and prhps I shld b amng th nmbr. Nxt dy I
ws inclnd t thnk tht I hd md a mstk, and by th dy aftr I
ws sr of it. I hd almst ovrcm my prd s fr as t g bck t
th agncy and inqr whthr th plc ws stll opn whn I rcvd
ths lttr frm th gntlmn hmslf. I hv it hr and I wll rd
it t y:

“‘Th Cppr Bchs, nr Wnchstr.

    “‘DR MSS HNTR,—Mss Stpr hs vry kndly gvn m yr
    addrss, and I wrt frm hr t ask y whthr y hv
    rcnsdrd yr dcsn. My wf is vry anxs tht y shld
    cm, fr sh hs bn mch attrctd by my dscrptn of y. W
    ar wllng t gv £ 30 a qrtr, or £ 120 a yr, s as t
    rcmpns y fr any lttl incnvnnc whch or fds my
    cs y. Thy ar nt vry exctng, aftr all. My wf is fnd
    of a prtclr shd of elctrc bl and wld lk y t wr
    sch a drss indrs in th mrnng. Y nd nt, hwvr, g t
    th expns of prchsng on, as w hv on blngng t my dr
    dghtr Alc (nw in Phldlph), whch wld, I shld thnk,
    ft y vry wll. Thn, as t sttng hr or thr, or amsng
    yrslf in any mnnr indctd, tht nd cs y n
    incnvnnc. As rgrds yr hr, it is n dbt a pty,
    espclly as I cld nt hlp rmrkng its bty drng or
    shrt intrvw, bt I am afrd tht I mst rmn frm upn ths
    pnt, and I only hp tht th incrsd slry my rcmpns y
    fr th lss. Yr dts, as fr as th chld is cncrnd, ar
    vry lght. Nw d try t cm, and I shll mt y wth th
    dg-crt at Wnchstr. Lt m knw yr trn. Yrs fthflly,


    “‘JPHR RCSTL.’


“Tht is th lttr whch I hv jst rcvd, Mr. Hlms, and my mnd
is md up tht I wll accpt it. I thght, hwvr, tht bfr
tkng th fnl stp I shld lk t sbmt th whl mttr t yr
cnsdrtn.”

“Wll, Mss Hntr, if yr mnd is md up, tht sttls th
qstn,” sd Hlms, smlng.

“Bt y wld nt advs m t rfs?”

“I cnfss tht it is nt th sttn whch I shld lk t s a
sstr of mn apply fr.”

“Wht is th mnng of it all, Mr. Hlms?”

“Ah, I hv n dt. I cnnt tll. Prhps y hv yrslf frmd
sm opnn?”

“Wll, thr sms t m t b only on pssbl sltn. Mr. Rcstl
smd t b a vry knd, gd-ntrd mn. Is it nt pssbl tht hs
wf is a lntc, tht h dsrs t kp th mttr qt fr fr
sh shld b tkn t an asylm, and tht h hmrs hr fncs in
evry wy in ordr t prvnt an otbrk?”

“Tht is a pssbl sltn—in fct, as mttrs stnd, it is th mst
prbbl on. Bt in any cs it ds nt sm t b a nc hshld
fr a yng ldy.”

“Bt th mny, Mr. Hlms, th mny!”

“Wll, ys, of crs th py is gd—t gd. Tht is wht mks m
unsy. Why shld thy gv y £ 120 a yr, whn thy cld hv
thr pck fr £ 40? Thr mst b sm strng rsn bhnd.”

“I thght tht if I tld y th crcmstncs y wld undrstnd
aftrwrds if I wntd yr hlp. I shld fl s mch strngr if I
flt tht y wr at th bck of m.”

“Oh, y my crry tht flng awy wth y. I assr y tht yr
lttl prblm prmss t b th mst intrstng whch hs cm my
wy fr sm mnths. Thr is smthng dstnctly nvl abt sm of
th ftrs. If y shld fnd yrslf in dbt or in dngr—”

“Dngr! Wht dngr d y frs?”

Hlms shk hs hd grvly. “It wld cs t b a dngr if w
cld dfn it,” sd h. “Bt at any tm, dy or nght, a tlgrm
wld brng m dwn t yr hlp.”

“Tht is engh.” Sh rs brskly frm hr chr wth th anxty all
swpt frm hr fc. “I shll g dwn t Hmpshr qt esy in my
mnd nw. I shll wrt t Mr. Rcstl at onc, scrfc my pr hr
t-nght, and strt fr Wnchstr t-mrrw.” Wth a fw grtfl
wrds t Hlms sh bd us bth gd-nght and bstld off upn hr
wy.

“At lst,” sd I as w hrd hr qck, frm stps dscndng th
strs, “sh sms t b a yng ldy wh is vry wll abl t tk
cr of hrslf.”

“And sh wld nd t b,” sd Hlms grvly. “I am mch mstkn if
w d nt hr frm hr bfr mny dys ar pst.”

It ws nt vry lng bfr my frnd’s prdctn ws flflld. A
frtnght wnt by, drng whch I frqntly fnd my thghts trnng
in hr drctn and wndrng wht strng sd-ally of hmn
exprnc ths lnly wmn hd stryd int. Th unsl slry, th
crs cndtns, th lght dts, all pntd t smthng
abnrml, thgh whthr a fd or a plt, or whthr th mn wr a
phlnthrpst or a vlln, it ws qt bynd my pwrs t
dtrmn. As t Hlms, I obsrvd tht h st frqntly fr hlf an
hr on end, wth knttd brws and an abstrctd ar, bt h swpt th
mttr awy wth a wv of hs hnd whn I mntnd it. “Dt! dt!
dt!” h crd imptntly. “I cn’t mk brcks wtht cly.” And
yt h wld alwys wnd up by mttrng tht n sstr of hs shld
evr hv accptd sch a sttn.

Th tlgrm whch w evntlly rcvd cm lt on nght jst as I
ws thnkng of trnng in and Hlms ws sttlng dwn t on of ths
all-nght chmcl rsrchs whch h frqntly indlgd in, whn I
wld lv hm stpng ovr a rtrt and a tst-tb at nght and
fnd hm in th sm pstn whn I cm dwn t brkfst in th
mrnng. H opnd th yllw envlp, and thn, glncng at th
mssg, thrw it acrss t m.

“Jst lk up th trns in Brdshw,” sd h, and trnd bck t hs
chmcl stds.

Th smmns ws a brf and urgnt on.

“Pls b at th Blck Swn Htl at Wnchstr at mddy t-mrrw,”
it sd. “D cm! I am at my wt’s end.


“HNTR.”


“Wll y cm wth m?” askd Hlms, glncng up.

“I shld wsh t.”

“Jst lk it up, thn.”

“Thr is a trn at hlf-pst nn,” sd I, glncng ovr my
Brdshw. “It is d at Wnchstr at 11:30.”

“Tht wll d vry ncly. Thn prhps I hd bttr pstpn my
anlyss of th actns, as w my nd t b at or bst in th
mrnng.”

By elvn o’clck th nxt dy w wr wll upn or wy t th old
Englsh cptl. Hlms hd bn brd in th mrnng pprs all th
wy dwn, bt aftr w hd pssd th Hmpshr brdr h thrw thm
dwn and bgn t admr th scnry. It ws an idl sprng dy, a
lght bl sky, flckd wth lttl flcy wht clds drftng acrss
frm wst t est. Th sn ws shnng vry brghtly, and yt thr ws
an exhlrtng np in th ar, whch st an edg t a mn’s enrgy.
All ovr th cntrysd, awy t th rllng hlls arnd Aldrsht,
th lttl rd and gry rfs of th frm-stdngs ppd ot frm
amd th lght grn of th nw flg.

“Ar thy nt frsh and btfl?” I crd wth all th enthssm of
a mn frsh frm th fgs of Bkr Strt.

Bt Hlms shk hs hd grvly.

“D y knw, Wtsn,” sd h, “tht it is on of th crss of a mnd
wth a trn lk mn tht I mst lk at evrythng wth rfrnc t
my own spcl sbjct. Y lk at ths scttrd hss, and y ar
imprssd by thr bty. I lk at thm, and th only thght whch
cms t m is a flng of thr isltn and of th impnty wth
whch crm my b cmmttd thr.”

“Gd hvns!” I crd. “Wh wld assct crm wth ths dr old
hmstds?”

“Thy alwys fll m wth a crtn hrrr. It is my blf, Wtsn,
fndd upn my exprnc, tht th lwst and vlst allys in Lndn
d nt prsnt a mr drdfl rcrd of sn thn ds th smlng and
btfl cntrysd.”

“Y hrrfy m!”

“Bt th rsn is vry obvs. Th prssr of pblc opnn cn d
in th twn wht th lw cnnt accmplsh. Thr is n ln s vl
tht th scrm of a trtrd chld, or th thd of a drnkrd’s blw,
ds nt bgt sympthy and indgntn amng th nghbrs, and thn
th whl mchnry of jstc is evr s cls tht a wrd of
cmplnt cn st it gng, and thr is bt a stp btwn th crm
and th dck. Bt lk at ths lnly hss, ech in its own flds,
flld fr th mst prt wth pr ignrnt flk wh knw lttl of th
lw. Thnk of th dds of hllsh crlty, th hddn wckdnss whch
my g on, yr in, yr ot, in sch plcs, and nn th wsr. Hd
ths ldy wh appls t us fr hlp gn t lv in Wnchstr, I
shld nvr hv hd a fr fr hr. It is th fv mls of cntry
whch mks th dngr. Stll, it is clr tht sh is nt prsnlly
thrtnd.”

“N. If sh cn cm t Wnchstr t mt us sh cn gt awy.”

“Qt s. Sh hs hr frdm.”

“Wht _cn_ b th mttr, thn? Cn y sggst n explntn?”

“I hv dvsd svn sprt explntns, ech of whch wld cvr
th fcts as fr as w knw thm. Bt whch of ths is crrct cn
only b dtrmnd by th frsh infrmtn whch w shll n dbt
fnd wtng fr us. Wll, thr is th twr of th cthdrl, and w
shll sn lrn all tht Mss Hntr hs t tll.”

Th Blck Swn is an inn of rpt in th Hgh Strt, at n dstnc
frm th sttn, and thr w fnd th yng ldy wtng fr us. Sh
hd enggd a sttng-rm, and or lnch awtd us upn th tbl.

“I am s dlghtd tht y hv cm,” sh sd ernstly. “It is s
vry knd of y bth; bt indd I d nt knw wht I shld d. Yr
advc wll b altgthr invlbl t m.”

“Pry tll us wht hs hppnd t y.”

“I wll d s, and I mst b qck, fr I hv prmsd Mr. Rcstl t
b bck bfr thr. I gt hs lv t cm int twn ths mrnng,
thgh h lttl knw fr wht prps.”

“Lt us hv evrythng in its d ordr.” Hlms thrst hs lng thn
lgs ot twrds th fr and cmpsd hmslf t lstn.

“In th frst plc, I my sy tht I hv mt, on th whl, wth n
actl ill-trtmnt frm Mr. and Mrs. Rcstl. It is only fr t
thm t sy tht. Bt I cnnt undrstnd thm, and I am nt esy in my
mnd abt thm.”

“Wht cn y nt undrstnd?”

“Thr rsns fr thr cndct. Bt y shll hv it all jst as it
occrrd. Whn I cm dwn, Mr. Rcstl mt m hr and drv m in
hs dg-crt t th Cppr Bchs. It is, as h sd, btflly
sttd, bt it is nt btfl in itslf, fr it is a lrg sqr
blck of a hs, whtwshd, bt all stnd and strkd wth dmp
and bd wthr. Thr ar grnds rnd it, wds on thr sds, and
on th frth a fld whch slps dwn t th Sthmptn hgh rd,
whch crvs pst abt a hndrd yrds frm th frnt dr. Ths
grnd in frnt blngs t th hs, bt th wds all rnd ar prt
of Lrd Sthrtn’s prsrvs. A clmp of cppr bchs immdtly
in frnt of th hll dr hs gvn its nm t th plc.

“I ws drvn ovr by my emplyr, wh ws as ambl as evr, and ws
intrdcd by hm tht evnng t hs wf and th chld. Thr ws n
trth, Mr. Hlms, in th cnjctr whch smd t us t b prbbl
in yr rms at Bkr Strt. Mrs. Rcstl is nt md. I fnd hr t
b a slnt, pl-fcd wmn, mch yngr thn hr hsbnd, nt mr
thn thrty, I shld thnk, whl h cn hrdly b lss thn
frty-fv. Frm thr cnvrstn I hv gthrd tht thy hv bn
mrrd abt svn yrs, tht h ws a wdwr, and tht hs only
chld by th frst wf ws th dghtr wh hs gn t Phldlph.
Mr. Rcstl tld m in prvt tht th rsn why sh hd lft thm
ws tht sh hd an unrsnng avrsn t hr stpmthr. As th
dghtr cld nt hv bn lss thn twnty, I cn qt imgn tht
hr pstn mst hv bn uncmfrtbl wth hr fthr’s yng wf.

“Mrs. Rcstl smd t m t b clrlss in mnd as wll as in
ftr. Sh imprssd m nthr fvrbly nr th rvrs. Sh ws a
nnntty. It ws esy t s tht sh ws pssntly dvtd bth t
hr hsbnd and t hr lttl sn. Hr lght gry eys wndrd
cntnlly frm on t th othr, ntng evry lttl wnt and
frstllng it if pssbl. H ws knd t hr als in hs blff,
bstrs fshn, and on th whl thy smd t b a hppy cpl.
And yt sh hd sm scrt srrw, ths wmn. Sh wld oftn b lst
in dp thght, wth th sddst lk upn hr fc. Mr thn onc I
hv srprsd hr in trs. I hv thght smtms tht it ws th
dspstn of hr chld whch wghd upn hr mnd, fr I hv nvr
mt s uttrly spld and s ill-ntrd a lttl crtr. H is
smll fr hs ag, wth a hd whch is qt dsprprtntly lrg.
Hs whl lf apprs t b spnt in an altrntn btwn svg
fts of pssn and glmy intrvls of slkng. Gvng pn t any
crtr wkr thn hmslf sms t b hs on id of amsmnt, and
h shws qt rmrkbl tlnt in plnnng th cptr of mc,
lttl brds, and inscts. Bt I wld rthr nt tlk abt th
crtr, Mr. Hlms, and, indd, h hs lttl t d wth my stry.”

“I am gld of all dtls,” rmrkd my frnd, “whthr thy sm t
y t b rlvnt or nt.”

“I shll try nt t mss anythng of imprtnc. Th on unplsnt
thng abt th hs, whch strck m at onc, ws th apprnc and
cndct of th srvnts. Thr ar only tw, a mn and hs wf.
Tllr, fr tht is hs nm, is a rgh, uncth mn, wth grzzld
hr and whskrs, and a prptl smll of drnk. Twc snc I hv
bn wth thm h hs bn qt drnk, and yt Mr. Rcstl smd t
tk n ntc of it. Hs wf is a vry tll and strng wmn wth a
sr fc, as slnt as Mrs. Rcstl and mch lss ambl. Thy ar a
mst unplsnt cpl, bt frtntly I spnd mst of my tm in th
nrsry and my own rm, whch ar nxt t ech othr in on crnr of
th bldng.

“Fr tw dys aftr my arrvl at th Cppr Bchs my lf ws vry
qt; on th thrd, Mrs. Rcstl cm dwn jst aftr brkfst and
whsprd smthng t hr hsbnd.

“‘Oh, ys,’ sd h, trnng t m, ‘w ar vry mch oblgd t y,
Mss Hntr, fr fllng in wth or whms s fr as t ct yr hr.
I assr y tht it hs nt dtrctd in th tnst it frm yr
apprnc. W shll nw s hw th elctrc-bl drss wll bcm
y. Y wll fnd it ld ot upn th bd in yr rm, and if y
wld b s gd as t pt it on w shld bth b extrmly oblgd.’

“Th drss whch I fnd wtng fr m ws of a pclr shd of
bl. It ws of excllnt mtrl, a srt of bg, bt it br
unmstkbl sgns of hvng bn wrn bfr. It cld nt hv bn a
bttr ft if I hd bn msrd fr it. Bth Mr. and Mrs. Rcstl
exprssd a dlght at th lk of it, whch smd qt exggrtd
in its vhmnc. Thy wr wtng fr m in th drwng-rm, whch
is a vry lrg rm, strtchng alng th entr frnt of th hs,
wth thr lng wndws rchng dwn t th flr. A chr hd bn
plcd cls t th cntrl wndw, wth its bck trnd twrds it. In
ths I ws askd t st, and thn Mr. Rcstl, wlkng up and dwn on
th othr sd of th rm, bgn t tll m a srs of th fnnst
strs tht I hv evr lstnd t. Y cnnt imgn hw cmcl h
ws, and I lghd untl I ws qt wry. Mrs. Rcstl, hwvr, wh
hs evdntly n sns of hmr, nvr s mch as smld, bt st wth
hr hnds in hr lp, and a sd, anxs lk upn hr fc. Aftr an
hr or s, Mr. Rcstl sddnly rmrkd tht it ws tm t cmmnc
th dts of th dy, and tht I mght chng my drss and g t
lttl Edwrd in th nrsry.

“Tw dys ltr ths sm prfrmnc ws gn thrgh undr exctly
smlr crcmstncs. Agn I chngd my drss, agn I st in th
wndw, and agn I lghd vry hrtly at th fnny strs of whch
my emplyr hd an immns _réprtr_, and whch h tld inmtbly.
Thn h hndd m a yllw-bckd nvl, and mvng my chr a lttl
sdwys, tht my own shdw mght nt fll upn th pg, h bggd m
t rd ald t hm. I rd fr abt tn mnts, bgnnng in th
hrt of a chptr, and thn sddnly, in th mddl of a sntnc, h
ordrd m t cs and t chng my drss.

“Y cn esly imgn, Mr. Hlms, hw crs I bcm as t wht
th mnng of ths extrrdnry prfrmnc cld pssbly b. Thy
wr alwys vry crfl, I obsrvd, t trn my fc awy frm th
wndw, s tht I bcm cnsmd wth th dsr t s wht ws gng
on bhnd my bck. At frst it smd t b impssbl, bt I sn
dvsd a mns. My hnd-mrrr hd bn brkn, s a hppy thght
szd m, and I cncld a pc of th glss in my hndkrchf. On
th nxt occsn, in th mdst of my lghtr, I pt my hndkrchf
up t my eys, and ws abl wth a lttl mngmnt t s all tht
thr ws bhnd m. I cnfss tht I ws dsppntd. Thr ws
nthng. At lst tht ws my frst imprssn. At th scnd glnc,
hwvr, I prcvd tht thr ws a mn stndng in th Sthmptn
Rd, a smll brdd mn in a gry st, wh smd t b lkng in
my drctn. Th rd is an imprtnt hghwy, and thr ar uslly
ppl thr. Ths mn, hwvr, ws lnng agnst th rlngs whch
brdrd or fld and ws lkng ernstly up. I lwrd my
hndkrchf and glncd at Mrs. Rcstl t fnd hr eys fxd upn
m wth a mst srchng gz. Sh sd nthng, bt I am cnvncd
tht sh hd dvnd tht I hd a mrrr in my hnd and hd sn wht
ws bhnd m. Sh rs at onc.

“‘Jphr,’ sd sh, ‘thr is an imprtnnt fllw upn th rd
thr wh strs up at Mss Hntr.’

“‘N frnd of yrs, Mss Hntr?’ h askd.

“‘N, I knw n on in ths prts.’

“‘Dr m! Hw vry imprtnnt! Kndly trn rnd and mtn t hm t
g awy.’

“‘Srly it wld b bttr t tk n ntc.’

“‘N, n, w shld hv hm ltrng hr alwys. Kndly trn rnd
and wv hm awy lk tht.’

“I dd as I ws tld, and at th sm instnt Mrs. Rcstl drw dwn
th blnd. Tht ws a wk ag, and frm tht tm I hv nt st agn
in th wndw, nr hv I wrn th bl drss, nr sn th mn in th
rd.”

“Pry cntn,” sd Hlms. “Yr nrrtv prmss t b a mst
intrstng on.”

“Y wll fnd it rthr dscnnctd, I fr, and thr my prv t
b lttl rltn btwn th dffrnt incdnts of whch I spk. On
th vry frst dy tht I ws at th Cppr Bchs, Mr. Rcstl tk
m t a smll oths whch stnds nr th ktchn dr. As w
apprchd it I hrd th shrp rttlng of a chn, and th snd as
of a lrg anml mvng abt.

“‘Lk in hr!’ sd Mr. Rcstl, shwng m a slt btwn tw
plnks. ‘Is h nt a bty?’

“I lkd thrgh and ws cnscs of tw glwng eys, and of a vg
fgr hddld up in th drknss.

“‘Dn’t b frghtnd,’ sd my emplyr, lghng at th strt whch I
hd gvn. ‘It’s only Crl, my mstff. I cll hm mn, bt rlly
old Tllr, my grm, is th only mn wh cn d anythng wth hm. W
fd hm onc a dy, and nt t mch thn, s tht h is alwys as
kn as mstrd. Tllr lts hm ls evry nght, and Gd hlp th
trspssr whm h lys hs fngs upn. Fr gdnss’ sk dn’t y
evr on any prtxt st yr ft ovr th thrshld at nght, fr it’s
as mch as yr lf is wrth.’

“Th wrnng ws n idl on, fr tw nghts ltr I hppnd t lk
ot of my bdrm wndw abt tw o’clck in th mrnng. It ws a
btfl mnlght nght, and th lwn in frnt of th hs ws
slvrd ovr and almst as brght as dy. I ws stndng, rpt in th
pcfl bty of th scn, whn I ws awr tht smthng ws
mvng undr th shdw of th cppr bchs. As it emrgd int th
mnshn I sw wht it ws. It ws a gnt dg, as lrg as a clf,
twny tntd, wth hngng jwl, blck mzzl, and hg prjctng
bns. It wlkd slwly acrss th lwn and vnshd int th shdw
upn th othr sd. Tht drdfl sntnl snt a chll t my hrt
whch I d nt thnk tht any brglr cld hv dn.

“And nw I hv a vry strng exprnc t tll y. I hd, as y
knw, ct off my hr in Lndn, and I hd plcd it in a grt cl at
th bttm of my trnk. On evnng, aftr th chld ws in bd, I
bgn t ams myslf by exmnng th frntr of my rm and by
rrrngng my own lttl thngs. Thr ws an old chst of drwrs in
th rm, th tw uppr ons empty and opn, th lwr on lckd. I
hd flld th frst tw wth my lnn, and as I hd stll mch t pck
awy I ws ntrlly annyd at nt hvng th us of th thrd drwr.
It strck m tht it mght hv bn fstnd by a mr ovrsght, s I
tk ot my bnch of kys and trd t opn it. Th vry frst ky
fttd t prfctn, and I drw th drwr opn. Thr ws only on
thng in it, bt I am sr tht y wld nvr gss wht it ws. It
ws my cl of hr.

“I tk it up and exmnd it. It ws of th sm pclr tnt, and
th sm thcknss. Bt thn th impssblty of th thng obtrdd
itslf upn m. Hw cld my hr hv bn lckd in th drwr? Wth
trmblng hnds I undd my trnk, trnd ot th cntnts, and drw
frm th bttm my own hr. I ld th tw trsss tgthr, and I
assr y tht thy wr idntcl. Ws it nt extrrdnry? Pzzl
as I wld, I cld mk nthng at all of wht it mnt. I rtrnd
th strng hr t th drwr, and I sd nthng of th mttr t th
Rcstls as I flt tht I hd pt myslf in th wrng by opnng a
drwr whch thy hd lckd.

“I am ntrlly obsrvnt, as y my hv rmrkd, Mr. Hlms, and I
sn hd a prtty gd pln of th whl hs in my hd. Thr ws
on wng, hwvr, whch apprd nt t b inhbtd at all. A dr
whch fcd tht whch ld int th qrtrs of th Tllrs opnd int
ths st, bt it ws invrbly lckd. On dy, hwvr, as I
ascndd th str, I mt Mr. Rcstl cmng ot thrgh ths dr,
hs kys in hs hnd, and a lk on hs fc whch md hm a vry
dffrnt prsn t th rnd, jvl mn t whm I ws accstmd. Hs
chks wr rd, hs brw ws all crnkld wth angr, and th vns
std ot at hs tmpls wth pssn. H lckd th dr and hrrd
pst m wtht a wrd or a lk.

“Ths arsd my crsty, s whn I wnt ot fr a wlk in th
grnds wth my chrg, I strlld rnd t th sd frm whch I cld
s th wndws of ths prt of th hs. Thr wr fr of thm in a
rw, thr of whch wr smply drty, whl th frth ws shttrd
up. Thy wr evdntly all dsrtd. As I strlld up and dwn,
glncng at thm occsnlly, Mr. Rcstl cm ot t m, lkng as
mrry and jvl as evr.

“‘Ah!’ sd h, ‘y mst nt thnk m rd if I pssd y wtht a
wrd, my dr yng ldy. I ws prccpd wth bsnss mttrs.’

“I assrd hm tht I ws nt offndd. ‘By th wy,’ sd I, ‘y sm
t hv qt a st of spr rms up thr, and on of thm hs th
shttrs up.’

“H lkd srprsd and, as it smd t m, a lttl strtld at my
rmrk.

“‘Phtgrphy is on of my hbbs,’ sd h. ‘I hv md my drk rm
up thr. Bt, dr m! wht an obsrvnt yng ldy w hv cm upn.
Wh wld hv blvd it? Wh wld hv evr blvd it?’ H spk
in a jstng tn, bt thr ws n jst in hs eys as h lkd at
m. I rd sspcn thr and annync, bt n jst.

“Wll, Mr. Hlms, frm th mmnt tht I undrstd tht thr ws
smthng abt tht st of rms whch I ws nt t knw, I ws all
on fr t g ovr thm. It ws nt mr crsty, thgh I hv my
shr of tht. It ws mr a flng of dty—a flng tht sm gd
mght cm frm my pntrtng t ths plc. Thy tlk of wmn’s
instnct; prhps it ws wmn’s instnct whch gv m tht flng.
At any rt, it ws thr, and I ws knly on th lkt fr any
chnc t pss th frbddn dr.

“It ws only ystrdy tht th chnc cm. I my tll y tht,
bsds Mr. Rcstl, bth Tllr and hs wf fnd smthng t d in
ths dsrtd rms, and I onc sw hm crryng a lrg blck lnn
bg wth hm thrgh th dr. Rcntly h hs bn drnkng hrd, and
ystrdy evnng h ws vry drnk; and whn I cm upstrs thr ws
th ky in th dr. I hv n dbt at all tht h hd lft it thr.
Mr. and Mrs. Rcstl wr bth dwnstrs, and th chld ws wth
thm, s tht I hd an admrbl opprtnty. I trnd th ky gntly
in th lck, opnd th dr, and slppd thrgh.

“Thr ws a lttl pssg in frnt of m, unpprd and uncrptd,
whch trnd at a rght angl at th frthr end. Rnd ths crnr
wr thr drs in a ln, th frst and thrd of whch wr opn.
Thy ech ld int an empty rm, dsty and chrlss, wth tw wndws
in th on and on in th othr, s thck wth drt tht th evnng
lght glmmrd dmly thrgh thm. Th cntr dr ws clsd, and
acrss th otsd of it hd bn fstnd on of th brd brs of an
irn bd, pdlckd at on end t a rng in th wll, and fstnd at
th othr wth stt crd. Th dr itslf ws lckd as wll, and th
ky ws nt thr. Ths brrcdd dr crrspndd clrly wth th
shttrd wndw otsd, and yt I cld s by th glmmr frm
bnth it tht th rm ws nt in drknss. Evdntly thr ws a
skylght whch lt in lght frm abv. As I std in th pssg
gzng at th snstr dr and wndrng wht scrt it mght vl, I
sddnly hrd th snd of stps wthn th rm and sw a shdw pss
bckwrd and frwrd agnst th lttl slt of dm lght whch shn
ot frm undr th dr. A md, unrsnng trrr rs up in m at th
sght, Mr. Hlms. My ovrstrng nrvs fld m sddnly, and I
trnd and rn—rn as thgh sm drdfl hnd wr bhnd m
cltchng at th skrt of my drss. I rshd dwn th pssg, thrgh
th dr, and strght int th arms of Mr. Rcstl, wh ws wtng
otsd.

“‘S,’ sd h, smlng, ‘it ws y, thn. I thght tht it mst b
whn I sw th dr opn.’

“‘Oh, I am s frghtnd!’ I pntd.

“‘My dr yng ldy! my dr yng ldy!’—y cnnt thnk hw
crssng and sthng hs mnnr ws—‘and wht hs frghtnd y, my
dr yng ldy?’

“Bt hs vc ws jst a lttl t cxng. H ovrdd it. I ws
knly on my grd agnst hm.

“‘I ws flsh engh t g int th empty wng,’ I answrd. ‘Bt it
is s lnly and er in ths dm lght tht I ws frghtnd and rn
ot agn. Oh, it is s drdflly stll in thr!’

“‘Only tht?’ sd h, lkng at m knly.

“‘Why, wht dd y thnk?’ I askd.

“‘Why d y thnk tht I lck ths dr?’

“‘I am sr tht I d nt knw.’

“‘It is t kp ppl ot wh hv n bsnss thr. D y s?’ H
ws stll smlng in th mst ambl mnnr.

“‘I am sr if I hd knwn—’

“‘Wll, thn, y knw nw. And if y evr pt yr ft ovr tht
thrshld agn’—hr in an instnt th sml hrdnd int a grn of
rg, and h glrd dwn at m wth th fc of a dmn—‘I’ll thrw y
t th mstff.’

“I ws s trrfd tht I d nt knw wht I dd. I spps tht I
mst hv rshd pst hm int my rm. I rmmbr nthng untl I
fnd myslf lyng on my bd trmblng all ovr. Thn I thght of y,
Mr. Hlms. I cld nt lv thr lngr wtht sm advc. I ws
frghtnd of th hs, of th mn, of th wmn, of th srvnts,
evn of th chld. Thy wr all hrrbl t m. If I cld only brng
y dwn all wld b wll. Of crs I mght hv fld frm th hs,
bt my crsty ws almst as strng as my frs. My mnd ws sn
md up. I wld snd y a wr. I pt on my ht and clk, wnt dwn
t th offc, whch is abt hlf a ml frm th hs, and thn
rtrnd, flng vry mch esr. A hrrbl dbt cm int my mnd
as I apprchd th dr lst th dg mght b ls, bt I rmmbrd
tht Tllr hd drnk hmslf int a stt of insnsblty tht
evnng, and I knw tht h ws th only on in th hshld wh hd
any inflnc wth th svg crtr, or wh wld vntr t st hm
fr. I slppd in in sfty and ly awk hlf th nght in my jy at
th thght of sng y. I hd n dffclty in gttng lv t cm
int Wnchstr ths mrnng, bt I mst b bck bfr thr o’clck,
fr Mr. and Mrs. Rcstl ar gng on a vst, and wll b awy all
th evnng, s tht I mst lk aftr th chld. Nw I hv tld y
all my advntrs, Mr. Hlms, and I shld b vry gld if y cld
tll m wht it all mns, and, abv all, wht I shld d.”

Hlms and I hd lstnd spllbnd t ths extrrdnry stry. My
frnd rs nw and pcd up and dwn th rm, hs hnds in hs
pckts, and an exprssn of th mst prfnd grvty upn hs fc.

“Is Tllr stll drnk?” h askd.

“Ys. I hrd hs wf tll Mrs. Rcstl tht sh cld d nthng
wth hm.”

“Tht is wll. And th Rcstls g ot t-nght?”

“Ys.”

“Is thr a cllr wth a gd strng lck?”

“Ys, th wn-cllr.”

“Y sm t m t hv actd all thrgh ths mttr lk a vry brv
and snsbl grl, Mss Hntr. D y thnk tht y cld prfrm on
mr ft? I shld nt ask it of y if I dd nt thnk y a qt
excptnl wmn.”

“I wll try. Wht is it?”

“W shll b at th Cppr Bchs by svn o’clck, my frnd and I.
Th Rcstls wll b gn by tht tm, and Tllr wll, w hp, b
incpbl. Thr only rmns Mrs. Tllr, wh mght gv th alrm. If
y cld snd hr int th cllr on sm errnd, and thn trn th
ky upn hr, y wld fcltt mttrs immnsly.”

“I wll d it.”

“Excllnt! W shll thn lk thrghly int th affr. Of crs
thr is only on fsbl explntn. Y hv bn brght thr t
prsnt smn, and th rl prsn is imprsnd in ths chmbr.
Tht is obvs. As t wh ths prsnr is, I hv n dbt tht it is
th dghtr, Mss Alc Rcstl, if I rmmbr rght, wh ws sd t
hv gn t Amrc. Y wr chsn, dbtlss, as rsmblng hr in
hght, fgr, and th clr of yr hr. Hrs hd bn ct off,
vry pssbly in sm illnss thrgh whch sh hs pssd, and s, of
crs, yrs hd t b scrfcd als. By a crs chnc y cm
upn hr trsss. Th mn in th rd ws undbtdly sm frnd of
hrs—pssbly hr _fncé_—and n dbt, as y wr th grl’s drss
and wr s lk hr, h ws cnvncd frm yr lghtr, whnvr h
sw y, and aftrwrds frm yr gstr, tht Mss Rcstl ws
prfctly hppy, and tht sh n lngr dsrd hs attntns. Th dg
is lt ls at nght t prvnt hm frm endvrng t cmmnct
wth hr. S mch is frly clr. Th mst srs pnt in th cs
is th dspstn of th chld.”

“Wht on erth hs tht t d wth it?” I ejcltd.

“My dr Wtsn, y as a mdcl mn ar cntnlly gnng lght as
t th tndncs of a chld by th stdy of th prnts. Dn’t y s
tht th cnvrs is eqlly vld. I hv frqntly gnd my frst
rl insght int th chrctr of prnts by stdyng thr chldrn.
Ths chld’s dspstn is abnrmlly crl, mrly fr crlty’s
sk, and whthr h drvs ths frm hs smlng fthr, as I shld
sspct, or frm hs mthr, it bds evl fr th pr grl wh is in
thr pwr.”

“I am sr tht y ar rght, Mr. Hlms,” crd or clnt. “A
thsnd thngs cm bck t m whch mk m crtn tht y hv ht
it. Oh, lt us ls nt an instnt in brngng hlp t ths pr
crtr.”

“W mst b crcmspct, fr w ar dlng wth a vry cnnng mn. W
cn d nthng untl svn o’clck. At tht hr w shll b wth y,
and it wll nt b lng bfr w slv th mystry.”

W wr as gd as or wrd, fr it ws jst svn whn w rchd th
Cppr Bchs, hvng pt up or trp at a wysd pblc-hs. Th
grp of trs, wth thr drk lvs shnng lk brnshd mtl in
th lght of th sttng sn, wr sffcnt t mrk th hs evn
hd Mss Hntr nt bn stndng smlng on th dr-stp.

“Hv y mngd it?” askd Hlms.

A ld thddng ns cm frm smwhr dwnstrs. “Tht is Mrs.
Tllr in th cllr,” sd sh. “Hr hsbnd ls snrng on th
ktchn rg. Hr ar hs kys, whch ar th dplcts of Mr.
Rcstl’s.”

“Y hv dn wll indd!” crd Hlms wth enthssm. “Nw ld
th wy, and w shll sn s th end of ths blck bsnss.”

W pssd up th str, unlckd th dr, fllwd on dwn a pssg,
and fnd orslvs in frnt of th brrcd whch Mss Hntr hd
dscrbd. Hlms ct th crd and rmvd th trnsvrs br. Thn h
trd th vrs kys in th lck, bt wtht sccss. N snd cm
frm wthn, and at th slnc Hlms’ fc cldd ovr.

“I trst tht w ar nt t lt,” sd h. “I thnk, Mss Hntr,
tht w hd bttr g in wtht y. Nw, Wtsn, pt yr shldr t
it, and w shll s whthr w cnnt mk or wy in.”

It ws an old rckty dr and gv at onc bfr or untd strngth.
Tgthr w rshd int th rm. It ws empty. Thr ws n frntr
sv a lttl pllt bd, a smll tbl, and a bsktfl of lnn. Th
skylght abv ws opn, and th prsnr gn.

“Thr hs bn sm vllny hr,” sd Hlms; “ths bty hs
gssd Mss Hntr’s intntns and hs crrd hs vctm off.”

“Bt hw?”

“Thrgh th skylght. W shll sn s hw h mngd it.” H swng
hmslf up ont th rf. “Ah, ys,” h crd, “hr’s th end of a
lng lght lddr agnst th evs. Tht is hw h dd it.”

“Bt it is impssbl,” sd Mss Hntr; “th lddr ws nt thr
whn th Rcstls wnt awy.”

“H hs cm bck and dn it. I tll y tht h is a clvr and
dngrs mn. I shld nt b vry mch srprsd if ths wr h
whs stp I hr nw upn th str. I thnk, Wtsn, tht it wld b
as wll fr y t hv yr pstl rdy.”

Th wrds wr hrdly ot of hs mth bfr a mn apprd at th
dr of th rm, a vry ft and brly mn, wth a hvy stck in hs
hnd. Mss Hntr scrmd and shrnk agnst th wll at th sght of
hm, bt Shrlck Hlms sprng frwrd and cnfrntd hm.

“Y vlln!” sd h, “whr’s yr dghtr?”

Th ft mn cst hs eys rnd, and thn up at th opn skylght.

“It is fr m t ask y tht,” h shrkd, “y thvs! Sps and
thvs! I hv cght y, hv I? Y ar in my pwr. I’ll srv
y!” H trnd and clttrd dwn th strs as hrd as h cld g.

“H’s gn fr th dg!” crd Mss Hntr.

“I hv my rvlvr,” sd I.

“Bttr cls th frnt dr,” crd Hlms, and w all rshd dwn th
strs tgthr. W hd hrdly rchd th hll whn w hrd th
byng of a hnd, and thn a scrm of agny, wth a hrrbl wrryng
snd whch it ws drdfl t lstn t. An eldrly mn wth a rd
fc and shkng lmbs cm stggrng ot at a sd dr.

“My Gd!” h crd. “Smn hs lsd th dg. It’s nt bn fd fr
tw dys. Qck, qck, or it’ll b t lt!”

Hlms and I rshd ot and rnd th angl of th hs, wth Tllr
hrryng bhnd us. Thr ws th hg fmshd brt, its blck mzzl
brd in Rcstl’s thrt, whl h wrthd and scrmd upn th
grnd. Rnnng up, I blw its brns ot, and it fll ovr wth its
kn wht tth stll mtng in th grt crss of hs nck. Wth
mch lbr w sprtd thm and crrd hm, lvng bt hrrbly
mngld, int th hs. W ld hm upn th drwng-rm sf, and
hvng dsptchd th sbrd Tllr t br th nws t hs wf, I
dd wht I cld t rlv hs pn. W wr all assmbld rnd hm
whn th dr opnd, and a tll, gnt wmn entrd th rm.

“Mrs. Tllr!” crd Mss Hntr.

“Ys, mss. Mr. Rcstl lt m ot whn h cm bck bfr h wnt up
t y. Ah, mss, it is a pty y ddn’t lt m knw wht y wr
plnnng, fr I wld hv tld y tht yr pns wr wstd.”

“H!” sd Hlms, lkng knly at hr. “It is clr tht Mrs. Tllr
knws mr abt ths mttr thn anyn els.”

“Ys, sr, I d, and I am rdy engh t tll wht I knw.”

“Thn, pry, st dwn, and lt us hr it fr thr ar svrl pnts
on whch I mst cnfss tht I am stll in th drk.”

“I wll sn mk it clr t y,” sd sh; “and I’d hv dn s
bfr nw if I cld h’ gt ot frm th cllr. If thr’s
plc-crt bsnss ovr ths, y’ll rmmbr tht I ws th on
tht std yr frnd, and tht I ws Mss Alc’s frnd t.

“Sh ws nvr hppy at hm, Mss Alc wsn’t, frm th tm tht hr
fthr mrrd agn. Sh ws slghtd lk and hd n sy in anythng,
bt it nvr rlly bcm bd fr hr untl aftr sh mt Mr. Fwlr
at a frnd’s hs. As wll as I cld lrn, Mss Alc hd rghts of
hr own by wll, bt sh ws s qt and ptnt, sh ws, tht sh
nvr sd a wrd abt thm bt jst lft evrythng in Mr. Rcstl’s
hnds. H knw h ws sf wth hr; bt whn thr ws a chnc of a
hsbnd cmng frwrd, wh wld ask fr all tht th lw wld gv
hm, thn hr fthr thght it tm t pt a stp on it. H wntd hr
t sgn a ppr, s tht whthr sh mrrd or nt, h cld us hr
mny. Whn sh wldn’t d it, h kpt on wrryng hr untl sh gt
brn-fvr, and fr sx wks ws at dth’s dr. Thn sh gt bttr
at lst, all wrn t a shdw, and wth hr btfl hr ct off; bt
tht ddn’t mk n chng in hr yng mn, and h stck t hr as
tr as mn cld b.”

“Ah,” sd Hlms, “I thnk tht wht y hv bn gd engh t tll
us mks th mttr frly clr, and tht I cn ddc all tht
rmns. Mr. Rcstl thn, I prsm, tk t ths systm of
imprsnmnt?”

“Ys, sr.”

“And brght Mss Hntr dwn frm Lndn in ordr t gt rd of th
dsgrbl prsstnc of Mr. Fwlr.”

“Tht ws it, sr.”

“Bt Mr. Fwlr bng a prsvrng mn, as a gd smn shld b,
blckdd th hs, and hvng mt y sccdd by crtn argmnts,
mtllc or othrws, in cnvncng y tht yr intrsts wr th
sm as hs.”

“Mr. Fwlr ws a vry knd-spkn, fr-hndd gntlmn,” sd Mrs.
Tllr srnly.

“And in ths wy h mngd tht yr gd mn shld hv n wnt of
drnk, and tht a lddr shld b rdy at th mmnt whn yr mstr
hd gn ot.”

“Y hv it, sr, jst as it hppnd.”

“I am sr w ow y an aplgy, Mrs. Tllr,” sd Hlms, “fr y
hv crtnly clrd up evrythng whch pzzld us. And hr cms
th cntry srgn and Mrs. Rcstl, s I thnk, Wtsn, tht w hd
bst escrt Mss Hntr bck t Wnchstr, as it sms t m tht or
_lcs stnd_ nw is rthr a qstnbl on.”

And ths ws slvd th mystry of th snstr hs wth th cppr
bchs in frnt of th dr. Mr. Rcstl srvvd, bt ws alwys a
brkn mn, kpt alv slly thrgh th cr of hs dvtd wf.
Thy stll lv wth thr old srvnts, wh prbbly knw s mch of
Rcstl’s pst lf tht h fnds it dffclt t prt frm thm. Mr.
Fwlr and Mss Rcstl wr mrrd, by spcl lcns, in
Sthmptn th dy aftr thr flght, and h is nw th hldr of a
gvrnmnt appntmnt in th islnd of Mrts. As t Mss Vlt
Hntr, my frnd Hlms, rthr t my dsppntmnt, mnfstd n
frthr intrst in hr whn onc sh hd csd t b th cntr of
on of hs prblms, and sh is nw th hd of a prvt schl at
Wlsll, whr I blv tht sh hs mt wth cnsdrbl sccss.






