



MBY-DCK;

or, TH WHL.

By Hrmn Mlvll



CNTNTS

ETYMLGY.

EXTRCTS (Sppld by a Sb-Sb-Lbrrn).

CHPTR 1. Lmngs.

CHPTR 2. Th Crpt-Bg.

CHPTR 3. Th Sptr-Inn.

CHPTR 4. Th Cntrpn.

CHPTR 5. Brkfst.

CHPTR 6. Th Strt.

CHPTR 7. Th Chpl.

CHPTR 8. Th Plpt.

CHPTR 9. Th Srmn.

CHPTR 10. A Bsm Frnd.

CHPTR 11. Nghtgwn.

CHPTR 12. Bgrphcl.

CHPTR 13. Whlbrrw.

CHPTR 14. Nntckt.

CHPTR 15. Chwdr.

CHPTR 16. Th Shp.

CHPTR 17. Th Rmdn.

CHPTR 18. Hs Mrk.

CHPTR 19. Th Prpht.

CHPTR 20. All Astr.

CHPTR 21. Gng Abrd.

CHPTR 22. Mrry Chrstms.

CHPTR 23. Th L Shr.

CHPTR 24. Th Advct.

CHPTR 25. Pstscrpt.

CHPTR 26. Knghts and Sqrs.

CHPTR 27. Knghts and Sqrs.

CHPTR 28. Ahb.

CHPTR 29. Entr Ahb; t Hm, Stbb.

CHPTR 30. Th Pp.

CHPTR 31. Qn Mb.

CHPTR 32. Ctlgy.

CHPTR 33. Th Spcksnydr.

CHPTR 34. Th Cbn-Tbl.

CHPTR 35. Th Mst-Hd.

CHPTR 36. Th Qrtr-Dck.

CHPTR 37. Snst.

CHPTR 38. Dsk.

CHPTR 39. Frst Nght-Wtch.

CHPTR 40. Mdnght, Frcstl.

CHPTR 41. Mby Dck.

CHPTR 42. Th Whtnss of th Whl.

CHPTR 43. Hrk!

CHPTR 44. Th Chrt.

CHPTR 45. Th Affdvt.

CHPTR 46. Srmss.

CHPTR 47. Th Mt-Mkr.

CHPTR 48. Th Frst Lwrng.

CHPTR 49. Th Hyn.

CHPTR 50. Ahb’s Bt and Crw. Fdllh.

CHPTR 51. Th Sprt-Spt.

CHPTR 52. Th Albtrss.

CHPTR 53. Th Gm.

CHPTR 54. Th Twn-H’s Stry.

CHPTR 55. Of th Mnstrs Pctrs of Whls.

CHPTR 56. Of th Lss Errns Pctrs of Whls, and th Tr
Pctrs of Whlng Scns.

CHPTR 57. Of Whls in Pnt; in Tth; in Wd; in Sht-Irn; in
Stn; in Mntns; in Strs.

CHPTR 58. Brt.

CHPTR 59. Sqd.

CHPTR 60. Th Ln.

CHPTR 61. Stbb Klls a Whl.

CHPTR 62. Th Drt.

CHPTR 63. Th Crtch.

CHPTR 64. Stbb’s Sppr.

CHPTR 65. Th Whl as a Dsh.

CHPTR 66. Th Shrk Msscr.

CHPTR 67. Cttng In.

CHPTR 68. Th Blnkt.

CHPTR 69. Th Fnrl.

CHPTR 70. Th Sphynx.

CHPTR 71. Th Jrbm’s Stry.

CHPTR 72. Th Mnky-Rp.

CHPTR 73. Stbb and Flsk kll a Rght Whl; and Thn Hv a Tlk
ovr Hm.

CHPTR 74. Th Sprm Whl’s Hd—Cntrstd Vw.

CHPTR 75. Th Rght Whl’s Hd—Cntrstd Vw.

CHPTR 76. Th Bttrng-Rm.

CHPTR 77. Th Grt Hdlbrgh Tn.

CHPTR 78. Cstrn and Bckts.

CHPTR 79. Th Prr.

CHPTR 80. Th Nt.

CHPTR 81. Th Pqd Mts Th Vrgn.

CHPTR 82. Th Hnr and Glry of Whlng.

CHPTR 83. Jnh Hstrclly Rgrdd.

CHPTR 84. Ptchplng.

CHPTR 85. Th Fntn.

CHPTR 86. Th Tl.

CHPTR 87. Th Grnd Armd.

CHPTR 88. Schls and Schlmstrs.

CHPTR 89. Fst-Fsh and Ls-Fsh.

CHPTR 90. Hds or Tls.

CHPTR 91. Th Pqd Mts Th Rs-Bd.

CHPTR 92. Ambrgrs.

CHPTR 93. Th Cstwy.

CHPTR 94. A Sqz of th Hnd.

CHPTR 95. Th Cssck.

CHPTR 96. Th Try-Wrks.

CHPTR 97. Th Lmp.

CHPTR 98. Stwng Dwn and Clrng Up.

CHPTR 99. Th Dbln.

CHPTR 100. Lg and Arm.

CHPTR 101. Th Dcntr.

CHPTR 102. A Bwr in th Arscds.

CHPTR 103. Msrmnt of Th Whl’s Skltn.

CHPTR 104. Th Fssl Whl.

CHPTR 105. Ds th Whl’s Mgntd Dmnsh?—Wll H Prsh?

CHPTR 106. Ahb’s Lg.

CHPTR 107. Th Crpntr.

CHPTR 108. Ahb and th Crpntr.

CHPTR 109. Ahb and Strbck in th Cbn.

CHPTR 110. Qqg in Hs Cffn.

CHPTR 111. Th Pcfc.

CHPTR 112. Th Blcksmth.

CHPTR 113. Th Frg.

CHPTR 114. Th Gldr.

CHPTR 115. Th Pqd Mts Th Bchlr.

CHPTR 116. Th Dyng Whl.

CHPTR 117. Th Whl Wtch.

CHPTR 118. Th Qdrnt.

CHPTR 119. Th Cndls.

CHPTR 120. Th Dck Twrds th End of th Frst Nght Wtch.

CHPTR 121. Mdnght.—Th Frcstl Blwrks.

CHPTR 122. Mdnght Alft.—Thndr and Lghtnng.

CHPTR 123. Th Mskt.

CHPTR 124. Th Ndl.

CHPTR 125. Th Lg and Ln.

CHPTR 126. Th Lf-By.

CHPTR 127. Th Dck.

CHPTR 128. Th Pqd Mts Th Rchl.

CHPTR 129. Th Cbn.

CHPTR 130. Th Ht.

CHPTR 131. Th Pqd Mts Th Dlght.

CHPTR 132. Th Symphny.

CHPTR 133. Th Chs—Frst Dy.

CHPTR 134. Th Chs—Scnd Dy.

CHPTR 135. Th Chs.—Thrd Dy.

Eplg




Orgnl Trnscrbr’s Nts:

Ths txt is a cmbntn of etxts, on frm th nw-dfnct ERS
prjct at Vrgn Tch and on frm Prjct Gtnbrg’s archvs. Th
prfrdrs of ths vrsn ar indbtd t Th Unvrsty of Adld
Lbrry fr prsrvng th Vrgn Tch vrsn. Th rsltng etxt
ws cmprd wth a pblc dmn hrd cpy vrsn of th txt.





  ETYMLGY.


  (Sppld by a Lt Cnsmptv Ushr t a Grmmr Schl.)

  Th pl Ushr—thrdbr in ct, hrt, bdy, and brn; I s hm
  nw. H ws evr dstng hs old lxcns and grmmrs, wth a qr
  hndkrchf, mckngly embllshd wth all th gy flgs of all th
  knwn ntns of th wrld. H lvd t dst hs old grmmrs; it
  smhw mldly rmndd hm of hs mrtlty.

  “Whl y tk in hnd t schl othrs, and t tch thm by wht
  nm a whl-fsh is t b clld in or tng, lvng ot, thrgh
  ignrnc, th lttr H, whch almst aln mkth up th
  sgnfctn of th wrd, y dlvr tht whch is nt tr.”
  —_Hcklyt._

  “WHL. * * * Sw. and Dn. _hvl_. Ths anml is nmd frm
  rndnss or rllng; fr in Dn. _hvlt_ is archd or vltd.”
  —_Wbstr’s Dctnry._

  “WHL. * * * It is mr immdtly frm th Dt. and Gr. _Wlln_;
  A.S. _Wlw-in_, t rll, t wllw.” —_Rchrdsn’s Dctnry._


  ‏חו‎,                _Hbrw_.
  ϰητος,             _Grk_.
  CTS,             _Ltn_.
  WHŒL,              _Angl-Sxn_.
  HVLT,             _Dnsh_.
  WL,               _Dtch_.
  HWL,              _Swdsh_.
  HVLR,            _Iclndc_.
  WHL,             _Englsh_.
  BLN,           _Frnch_.
  BLLN,           _Spnsh_.
  PK-N-N,   _Fg_.
  PH-N-N,   _Errmngn_.


  EXTRCTS. (Sppld by a Sb-Sb-Lbrrn).



  It wll b sn tht ths mr pnstkng brrwr and grb-wrm of
  a pr dvl of a Sb-Sb apprs t hv gn thrgh th lng
  Vtcns and strt-stlls of th erth, pckng up whtvr rndm
  allsns t whls h cld anywys fnd in any bk whtsvr,
  scrd or prfn. Thrfr y mst nt, in evry cs at lst,
  tk th hggldy-pggldy whl sttmnts, hwvr athntc, in
  ths extrcts, fr vrtbl gspl ctlgy. Fr frm it. As
  tchng th ancnt athrs gnrlly, as wll as th pts hr
  apprng, ths extrcts ar slly vlbl or entrtnng, as
  affrdng a glncng brd’s ey vw of wht hs bn prmscsly
  sd, thght, fncd, and sng of Lvthn, by mny ntns and
  gnrtns, incldng or own.

  S fr th wll, pr dvl of a Sb-Sb, whs cmmnttr I am.
  Th blngst t tht hplss, sllw trb whch n wn of ths
  wrld wll evr wrm; and fr whm evn Pl Shrry wld b t
  rsy-strng; bt wth whm on smtms lvs t st, and fl
  pr-dvlsh, t; and grw cnvvl upn trs; and sy t thm
  blntly, wth fll eys and empty glsss, and in nt altgthr
  unplsnt sdnss—Gv it up, Sb-Sbs! Fr by hw mch th mr
  pns y tk t pls th wrld, by s mch th mr shll y fr
  evr g thnklss! Wld tht I cld clr ot Hmptn Crt and th
  Tlrs fr y! Bt glp dwn yr trs and h alft t th
  ryl-mst wth yr hrts; fr yr frnds wh hv gn bfr
  ar clrng ot th svn-strd hvns, and mkng rfgs of
  lng-pmprd Gbrl, Mchl, and Rphl, agnst yr cmng.
  Hr y strk bt splntrd hrts tgthr—thr, y shll strk
  unsplntrbl glsss!

EXTRCTS.

  “And Gd crtd grt whls.” —_Gnss_.

  “Lvthn mkth a pth t shn aftr hm; On wld thnk th dp
  t b hry.” —_Jb_.

  “Nw th Lrd hd prprd a grt fsh t swllw up Jnh.”
  —_Jnh_.

  “Thr g th shps; thr is tht Lvthn whm th hst md t
  ply thrn.” —_Pslms_.

  “In tht dy, th Lrd wth hs sr, and grt, and strng swrd,
  shll pnsh Lvthn th prcng srpnt, evn Lvthn tht
  crkd srpnt; and h shll sly th drgn tht is in th s.”
  —_Ish_.

  “And wht thng svr bsds cmth wthn th chs of ths
  mnstr’s mth, b it bst, bt, or stn, dwn it gs all
  incntnntly tht fl grt swllw of hs, and prshth in th
  bttmlss glf of hs pnch.” —_Hllnd’s Pltrch’s Mrls_.

  “Th Indn S brdth th mst and th bggst fshs tht ar:
  amng whch th Whls and Whrlpls clld Bln, tk up as
  mch in lngth as fr acrs or arpns of lnd.” —_Hllnd’s Plny_.

  “Scrcly hd w prcdd tw dys on th s, whn abt snrs a
  grt mny Whls and othr mnstrs of th s, apprd. Amng th
  frmr, on ws of a mst mnstrs sz.... Ths cm twrds us,
  opn-mthd, rsng th wvs on all sds, and btng th s
  bfr hm int a fm.” —_Tk’s Lcn_. “_Th Tr Hstry_.”




  “H vstd ths cntry als wth a vw of ctchng hrs-whls,
  whch hd bns of vry grt vl fr thr tth, of whch h
  brght sm t th kng.... Th bst whls wr ctchd in hs own
  cntry, of whch sm wr frty-eght, sm ffty yrds lng. H
  sd tht h ws on of sx wh hd klld sxty in tw dys.”
  —_Othr or Othr’s vrbl nrrtv tkn dwn frm hs mth by Kng
  Alfrd, A.D._ 890.

  “And whrs all th othr thngs, whthr bst or vssl, tht
  entr int th drdfl glf of ths mnstr’s (whl’s) mth, ar
  immdtly lst and swllwd up, th s-gdgn rtrs int it in
  grt scrty, and thr slps.” —MNTGN. —_Aplgy fr Rmnd
  Sbnd_.

  “Lt us fly, lt us fly! Old Nck tk m if it is nt Lvthn
  dscrbd by th nbl prpht Mss in th lf of ptnt Jb.”
  —_Rbls_.

  “Ths whl’s lvr ws tw crtlds.” —_Stw’s Annls_.

  “Th grt Lvthn tht mkth th ss t sth lk blng
  pn.” —_Lrd Bcn’s Vrsn of th Pslms_.

  “Tchng tht mnstrs blk of th whl or ork w hv rcvd
  nthng crtn. Thy grw excdng ft, insmch tht an incrdbl
  qntty of ol wll b extrctd ot of on whl.” —_Ibd_.
  “_Hstry of Lf and Dth_.”




  “Th svrgnst thng on erth is prmctt fr an inwrd brs.”
  —_Kng Hnry_.

  “Vry lk a whl.” —_Hmlt_.


  “Whch t scr, n skll of lch’s art Mt hm avll, bt t
  rtrn agn T hs wnd’s wrkr, tht wth lwly drt, Dntng
  hs brst, hd brd hs rstlss pn, Lk as th wndd whl t
  shr fls thr’ th mn.” —_Th Fr Qn_.



  “Immns as whls, th mtn of whs vst bds cn in a pcfl
  clm trbl th ocn tll it bl.” —_Sr Wllm Dvnnt. Prfc
  t Gndbrt_.

  “Wht sprmctt is, mn mght jstly dbt, snc th lrnd
  Hsmnns in hs wrk of thrty yrs, sth plnly, _Nsc qd
  st_.” —_Sr T. Brwn. Of Sprm Ct and th Sprm Ct Whl.
  Vd hs V. E._


  “Lk Spncr’s Tls wth hs mdrn fll H thrtns rn wth
  hs pndrs tl. ... Thr fxd jv’lns in hs sd h wrs,
  And on hs bck a grv of pks apprs.” —_Wllr’s Bttl of th
  Smmr Islnds_.



  “By art is crtd tht grt Lvthn, clld a Cmmnwlth or
  Stt—(in Ltn, Cvts) whch is bt an artfcl mn.” —_Opnng
  sntnc of Hbbs’s Lvthn_.

  “Slly Mnsl swllwd it wtht chwng, as if it hd bn a
  sprt in th mth of a whl.” —_Plgrm’s Prgrss_.


  “Tht s bst Lvthn, whch Gd of all hs wrks Crtd hgst
  tht swm th ocn strm.” —_Prds Lst_.

  —“Thr Lvthn, Hgst of lvng crtrs, in th dp Strtchd
  lk a prmntry slps or swms, And sms a mvng lnd; and at
  hs glls Drws in, and at hs brth spts ot a s.” —_Ibd_.



  “Th mghty whls whch swm in a s of wtr, and hv a s of
  ol swmmng in thm.” —_Fllr’s Prfn and Hly Stt_.


  “S cls bhnd sm prmntry l Th hg Lvthn t attnd
  thr pry, And gv n chnc, bt swllw in th fry, Whch thrgh
  thr gpng jws mstk th wy.” —_Drydn’s Anns Mrbls_.



  “Whl th whl is fltng at th strn of th shp, thy ct off
  hs hd, and tw it wth a bt as nr th shr as it wll cm;
  bt it wll b agrnd in twlv or thrtn ft wtr.” —_Thms
  Edg’s Tn Vygs t Sptzbrgn, in Prchs_.

  “In thr wy thy sw mny whls sprtng in th ocn, and in
  wntnnss fzzng up th wtr thrgh thr pps and vnts, whch
  ntr hs plcd on thr shldrs.” —_Sr T. Hrbrt’s Vygs
  int As and Afrc. Hrrs Cll_.

  “Hr thy sw sch hg trps of whls, tht thy wr frcd t
  prcd wth a grt dl of ctn fr fr thy shld rn thr
  shp upn thm.” —_Schtn’s Sxth Crcmnvgtn_.

  “W st sl frm th Elb, wnd N.E. in th shp clld Th
  Jns-in-th-Whl.... Sm sy th whl cn’t opn hs mth, bt
  tht is a fbl.... Thy frqntly clmb up th msts t s whthr
  thy cn s a whl, fr th frst dscvrr hs a dct fr hs
  pns.... I ws tld of a whl tkn nr Shtlnd, tht hd abv a
  brrl of hrrngs in hs blly.... On of or hrpnrs tld m
  tht h cght onc a whl in Sptzbrgn tht ws wht all ovr.”
  —_A Vyg t Grnlnd, A.D._ 1671. _Hrrs Cll_.

  “Svrl whls hv cm in upn ths cst (Ff) Ann 1652, on
  eghty ft in lngth of th whl-bn knd cm in, whch (as I ws
  infrmd), bsds a vst qntty of ol, dd affrd 500 wght of
  bln. Th jws of it stnd fr a gt in th grdn of Ptfrrn.”
  —_Sbbld’s Ff and Knrss_.

  “Myslf hv agrd t try whthr I cn mstr and kll ths
  Sprm-ct whl, fr I cld nvr hr of any of tht srt tht
  ws klld by any mn, sch is hs frcnss and swftnss.”
  —_Rchrd Strffrd’s Lttr frm th Brmds. Phl. Trns. A.D._
  1668.

  “Whls in th s Gd’s vc oby.” —_N. E. Prmr_.

  “W sw als abndnc of lrg whls, thr bng mr in ths
  sthrn ss, as I my sy, by a hndrd t on; thn w hv t th
  nrthwrd of us.” —_Cptn Cwly’s Vyg rnd th Glb, A.D._
  1729.

  “... and th brth of th whl is frqntly attndd wth sch an
  inspprtbl smll, as t brng on a dsrdr of th brn.”
  —_Ull’s Sth Amrc_.


  “T ffty chsn sylphs of spcl nt, W trst th imprtnt
  chrg, th pttct. Oft hv w knwn tht svn-fld fnc t
  fl, Th’ stffd wth hps and armd wth rbs of whl.” —_Rp
  of th Lck_.



  “If w cmpr lnd anmls in rspct t mgntd, wth ths tht
  tk up thr abd in th dp, w shll fnd thy wll appr
  cntmptbl in th cmprsn. Th whl is dbtlss th lrgst
  anml in crtn.” —_Gldsmth, Nt. Hst_.

  “If y shld wrt a fbl fr lttl fshs, y wld mk thm
  spk lk grt whls.” —_Gldsmth t Jhnsn_.

  “In th aftrnn w sw wht ws sppsd t b a rck, bt it ws
  fnd t b a dd whl, whch sm Astcs hd klld, and wr
  thn twng ashr. Thy smd t endvr t cncl thmslvs
  bhnd th whl, in ordr t avd bng sn by us.” —_Ck’s
  Vygs_.

  “Th lrgr whls, thy sldm vntr t attck. Thy stnd in s
  grt drd of sm of thm, tht whn ot at s thy ar afrd t
  mntn evn thr nms, and crry dng, lm-stn, jnpr-wd,
  and sm othr artcls of th sm ntr in thr bts, in ordr
  t trrfy and prvnt thr t nr apprch.” —_Un Vn Trl’s
  Lttrs on Bnks’s and Slndr’s Vyg t Iclnd in_ 1772.

  “Th Sprmctt Whl fnd by th Nntcks, is an actv, frc
  anml, and rqrs vst addrss and bldnss in th fshrmn.”
  —_Thms Jffrsn’s Whl Mmrl t th Frnch mnstr in_ 1778.

  “And pry, sr, wht in th wrld is eql t it?” —_Edmnd Brk’s
  rfrnc in Prlmnt t th Nntckt Whl-Fshry_.

  “Spn—a grt whl strndd on th shrs of Erp.” —_Edmnd
  Brk_. (_smwhr_.)

  “A tnth brnch of th kng’s ordnry rvn, sd t b grndd
  on th cnsdrtn of hs grdng and prtctng th ss frm
  prts and rbbrs, is th rght t _ryl_ fsh, whch ar whl
  and strgn. And ths, whn ethr thrwn ashr or cght nr th
  cst, ar th prprty of th kng.” —_Blckstn_.


  “Sn t th sprt of dth th crws rpr: Rdmnd unrrng o’er
  hs hd sspnds Th brbd stl, and evry trn attnds.”
  —_Flcnr’s Shpwrck_.

  “Brght shn th rfs, th dms, th sprs, And rckts blw slf
  drvn, T hng thr mmntry fr Arnd th vlt of hvn.

  “S fr wth wtr t cmpr, Th ocn srvs on hgh, Up-sptd
  by a whl in ar, T exprss unwldy jy.” —_Cwpr, on th Qn’s
  Vst t Lndn_.



  “Tn or fftn gllns of bld ar thrwn ot of th hrt at a
  strk, wth immns vlcty.” —_Jhn Hntr’s accnt of th
  dssctn of a whl_. (_A smll szd on_.)

  “Th art of a whl is lrgr in th br thn th mn pp of th
  wtr-wrks at Lndn Brdg, and th wtr rrng in its pssg
  thrgh tht pp is infrr in impts and vlcty t th bld
  gshng frm th whl’s hrt.” —_Ply’s Thlgy_.

  “Th whl is a mmmfrs anml wtht hnd ft.” —_Brn
  Cvr_.

  “In 40 dgrs sth, w sw Sprmctt Whls, bt dd nt tk any
  tll th frst of My, th s bng thn cvrd wth thm.”
  —_Clntt’s Vyg fr th Prps of Extndng th Sprmct Whl
  Fshry_.


  “In th fr elmnt bnth m swm, Flndrd and dvd, in ply,
  in chc, in bttl, Fshs of evry clr, frm, and knd; Whch
  lngg cnnt pnt, and mrnr Hd nvr sn; frm drd
  Lvthn T insct mllns pplng evry wv: Gthr’d in shls
  immns, lk fltng islnds, Ld by mystrs instncts thrgh
  tht wst And trcklss rgn, thgh on evry sd Assltd by
  vrcs enms, Whls, shrks, and mnstrs, arm’d in frnt or
  jw, Wth swrds, sws, sprl hrns, or hkd fngs.”
  —_Mntgmry’s Wrld bfr th Fld_.

  “I!  Pn!  I! sng. T th fnny ppl’s kng. Nt a mghtr
  whl thn ths In th vst Atlntc is; Nt a fttr fsh thn h,
  Flndrs rnd th Plr S.” —_Chrls Lmb’s Trmph of th
  Whl_.



  “In th yr 1690 sm prsns wr on a hgh hll obsrvng th
  whls sptng and sprtng wth ech othr, whn on obsrvd:
  thr—pntng t th s—is a grn pstr whr or chldrn’s
  grnd-chldrn wll g fr brd.” —_Obd Mcy’s Hstry of
  Nntckt_.

  “I blt a cttg fr Ssn and myslf and md a gtwy in th
  frm of a Gthc Arch, by sttng up a whl’s jw bns.”
  —_Hwthrn’s Twc Tld Tls_.

  “Sh cm t bspk a mnmnt fr hr frst lv, wh hd bn
  klld by a whl in th Pcfc ocn, n lss thn frty yrs
  ag.” —_Ibd_.

  “N, Sr, ’ts a Rght Whl,” answrd Tm; “I sw hs sprt; h
  thrw up a pr of as prtty rnbws as a Chrstn wld wsh t
  lk at. H’s a rl ol-btt, tht fllw!” —_Cpr’s Plt_.

  “Th pprs wr brght in, and w sw in th Brln Gztt tht
  whls hd bn intrdcd on th stg thr.” —_Eckrmnn’s
  Cnvrstns wth Gth_.

  “My Gd! Mr. Chc, wht is th mttr?” I answrd, “w hv bn
  stv by a whl.” —“_Nrrtv of th Shpwrck of th Whl Shp
  Essx of Nntckt, whch ws attckd and fnlly dstryd by a
  lrg Sprm Whl in th Pcfc Ocn_.” _By Own Chc of
  Nntckt, frst mt of sd vssl. Nw Yrk_, 1821.


  “A mrnr st in th shrds on nght, Th wnd ws ppng fr;
  Nw brght, nw dmmd, ws th mnlght pl, And th phsphr
  glmd in th wk of th whl, As it flndrd in th s.”
  —_Elzbth Oks Smth_.



  “Th qntty of ln wthdrwn frm th bts enggd in th cptr
  of ths on whl, amntd altgthr t 10,440 yrds or nrly sx
  Englsh mls....

  “Smtms th whl shks its trmnds tl in th ar, whch,
  crckng lk a whp, rsnds t th dstnc of thr or fr
  mls.” —_Scrsby_.

  “Md wth th agns h endrs frm ths frsh attcks, th
  infrtd Sprm Whl rlls ovr and ovr; h rrs hs enrms
  hd, and wth wd expndd jws snps at evrythng arnd hm; h
  rshs at th bts wth hs hd; thy ar prplld bfr hm wth
  vst swftnss, and smtms uttrly dstryd.... It is a mttr of
  grt astnshmnt tht th cnsdrtn of th hbts of s
  intrstng, and, in a cmmrcl pnt of vw, s imprtnt an
  anml (as th Sprm Whl) shld hv bn s entrly nglctd,
  or shld hv exctd s lttl crsty amng th nmrs, and
  mny of thm cmptnt obsrvrs, tht of lt yrs, mst hv
  pssssd th mst abndnt and th mst cnvnnt opprtnts of
  wtnssng thr hbtds.” —_Thms Bl’s Hstry of th Sprm
  Whl_, 1839.

  “Th Cchlt” (Sprm Whl) “is nt only bttr armd thn th Tr
  Whl” (Grnlnd or Rght Whl) “in pssssng a frmdbl wpn
  at ethr extrmty of its bdy, bt als mr frqntly dsplys a
  dspstn t emply ths wpns offnsvly and in mnnr at onc
  s artfl, bld, and mschvs, as t ld t its bng rgrdd as
  th mst dngrs t attck of all th knwn spcs of th whl
  trb.” —_Frdrck Dbll Bnntt’s Whlng Vyg Rnd th Glb_,
  1840.


  Octbr 13.  “Thr sh blws,” ws sng ot frm th mst-hd.
  “Whr awy?” dmndd th cptn. “Thr pnts off th l bw,
  sr.” “Rs up yr whl.  Stdy!”  “Stdy, sr.” “Mst-hd
  ahy! D y s tht whl nw?” “Ay ay, sr!  A shl of Sprm
  Whls! Thr sh blws!  Thr sh brchs!” “Sng ot! sng ot
  evry tm!” “Ay Ay, sr!  Thr sh blws! thr—thr—_thr_ sh
  blws—bws—b-o-os!” “Hw fr off?” “Tw mls and a hlf.” “Thndr
  and lghtnng! s nr!  Cll all hnds.” —_J. Rss Brwn’s Etchngs
  of a Whlng Crz_.  1846.



  “Th Whl-shp Glb, on brd of whch vssl occrrd th hrrd
  trnsctns w ar abt t rlt, blngd t th islnd of
  Nntckt.” —“_Nrrtv of th Glb Mtny_,” _by Ly and Hssy
  srvvrs. A.D._ 1828.

  Bng onc prsd by a whl whch h hd wndd, h prrd th
  asslt fr sm tm wth a lnc; bt th frs mnstr at lngth
  rshd on th bt; hmslf and cmrds only bng prsrvd by
  lpng int th wtr whn thy sw th onst ws invtbl.”
  —_Mssnry Jrnl of Tyrmn and Bnntt_.

  “Nntckt itslf,” sd Mr. Wbstr, “is a vry strkng and
  pclr prtn of th Ntnl intrst. Thr is a ppltn of
  eght or nn thsnd prsns lvng hr in th s, addng lrgly
  evry yr t th Ntnl wlth by th bldst and mst prsvrng
  indstry.” —_Rprt of Dnl Wbstr’s Spch in th U. S. Snt,
  on th applctn fr th Erctn of a Brkwtr at Nntckt_.
  1828.

  “Th whl fll drctly ovr hm, and prbbly klld hm in a
  mmnt.” —“_Th Whl and hs Cptrs, or Th Whlmn’s Advntrs
  and th Whl’s Bgrphy, gthrd on th Hmwrd Crs of th
  Cmmdr Prbl_.” _By Rv. Hnry T. Chvr_.

  “If y mk th lst dmn bt of ns,” rpld Sml, “I wll
  snd y t hll.” —_Lf of Sml Cmstck_ (_th mtnr_), _by
  hs brthr, Wllm Cmstck. Anthr Vrsn of th whl-shp
  Glb nrrtv_.

  “Th vygs of th Dtch and Englsh t th Nrthrn Ocn, in
  ordr, if pssbl, t dscvr a pssg thrgh it t Ind, thgh
  thy fld of thr mn objct, ld-opn th hnts of th whl.”
  —_McCllch’s Cmmrcl Dctnry_.

  “Ths thngs ar rcprcl; th bll rbnds, only t bnd
  frwrd agn; fr nw in lyng opn th hnts of th whl, th
  whlmn sm t hv indrctly ht upn nw clws t tht sm
  mystc Nrth-Wst Pssg.” —_Frm_ “_Smthng_” _unpblshd_.

  “It is impssbl t mt a whl-shp on th ocn wtht bng
  strck by hr nr apprnc. Th vssl undr shrt sl, wth
  lk-ots at th mst-hds, egrly scnnng th wd expns arnd
  thm, hs a ttlly dffrnt ar frm ths enggd in rglr
  vyg.” —_Crrnts and Whlng. U.S. Ex. Ex_.

  “Pdstrns in th vcnty of Lndn and elswhr my rcllct
  hvng sn lrg crvd bns st uprght in th erth, ethr t
  frm archs ovr gtwys, or entrncs t alcvs, and thy my
  prhps hv bn tld tht ths wr th rbs of whls.” —_Tls
  of a Whl Vygr t th Arctc Ocn_.

  “It ws nt tll th bts rtrnd frm th prst of ths whls,
  tht th whts sw thr shp in bldy pssssn of th svgs
  enrlld amng th crw.” —_Nwsppr Accnt of th Tkng and
  Rtkng of th Whl-Shp Hbmck_.

  “It is gnrlly wll knwn tht ot of th crws of Whlng vssls
  (Amrcn) fw evr rtrn in th shps on brd of whch thy
  dprtd.” —_Crs in a Whl Bt_.

  “Sddnly a mghty mss emrgd frm th wtr, and sht up
  prpndclrly int th ar. It ws th whl.” —_Mrm Cffn or
  th Whl Fshrmn_.

  “Th Whl is hrpnd t b sr; bt bthnk y, hw y wld
  mng a pwrfl unbrkn clt, wth th mr applnc of a rp
  td t th rt of hs tl.” —_A Chptr on Whlng in Rbs and
  Trcks_.

  “On on occsn I sw tw of ths mnstrs (whls) prbbly ml
  and fml, slwly swmmng, on aftr th othr, wthn lss thn a
  stn’s thrw of th shr” (Trr Dl Fg), “ovr whch th bch
  tr extndd its brnchs.” —_Drwn’s Vyg of a Ntrlst_.

  “‘Strn all!’ exclmd th mt, as upn trnng hs hd, h sw
  th dstndd jws of a lrg Sprm Whl cls t th hd of th
  bt, thrtnng it wth instnt dstrctn;—‘Strn all, fr yr
  lvs!’” —_Whrtn th Whl Kllr_.

  “S b chry, my lds, lt yr hrts nvr fl, Whl th bld
  hrpnr is strkng th whl!” —_Nntckt Sng_.


  “Oh, th rr old Whl, md strm and gl In hs ocn hm wll b
  A gnt in mght, whr mght is rght, And Kng of th bndlss
  s.” —_Whl Sng_.





CHPTR 1. Lmngs.

Cll m Ishml. Sm yrs ag—nvr mnd hw lng prcsly—hvng
lttl or n mny in my prs, and nthng prtclr t intrst m
on shr, I thght I wld sl abt a lttl and s th wtry prt
of th wrld. It is a wy I hv of drvng off th spln and
rgltng th crcltn. Whnvr I fnd myslf grwng grm abt
th mth; whnvr it is a dmp, drzzly Nvmbr in my sl; whnvr
I fnd myslf invlntrly psng bfr cffn wrhss, and
brngng up th rr of evry fnrl I mt; and espclly whnvr
my hyps gt sch an uppr hnd of m, tht it rqrs a strng mrl
prncpl t prvnt m frm dlbrtly stppng int th strt, and
mthdclly knckng ppl’s hts off—thn, I accnt it hgh tm t
gt t s as sn as I cn. Ths is my sbsttt fr pstl and bll.
Wth a phlsphcl flrsh Ct thrws hmslf upn hs swrd; I
qtly tk t th shp. Thr is nthng srprsng in ths. If thy
bt knw it, almst all mn in thr dgr, sm tm or othr,
chrsh vry nrly th sm flngs twrds th ocn wth m.

Thr nw is yr inslr cty of th Mnhtts, bltd rnd by
whrvs as Indn isls by crl rfs—cmmrc srrnds it wth hr
srf. Rght and lft, th strts tk y wtrwrd. Its extrm
dwntwn is th bttry, whr tht nbl ml is wshd by wvs, and
cld by brzs, whch a fw hrs prvs wr ot of sght of
lnd. Lk at th crwds of wtr-gzrs thr.

Crcmmblt th cty of a drmy Sbbth aftrnn. G frm Crlrs
Hk t Cnts Slp, and frm thnc, by Whthll, nrthwrd. Wht
d y s?—Pstd lk slnt sntnls all arnd th twn, stnd
thsnds upn thsnds of mrtl mn fxd in ocn rvrs. Sm
lnng agnst th spls; sm std upn th pr-hds; sm
lkng ovr th blwrks of shps frm Chn; sm hgh alft in th
rggng, as if strvng t gt a stll bttr swrd pp. Bt ths
ar all lndsmn; of wk dys pnt up in lth and plstr—td t
cntrs, nld t bnchs, clnchd t dsks. Hw thn is ths? Ar
th grn flds gn? Wht d thy hr?

Bt lk! hr cm mr crwds, pcng strght fr th wtr, and
smngly bnd fr a dv. Strng! Nthng wll cntnt thm bt th
extrmst lmt of th lnd; ltrng undr th shdy l of yndr
wrhss wll nt sffc. N. Thy mst gt jst as ngh th wtr
as thy pssbly cn wtht fllng in. And thr thy stnd—mls of
thm—lgs. Inlndrs all, thy cm frm lns and allys, strts
and avns—nrth, est, sth, and wst. Yt hr thy all unt. Tll
m, ds th mgntc vrt of th ndls of th cmpsss of all
ths shps attrct thm ththr?

Onc mr. Sy y ar in th cntry; in sm hgh lnd of lks. Tk
almst any pth y pls, and tn t on it crrs y dwn in a
dl, and lvs y thr by a pl in th strm. Thr is mgc in
it. Lt th mst absnt-mndd of mn b plngd in hs dpst
rvrs—stnd tht mn on hs lgs, st hs ft a-gng, and h wll
infllbly ld y t wtr, if wtr thr b in all tht rgn.
Shld y evr b athrst in th grt Amrcn dsrt, try ths
exprmnt, if yr crvn hppn t b sppld wth a mtphyscl
prfssr. Ys, as evry on knws, mdttn and wtr ar wddd fr
evr.

Bt hr is an artst. H dsrs t pnt y th drmst, shdst,
qtst, mst enchntng bt of rmntc lndscp in all th vlly
of th Sc. Wht is th chf elmnt h emplys? Thr stnd hs
trs, ech wth a hllw trnk, as if a hrmt and a crcfx wr
wthn; and hr slps hs mdw, and thr slp hs cttl; and up
frm yndr cttg gs a slpy smk. Dp int dstnt wdlnds
wnds a mzy wy, rchng t ovrlppng sprs of mntns bthd in
thr hll-sd bl. Bt thgh th pctr ls ths trncd, and
thgh ths pn-tr shks dwn its sghs lk lvs upn ths
shphrd’s hd, yt all wr vn, unlss th shphrd’s ey wr
fxd upn th mgc strm bfr hm. G vst th Prrs in Jn,
whn fr scrs on scrs of mls y wd kn-dp amng
Tgr-lls—wht is th on chrm wntng?—Wtr—thr is nt a drp
of wtr thr! Wr Ngr bt a ctrct of snd, wld y trvl
yr thsnd mls t s it? Why dd th pr pt of Tnnss, upn
sddnly rcvng tw hndfls of slvr, dlbrt whthr t by
hm a ct, whch h sdly ndd, or invst hs mny in a pdstrn
trp t Rckwy Bch? Why is almst evry rbst hlthy by wth a
rbst hlthy sl in hm, at sm tm or othr crzy t g t s?
Why upn yr frst vyg as a pssngr, dd y yrslf fl sch a
mystcl vbrtn, whn frst tld tht y and yr shp wr nw ot
of sght of lnd? Why dd th old Prsns hld th s hly? Why dd
th Grks gv it a sprt dty, and own brthr of Jv? Srly
all ths is nt wtht mnng. And stll dpr th mnng of tht
stry of Nrcsss, wh bcs h cld nt grsp th trmntng, mld
img h sw in th fntn, plngd int it and ws drwnd. Bt tht
sm img, w orslvs s in all rvrs and ocns. It is th img
of th ungrspbl phntm of lf; and ths is th ky t it all.

Nw, whn I sy tht I am in th hbt of gng t s whnvr I bgn
t grw hzy abt th eys, and bgn t b ovr cnscs of my
lngs, I d nt mn t hv it infrrd tht I evr g t s as a
pssngr. Fr t g as a pssngr y mst nds hv a prs, and a
prs is bt a rg unlss y hv smthng in it. Bsds, pssngrs
gt s-sck—grw qrrlsm—dn’t slp of nghts—d nt enjy
thmslvs mch, as a gnrl thng;—n, I nvr g as a pssngr;
nr, thgh I am smthng of a slt, d I evr g t s as a
Cmmdr, or a Cptn, or a Ck. I abndn th glry and dstnctn
of sch offcs t ths wh lk thm. Fr my prt, I abmnt all
hnrbl rspctbl tls, trls, and trbltns of evry knd
whtsvr. It is qt as mch as I cn d t tk cr of myslf,
wtht tkng cr of shps, brqs, brgs, schnrs, and wht nt.
And as fr gng as ck,—thgh I cnfss thr is cnsdrbl glry
in tht, a ck bng a srt of offcr on shp-brd—yt, smhw, I
nvr fncd brlng fwls;—thgh onc brld, jdcsly
bttrd, and jdgmtclly sltd and ppprd, thr is n on wh
wll spk mr rspctflly, nt t sy rvrntlly, of a brld
fwl thn I wll. It is ot of th idltrs dtngs of th old
Egyptns upn brld ibs and rstd rvr hrs, tht y s th
mmms of ths crtrs in thr hg bk-hss th pyrmds.

N, whn I g t s, I g as a smpl slr, rght bfr th mst,
plmb dwn int th frcstl, alft thr t th ryl mst-hd.
Tr, thy rthr ordr m abt sm, and mk m jmp frm spr t
spr, lk a grsshppr in a My mdw. And at frst, ths srt of
thng is unplsnt engh. It tchs on’s sns of hnr,
prtclrly if y cm of an old estblshd fmly in th lnd, th
Vn Rnsslrs, or Rndlphs, or Hrdcnts. And mr thn all, if
jst prvs t pttng yr hnd int th tr-pt, y hv bn
lrdng it as a cntry schlmstr, mkng th tllst bys stnd in
aw of y. Th trnstn is a kn on, I assr y, frm a
schlmstr t a slr, and rqrs a strng dcctn of Snc and
th Stcs t enbl y t grn and br it. Bt evn ths wrs off
in tm.

Wht of it, if sm old hnks of a s-cptn ordrs m t gt a brm
and swp dwn th dcks? Wht ds tht indgnty amnt t, wghd,
I mn, in th scls of th Nw Tstmnt? D y thnk th archngl
Gbrl thnks anythng th lss of m, bcs I prmptly and
rspctflly oby tht old hnks in tht prtclr instnc? Wh an’t
a slv? Tll m tht. Wll, thn, hwvr th old s-cptns my
ordr m abt—hwvr thy my thmp and pnch m abt, I hv th
stsfctn of knwng tht it is all rght; tht evrybdy els is
on wy or othr srvd in mch th sm wy—ethr in a physcl or
mtphyscl pnt of vw, tht is; and s th unvrsl thmp is
pssd rnd, and all hnds shld rb ech othr’s shldr-blds,
and b cntnt.

Agn, I alwys g t s as a slr, bcs thy mk a pnt of
pyng m fr my trbl, whrs thy nvr py pssngrs a sngl
pnny tht I evr hrd of. On th cntrry, pssngrs thmslvs mst
py. And thr is all th dffrnc in th wrld btwn pyng and
bng pd. Th act of pyng is prhps th mst uncmfrtbl
inflctn tht th tw orchrd thvs entld upn us. Bt _bng
pd_,—wht wll cmpr wth it? Th urbn actvty wth whch a mn
rcvs mny is rlly mrvlls, cnsdrng tht w s ernstly
blv mny t b th rt of all erthly ills, and tht on n
accnt cn a mnd mn entr hvn. Ah! hw chrflly w cnsgn
orslvs t prdtn!

Fnlly, I alwys g t s as a slr, bcs of th whlsm
exrcs and pr ar of th fr-cstl dck. Fr as in ths wrld,
hd wnds ar fr mr prvlnt thn wnds frm astrn (tht is, if
y nvr vlt th Pythgrn mxm), s fr th mst prt th
Cmmdr on th qrtr-dck gts hs atmsphr at scnd hnd frm
th slrs on th frcstl. H thnks h brths it frst; bt nt
s. In mch th sm wy d th cmmnlty ld thr ldrs in mny
othr thngs, at th sm tm tht th ldrs lttl sspct it. Bt
whrfr it ws tht aftr hvng rptdly smlt th s as a
mrchnt slr, I shld nw tk it int my hd t g on a whlng
vyg; ths th invsbl plc offcr of th Fts, wh hs th
cnstnt srvllnc of m, and scrtly dgs m, and inflncs m in
sm unccntbl wy—h cn bttr answr thn any on els. And,
dbtlss, my gng on ths whlng vyg, frmd prt of th grnd
prgrmm of Prvdnc tht ws drwn up a lng tm ag. It cm in
as a srt of brf intrld and sl btwn mr extnsv
prfrmncs. I tk it tht ths prt of th bll mst hv rn
smthng lk ths:

“_Grnd Cntstd Elctn fr th Prsdncy of th Untd Stts._
“WHLNG VYG BY ON ISHML. “BLDY BTTL IN AFFGHNSTN.”

Thgh I cnnt tll why it ws exctly tht ths stg mngrs, th
Fts, pt m dwn fr ths shbby prt of a whlng vyg, whn
othrs wr st dwn fr mgnfcnt prts in hgh trgds, and shrt
and esy prts in gntl cmds, and jlly prts in frcs—thgh I
cnnt tll why ths ws exctly; yt, nw tht I rcll all th
crcmstncs, I thnk I cn s a lttl int th sprngs and mtvs
whch bng cnnngly prsntd t m undr vrs dsgss, indcd
m t st abt prfrmng th prt I dd, bsds cjlng m int th
dlsn tht it ws a chc rsltng frm my own unbsd frwll
and dscrmntng jdgmnt.

Chf amng ths mtvs ws th ovrwhlmng id of th grt whl
hmslf. Sch a prtnts and mystrs mnstr rsd all my
crsty. Thn th wld and dstnt ss whr h rlld hs islnd
blk; th undlvrbl, nmlss prls of th whl; ths, wth all
th attndng mrvls of a thsnd Ptgnn sghts and snds,
hlpd t swy m t my wsh. Wth othr mn, prhps, sch thngs
wld nt hv bn indcmnts; bt as fr m, I am trmntd wth an
evrlstng itch fr thngs rmt. I lv t sl frbddn ss, and
lnd on brbrs csts. Nt ignrng wht is gd, I am qck t
prcv a hrrr, and cld stll b scl wth it—wld thy lt
m—snc it is bt wll t b on frndly trms wth all th inmts of
th plc on ldgs in.

By rsn of ths thngs, thn, th whlng vyg ws wlcm; th
grt fld-gts of th wndr-wrld swng opn, and in th wld
cncts tht swyd m t my prps, tw and tw thr fltd int
my inmst sl, endlss prcssns of th whl, and, md mst of thm
all, on grnd hdd phntm, lk a snw hll in th ar.


CHPTR 2. Th Crpt-Bg.

I stffd a shrt or tw int my old crpt-bg, tckd it undr my
arm, and strtd fr Cp Hrn and th Pcfc. Qttng th gd cty
of old Mnhtt, I dly arrvd in Nw Bdfrd. It ws a Strdy nght
in Dcmbr. Mch ws I dsppntd upn lrnng tht th lttl
pckt fr Nntckt hd alrdy sld, and tht n wy of rchng
tht plc wld offr, tll th fllwng Mndy.

As mst yng cnddts fr th pns and pnlts of whlng stp at
ths sm Nw Bdfrd, thnc t embrk on thr vyg, it my as wll
b rltd tht I, fr on, hd n id of s dng. Fr my mnd ws
md up t sl in n othr thn a Nntckt crft, bcs thr ws a
fn, bstrs smthng abt evrythng cnnctd wth tht fms
old islnd, whch amzngly plsd m. Bsds thgh Nw Bdfrd hs
of lt bn grdlly mnplsng th bsnss of whlng, and thgh
in ths mttr pr old Nntckt is nw mch bhnd hr, yt Nntckt
ws hr grt orgnl—th Tyr of ths Crthg;—th plc whr th
frst dd Amrcn whl ws strndd. Whr els bt frm Nntckt
dd ths abrgnl whlmn, th Rd-Mn, frst slly ot in cns
t gv chs t th Lvthn? And whr bt frm Nntckt, t, dd
tht frst advntrs lttl slp pt frth, prtly ldn wth
imprtd cbblstns—s gs th stry—t thrw at th whls, in
ordr t dscvr whn thy wr ngh engh t rsk a hrpn frm th
bwsprt?

Nw hvng a nght, a dy, and stll anthr nght fllwng bfr m
in Nw Bdfrd, er I cld embrk fr my dstnd prt, it bcm a
mttr of cncrnmnt whr I ws t et and slp mnwhl. It ws a
vry dbs-lkng, ny, a vry drk and dsml nght, btngly cld
and chrlss. I knw n on in th plc. Wth anxs grpnls I hd
sndd my pckt, and only brght up a fw pcs of slvr,—S,
whrvr y g, Ishml, sd I t myslf, as I std in th mddl of
a drry strt shldrng my bg, and cmprng th glm twrds th
nrth wth th drknss twrds th sth—whrvr in yr wsdm y
my cncld t ldg fr th nght, my dr Ishml, b sr t
inqr th prc, and dn’t b t prtclr.

Wth hltng stps I pcd th strts, and pssd th sgn of “Th
Crssd Hrpns”—bt it lkd t expnsv and jlly thr. Frthr
on, frm th brght rd wndws of th “Swrd-Fsh Inn,” thr cm
sch frvnt rys, tht it smd t hv mltd th pckd snw and
ic frm bfr th hs, fr evrywhr els th cngld frst ly
tn inchs thck in a hrd, asphltc pvmnt,—rthr wry fr m,
whn I strck my ft agnst th flnty prjctns, bcs frm
hrd, rmrslss srvc th sls of my bts wr in a mst
msrbl plght. T expnsv and jlly, agn thght I, psng on
mmnt t wtch th brd glr in th strt, and hr th snds of
th tnklng glsss wthn. Bt g on, Ishml, sd I at lst; dn’t
y hr? gt awy frm bfr th dr; yr ptchd bts ar
stppng th wy. S on I wnt. I nw by instnct fllwd th strts
tht tk m wtrwrd, fr thr, dbtlss, wr th chpst, if nt
th chrst inns.

Sch drry strts! blcks of blcknss, nt hss, on ethr hnd,
and hr and thr a cndl, lk a cndl mvng abt in a tmb. At
ths hr of th nght, of th lst dy of th wk, tht qrtr of
th twn prvd all bt dsrtd. Bt prsntly I cm t a smky lght
prcdng frm a lw, wd bldng, th dr of whch std
invtngly opn. It hd a crlss lk, as if it wr mnt fr th
uss of th pblc; s, entrng, th frst thng I dd ws t stmbl
ovr an ash-bx in th prch. H! thght I, h, as th flyng
prtcls almst chkd m, ar ths ashs frm tht dstryd cty,
Gmrrh? Bt “Th Crssd Hrpns,” and “Th Swrd-Fsh?”—ths, thn
mst nds b th sgn of “Th Trp.” Hwvr, I pckd myslf up and
hrng a ld vc wthn, pshd on and opnd a scnd, intrr
dr.

It smd th grt Blck Prlmnt sttng in Tpht. A hndrd blck
fcs trnd rnd in thr rws t pr; and bynd, a blck Angl of
Dm ws btng a bk in a plpt. It ws a ngr chrch; and th
prchr’s txt ws abt th blcknss of drknss, and th wpng
and wlng and tth-gnshng thr. H, Ishml, mttrd I, bckng
ot, Wrtchd entrtnmnt at th sgn of ‘Th Trp!’

Mvng on, I at lst cm t a dm srt of lght nt fr frm th
dcks, and hrd a frlrn crkng in th ar; and lkng up, sw a
swngng sgn ovr th dr wth a wht pntng upn it, fntly
rprsntng a tll strght jt of msty spry, and ths wrds
undrnth—“Th Sptr Inn:—Ptr Cffn.”

Cffn?—Sptr?—Rthr omns in tht prtclr cnnxn, thght
I. Bt it is a cmmn nm in Nntckt, thy sy, and I spps ths
Ptr hr is an emgrnt frm thr. As th lght lkd s dm, and
th plc, fr th tm, lkd qt engh, and th dlpdtd
lttl wdn hs itslf lkd as if it mght hv bn crtd hr
frm th rns of sm brnt dstrct, and as th swngng sgn hd a
pvrty-strckn srt of crk t it, I thght tht hr ws th vry
spt fr chp ldgngs, and th bst of p cff.

It ws a qr srt of plc—a gbl-endd old hs, on sd plsd
as it wr, and lnng ovr sdly. It std on a shrp blk crnr,
whr tht tmpsts wnd Erclydn kpt up a wrs hwlng thn
evr it dd abt pr Pl’s tssd crft. Erclydn, nvrthlss,
is a mghty plsnt zphyr t any on in-drs, wth hs ft on th
hb qtly tstng fr bd. “In jdgng of tht tmpsts wnd
clld Erclydn,” sys an old wrtr—of whs wrks I pssss th
only cpy extnt—“it mkth a mrvlls dffrnc, whthr th
lkst ot at it frm a glss wndw whr th frst is all on th
otsd, or whthr th obsrvst it frm tht sshlss wndw, whr
th frst is on bth sds, and of whch th wght Dth is th only
glzr.” Tr engh, thght I, as ths pssg occrrd t my
mnd—old blck-lttr, th rsnst wll. Ys, ths eys ar
wndws, and ths bdy of mn is th hs. Wht a pty thy ddn’t
stp up th chnks and th crnns thgh, and thrst in a lttl lnt
hr and thr. Bt it’s t lt t mk any imprvmnts nw. Th
unvrs is fnshd; th cpstn is on, and th chps wr crtd
off a mlln yrs ag. Pr Lzrs thr, chttrng hs tth
agnst th crbstn fr hs pllw, and shkng off hs tttrs wth
hs shvrngs, h mght plg up bth ers wth rgs, and pt a
crn-cb int hs mth, and yt tht wld nt kp ot th
tmpsts Erclydn. Erclydn! sys old Dvs, in hs rd slkn
wrppr—(h hd a rddr on aftrwrds) ph, ph! Wht a fn frsty
nght; hw Orn glttrs; wht nrthrn lghts! Lt thm tlk of thr
orntl smmr clms of evrlstng cnsrvtrs; gv m th
prvlg of mkng my own smmr wth my own cls.

Bt wht thnks Lzrs? Cn h wrm hs bl hnds by hldng thm up
t th grnd nrthrn lghts? Wld nt Lzrs rthr b in Smtr
thn hr? Wld h nt fr rthr ly hm dwn lngthws alng th
ln of th eqtr; y, y gds! g dwn t th fry pt itslf, in
ordr t kp ot ths frst?

Nw, tht Lzrs shld l strndd thr on th crbstn bfr th
dr of Dvs, ths is mr wndrfl thn tht an icbrg shld b
mrd t on of th Mlccs. Yt Dvs hmslf, h t lvs lk a
Czr in an ic plc md of frzn sghs, and bng a prsdnt of a
tmprnc scty, h only drnks th tpd trs of orphns.

Bt n mr of ths blbbrng nw, w ar gng a-whlng, and thr
is plnty of tht yt t cm. Lt us scrp th ic frm or frstd
ft, and s wht srt of a plc ths “Sptr” my b.


CHPTR 3. Th Sptr-Inn.

Entrng tht gbl-endd Sptr-Inn, y fnd yrslf in a wd,
lw, strgglng entry wth old-fshnd wnscts, rmndng on of
th blwrks of sm cndmnd old crft. On on sd hng a vry lrg
olpntng s thrghly bsmkd, and evry wy dfcd, tht in th
unql crsslghts by whch y vwd it, it ws only by dlgnt
stdy and a srs of systmtc vsts t it, and crfl inqry of
th nghbrs, tht y cld any wy arrv at an undrstndng of its
prps. Sch unccntbl msss of shds and shdws, tht at frst
y almst thght sm ambts yng artst, in th tm of th Nw
Englnd hgs, hd endvrd t dlnt chs bwtchd. Bt by dnt
of mch and ernst cntmpltn, and oft rptd pndrngs, and
espclly by thrwng opn th lttl wndw twrds th bck of th
entry, y at lst cm t th cnclsn tht sch an id, hwvr
wld, mght nt b altgthr unwrrntd.

Bt wht mst pzzld and cnfndd y ws a lng, lmbr,
prtnts, blck mss of smthng hvrng in th cntr of th
pctr ovr thr bl, dm, prpndclr lns fltng in a
nmlss yst. A bggy, sggy, sqtchy pctr trly, engh t drv
a nrvs mn dstrctd. Yt ws thr a srt of indfnt,
hlf-attnd, unmgnbl sblmty abt it tht frly frz y t
it, tll y invlntrly tk an oth wth yrslf t fnd ot wht
tht mrvlls pntng mnt. Evr and ann a brght, bt, als,
dcptv id wld drt y thrgh.—It’s th Blck S in a mdnght
gl.—It’s th unntrl cmbt of th fr prml elmnts.—It’s a
blstd hth.—It’s a Hyprbrn wntr scn.—It’s th brkng-up of
th icbnd strm of Tm. Bt at lst all ths fncs yldd t
tht on prtnts smthng in th pctr’s mdst. _Tht_ onc fnd
ot, and all th rst wr pln. Bt stp; ds it nt br a fnt
rsmblnc t a ggntc fsh? evn th grt lvthn hmslf?

In fct, th artst’s dsgn smd ths: a fnl thry of my own,
prtly bsd upn th aggrgtd opnns of mny agd prsns wth
whm I cnvrsd upn th sbjct. Th pctr rprsnts a Cp-Hrnr
in a grt hrrcn; th hlf-fndrd shp wltrng thr wth its
thr dsmntld msts aln vsbl; and an exsprtd whl,
prpsng t sprng cln ovr th crft, is in th enrms act of
implng hmslf upn th thr mst-hds.

Th oppst wll of ths entry ws hng all ovr wth a hthnsh
arry of mnstrs clbs and sprs. Sm wr thckly st wth
glttrng tth rsmblng ivry sws; othrs wr tftd wth knts
of hmn hr; and on ws sckl-shpd, wth a vst hndl swpng
rnd lk th sgmnt md in th nw-mwn grss by a lng-armd
mwr. Y shddrd as y gzd, and wndrd wht mnstrs cnnbl
and svg cld evr hv gn a dth-hrvstng wth sch a hckng,
hrrfyng implmnt. Mxd wth ths wr rsty old whlng lncs
and hrpns all brkn and dfrmd. Sm wr strd wpns. Wth
ths onc lng lnc, nw wldly elbwd, ffty yrs ag dd Nthn
Swn kll fftn whls btwn a snrs and a snst. And tht
hrpn—s lk a crkscrw nw—ws flng in Jvn ss, and rn awy
wth by a whl, yrs aftrwrds sln off th Cp of Blnc. Th
orgnl irn entrd ngh th tl, and, lk a rstlss ndl
sjrnng in th bdy of a mn, trvlld fll frty ft, and at lst
ws fnd imbddd in th hmp.

Crssng ths dsky entry, and on thrgh yn lw-archd wy—ct
thrgh wht in old tms mst hv bn a grt cntrl chmny wth
frplcs all rnd—y entr th pblc rm. A stll dskr plc
is ths, wth sch lw pndrs bms abv, and sch old wrnkld
plnks bnth, tht y wld almst fncy y trd sm old crft’s
cckpts, espclly of sch a hwlng nght, whn ths crnr-anchrd
old ark rckd s frsly. On on sd std a lng, lw, shlf-lk
tbl cvrd wth crckd glss css, flld wth dsty rrts
gthrd frm ths wd wrld’s rmtst nks. Prjctng frm th
frthr angl of th rm stnds a drk-lkng dn—th br—a rd
attmpt at a rght whl’s hd. B tht hw it my, thr stnds th
vst archd bn of th whl’s jw, s wd, a cch mght almst
drv bnth it. Wthn ar shbby shlvs, rngd rnd wth old
dcntrs, bttls, flsks; and in ths jws of swft dstrctn,
lk anthr crsd Jnh (by whch nm indd thy clld hm),
bstls a lttl wthrd old mn, wh, fr thr mny, drly slls
th slrs dlrms and dth.

Abmnbl ar th tmblrs int whch h prs hs psn. Thgh tr
cylndrs wtht—wthn, th vllns grn ggglng glsss
dctflly tprd dwnwrds t a chtng bttm. Prlll mrdns
rdly pckd int th glss, srrnd ths ftpds’ gblts. Fll t
_ths_ mrk, and yr chrg is bt a pnny; t _ths_ a pnny mr;
and s on t th fll glss—th Cp Hrn msr, whch y my glp
dwn fr a shllng.

Upn entrng th plc I fnd a nmbr of yng smn gthrd abt
a tbl, exmnng by a dm lght dvrs spcmns of _skrmshndr_. I
sght th lndlrd, and tllng hm I dsrd t b accmmdtd wth
a rm, rcvd fr answr tht hs hs ws fll—nt a bd
unccpd. “Bt avst,” h addd, tppng hs frhd, “y hnt n
objctns t shrng a hrpnr’s blnkt, hv y? I s’ps y ar
gn’ a-whln’, s y’d bttr gt usd t tht srt of thng.”

I tld hm tht I nvr lkd t slp tw in a bd; tht if I shld
evr d s, it wld dpnd upn wh th hrpnr mght b, and tht
if h (th lndlrd) rlly hd n othr plc fr m, and th
hrpnr ws nt dcddly objctnbl, why rthr thn wndr
frthr abt a strng twn on s bttr a nght, I wld pt up wth
th hlf of any dcnt mn’s blnkt.

“I thght s. All rght; tk a st. Sppr?—y wnt sppr?
Sppr’ll b rdy drctly.”

I st dwn on an old wdn sttl, crvd all ovr lk a bnch on th
Bttry. At on end a rmntng tr ws stll frthr adrnng it wth
hs jck-knf, stpng ovr and dlgntly wrkng awy at th spc
btwn hs lgs. H ws tryng hs hnd at a shp undr fll sl, bt
h ddn’t mk mch hdwy, I thght.

At lst sm fr or fv of us wr smmnd t or ml in an
adjnng rm. It ws cld as Iclnd—n fr at all—th lndlrd sd
h cldn’t affrd it. Nthng bt tw dsml tllw cndls, ech in a
wndng sht. W wr fn t bttn up or mnky jckts, and hld
t or lps cps of scldng t wth or hlf frzn fngrs. Bt th
fr ws of th mst sbstntl knd—nt only mt and ptts, bt
dmplngs; gd hvns! dmplngs fr sppr! On yng fllw in a
grn bx ct, addrssd hmslf t ths dmplngs in a mst drfl
mnnr.

“My by,” sd th lndlrd, “y’ll hv th nghtmr t a dd
srtnty.”

“Lndlrd,” I whsprd, “tht ant th hrpnr is it?”

“Oh, n,” sd h, lkng a srt of dblclly fnny, “th
hrpnr is a drk cmplxnd chp. H nvr ets dmplngs, h
dn’t—h ets nthng bt stks, and h lks ’em rr.”

“Th dvl h ds,” sys I. “Whr is tht hrpnr? Is h hr?”

“H’ll b hr afr lng,” ws th answr.

I cld nt hlp it, bt I bgn t fl sspcs of ths “drk
cmplxnd” hrpnr. At any rt, I md up my mnd tht if it s
trnd ot tht w shld slp tgthr, h mst undrss and gt int
bd bfr I dd.

Sppr ovr, th cmpny wnt bck t th br-rm, whn, knwng nt
wht els t d wth myslf, I rslvd t spnd th rst of th
evnng as a lkr on.

Prsntly a rtng ns ws hrd wtht. Strtng up, th lndlrd
crd, “Tht’s th Grmps’s crw. I sd hr rprtd in th offng
ths mrnng; a thr yrs’ vyg, and a fll shp. Hrrh, bys; nw
w’ll hv th ltst nws frm th Fgs.”

A trmpng of s bts ws hrd in th entry; th dr ws flng
opn, and in rlld a wld st of mrnrs engh. Envlpd in thr
shggy wtch cts, and wth thr hds mffld in wlln cmfrtrs,
all bdrnd and rggd, and thr brds stff wth iccls, thy
smd an erptn of brs frm Lbrdr. Thy hd jst lndd frm
thr bt, and ths ws th frst hs thy entrd. N wndr, thn,
tht thy md a strght wk fr th whl’s mth—th br—whn th
wrnkld lttl old Jnh, thr offctng, sn prd thm ot
brmmrs all rnd. On cmplnd of a bd cld in hs hd, upn
whch Jnh mxd hm a ptch-lk ptn of gn and mlsss, whch h
swr ws a svrgn cr fr all clds and ctrrhs whtsvr, nvr
mnd of hw lng stndng, or whthr cght off th cst of Lbrdr,
or on th wthr sd of an ic-islnd.

Th lqr sn mntd int thr hds, as it gnrlly ds evn
wth th arrntst tprs nwly lndd frm s, and thy bgn
cprng abt mst obstrprsly.

I obsrvd, hwvr, tht on of thm hld smwht alf, and thgh
h smd dsrs nt t spl th hlrty of hs shpmts by hs
own sbr fc, yt upn th whl h rfrnd frm mkng as mch
ns as th rst. Ths mn intrstd m at onc; and snc th
s-gds hd ordnd tht h shld sn bcm my shpmt (thgh
bt a slpng-prtnr on, s fr as ths nrrtv is cncrnd), I
wll hr vntr upn a lttl dscrptn of hm. H std fll sx
ft in hght, wth nbl shldrs, and a chst lk a cffr-dm. I
hv sldm sn sch brwn in a mn. Hs fc ws dply brwn and
brnt, mkng hs wht tth dzzlng by th cntrst; whl in th
dp shdws of hs eys fltd sm rmnscncs tht dd nt sm
t gv hm mch jy. Hs vc at onc annncd tht h ws a
Sthrnr, and frm hs fn sttr, I thght h mst b on of
ths tll mntnrs frm th Allghnn Rdg in Vrgn. Whn
th rvlry of hs cmpnns hd mntd t its hght, ths mn
slppd awy unbsrvd, and I sw n mr of hm tll h bcm my
cmrd on th s. In a fw mnts, hwvr, h ws mssd by hs
shpmts, and bng, it sms, fr sm rsn a hg fvrt wth
thm, thy rsd a cry of “Blkngtn! Blkngtn! whr’s
Blkngtn?” and drtd ot of th hs in prst of hm.

It ws nw abt nn o’clck, and th rm smng almst
sprntrlly qt aftr ths orgs, I bgn t cngrtlt myslf
upn a lttl pln tht hd occrrd t m jst prvs t th
entrnc of th smn.

N mn prfrs t slp tw in a bd. In fct, y wld a gd dl
rthr nt slp wth yr own brthr. I dn’t knw hw it is, bt
ppl lk t b prvt whn thy ar slpng. And whn it cms t
slpng wth an unknwn strngr, in a strng inn, in a strng twn,
and tht strngr a hrpnr, thn yr objctns indfntly
mltply. Nr ws thr any erthly rsn why I as a slr shld
slp tw in a bd, mr thn anybdy els; fr slrs n mr slp
tw in a bd at s, thn bchlr Kngs d ashr. T b sr thy all
slp tgthr in on aprtmnt, bt y hv yr own hmmck, and
cvr yrslf wth yr own blnkt, and slp in yr own skn.

Th mr I pndrd ovr ths hrpnr, th mr I abmntd th
thght of slpng wth hm. It ws fr t prsm tht bng a
hrpnr, hs lnn or wlln, as th cs mght b, wld nt b of
th tdst, crtnly nn of th fnst. I bgn t twtch all ovr.
Bsds, it ws gttng lt, and my dcnt hrpnr oght t b hm
and gng bdwrds. Spps nw, h shld tmbl in upn m at
mdnght—hw cld I tll frm wht vl hl h hd bn cmng?

“Lndlrd! I’v chngd my mnd abt tht hrpnr.—I shn’t slp
wth hm. I’ll try th bnch hr.”

“Jst as y pls; I’m srry I cn’t spr y a tblclth fr a
mttrss, and it’s a plgy rgh brd hr”—flng of th knts and
ntchs. “Bt wt a bt, Skrmshndr; I’v gt a crpntr’s pln
thr in th br—wt, I sy, and I’ll mk y sng engh.” S syng
h prcrd th pln; and wth hs old slk hndkrchf frst dstng
th bnch, vgrsly st t plnng awy at my bd, th whl grnnng
lk an ap. Th shvngs flw rght and lft; tll at lst th
pln-irn cm bmp agnst an indstrctbl knt. Th lndlrd ws
nr sprnng hs wrst, and I tld hm fr hvn’s sk t qt—th
bd ws sft engh t st m, and I dd nt knw hw all th plnng
in th wrld cld mk edr dwn of a pn plnk. S gthrng up th
shvngs wth anthr grn, and thrwng thm int th grt stv in
th mddl of th rm, h wnt abt hs bsnss, and lft m in a
brwn stdy.

I nw tk th msr of th bnch, and fnd tht it ws a ft t
shrt; bt tht cld b mndd wth a chr. Bt it ws a ft t
nrrw, and th othr bnch in th rm ws abt fr inchs hghr
thn th plnd on—s thr ws n ykng thm. I thn plcd th
frst bnch lngthws alng th only clr spc agnst th wll,
lvng a lttl intrvl btwn, fr my bck t sttl dwn in. Bt I
sn fnd tht thr cm sch a drght of cld ar ovr m frm
undr th sll of th wndw, tht ths pln wld nvr d at all,
espclly as anthr crrnt frm th rckty dr mt th on frm
th wndw, and bth tgthr frmd a srs of smll whrlwnds in
th immdt vcnty of th spt whr I hd thght t spnd th
nght.

Th dvl ftch tht hrpnr, thght I, bt stp, cldn’t I stl
a mrch on hm—blt hs dr insd, and jmp int hs bd, nt t b
wknd by th mst vlnt knckngs? It smd n bd id; bt upn
scnd thghts I dsmssd it. Fr wh cld tll bt wht th nxt
mrnng, s sn as I pppd ot of th rm, th hrpnr mght b
stndng in th entry, all rdy t knck m dwn!

Stll, lkng rnd m agn, and sng n pssbl chnc of
spndng a sffrbl nght unlss in sm othr prsn’s bd, I bgn
t thnk tht aftr all I mght b chrshng unwrrntbl prjdcs
agnst ths unknwn hrpnr. Thnks I, I’ll wt awhl; h mst b
drppng in bfr lng. I’ll hv a gd lk at hm thn, and prhps
w my bcm jlly gd bdfllws aftr all—thr’s n tllng.

Bt thgh th othr brdrs kpt cmng in by ons, tws, and thrs,
and gng t bd, yt n sgn of my hrpnr.

“Lndlrd!” sd I, “wht srt of a chp is h—ds h alwys kp sch
lt hrs?” It ws nw hrd upn twlv o’clck.

Th lndlrd chckld agn wth hs ln chckl, and smd t b
mghtly tckld at smthng bynd my cmprhnsn. “N,” h
answrd, “gnrlly h’s an erly brd—arly t bd and arly t
rs—ys, h’s th brd wht ctchs th wrm. Bt t-nght h wnt ot
a pddlng, y s, and I dn’t s wht on arth kps hm s lt,
unlss, my b, h cn’t sll hs hd.”

“Cn’t sll hs hd?—Wht srt of a bmbzngly stry is ths y ar
tllng m?” gttng int a twrng rg. “D y prtnd t sy,
lndlrd, tht ths hrpnr is actlly enggd ths blssd
Strdy nght, or rthr Sndy mrnng, in pddlng hs hd arnd
ths twn?”

“Tht’s prcsly it,” sd th lndlrd, “and I tld hm h cldn’t
sll it hr, th mrkt’s ovrstckd.”

“Wth wht?” shtd I.

“Wth hds t b sr; an’t thr t mny hds in th wrld?”

“I tll y wht it is, lndlrd,” sd I qt clmly, “y’d bttr
stp spnnng tht yrn t m—I’m nt grn.”

“My b nt,” tkng ot a stck and whttlng a tthpck, “bt I
rythr gss y’ll b dn _brwn_ if tht er hrpnr hrs y a
slndrn’ hs hd.”

“I’ll brk it fr hm,” sd I, nw flyng int a pssn agn at
ths unccntbl frrg of th lndlrd’s.

“It’s brk a’rdy,” sd h.

“Brk,” sd I—“_brk_, d y mn?”

“Srtn, and tht’s th vry rsn h cn’t sll it, I gss.”

“Lndlrd,” sd I, gng up t hm as cl as Mt. Hcl in a
snw-strm—“lndlrd, stp whttlng. Y and I mst undrstnd on
anthr, and tht t wtht dly. I cm t yr hs and wnt a
bd; y tll m y cn only gv m hlf a on; tht th othr hlf
blngs t a crtn hrpnr. And abt ths hrpnr, whm I hv
nt yt sn, y prsst in tllng m th mst mystfyng and
exsprtng strs tndng t bgt in m an uncmfrtbl flng
twrds th mn whm y dsgn fr my bdfllw—a srt of cnnxn,
lndlrd, whch is an intmt and cnfdntl on in th hghst
dgr. I nw dmnd of y t spk ot and tll m wh and wht ths
hrpnr is, and whthr I shll b in all rspcts sf t spnd th
nght wth hm. And in th frst plc, y wll b s gd as t unsy
tht stry abt sllng hs hd, whch if tr I tk t b gd
evdnc tht ths hrpnr is strk md, and I’v n id of
slpng wth a mdmn; and y, sr, _y_ I mn, lndlrd, _y_,
sr, by tryng t indc m t d s knwngly, wld thrby rndr
yrslf lbl t a crmnl prsctn.”

“Wll,” sd th lndlrd, ftchng a lng brth, “tht’s a prty lng
srmn fr a chp tht rps a lttl nw and thn. Bt b esy, b
esy, ths hr hrpnr I hv bn tlln’ y of hs jst arrvd
frm th sth ss, whr h bght up a lt of ’blmd Nw Zlnd
hds (grt crs, y knw), and h’s sld all on ’em bt on, and
tht on h’s tryng t sll t-nght, cs t-mrrw’s Sndy, and it
wld nt d t b slln’ hmn hds abt th strts whn flks is
gn’ t chrchs. H wntd t, lst Sndy, bt I stppd hm jst as
h ws gn’ ot of th dr wth fr hds strng on a strng, fr
all th arth lk a strng of inns.”

Ths accnt clrd up th othrws unccntbl mystry, and shwd
tht th lndlrd, aftr all, hd hd n id of flng m—bt at th
sm tm wht cld I thnk of a hrpnr wh styd ot of a
Strdy nght cln int th hly Sbbth, enggd in sch a cnnbl
bsnss as sllng th hds of dd idltrs?

“Dpnd upn it, lndlrd, tht hrpnr is a dngrs mn.”

“H pys rg’lr,” ws th rjndr. “Bt cm, it’s gttng drdfl
lt, y hd bttr b trnng flks—it’s a nc bd; Sl and m
slpt in tht er bd th nght w wr splcd. Thr’s plnty of rm
fr tw t kck abt in tht bd; it’s an almghty bg bd tht. Why,
afr w gv it up, Sl usd t pt or Sm and lttl Jhnny in th
ft of it. Bt I gt a drmng and sprwlng abt on nght, and
smhw, Sm gt ptchd on th flr, and cm nr brkng hs arm.
Artr tht, Sl sd it wldn’t d. Cm alng hr, I’ll gv y a
glm in a jffy;” and s syng h lghtd a cndl and hld it twrds
m, offrng t ld th wy. Bt I std irrslt; whn lkng at a
clck in th crnr, h exclmd “I vm it’s Sndy—y wn’t s tht
hrpnr t-nght; h’s cm t anchr smwhr—cm alng thn;
_d_ cm; _wn’t_ y cm?”

I cnsdrd th mttr a mmnt, and thn up strs w wnt, and I ws
ushrd int a smll rm, cld as a clm, and frnshd, sr engh,
wth a prdgs bd, almst bg engh indd fr any fr
hrpnrs t slp abrst.

“Thr,” sd th lndlrd, plcng th cndl on a crzy old s chst
tht dd dbl dty as a wsh-stnd and cntr tbl; “thr, mk
yrslf cmfrtbl nw, and gd nght t y.” I trnd rnd frm
eyng th bd, bt h hd dspprd.

Fldng bck th cntrpn, I stpd ovr th bd. Thgh nn of
th mst elgnt, it yt std th scrtny tlrbly wll. I thn
glncd rnd th rm; and bsds th bdstd and cntr tbl,
cld s n othr frntr blngng t th plc, bt a rd shlf,
th fr wlls, and a pprd frbrd rprsntng a mn strkng a
whl. Of thngs nt prprly blngng t th rm, thr ws a
hmmck lshd up, and thrwn upn th flr in on crnr; als a
lrg smn’s bg, cntnng th hrpnr’s wrdrb, n dbt in
l of a lnd trnk. Lkws, thr ws a prcl of otlndsh bn
fsh hks on th shlf ovr th fr-plc, and a tll hrpn
stndng at th hd of th bd.

Bt wht is ths on th chst? I tk it up, and hld it cls t th
lght, and flt it, and smlt it, and trd evry wy pssbl t
arrv at sm stsfctry cnclsn cncrnng it. I cn cmpr it
t nthng bt a lrg dr mt, ornmntd at th edgs wth lttl
tnklng tgs smthng lk th stnd prcpn qlls rnd an
Indn mccsn. Thr ws a hl or slt in th mddl of ths mt, as
y s th sm in Sth Amrcn pnchs. Bt cld it b pssbl
tht any sbr hrpnr wld gt int a dr mt, and prd th
strts of any Chrstn twn in tht srt of gs? I pt it on, t
try it, and it wghd m dwn lk a hmpr, bng uncmmnly shggy
and thck, and I thght a lttl dmp, as thgh ths mystrs
hrpnr hd bn wrng it of a rny dy. I wnt up in it t a bt
of glss stck agnst th wll, and I nvr sw sch a sght in my
lf. I tr myslf ot of it in sch a hrry tht I gv myslf a knk
in th nck.

I st dwn on th sd of th bd, and cmmncd thnkng abt ths
hd-pddlng hrpnr, and hs dr mt. Aftr thnkng sm tm on
th bd-sd, I gt up and tk off my mnky jckt, and thn std in
th mddl of th rm thnkng. I thn tk off my ct, and thght a
lttl mr in my shrt slvs. Bt bgnnng t fl vry cld nw,
hlf undrssd as I ws, and rmmbrng wht th lndlrd sd abt
th hrpnr’s nt cmng hm at all tht nght, it bng s vry
lt, I md n mr ad, bt jmpd ot of my pntlns and bts,
and thn blwng ot th lght tmbld int bd, and cmmndd myslf
t th cr of hvn.

Whthr tht mttrss ws stffd wth crn-cbs or brkn crckry,
thr is n tllng, bt I rlld abt a gd dl, and cld nt
slp fr a lng tm. At lst I sld off int a lght dz, and hd
prtty nrly md a gd offng twrds th lnd of Nd, whn I hrd
a hvy ftfll in th pssg, and sw a glmmr of lght cm int
th rm frm undr th dr.

Lrd sv m, thnks I, tht mst b th hrpnr, th infrnl
hd-pddlr. Bt I ly prfctly stll, and rslvd nt t sy a wrd
tll spkn t. Hldng a lght in on hnd, and tht idntcl Nw
Zlnd hd in th othr, th strngr entrd th rm, and wtht
lkng twrds th bd, plcd hs cndl a gd wy off frm m on
th flr in on crnr, and thn bgn wrkng awy at th knttd
crds of th lrg bg I bfr spk of as bng in th rm. I ws
all egrnss t s hs fc, bt h kpt it avrtd fr sm tm
whl emplyd in unlcng th bg’s mth. Ths accmplshd, hwvr,
h trnd rnd—whn, gd hvns! wht a sght! Sch a fc! It ws
of a drk, prplsh, yllw clr, hr and thr stck ovr wth
lrg blcksh lkng sqrs. Ys, it’s jst as I thght, h’s a
trrbl bdfllw; h’s bn in a fght, gt drdflly ct, and hr
h is, jst frm th srgn. Bt at tht mmnt h chncd t trn hs
fc s twrds th lght, tht I plnly sw thy cld nt b
stckng-plstrs at all, ths blck sqrs on hs chks. Thy wr
stns of sm srt or othr. At frst I knw nt wht t mk of ths;
bt sn an inklng of th trth occrrd t m. I rmmbrd a stry
of a wht mn—a whlmn t—wh, fllng amng th cnnbls, hd
bn tttd by thm. I cncldd tht ths hrpnr, in th crs
of hs dstnt vygs, mst hv mt wth a smlr advntr. And
wht is it, thght I, aftr all! It’s only hs otsd; a mn cn b
hnst in any srt of skn. Bt thn, wht t mk of hs unrthly
cmplxn, tht prt of it, I mn, lyng rnd abt, and cmpltly
indpndnt of th sqrs of tttng. T b sr, it mght b
nthng bt a gd ct of trpcl tnnng; bt I nvr hrd of a ht
sn’s tnnng a wht mn int a prplsh yllw on. Hwvr, I hd
nvr bn in th Sth Ss; and prhps th sn thr prdcd ths
extrrdnry effcts upn th skn. Nw, whl all ths ids wr
pssng thrgh m lk lghtnng, ths hrpnr nvr ntcd m at
all. Bt, aftr sm dffclty hvng opnd hs bg, h cmmncd
fmblng in it, and prsntly plld ot a srt of tmhwk, and a
sl-skn wllt wth th hr on. Plcng ths on th old chst in
th mddl of th rm, h thn tk th Nw Zlnd hd—a ghstly
thng engh—and crmmd it dwn int th bg. H nw tk off hs
ht—a nw bvr ht—whn I cm ngh sngng ot wth frsh srprs.
Thr ws n hr on hs hd—nn t spk of at lst—nthng bt a
smll sclp-knt twstd up on hs frhd. Hs bld prplsh hd nw
lkd fr all th wrld lk a mldwd skll. Hd nt th strngr
std btwn m and th dr, I wld hv bltd ot of it qckr
thn evr I bltd a dnnr.

Evn as it ws, I thght smthng of slppng ot of th wndw, bt
it ws th scnd flr bck. I am n cwrd, bt wht t mk of ths
hd-pddlng prpl rscl altgthr pssd my cmprhnsn.
Ignrnc is th prnt of fr, and bng cmpltly nnplssd and
cnfndd abt th strngr, I cnfss I ws nw as mch afrd of
hm as if it ws th dvl hmslf wh hd ths brkn int my rm at
th dd of nght. In fct, I ws s afrd of hm tht I ws nt gm
engh jst thn t addrss hm, and dmnd a stsfctry answr
cncrnng wht smd inxplcbl in hm.

Mnwhl, h cntnd th bsnss of undrssng, and at lst shwd
hs chst and arms. As I lv, ths cvrd prts of hm wr
chckrd wth th sm sqrs as hs fc; hs bck, t, ws all
ovr th sm drk sqrs; h smd t hv bn in a Thrty Yrs’
Wr, and jst escpd frm it wth a stckng-plstr shrt. Stll
mr, hs vry lgs wr mrkd, as if a prcl of drk grn frgs
wr rnnng up th trnks of yng plms. It ws nw qt pln tht
h mst b sm abmnbl svg or othr shppd abrd of a whlmn
in th Sth Ss, and s lndd in ths Chrstn cntry. I qkd t
thnk of it. A pddlr of hds t—prhps th hds of hs own
brthrs. H mght tk a fncy t mn—hvns! lk at tht tmhwk!

Bt thr ws n tm fr shddrng, fr nw th svg wnt abt
smthng tht cmpltly fscntd my attntn, and cnvncd m
tht h mst indd b a hthn. Gng t hs hvy grg, or wrpll,
or drdnght, whch h hd prvsly hng on a chr, h fmbld in
th pckts, and prdcd at lngth a crs lttl dfrmd img
wth a hnch on its bck, and exctly th clr of a thr dys’ old
Cng bby. Rmmbrng th emblmd hd, at frst I almst thght
tht ths blck mnkn ws a rl bby prsrvd in sm smlr
mnnr. Bt sng tht it ws nt at all lmbr, and tht it glstnd
a gd dl lk plshd ebny, I cncldd tht it mst b nthng
bt a wdn idl, whch indd it prvd t b. Fr nw th svg
gs up t th empty fr-plc, and rmvng th pprd fr-brd,
sts up ths lttl hnch-bckd img, lk a tnpn, btwn th
andrns. Th chmny jmbs and all th brcks insd wr vry sty,
s tht I thght ths fr-plc md a vry apprprt lttl shrn
or chpl fr hs Cng idl.

I nw scrwd my eys hrd twrds th hlf hddn img, flng bt
ill at es mntm—t s wht ws nxt t fllw. Frst h tks
abt a dbl hndfl of shvngs ot of hs grg pckt, and plcs
thm crflly bfr th idl; thn lyng a bt of shp bsct on
tp and applyng th flm frm th lmp, h kndld th shvngs int
a scrfcl blz. Prsntly, aftr mny hsty sntchs int th
fr, and stll hstr wthdrwls of hs fngrs (whrby h smd
t b scrchng thm bdly), h at lst sccdd in drwng ot th
bsct; thn blwng off th ht and ashs a lttl, h md a plt
offr of it t th lttl ngr. Bt th lttl dvl dd nt sm t
fncy sch dry srt of fr at all; h nvr mvd hs lps. All ths
strng antcs wr accmpnd by stll strngr gttrl nss frm
th dvt, wh smd t b pryng in a sng-sng or els sngng
sm pgn pslmdy or othr, drng whch hs fc twtchd abt in
th mst unntrl mnnr. At lst extngshng th fr, h tk th
idl up vry uncrmnsly, and bggd it agn in hs grg pckt
as crlssly as if h wr a sprtsmn bggng a dd wdcck.

All ths qr prcdngs incrsd my uncmfrtblnss, and sng
hm nw exhbtng strng symptms of cncldng hs bsnss
oprtns, and jmpng int bd wth m, I thght it ws hgh tm,
nw or nvr, bfr th lght ws pt ot, t brk th spll in whch
I hd s lng bn bnd.

Bt th intrvl I spnt in dlbrtng wht t sy, ws a ftl on.
Tkng up hs tmhwk frm th tbl, h exmnd th hd of it fr
an instnt, and thn hldng it t th lght, wth hs mth at th
hndl, h pffd ot grt clds of tbcc smk. Th nxt mmnt
th lght ws extngshd, and ths wld cnnbl, tmhwk btwn
hs tth, sprng int bd wth m. I sng ot, I cld nt hlp it
nw; and gvng a sddn grnt of astnshmnt h bgn flng m.

Stmmrng ot smthng, I knw nt wht, I rlld awy frm hm
agnst th wll, and thn cnjrd hm, whvr or whtvr h mght
b, t kp qt, and lt m gt up and lght th lmp agn. Bt hs
gttrl rspnss stsfd m at onc tht h bt ill cmprhndd my
mnng.

“Wh-e dbl y?”—h at lst sd—“y n spk-e, dm-m, I kll-e.”
And s syng th lghtd tmhwk bgn flrshng abt m in th
drk.

“Lndlrd, fr Gd’s sk, Ptr Cffn!” shtd I. “Lndlrd! Wtch!
Cffn! Angls! sv m!”

“Spk-e! tll-e m wh-e b, or dm-m, I kll-e!” agn grwld th
cnnbl, whl hs hrrd flrshngs of th tmhwk scttrd th
ht tbcc ashs abt m tll I thght my lnn wld gt on fr.
Bt thnk hvn, at tht mmnt th lndlrd cm int th rm lght
in hnd, and lpng frm th bd I rn up t hm.

“Dn’t b afrd nw,” sd h, grnnng agn, “Qqg hr wldn’t
hrm a hr of yr hd.”

“Stp yr grnnng,” shtd I, “and why ddn’t y tll m tht tht
infrnl hrpnr ws a cnnbl?”

“I thght y knw’d it;—ddn’t I tll y, h ws a pddln’ hds
arnd twn?—bt trn flks agn and g t slp. Qqg, lk
hr—y sbb m, I sbb—y ths mn slp y—y sbb?”

“M sbb plnty”—grntd Qqg, pffng awy at hs pp and
sttng up in bd.

“Y gtt in,” h addd, mtnng t m wth hs tmhwk, and
thrwng th clths t on sd. H rlly dd ths in nt only a
cvl bt a rlly knd and chrtbl wy. I std lkng at hm a
mmnt. Fr all hs tttngs h ws on th whl a cln, cmly
lkng cnnbl. Wht’s all ths fss I hv bn mkng abt,
thght I t myslf—th mn’s a hmn bng jst as I am: h hs jst
as mch rsn t fr m, as I hv t b afrd of hm. Bttr slp
wth a sbr cnnbl thn a drnkn Chrstn.

“Lndlrd,” sd I, “tll hm t stsh hs tmhwk thr, or pp, or
whtvr y cll it; tll hm t stp smkng, in shrt, and I wll
trn in wth hm. Bt I dn’t fncy hvng a mn smkng in bd wth
m. It’s dngrs. Bsds, I an’t insrd.”

Ths bng tld t Qqg, h at onc cmpld, and agn pltly
mtnd m t gt int bd—rllng ovr t on sd as mch as t
sy—“I wn’t tch a lg of y.”

“Gd nght, lndlrd,” sd I, “y my g.”

I trnd in, and nvr slpt bttr in my lf.


CHPTR 4. Th Cntrpn.

Upn wkng nxt mrnng abt dylght, I fnd Qqg’s arm thrwn
ovr m in th mst lvng and affctnt mnnr. Y hd almst
thght I hd bn hs wf. Th cntrpn ws of ptchwrk, fll of
odd lttl prt-clrd sqrs and trngls; and ths arm of hs
tttd all ovr wth an intrmnbl Crtn lbyrnth of a fgr, n
tw prts of whch wr of on prcs shd—owng I spps t hs
kpng hs arm at s unmthdclly in sn and shd, hs shrt
slvs irrglrly rlld up at vrs tms—ths sm arm of hs, I
sy, lkd fr all th wrld lk a strp of tht sm ptchwrk
qlt. Indd, prtly lyng on it as th arm dd whn I frst awk, I
cld hrdly tll it frm th qlt, thy s blndd thr hs
tgthr; and it ws only by th sns of wght and prssr tht I
cld tll tht Qqg ws hggng m.

My snstns wr strng. Lt m try t expln thm. Whn I ws a
chld, I wll rmmbr a smwht smlr crcmstnc tht bfll m;
whthr it ws a rlty or a drm, I nvr cld entrly sttl. Th
crcmstnc ws ths. I hd bn cttng up sm cpr or othr—I
thnk it ws tryng t crwl up th chmny, as I hd sn a lttl
swp d a fw dys prvs; and my stpmthr wh, smhw or othr,
ws all th tm whppng m, or sndng m t bd spprlss,—my
mthr drggd m by th lgs ot of th chmny and pckd m off t
bd, thgh it ws only tw o’clck in th aftrnn of th 21st Jn,
th lngst dy in th yr in or hmsphr. I flt drdflly. Bt
thr ws n hlp fr it, s up strs I wnt t my lttl rm in th
thrd flr, undrssd myslf as slwly as pssbl s as t kll tm,
and wth a bttr sgh gt btwn th shts.

I ly thr dsmlly clcltng tht sxtn entr hrs mst elps
bfr I cld hp fr a rsrrctn. Sxtn hrs in bd! th smll
of my bck achd t thnk of it. And it ws s lght t; th sn
shnng in at th wndw, and a grt rttlng of cchs in th
strts, and th snd of gy vcs all ovr th hs. I flt wrs
and wrs—at lst I gt up, drssd, and sftly gng dwn in my
stckngd ft, sght ot my stpmthr, and sddnly thrw myslf at
hr ft, bschng hr as a prtclr fvr t gv m a gd
slpprng fr my msbhvr; anythng indd bt cndmnng m t
l abd sch an unndrbl lngth of tm. Bt sh ws th bst and
mst cnscnts of stpmthrs, and bck I hd t g t my rm. Fr
svrl hrs I ly thr brd awk, flng a grt dl wrs thn
I hv evr dn snc, evn frm th grtst sbsqnt msfrtns.
At lst I mst hv flln int a trbld nghtmr of a dz; and
slwly wkng frm it—hlf stpd in drms—I opnd my eys, and th
bfr sn-lt rm ws nw wrppd in otr drknss. Instntly I flt
a shck rnnng thrgh all my frm; nthng ws t b sn, and
nthng ws t b hrd; bt a sprntrl hnd smd plcd in mn.
My arm hng ovr th cntrpn, and th nmlss, unmgnbl,
slnt frm or phntm, t whch th hnd blngd, smd clsly
std by my bd-sd. Fr wht smd ags pld on ags, I ly thr,
frzn wth th mst awfl frs, nt drng t drg awy my hnd; yt
evr thnkng tht if I cld bt str it on sngl inch, th hrrd
spll wld b brkn. I knw nt hw ths cnscsnss at lst gldd
awy frm m; bt wkng in th mrnng, I shddrngly rmmbrd it
all, and fr dys and wks and mnths aftrwrds I lst myslf in
cnfndng attmpts t expln th mystry. Ny, t ths vry hr, I
oftn pzzl myslf wth it.

Nw, tk awy th awfl fr, and my snstns at flng th
sprntrl hnd in mn wr vry smlr, in thr strngnss, t
ths whch I exprncd on wkng up and sng Qqg’s pgn arm
thrwn rnd m. Bt at lngth all th pst nght’s evnts sbrly
rcrrd, on by on, in fxd rlty, and thn I ly only alv t
th cmcl prdcmnt. Fr thgh I trd t mv hs arm—unlck hs
brdgrm clsp—yt, slpng as h ws, h stll hggd m tghtly,
as thgh nght bt dth shld prt us twn. I nw strv t rs
hm—“Qqg!”—bt hs only answr ws a snr. I thn rlld ovr, my
nck flng as if it wr in a hrs-cllr; and sddnly flt a
slght scrtch. Thrwng asd th cntrpn, thr ly th tmhwk
slpng by th svg’s sd, as if it wr a htcht-fcd bby. A
prtty pckl, trly, thght I; abd hr in a strng hs in th
brd dy, wth a cnnbl and a tmhwk! “Qqg!—in th nm of
gdnss, Qqg, wk!” At lngth, by dnt of mch wrgglng, and
ld and incssnt expstltns upn th unbcmngnss of hs
hggng a fllw ml in tht mtrmnl srt of styl, I sccdd in
extrctng a grnt; and prsntly, h drw bck hs arm, shk hmslf
all ovr lk a Nwfndlnd dg jst frm th wtr, and st up in
bd, stff as a pk-stff, lkng at m, and rbbng hs eys as if
h dd nt altgthr rmmbr hw I cm t b thr, thgh a dm
cnscsnss of knwng smthng abt m smd slwly dwnng ovr
hm. Mnwhl, I ly qtly eyng hm, hvng n srs msgvngs
nw, and bnt upn nrrwly obsrvng s crs a crtr. Whn, at
lst, hs mnd smd md up tchng th chrctr of hs bdfllw,
and h bcm, as it wr, rcncld t th fct; h jmpd ot upn
th flr, and by crtn sgns and snds gv m t undrstnd tht,
if it plsd m, h wld drss frst and thn lv m t drss
aftrwrds, lvng th whl aprtmnt t myslf. Thnks I, Qqg,
undr th crcmstncs, ths is a vry cvlzd ovrtr; bt, th
trth is, ths svgs hv an innt sns of dlccy, sy wht y
wll; it is mrvlls hw essntlly plt thy ar. I py ths
prtclr cmplmnt t Qqg, bcs h trtd m wth s mch
cvlty and cnsdrtn, whl I ws glty of grt rdnss;
strng at hm frm th bd, and wtchng all hs tltt mtns; fr
th tm my crsty gttng th bttr of my brdng. Nvrthlss,
a mn lk Qqg y dn’t s evry dy, h and hs wys wr wll
wrth unsl rgrdng.

H cmmncd drssng at tp by dnnng hs bvr ht, a vry tll
on, by th by, and thn—stll mns hs trwsrs—h hntd up hs
bts. Wht undr th hvns h dd it fr, I cnnt tll, bt hs
nxt mvmnt ws t crsh hmslf—bts in hnd, and ht on—undr th
bd; whn, frm sndry vlnt gspngs and strnngs, I infrrd h
ws hrd at wrk btng hmslf; thgh by n lw of prprty tht I
evr hrd of, is any mn rqrd t b prvt whn pttng on hs
bts. Bt Qqg, d y s, ws a crtr in th trnstn
stg—nthr ctrpllr nr bttrfly. H ws jst engh cvlzd
t shw off hs otlndshnss in th strngst pssbl mnnrs. Hs
edctn ws nt yt cmpltd. H ws an undrgrdt. If h hd nt
bn a smll dgr cvlzd, h vry prbbly wld nt hv trbld
hmslf wth bts at all; bt thn, if h hd nt bn stll a svg,
h nvr wld hv drmt of gttng undr th bd t pt thm on. At
lst, h emrgd wth hs ht vry mch dntd and crshd dwn ovr
hs eys, and bgn crkng and lmpng abt th rm, as if, nt
bng mch accstmd t bts, hs pr of dmp, wrnkld cwhd
ons—prbbly nt md t ordr ethr—rthr pnchd and trmntd hm
at th frst g off of a bttr cld mrnng.

Sng, nw, tht thr wr n crtns t th wndw, and tht th
strt bng vry nrrw, th hs oppst cmmndd a pln vw
int th rm, and obsrvng mr and mr th indcrs fgr tht
Qqg md, stvng abt wth lttl els bt hs ht and bts on;
I bggd hm as wll as I cld, t acclrt hs tlt smwht, and
prtclrly t gt int hs pntlns as sn as pssbl. H
cmpld, and thn prcdd t wsh hmslf. At tht tm in th
mrnng any Chrstn wld hv wshd hs fc; bt Qqg, t my
amzmnt, cntntd hmslf wth rstrctng hs abltns t hs
chst, arms, and hnds. H thn dnnd hs wstct, and tkng up a
pc of hrd sp on th wsh-stnd cntr tbl, dppd it int wtr
and cmmncd lthrng hs fc. I ws wtchng t s whr h kpt
hs rzr, whn l and bhld, h tks th hrpn frm th bd
crnr, slps ot th lng wdn stck, unshths th hd, whts it
a lttl on hs bt, and strdng up t th bt of mrrr agnst th
wll, bgns a vgrs scrpng, or rthr hrpnng of hs chks.
Thnks I, Qqg, ths is usng Rgrs’s bst ctlry wth a
vngnc. Aftrwrds I wndrd th lss at ths oprtn whn I cm
t knw of wht fn stl th hd of a hrpn is md, and hw
excdngly shrp th lng strght edgs ar alwys kpt.

Th rst of hs tlt ws sn achvd, and h prdly mrchd ot of
th rm, wrppd up in hs grt plt mnky jckt, and sprtng hs
hrpn lk a mrshl’s btn.


CHPTR 5. Brkfst.

I qckly fllwd st, and dscndng int th br-rm accstd th
grnnng lndlrd vry plsntly. I chrshd n mlc twrds hm,
thgh h hd bn skylrkng wth m nt a lttl in th mttr of my
bdfllw.

Hwvr, a gd lgh is a mghty gd thng, and rthr t scrc a
gd thng; th mr’s th pty. S, if any on mn, in hs own prpr
prsn, affrd stff fr a gd jk t anybdy, lt hm nt b
bckwrd, bt lt hm chrflly allw hmslf t spnd and b spnt in
tht wy. And th mn tht hs anythng bntflly lghbl abt
hm, b sr thr is mr in tht mn thn y prhps thnk fr.

Th br-rm ws nw fll of th brdrs wh hd bn drppng in th
nght prvs, and whm I hd nt as yt hd a gd lk at. Thy wr
nrly all whlmn; chf mts, and scnd mts, and thrd mts,
and s crpntrs, and s cprs, and s blcksmths, and
hrpnrs, and shp kprs; a brwn and brwny cmpny, wth bsky
brds; an unshrn, shggy st, all wrng mnky jckts fr mrnng
gwns.

Y cld prtty plnly tll hw lng ech on hd bn ashr. Ths
yng fllw’s hlthy chk is lk a sn-tstd pr in h, and
wld sm t smll almst as msky; h cnnt hv bn thr dys
lndd frm hs Indn vyg. Tht mn nxt hm lks a fw shds
lghtr; y mght sy a tch of stn wd is in hm. In th
cmplxn of a thrd stll lngrs a trpc twn, bt slghtly
blchd wthl; _h_ dbtlss hs trrd whl wks ashr. Bt wh
cld shw a chk lk Qqg? whch, brrd wth vrs tnts,
smd lk th Ands’ wstrn slp, t shw frth in on arry,
cntrstng clmts, zn by zn.

“Grb, h!” nw crd th lndlrd, flngng opn a dr, and in w
wnt t brkfst.

Thy sy tht mn wh hv sn th wrld, thrby bcm qt at es
in mnnr, qt slf-pssssd in cmpny. Nt alwys, thgh:
Ldyrd, th grt Nw Englnd trvllr, and Mng Prk, th Sctch
on; of all mn, thy pssssd th lst assrnc in th prlr. Bt
prhps th mr crssng of Sbr in a sldg drwn by dgs as
Ldyrd dd, or th tkng a lng sltry wlk on an empty stmch, in
th ngr hrt of Afrc, whch ws th sm of pr Mng’s
prfrmncs—ths knd of trvl, I sy, my nt b th vry bst md
of attnng a hgh scl plsh. Stll, fr th mst prt, tht srt
of thng is t b hd anywhr.

Ths rflctns jst hr ar occsnd by th crcmstnc tht
aftr w wr all std at th tbl, and I ws prprng t hr sm
gd strs abt whlng; t my n smll srprs, nrly evry mn
mntnd a prfnd slnc. And nt only tht, bt thy lkd
embrrssd. Ys, hr wr a st of s-dgs, mny of whm wtht th
slghtst bshflnss hd brdd grt whls on th hgh ss—entr
strngrs t thm—and dlld thm dd wtht wnkng; and yt, hr
thy st at a scl brkfst tbl—all of th sm cllng, all of
kndrd tsts—lkng rnd as shpshly at ech othr as thgh thy
hd nvr bn ot of sght of sm shpfld amng th Grn
Mntns. A crs sght; ths bshfl brs, ths tmd wrrr
whlmn!

Bt as fr Qqg—why, Qqg st thr amng thm—at th hd of
th tbl, t, it s chncd; as cl as an iccl. T b sr I
cnnt sy mch fr hs brdng. Hs grtst admrr cld nt hv
crdlly jstfd hs brngng hs hrpn int brkfst wth hm,
and usng it thr wtht crmny; rchng ovr th tbl wth it,
t th immnnt jprdy of mny hds, and grpplng th bfstks
twrds hm. Bt _tht_ ws crtnly vry clly dn by hm, and
evry on knws tht in mst ppl’s estmtn, t d anythng clly
is t d it gntlly.

W wll nt spk of all Qqg’s pclrts hr; hw h eschwd
cff and ht rlls, and appld hs undvdd attntn t
bfstks, dn rr. Engh, tht whn brkfst ws ovr h wthdrw
lk th rst int th pblc rm, lghtd hs tmhwk-pp, and ws
sttng thr qtly dgstng and smkng wth hs insprbl ht
on, whn I slld ot fr a strll.


CHPTR 6. Th Strt.

If I hd bn astnshd at frst ctchng a glmps of s otlndsh
an indvdl as Qqg crcltng amng th plt scty of a
cvlzd twn, tht astnshmnt sn dprtd upn tkng my frst
dylght strll thrgh th strts of Nw Bdfrd.

In thrghfrs ngh th dcks, any cnsdrbl sprt wll
frqntly offr t vw th qrst lkng nndscrpts frm frgn
prts. Evn in Brdwy and Chstnt strts, Mdtrrnn mrnrs
wll smtms jstl th affrghtd lds. Rgnt Strt is nt
unknwn t Lscrs and Mlys; and at Bmby, in th Apll Grn, lv
Ynks hv oftn scrd th ntvs. Bt Nw Bdfrd bts all Wtr
Strt and Wppng. In ths lst-mntnd hnts y s only
slrs; bt in Nw Bdfrd, actl cnnbls stnd chttng at strt
crnrs; svgs otrght; mny of whm yt crry on thr bns unhly
flsh. It mks a strngr str.

Bt, bsds th Fgns, Tngtbrrs, Errmnggns, Pnnngns,
and Brghggns, and, bsds th wld spcmns of th whlng-crft
whch unhdd rl abt th strts, y wll s othr sghts stll
mr crs, crtnly mr cmcl. Thr wkly arrv in ths twn
scrs of grn Vrmntrs and Nw Hmpshr mn, all athrst fr gn
and glry in th fshry. Thy ar mstly yng, of stlwrt frms;
fllws wh hv flld frsts, and nw sk t drp th ax and
sntch th whl-lnc. Mny ar as grn as th Grn Mntns whnc
thy cm. In sm thngs y wld thnk thm bt a fw hrs old.
Lk thr! tht chp strttng rnd th crnr. H wrs a bvr ht
and swllw-tld ct, grdld wth a slr-blt and shth-knf.
Hr cms anthr wth a s’-wstr and a bmbzn clk.

N twn-brd dndy wll cmpr wth a cntry-brd on—I mn a
dwnrght bmpkn dndy—a fllw tht, in th dg-dys, wll mw hs
tw acrs in bckskn glvs fr fr of tnnng hs hnds. Nw whn a
cntry dndy lk ths tks it int hs hd t mk a dstngshd
rpttn, and jns th grt whl-fshry, y shld s th
cmcl thngs h ds upn rchng th sprt. In bspkng hs
s-otft, h ordrs bll-bttns t hs wstcts; strps t hs
cnvs trwsrs. Ah, pr Hy-Sd! hw bttrly wll brst ths
strps in th frst hwlng gl, whn th art drvn, strps,
bttns, and all, dwn th thrt of th tmpst.

Bt thnk nt tht ths fms twn hs only hrpnrs, cnnbls,
and bmpkns t shw hr vstrs. Nt at all. Stll Nw Bdfrd is a
qr plc. Hd it nt bn fr us whlmn, tht trct of lnd wld
ths dy prhps hv bn in as hwlng cndtn as th cst of
Lbrdr. As it is, prts of hr bck cntry ar engh t frghtn
on, thy lk s bny. Th twn itslf is prhps th drst plc t
lv in, in all Nw Englnd. It is a lnd of ol, tr engh: bt nt
lk Cnn; a lnd, als, of crn and wn. Th strts d nt rn
wth mlk; nr in th sprng-tm d thy pv thm wth frsh eggs.
Yt, in spt of ths, nwhr in all Amrc wll y fnd mr
ptrcn-lk hss; prks and grdns mr oplnt, thn in Nw
Bdfrd. Whnc cm thy? hw plntd upn ths onc scrggy scr of
a cntry?

G and gz upn th irn emblmtcl hrpns rnd yndr lfty
mnsn, and yr qstn wll b answrd. Ys; all ths brv
hss and flwry grdns cm frm th Atlntc, Pcfc, and Indn
ocns. On and all, thy wr hrpnd and drggd up hthr frm th
bttm of th s. Cn Hrr Alxndr prfrm a ft lk tht?

In Nw Bdfrd, fthrs, thy sy, gv whls fr dwrs t thr
dghtrs, and prtn off thr ncs wth a fw prpss a-pc.
Y mst g t Nw Bdfrd t s a brllnt wddng; fr, thy sy,
thy hv rsrvrs of ol in evry hs, and evry nght rcklssly
brn thr lngths in sprmct cndls.

In smmr tm, th twn is swt t s; fll of fn mpls—lng
avns of grn and gld. And in Agst, hgh in ar, th btfl
and bntfl hrs-chstnts, cndlbr-ws, prffr th pssr-by
thr tprng uprght cns of cngrgtd blssms. S omnptnt is
art; whch in mny a dstrct of Nw Bdfrd hs sprndcd brght
trrcs of flwrs upn th brrn rfs rcks thrwn asd at
crtn’s fnl dy.

And th wmn of Nw Bdfrd, thy blm lk thr own rd rss. Bt
rss only blm in smmr; whrs th fn crntn of thr chks
is prnnl as snlght in th svnth hvns. Elswhr mtch tht
blm of thrs, y cnnt, sv in Slm, whr thy tll m th yng
grls brth sch msk, thr slr swthrts smll thm mls off
shr, as thgh thy wr drwng ngh th odrs Mlccs instd of
th Prtnc snds.


CHPTR 7. Th Chpl.

In ths sm Nw Bdfrd thr stnds a Whlmn’s Chpl, and fw ar
th mdy fshrmn, shrtly bnd fr th Indn Ocn or Pcfc, wh
fl t mk a Sndy vst t th spt. I am sr tht I dd nt.

Rtrnng frm my frst mrnng strll, I agn slld ot upn ths
spcl errnd. Th sky hd chngd frm clr, snny cld, t drvng
slt and mst. Wrppng myslf in my shggy jckt of th clth clld
brskn, I fght my wy agnst th stbbrn strm. Entrng, I fnd
a smll scttrd cngrgtn of slrs, and slrs’ wvs and
wdws. A mffld slnc rgnd, only brkn at tms by th shrks
of th strm. Ech slnt wrshppr smd prpsly sttng aprt
frm th othr, as if ech slnt grf wr inslr and
incmmncbl. Th chpln hd nt yt arrvd; and thr ths
slnt islnds of mn and wmn st stdfstly eyng svrl mrbl
tblts, wth blck brdrs, msnd int th wll on ethr sd th
plpt. Thr of thm rn smthng lk th fllwng, bt I d nt
prtnd t qt:—

SCRD T TH MMRY OF JHN TLBT, Wh, at th ag of eghtn, ws
lst ovrbrd, Nr th Isl of Dsltn, off Ptgn, _Nvmbr_
1_st_, 1836. THS TBLT Is erctd t hs Mmry BY HS SSTR.

SCRD T TH MMRY OF RBRT LNG, WLLS ELLRY, NTHN CLMN,
WLTR CNNY, STH MCY, AND SML GLG, Frmng on of th bts’
crws OF TH SHP ELZ Wh wr twd ot of sght by a Whl, On th
Off-shr Grnd in th PCFC, _Dcmbr_ 31_st_, 1839. THS MRBL
Is hr plcd by thr srvvng SHPMTS.

SCRD T TH MMRY OF Th lt CPTN EZKL HRDY, Wh in th bws
of hs bt ws klld by a Sprm Whl on th cst of Jpn, _Agst_
3_d_, 1833. THS TBLT Is erctd t hs Mmry BY HS WDW.

Shkng off th slt frm my ic-glzd ht and jckt, I std
myslf nr th dr, and trnng sdwys ws srprsd t s
Qqg nr m. Affctd by th slmnty of th scn, thr ws a
wndrng gz of incrdls crsty in hs cntnnc. Ths svg
ws th only prsn prsnt wh smd t ntc my entrnc; bcs
h ws th only on wh cld nt rd, and, thrfr, ws nt rdng
ths frgd inscrptns on th wll. Whthr any of th rltvs of
th smn whs nms apprd thr wr nw amng th cngrgtn,
I knw nt; bt s mny ar th unrcrdd accdnts in th fshry,
and s plnly dd svrl wmn prsnt wr th cntnnc if nt
th trppngs of sm uncsng grf, tht I fl sr tht hr
bfr m wr assmbld ths, in whs unhlng hrts th sght of
ths blk tblts sympthtclly csd th old wnds t bld
afrsh.

Oh! y whs dd l brd bnth th grn grss; wh stndng
amng flwrs cn sy—hr, _hr_ ls my blvd; y knw nt th
dsltn tht brds in bsms lk ths. Wht bttr blnks in
ths blck-brdrd mrbls whch cvr n ashs! Wht dspr in
ths immvbl inscrptns! Wht ddly vds and unbddn
infdlts in th lns tht sm t gnw upn all Fth, and rfs
rsrrctns t th bngs wh hv plclssly prshd wtht a
grv. As wll mght ths tblts stnd in th cv of Elphnt as
hr.

In wht cnss of lvng crtrs, th dd of mnknd ar incldd;
why it is tht a unvrsl prvrb sys of thm, tht thy tll n
tls, thgh cntnng mr scrts thn th Gdwn Snds; hw it is
tht t hs nm wh ystrdy dprtd fr th othr wrld, w prfx
s sgnfcnt and infdl a wrd, and yt d nt ths enttl hm, if
h bt embrks fr th rmtst Inds of ths lvng erth; why th
Lf Insrnc Cmpns py dth-frftrs upn immrtls; in wht
etrnl, unstrrng prlyss, and ddly, hplss trnc, yt ls
antq Adm wh dd sxty rnd cntrs ag; hw it is tht w
stll rfs t b cmfrtd fr ths wh w nvrthlss mntn ar
dwllng in unspkbl blss; why all th lvng s strv t hsh all
th dd; whrfr bt th rmr of a knckng in a tmb wll trrfy
a whl cty. All ths thngs ar nt wtht thr mnngs.

Bt Fth, lk a jckl, fds amng th tmbs, and evn frm ths
dd dbts sh gthrs hr mst vtl hp.

It nds scrcly t b tld, wth wht flngs, on th ev of a
Nntckt vyg, I rgrdd ths mrbl tblts, and by th mrky
lght of tht drknd, dlfl dy rd th ft of th whlmn wh
hd gn bfr m. Ys, Ishml, th sm ft my b thn. Bt
smhw I grw mrry agn. Dlghtfl indcmnts t embrk, fn
chnc fr prmtn, it sms—ay, a stv bt wll mk m an
immrtl by brvt. Ys, thr is dth in ths bsnss of whlng—a
spchlssly qck chtc bndlng of a mn int Etrnty. Bt wht
thn? Mthnks w hv hgly mstkn ths mttr of Lf and Dth.
Mthnks tht wht thy cll my shdw hr on erth is my tr
sbstnc. Mthnks tht in lkng at thngs sprtl, w ar t
mch lk oystrs obsrvng th sn thrgh th wtr, and thnkng
tht thck wtr th thnnst of ar. Mthnks my bdy is bt th ls
of my bttr bng. In fct tk my bdy wh wll, tk it I sy, it is
nt m. And thrfr thr chrs fr Nntckt; and cm a stv bt
and stv bdy whn thy wll, fr stv my sl, Jv hmslf cnnt.


CHPTR 8. Th Plpt.

I hd nt bn std vry lng er a mn of a crtn vnrbl
rbstnss entrd; immdtly as th strm-pltd dr flw bck upn
admttng hm, a qck rgrdfl eyng of hm by all th cngrgtn,
sffcntly attstd tht ths fn old mn ws th chpln. Ys, it
ws th fms Fthr Mppl, s clld by th whlmn, amng whm h
ws a vry grt fvrt. H hd bn a slr and a hrpnr in
hs yth, bt fr mny yrs pst hd ddctd hs lf t th
mnstry. At th tm I nw wrt of, Fthr Mppl ws in th hrdy
wntr of a hlthy old ag; tht srt of old ag whch sms mrgng
int a scnd flwrng yth, fr amng all th fssrs of hs
wrnkls, thr shn crtn mld glms of a nwly dvlpng
blm—th sprng vrdr ppng frth evn bnth Fbrry’s snw. N
on hvng prvsly hrd hs hstry, cld fr th frst tm
bhld Fthr Mppl wtht th utmst intrst, bcs thr wr
crtn engrftd clrcl pclrts abt hm, imptbl t tht
advntrs mrtm lf h hd ld. Whn h entrd I obsrvd tht
h crrd n umbrll, and crtnly hd nt cm in hs crrg, fr
hs trpln ht rn dwn wth mltng slt, and hs grt plt
clth jckt smd almst t drg hm t th flr wth th wght of
th wtr it hd absrbd. Hwvr, ht and ct and ovrshs wr on
by on rmvd, and hng up in a lttl spc in an adjcnt crnr;
whn, arryd in a dcnt st, h qtly apprchd th plpt.

Lk mst old fshnd plpts, it ws a vry lfty on, and snc a
rglr strs t sch a hght wld, by its lng angl wth th
flr, srsly cntrct th alrdy smll ar of th chpl, th
archtct, it smd, hd actd upn th hnt of Fthr Mppl, and
fnshd th plpt wtht a strs, sbstttng a prpndclr sd
lddr, lk ths usd in mntng a shp frm a bt at s. Th wf
of a whlng cptn hd prvdd th chpl wth a hndsm pr of
rd wrstd mn-rps fr ths lddr, whch, bng itslf ncly
hdd, and stnd wth a mhgny clr, th whl cntrvnc,
cnsdrng wht mnnr of chpl it ws, smd by n mns in bd
tst. Hltng fr an instnt at th ft of th lddr, and wth bth
hnds grspng th ornmntl knbs of th mn-rps, Fthr Mppl
cst a lk upwrds, and thn wth a trly slr-lk bt stll
rvrntl dxtrty, hnd ovr hnd, mntd th stps as if
ascndng th mn-tp of hs vssl.

Th prpndclr prts of ths sd lddr, as is uslly th cs
wth swngng ons, wr of clth-cvrd rp, only th rnds wr of
wd, s tht at evry stp thr ws a jnt. At my frst glmps of
th plpt, it hd nt escpd m tht hwvr cnvnnt fr a shp,
ths jnts in th prsnt instnc smd unncssry. Fr I ws nt
prprd t s Fthr Mppl aftr gnng th hght, slwly trn
rnd, and stpng ovr th plpt, dlbrtly drg up th lddr
stp by stp, tll th whl ws dpstd wthn, lvng hm
imprgnbl in hs lttl Qbc.

I pndrd sm tm wtht flly cmprhndng th rsn fr ths.
Fthr Mppl enjyd sch a wd rpttn fr sncrty and
snctty, tht I cld nt sspct hm of crtng ntrty by any
mr trcks of th stg. N, thght I, thr mst b sm sbr
rsn fr ths thng; frthrmr, it mst symblz smthng unsn.
Cn it b, thn, tht by tht act of physcl isltn, h sgnfs
hs sprtl wthdrwl fr th tm, frm all otwrd wrldly ts
and cnnxns? Ys, fr rplnshd wth th mt and wn of th
wrd, t th fthfl mn of Gd, ths plpt, I s, is a
slf-cntnng strnghld—a lfty Ehrnbrtstn, wth a prnnl
wll of wtr wthn th wlls.

Bt th sd lddr ws nt th only strng ftr of th plc,
brrwd frm th chpln’s frmr s-frngs. Btwn th mrbl
cntphs on ethr hnd of th plpt, th wll whch frmd its bck
ws adrnd wth a lrg pntng rprsntng a gllnt shp btng
agnst a trrbl strm off a l cst of blck rcks and snwy
brkrs. Bt hgh abv th flyng scd and drk-rllng clds, thr
fltd a lttl isl of snlght, frm whch bmd frth an angl’s
fc; and ths brght fc shd a dstnct spt of rdnc upn th
shp’s tssd dck, smthng lk tht slvr plt nw insrtd int
th Vctry’s plnk whr Nlsn fll. “Ah, nbl shp,” th angl
smd t sy, “bt on, bt on, th nbl shp, and br a hrdy
hlm; fr l! th sn is brkng thrgh; th clds ar rllng
off—srnst azr is at hnd.”

Nr ws th plpt itslf wtht a trc of th sm s-tst tht
hd achvd th lddr and th pctr. Its pnlld frnt ws in th
lknss of a shp’s blff bws, and th Hly Bbl rstd on a
prjctng pc of scrll wrk, fshnd aftr a shp’s fddl-hdd
bk.

Wht cld b mr fll of mnng?—fr th plpt is evr ths erth’s
frmst prt; all th rst cms in its rr; th plpt lds th
wrld. Frm thnc it is th strm of Gd’s qck wrth is frst
dscrd, and th bw mst br th erlst brnt. Frm thnc it is
th Gd of brzs fr or fl is frst invkd fr fvrbl wnds.
Ys, th wrld’s a shp on its pssg ot, and nt a vyg cmplt;
and th plpt is its prw.


CHPTR 9. Th Srmn.

Fthr Mppl rs, and in a mld vc of unssmng athrty ordrd
th scttrd ppl t cndns. “Strbrd gngwy, thr! sd awy
t lrbrd—lrbrd gngwy t strbrd! Mdshps! mdshps!”

Thr ws a lw rmblng of hvy s-bts amng th bnchs, and a
stll slghtr shfflng of wmn’s shs, and all ws qt agn, and
evry ey on th prchr.

H psd a lttl; thn knlng in th plpt’s bws, fldd hs
lrg brwn hnds acrss hs chst, uplftd hs clsd eys, and
offrd a pryr s dply dvt tht h smd knlng and pryng
at th bttm of th s.

Ths endd, in prlngd slmn tns, lk th cntnl tllng of a
bll in a shp tht is fndrng at s in a fg—in sch tns h
cmmncd rdng th fllwng hymn; bt chngng hs mnnr twrds
th cncldng stnzs, brst frth wth a plng exlttn and jy—


  “Th rbs and trrrs in th whl, Archd ovr m a dsml glm,
  Whl all Gd’s sn-lt wvs rlld by, And lft m dpnng dwn
  t dm.

  “I sw th opnng mw of hll, Wth endlss pns and srrws thr;
  Whch nn bt thy tht fl cn tll— Oh, I ws plngng t
  dspr.

  “In blck dstrss, I clld my Gd, Whn I cld scrc blv hm
  mn, H bwd hs er t my cmplnts— N mr th whl dd m
  cnfn.

  “Wth spd h flw t my rlf, As on a rdnt dlphn brn;
  Awfl, yt brght, as lghtnng shn Th fc of my Dlvrr Gd.

  “My sng fr evr shll rcrd Tht trrbl, tht jyfl hr; I
  gv th glry t my Gd, Hs all th mrcy and th pwr.”




Nrly all jnd in sngng ths hymn, whch swlld hgh abv th
hwlng of th strm. A brf ps ensd; th prchr slwly trnd
ovr th lvs of th Bbl, and at lst, fldng hs hnd dwn upn
th prpr pg, sd: “Blvd shpmts, clnch th lst vrs of th
frst chptr of Jnh—‘And Gd hd prprd a grt fsh t swllw up
Jnh.’”

“Shpmts, ths bk, cntnng only fr chptrs—fr yrns—is on
of th smllst strnds in th mghty cbl of th Scrptrs. Yt wht
dpths of th sl ds Jnh’s dp sln snd! wht a prgnnt
lssn t us is ths prpht! Wht a nbl thng is tht cntcl in
th fsh’s blly! Hw bllw-lk and bstrsly grnd! W fl th
flds srgng ovr us; w snd wth hm t th klpy bttm of th
wtrs; s-wd and all th slm of th s is abt us! Bt _wht_
is ths lssn tht th bk of Jnh tchs? Shpmts, it is a
tw-strndd lssn; a lssn t us all as snfl mn, and a lssn t
m as a plt of th lvng Gd. As snfl mn, it is a lssn t us
all, bcs it is a stry of th sn, hrd-hrtdnss, sddnly
awknd frs, th swft pnshmnt, rpntnc, pryrs, and fnlly
th dlvrnc and jy of Jnh. As wth all snnrs amng mn, th
sn of ths sn of Amtt ws in hs wlfl dsbdnc of th
cmmnd of Gd—nvr mnd nw wht tht cmmnd ws, or hw
cnvyd—whch h fnd a hrd cmmnd. Bt all th thngs tht Gd
wld hv us d ar hrd fr us t d—rmmbr tht—and hnc, h
oftnr cmmnds us thn endvrs t prsd. And if w oby Gd, w
mst dsby orslvs; and it is in ths dsbyng orslvs, whrn
th hrdnss of obyng Gd cnssts.

“Wth ths sn of dsbdnc in hm, Jnh stll frthr flts at
Gd, by skng t fl frm Hm. H thnks tht a shp md by mn
wll crry hm int cntrs whr Gd ds nt rgn, bt only th
Cptns of ths erth. H sklks abt th whrvs of Jpp, and sks
a shp tht’s bnd fr Trshsh. Thr lrks, prhps, a hthrt
unhdd mnng hr. By all accnts Trshsh cld hv bn n
othr cty thn th mdrn Cdz. Tht’s th opnn of lrnd mn.
And whr is Cdz, shpmts? Cdz is in Spn; as fr by wtr, frm
Jpp, as Jnh cld pssbly hv sld in ths ancnt dys, whn
th Atlntc ws an almst unknwn s. Bcs Jpp, th mdrn
Jff, shpmts, is on th mst estrly cst of th Mdtrrnn,
th Syrn; and Trshsh or Cdz mr thn tw thsnd mls t th
wstwrd frm tht, jst otsd th Strts of Gbrltr. S y nt
thn, shpmts, tht Jnh sght t fl wrld-wd frm Gd?
Msrbl mn! Oh! mst cntmptbl and wrthy of all scrn; wth
slchd ht and glty ey, sklkng frm hs Gd; prwlng amng th
shppng lk a vl brglr hstnng t crss th ss. S
dsrdrd, slf-cndmnng is hs lk, tht hd thr bn plcmn
in ths dys, Jnh, on th mr sspcn of smthng wrng, hd
bn arrstd er h tchd a dck. Hw plnly h’s a fgtv! n
bggg, nt a ht-bx, vls, or crpt-bg,—n frnds accmpny hm
t th whrf wth thr adx. At lst, aftr mch ddgng srch, h
fnds th Trshsh shp rcvng th lst itms of hr crg; and as
h stps on brd t s its Cptn in th cbn, all th slrs fr
th mmnt dsst frm hstng in th gds, t mrk th strngr’s
evl ey. Jnh ss ths; bt in vn h trs t lk all es and
cnfdnc; in vn essys hs wrtchd sml. Strng inttns of th
mn assr th mrnrs h cn b n inncnt. In thr gmsm bt
stll srs wy, on whsprs t th othr—“Jck, h’s rbbd a
wdw;” or, “J, d y mrk hm; h’s a bgmst;” or, “Hrry ld, I
gss h’s th adltrr tht brk jl in old Gmrrh, or blk,
on of th mssng mrdrrs frm Sdm.” Anthr rns t rd th bll
tht’s stck agnst th spl upn th whrf t whch th shp is
mrd, offrng fv hndrd gld cns fr th apprhnsn of a
prrcd, and cntnng a dscrptn of hs prsn. H rds, and
lks frm Jnh t th bll; whl all hs sympthtc shpmts nw
crwd rnd Jnh, prprd t ly thr hnds upn hm. Frghtd Jnh
trmbls, and smmnng all hs bldnss t hs fc, only lks s
mch th mr a cwrd. H wll nt cnfss hmslf sspctd; bt tht
itslf is strng sspcn. S h mks th bst of it; and whn th
slrs fnd hm nt t b th mn tht is advrtsd, thy lt hm
pss, and h dscnds int th cbn.

“‘Wh’s thr?’ crs th Cptn at hs bsy dsk, hrrdly mkng
ot hs pprs fr th Cstms—‘Wh’s thr?’ Oh! hw tht hrmlss
qstn mngls Jnh! Fr th instnt h almst trns t fl agn.
Bt h rlls. ‘I sk a pssg in ths shp t Trshsh; hw sn
sl y, sr?’ Ths fr th bsy Cptn hd nt lkd up t Jnh,
thgh th mn nw stnds bfr hm; bt n snr ds h hr tht
hllw vc, thn h drts a scrtnzng glnc. ‘W sl wth th
nxt cmng td,’ at lst h slwly answrd, stll intntly eyng
hm. ‘N snr, sr?’—‘Sn engh fr any hnst mn tht gs a
pssngr.’ H! Jnh, tht’s anthr stb. Bt h swftly clls awy
th Cptn frm tht scnt. ‘I’ll sl wth y,’—h sys,—‘th pssg
mny hw mch is tht?—I’ll py nw.’ Fr it is prtclrly wrttn,
shpmts, as if it wr a thng nt t b ovrlkd in ths hstry,
‘tht h pd th fr thrf’ er th crft dd sl. And tkn wth
th cntxt, ths is fll of mnng.

“Nw Jnh’s Cptn, shpmts, ws on whs dscrnmnt dtcts
crm in any, bt whs cpdty expss it only in th pnnlss. In
ths wrld, shpmts, sn tht pys its wy cn trvl frly, and
wtht a pssprt; whrs Vrt, if a ppr, is stppd at all
frntrs. S Jnh’s Cptn prprs t tst th lngth of Jnh’s
prs, er h jdg hm opnly. H chrgs hm thrc th usl sm;
and it’s assntd t. Thn th Cptn knws tht Jnh is a fgtv;
bt at th sm tm rslvs t hlp a flght tht pvs its rr wth
gld. Yt whn Jnh frly tks ot hs prs, prdnt sspcns
stll mlst th Cptn. H rngs evry cn t fnd a cntrft.
Nt a frgr, any wy, h mttrs; and Jnh is pt dwn fr hs
pssg. ‘Pnt ot my stt-rm, Sr,’ sys Jnh nw, ‘I’m
trvl-wry; I nd slp.’ ‘Th lkst lk it,’ sys th Cptn,
‘thr’s thy rm.’ Jnh entrs, and wld lck th dr, bt th lck
cntns n ky. Hrng hm flshly fmblng thr, th Cptn
lghs lwly t hmslf, and mttrs smthng abt th drs of
cnvcts’ clls bng nvr allwd t b lckd wthn. All drssd
and dsty as h is, Jnh thrws hmslf int hs brth, and fnds th
lttl stt-rm clng almst rstng on hs frhd. Th ar is
cls, and Jnh gsps. Thn, in tht cntrctd hl, snk, t,
bnth th shp’s wtr-ln, Jnh fls th hrldng prsntmnt
of tht stflng hr, whn th whl shll hld hm in th smllst of
hs bwls’ wrds.

“Scrwd at its axs agnst th sd, a swngng lmp slghtly
oscllts in Jnh’s rm; and th shp, hlng ovr twrds th
whrf wth th wght of th lst bls rcvd, th lmp, flm and
all, thgh in slght mtn, stll mntns a prmnnt oblqty
wth rfrnc t th rm; thgh, in trth, infllbly strght
itslf, it bt md obvs th fls, lyng lvls amng whch it
hng. Th lmp alrms and frghtns Jnh; as lyng in hs brth hs
trmntd eys rll rnd th plc, and ths ths fr sccssfl
fgtv fnds n rfg fr hs rstlss glnc. Bt tht
cntrdctn in th lmp mr and mr appls hm. Th flr, th
clng, and th sd, ar all awry. ‘Oh! s my cnscnc hngs in
m!’ h grns, ‘strght upwrds, s it brns; bt th chmbrs of my
sl ar all in crkdnss!’

“Lk on wh aftr a nght of drnkn rvlry hs t hs bd, stll
rlng, bt wth cnscnc yt prckng hm, as th plngngs of th
Rmn rc-hrs bt s mch th mr strk hs stl tgs int hm;
as on wh in tht msrbl plght stll trns and trns in gddy
angsh, pryng Gd fr annhltn untl th ft b pssd; and at
lst amd th whrl of w h fls, a dp stpr stls ovr hm, as
ovr th mn wh blds t dth, fr cnscnc is th wnd, and
thr’s nght t stnch it; s, aftr sr wrstlngs in hs brth,
Jnh’s prdgy of pndrs msry drgs hm drwnng dwn t slp.

“And nw th tm of td hs cm; th shp csts off hr cbls; and
frm th dsrtd whrf th unchrd shp fr Trshsh, all crnng,
glds t s. Tht shp, my frnds, ws th frst of rcrdd
smgglrs! th cntrbnd ws Jnh. Bt th s rbls; h wll nt
br th wckd brdn. A drdfl strm cms on, th shp is lk t
brk. Bt nw whn th btswn clls all hnds t lghtn hr; whn
bxs, bls, and jrs ar clttrng ovrbrd; whn th wnd is
shrkng, and th mn ar yllng, and evry plnk thndrs wth
trmplng ft rght ovr Jnh’s hd; in all ths rgng tmlt,
Jnh slps hs hds slp. H ss n blck sky and rgng s,
fls nt th rlng tmbrs, and lttl hrs h or hds h th fr
rsh of th mghty whl, whch evn nw wth opn mth is clvng
th ss aftr hm. Ay, shpmts, Jnh ws gn dwn int th sds
of th shp—a brth in th cbn as I hv tkn it, and ws fst
aslp. Bt th frghtnd mstr cms t hm, and shrks in hs dd
er, ‘Wht mnst th, O, slpr! ars!’ Strtld frm hs lthrgy
by tht drfl cry, Jnh stggrs t hs ft, and stmblng t th
dck, grsps a shrd, t lk ot upn th s. Bt at tht mmnt h
is sprng upn by a pnthr bllw lpng ovr th blwrks. Wv
aftr wv ths lps int th shp, and fndng n spdy vnt rns
rrng fr and aft, tll th mrnrs cm ngh t drwnng whl yt
aflt. And evr, as th wht mn shws hr affrghtd fc frm th
stp glls in th blcknss ovrhd, aghst Jnh ss th rrng
bwsprt pntng hgh upwrd, bt sn bt dwnwrd agn twrds th
trmntd dp.

“Trrrs upn trrrs rn shtng thrgh hs sl. In all hs
crngng atttds, th Gd-fgtv is nw t plnly knwn. Th
slrs mrk hm; mr and mr crtn grw thr sspcns of hm,
and at lst, flly t tst th trth, by rfrrng th whl mttr t
hgh Hvn, thy fll t cstng lts, t s fr whs cs ths
grt tmpst ws upn thm. Th lt is Jnh’s; tht dscvrd, thn
hw frsly thy mb hm wth thr qstns. ‘Wht is thn
occptn? Whnc cmst th? Thy cntry? Wht ppl?' Bt mrk nw,
my shpmts, th bhvr of pr Jnh. Th egr mrnrs bt ask
hm wh h is, and whr frm; whrs, thy nt only rcv an answr
t ths qstns, bt lkws anthr answr t a qstn nt pt
by thm, bt th unslctd answr is frcd frm Jnh by th hrd
hnd of Gd tht is upn hm.

“‘I am a Hbrw,’ h crs—and thn—‘I fr th Lrd th Gd of Hvn
wh hth md th s and th dry lnd!’ Fr hm, O Jnh? Ay, wll
mghtst th fr th Lrd Gd _thn!_ Strghtwy, h nw gs on t
mk a fll cnfssn; whrpn th mrnrs bcm mr and mr
applld, bt stll ar ptfl. Fr whn Jnh, nt yt spplctng
Gd fr mrcy, snc h bt t wll knw th drknss of hs
dsrts,—whn wrtchd Jnh crs ot t thm t tk hm and cst hm
frth int th s, fr h knw tht fr _hs_ sk ths grt tmpst
ws upn thm; thy mrcflly trn frm hm, and sk by othr mns
t sv th shp. Bt all in vn; th indgnnt gl hwls ldr;
thn, wth on hnd rsd invkngly t Gd, wth th othr thy nt
unrlctntly ly hld of Jnh.

“And nw bhld Jnh tkn up as an anchr and drppd int th s;
whn instntly an oly clmnss flts ot frm th est, and th s
is stll, as Jnh crrs dwn th gl wth hm, lvng smth wtr
bhnd. H gs dwn in th whrlng hrt of sch a mstrlss
cmmtn tht h scrc hds th mmnt whn h drps sthng int
th ywnng jws awtng hm; and th whl shts-t all hs ivry
tth, lk s mny wht blts, upn hs prsn. Thn Jnh pryd
unt th Lrd ot of th fsh’s blly. Bt obsrv hs pryr, and
lrn a wghty lssn. Fr snfl as h is, Jnh ds nt wp and
wl fr drct dlvrnc. H fls tht hs drdfl pnshmnt is
jst. H lvs all hs dlvrnc t Gd, cntntng hmslf wth
ths, tht spt of all hs pns and pngs, h wll stll lk twrds
Hs hly tmpl. And hr, shpmts, is tr and fthfl rpntnc;
nt clmrs fr prdn, bt grtfl fr pnshmnt. And hw plsng
t Gd ws ths cndct in Jnh, is shwn in th evntl dlvrnc
of hm frm th s and th whl. Shpmts, I d nt plc Jnh
bfr y t b cpd fr hs sn bt I d plc hm bfr y as a
mdl fr rpntnc. Sn nt; bt if y d, tk hd t rpnt of it
lk Jnh.”

Whl h ws spkng ths wrds, th hwlng of th shrkng,
slntng strm wtht smd t add nw pwr t th prchr, wh,
whn dscrbng Jnh’s s-strm, smd tssd by a strm hmslf.
Hs dp chst hvd as wth a grnd-swll; hs tssd arms smd
th wrrng elmnts at wrk; and th thndrs tht rlld awy frm
off hs swrthy brw, and th lght lpng frm hs ey, md all hs
smpl hrrs lk on hm wth a qck fr tht ws strng t thm.

Thr nw cm a lll in hs lk, as h slntly trnd ovr th
lvs of th Bk onc mr; and, at lst, stndng mtnlss, wth
clsd eys, fr th mmnt, smd cmmnng wth Gd and hmslf.

Bt agn h lnd ovr twrds th ppl, and bwng hs hd lwly,
wth an aspct of th dpst yt mnlst hmlty, h spk ths
wrds:

“Shpmts, Gd hs ld bt on hnd upn y; bth hs hnds prss
upn m. I hv rd y by wht mrky lght my b mn th lssn tht
Jnh tchs t all snnrs; and thrfr t y, and stll mr t
m, fr I am a grtr snnr thn y. And nw hw gldly wld I cm
dwn frm ths mst-hd and st on th htchs thr whr y st,
and lstn as y lstn, whl sm on of y rds _m_ tht othr
and mr awfl lssn whch Jnh tchs t _m_, as a plt of th
lvng Gd. Hw bng an anntd plt-prpht, or spkr of tr
thngs, and bddn by th Lrd t snd ths unwlcm trths in th
ers of a wckd Nnvh, Jnh, applld at th hstlty h shld
rs, fld frm hs mssn, and sght t escp hs dty and hs Gd
by tkng shp at Jpp. Bt Gd is evrywhr; Trshsh h nvr
rchd. As w hv sn, Gd cm upn hm in th whl, and swllwd
hm dwn t lvng glfs of dm, and wth swft slntngs tr hm
alng ‘int th mdst of th ss,’ whr th eddyng dpths sckd hm
tn thsnd fthms dwn, and ‘th wds wr wrppd abt hs hd,’
and all th wtry wrld of w bwld ovr hm. Yt evn thn bynd
th rch of any plmmt—‘ot of th blly of hll’—whn th whl
grndd upn th ocn’s utmst bns, evn thn, Gd hrd th
englphd, rpntng prpht whn h crd. Thn Gd spk unt th
fsh; and frm th shddrng cld and blcknss of th s, th whl
cm brchng up twrds th wrm and plsnt sn, and all th
dlghts of ar and erth; and ‘vmtd ot Jnh upn th dry lnd;’
whn th wrd of th Lrd cm a scnd tm; and Jnh, brsd and
btn—hs ers, lk tw s-shlls, stll mlttdnsly mrmrng
of th ocn—Jnh dd th Almghty’s bddng. And wht ws tht,
shpmts? T prch th Trth t th fc of Flshd! Tht ws it!

“Ths, shpmts, ths is tht othr lssn; and w t tht plt of
th lvng Gd wh slghts it. W t hm whm ths wrld chrms frm
Gspl dty! W t hm wh sks t pr ol upn th wtrs whn Gd
hs brwd thm int a gl! W t hm wh sks t pls rthr thn
t appl! W t hm whs gd nm is mr t hm thn gdnss! W
t hm wh, in ths wrld, crts nt dshnr! W t hm wh wld
nt b tr, evn thgh t b fls wr slvtn! Y, w t hm
wh, as th grt Plt Pl hs it, whl prchng t othrs is
hmslf a cstwy!”

H drppd and fll awy frm hmslf fr a mmnt; thn lftng hs
fc t thm agn, shwd a dp jy in hs eys, as h crd ot wth
a hvnly enthssm,—“Bt oh! shpmts! on th strbrd hnd of
evry w, thr is a sr dlght; and hghr th tp of tht dlght,
thn th bttm of th w is dp. Is nt th mn-trck hghr thn
th klsn is lw? Dlght is t hm—a fr, fr upwrd, and inwrd
dlght—wh agnst th prd gds and cmmdrs of ths erth, evr
stnds frth hs own inxrbl slf. Dlght is t hm whs strng
arms yt spprt hm, whn th shp of ths bs trchrs wrld hs
gn dwn bnth hm. Dlght is t hm, wh gvs n qrtr in th
trth, and klls, brns, and dstrys all sn thgh h plck it ot
frm undr th rbs of Sntrs and Jdgs. Dlght,—tp-gllnt
dlght is t hm, wh acknwldgs n lw or lrd, bt th Lrd hs
Gd, and is only a ptrt t hvn. Dlght is t hm, whm all th
wvs of th bllws of th ss of th bstrs mb cn nvr shk
frm ths sr Kl of th Ags. And etrnl dlght and dlcsnss
wll b hs, wh cmng t ly hm dwn, cn sy wth hs fnl
brth—O Fthr!—chfly knwn t m by Thy rd—mrtl or immrtl,
hr I d. I hv strvn t b Thn, mr thn t b ths wrld’s,
or mn own. Yt ths is nthng: I lv etrnty t Th; fr wht is
mn tht h shld lv ot th lftm of hs Gd?”

H sd n mr, bt slwly wvng a bndctn, cvrd hs fc wth
hs hnds, and s rmnd knlng, tll all th ppl hd dprtd,
and h ws lft aln in th plc.


CHPTR 10. A Bsm Frnd.

Rtrnng t th Sptr-Inn frm th Chpl, I fnd Qqg thr
qt aln; h hvng lft th Chpl bfr th bndctn sm
tm. H ws sttng on a bnch bfr th fr, wth hs ft on th
stv hrth, and in on hnd ws hldng cls up t hs fc tht
lttl ngr idl of hs; prng hrd int its fc, and wth a
jck-knf gntly whttlng awy at its ns, mnwhl hmmng t
hmslf in hs hthnsh wy.

Bt bng nw intrrptd, h pt up th img; and prtty sn, gng
t th tbl, tk up a lrg bk thr, and plcng it on hs lp
bgn cntng th pgs wth dlbrt rglrty; at evry fftth
pg—as I fncd—stppng a mmnt, lkng vcntly arnd hm, and
gvng uttrnc t a lng-drwn grglng whstl of astnshmnt. H
wld thn bgn agn at th nxt ffty; smng t cmmnc at nmbr
on ech tm, as thgh h cld nt cnt mr thn ffty, and it ws
only by sch a lrg nmbr of ffts bng fnd tgthr, tht hs
astnshmnt at th mlttd of pgs ws exctd.

Wth mch intrst I st wtchng hm. Svg thgh h ws, and
hdsly mrrd abt th fc—at lst t my tst—hs cntnnc
yt hd a smthng in it whch ws by n mns dsgrbl. Y
cnnt hd th sl. Thrgh all hs unrthly tttngs, I thght I
sw th trcs of a smpl hnst hrt; and in hs lrg, dp eys,
fry blck and bld, thr smd tkns of a sprt tht wld dr a
thsnd dvls. And bsds all ths, thr ws a crtn lfty
brng abt th Pgn, whch evn hs uncthnss cld nt
altgthr mm. H lkd lk a mn wh hd nvr crngd and nvr
hd hd a crdtr. Whthr it ws, t, tht hs hd bng shvd,
hs frhd ws drwn ot in frr and brghtr rlf, and lkd
mr expnsv thn it othrws wld, ths I wll nt vntr t
dcd; bt crtn it ws hs hd ws phrnlgclly an excllnt
on. It my sm rdcls, bt it rmndd m of Gnrl Wshngtn’s
hd, as sn in th pplr bsts of hm. It hd th sm lng
rglrly grdd rtrtng slp frm abv th brws, whch wr
lkws vry prjctng, lk tw lng prmntrs thckly wdd on
tp. Qqg ws Grg Wshngtn cnnblstclly dvlpd.

Whlst I ws ths clsly scnnng hm, hlf-prtndng mnwhl t b
lkng ot at th strm frm th csmnt, h nvr hdd my
prsnc, nvr trbld hmslf wth s mch as a sngl glnc; bt
apprd whlly occpd wth cntng th pgs of th mrvlls
bk. Cnsdrng hw scbly w hd bn slpng tgthr th nght
prvs, and espclly cnsdrng th affctnt arm I hd fnd
thrwn ovr m upn wkng in th mrnng, I thght ths indffrnc
of hs vry strng. Bt svgs ar strng bngs; at tms y d
nt knw exctly hw t tk thm. At frst thy ar ovrwng; thr
clm slf-cllctdnss of smplcty sms a Scrtc wsdm. I hd
ntcd als tht Qqg nvr cnsrtd at all, or bt vry lttl,
wth th othr smn in th inn. H md n advncs whtvr;
apprd t hv n dsr t enlrg th crcl of hs acqntncs.
All ths strck m as mghty snglr; yt, upn scnd thghts, thr
ws smthng almst sblm in it. Hr ws a mn sm twnty thsnd
mls frm hm, by th wy of Cp Hrn, tht is—whch ws th only
wy h cld gt thr—thrwn amng ppl as strng t hm as thgh
h wr in th plnt Jptr; and yt h smd entrly at hs es;
prsrvng th utmst srnty; cntnt wth hs own cmpnnshp;
alwys eql t hmslf. Srly ths ws a tch of fn phlsphy;
thgh n dbt h hd nvr hrd thr ws sch a thng as tht. Bt,
prhps, t b tr phlsphrs, w mrtls shld nt b cnscs of
s lvng or s strvng. S sn as I hr tht sch or sch a mn
gvs hmslf ot fr a phlsphr, I cncld tht, lk th
dyspptc old wmn, h mst hv “brkn hs dgstr.”

As I st thr in tht nw lnly rm; th fr brnng lw, in tht
mld stg whn, aftr its frst intnsty hs wrmd th ar, it thn
only glws t b lkd at; th evnng shds and phntms gthrng
rnd th csmnts, and prng in upn us slnt, sltry twn; th
strm bmng wtht in slmn swlls; I bgn t b snsbl of
strng flngs. I flt a mltng in m. N mr my splntrd hrt
and mddnd hnd wr trnd agnst th wlfsh wrld. Ths sthng
svg hd rdmd it. Thr h st, hs vry indffrnc spkng a
ntr in whch thr lrkd n cvlzd hypcrss and blnd
dcts. Wld h ws; a vry sght of sghts t s; yt I bgn t
fl myslf mystrsly drwn twrds hm. And ths sm thngs tht
wld hv rplld mst othrs, thy wr th vry mgnts tht ths
drw m. I’ll try a pgn frnd, thght I, snc Chrstn kndnss
hs prvd bt hllw crtsy. I drw my bnch nr hm, and md sm
frndly sgns and hnts, dng my bst t tlk wth hm mnwhl. At
frst h lttl ntcd ths advncs; bt prsntly, upn my
rfrrng t hs lst nght’s hsptlts, h md ot t ask m
whthr w wr agn t b bdfllws. I tld hm ys; whrt I
thght h lkd plsd, prhps a lttl cmplmntd.

W thn trnd ovr th bk tgthr, and I endvrd t expln t
hm th prps of th prntng, and th mnng of th fw pctrs
tht wr in it. Ths I sn enggd hs intrst; and frm tht w
wnt t jbbrng th bst w cld abt th vrs otr sghts t
b sn in ths fms twn. Sn I prpsd a scl smk; and,
prdcng hs pch and tmhwk, h qtly offrd m a pff. And
thn w st exchngng pffs frm tht wld pp of hs, and kpng it
rglrly pssng btwn us.

If thr yt lrkd any ic of indffrnc twrds m in th Pgn’s
brst, ths plsnt, gnl smk w hd, sn thwd it ot, and
lft us crns. H smd t tk t m qt as ntrlly and
unbddnly as I t hm; and whn or smk ws ovr, h prssd hs
frhd agnst mn, clspd m rnd th wst, and sd tht
hncfrth w wr mrrd; mnng, in hs cntry’s phrs, tht w
wr bsm frnds; h wld gldly d fr m, if nd shld b. In a
cntrymn, ths sddn flm of frndshp wld hv smd fr t
prmtr, a thng t b mch dstrstd; bt in ths smpl svg
ths old rls wld nt apply.

Aftr sppr, and anthr scl cht and smk, w wnt t or rm
tgthr. H md m a prsnt of hs emblmd hd; tk ot hs
enrms tbcc wllt, and grpng undr th tbcc, drw ot sm
thrty dllrs in slvr; thn sprdng thm on th tbl, and
mchnclly dvdng thm int tw eql prtns, pshd on of thm
twrds m, and sd it ws mn. I ws gng t rmnstrt; bt h
slncd m by prng thm int my trwsrs’ pckts. I lt thm sty.
H thn wnt abt hs evnng pryrs, tk ot hs idl, and rmvd
th ppr frbrd. By crtn sgns and symptms, I thght h smd
anxs fr m t jn hm; bt wll knwng wht ws t fllw, I
dlbrtd a mmnt whthr, in cs h invtd m, I wld cmply or
othrws.

I ws a gd Chrstn; brn and brd in th bsm of th infllbl
Prsbytrn Chrch. Hw thn cld I unt wth ths wld idltr in
wrshppng hs pc of wd? Bt wht is wrshp? thght I. D y
spps nw, Ishml, tht th mgnnms Gd of hvn and
erth—pgns and all incldd—cn pssbly b jls of an
insgnfcnt bt of blck wd? Impssbl! Bt wht is wrshp?—t d
th wll of Gd—_tht_ is wrshp. And wht is th wll of Gd?—t d
t my fllw mn wht I wld hv my fllw mn t d t m—_tht_ is
th wll of Gd. Nw, Qqg is my fllw mn. And wht d I wsh
tht ths Qqg wld d t m? Why, unt wth m in my prtclr
Prsbytrn frm of wrshp. Cnsqntly, I mst thn unt wth hm
in hs; erg, I mst trn idltr. S I kndld th shvngs; hlpd
prp up th inncnt lttl idl; offrd hm brnt bsct wth
Qqg; slmd bfr hm twc or thrc; kssd hs ns; and tht
dn, w undrssd and wnt t bd, at pc wth or own cnscncs
and all th wrld. Bt w dd nt g t slp wtht sm lttl cht.

Hw it is I knw nt; bt thr is n plc lk a bd fr cnfdntl
dsclsrs btwn frnds. Mn and wf, thy sy, thr opn th
vry bttm of thr sls t ech othr; and sm old cpls oftn
l and cht ovr old tms tll nrly mrnng. Ths, thn, in or
hrts’ hnymn, ly I and Qqg—a csy, lvng pr.


CHPTR 11. Nghtgwn.

W hd ln ths in bd, chttng and nppng at shrt intrvls, and
Qqg nw and thn affctntly thrwng hs brwn tttd lgs
ovr mn, and thn drwng thm bck; s entrly scbl and fr
and esy wr w; whn, at lst, by rsn of or cnfbltns, wht
lttl nppshnss rmnd in us altgthr dprtd, and w flt lk
gttng up agn, thgh dy-brk ws yt sm wy dwn th ftr.

Ys, w bcm vry wkfl; s mch s tht or rcmbnt pstn
bgn t grw wrsm, and by lttl and lttl w fnd orslvs
sttng up; th clths wll tckd arnd us, lnng agnst th
hd-brd wth or fr kns drwn up cls tgthr, and or tw
nss bndng ovr thm, as if or knpns wr wrmng-pns. W flt
vry nc and sng, th mr s snc it ws s chlly ot of drs;
indd ot of bd-clths t, sng tht thr ws n fr in th
rm. Th mr s, I sy, bcs trly t enjy bdly wrmth, sm
smll prt of y mst b cld, fr thr is n qlty in ths wrld
tht is nt wht it is mrly by cntrst. Nthng exsts in itslf. If
y flttr yrslf tht y ar all ovr cmfrtbl, and hv bn
s a lng tm, thn y cnnt b sd t b cmfrtbl any mr. Bt
if, lk Qqg and m in th bd, th tp of yr ns or th crwn
of yr hd b slghtly chlld, why thn, indd, in th gnrl
cnscsnss y fl mst dlghtflly and unmstkbly wrm. Fr
ths rsn a slpng aprtmnt shld nvr b frnshd wth a fr,
whch is on of th lxrs dscmfrts of th rch. Fr th hght
of ths srt of dlcsnss is t hv nthng bt th blnkt
btwn y and yr sngnss and th cld of th otr ar. Thn thr
y l lk th on wrm sprk in th hrt of an arctc crystl.

W hd bn sttng in ths crchng mnnr fr sm tm, whn all at
onc I thght I wld opn my eys; fr whn btwn shts, whthr
by dy or by nght, and whthr aslp or awk, I hv a wy of alwys
kpng my eys sht, in ordr th mr t cncntrt th sngnss of
bng in bd. Bcs n mn cn evr fl hs own idntty arght
excpt hs eys b clsd; as if drknss wr indd th prpr
elmnt of or essncs, thgh lght b mr cngnl t or clyy
prt. Upn opnng my eys thn, and cmng ot of my own plsnt and
slf-crtd drknss int th impsd and crs otr glm of th
unllmntd twlv-o’clck-at-nght, I exprncd a dsgrbl
rvlsn. Nr dd I at all objct t th hnt frm Qqg tht
prhps it wr bst t strk a lght, sng tht w wr s wd
awk; and bsds h flt a strng dsr t hv a fw qt pffs
frm hs Tmhwk. B it sd, tht thgh I hd flt sch a strng
rpgnnc t hs smkng in th bd th nght bfr, yt s hw
elstc or stff prjdcs grw whn lv onc cms t bnd thm.
Fr nw I lkd nthng bttr thn t hv Qqg smkng by m,
evn in bd, bcs h smd t b fll of sch srn hshld jy
thn. I n mr flt undly cncrnd fr th lndlrd’s plcy of
insrnc. I ws only alv t th cndnsd cnfdntl
cmfrtblnss of shrng a pp and a blnkt wth a rl frnd.
Wth or shggy jckts drwn abt or shldrs, w nw pssd th
Tmhwk frm on t th othr, tll slwly thr grw ovr us a bl
hngng tstr of smk, illmntd by th flm of th nw-lt lmp.

Whthr it ws tht ths undltng tstr rlld th svg awy t
fr dstnt scns, I knw nt, bt h nw spk of hs ntv islnd;
and, egr t hr hs hstry, I bggd hm t g on and tll it. H
gldly cmpld. Thgh at th tm I bt ill cmprhndd nt a fw of
hs wrds, yt sbsqnt dsclsrs, whn I hd bcm mr fmlr
wth hs brkn phrslgy, nw enbl m t prsnt th whl stry
sch as it my prv in th mr skltn I gv.


CHPTR 12. Bgrphcl.

Qqg ws a ntv of Rkvk, an islnd fr awy t th Wst and
Sth. It is nt dwn in any mp; tr plcs nvr ar.

Whn a nw-htchd svg rnnng wld abt hs ntv wdlnds in a
grss clt, fllwd by th nbblng gts, as if h wr a grn
splng; evn thn, in Qqg’s ambts sl, lrkd a strng
dsr t s smthng mr of Chrstndm thn a spcmn whlr or
tw. Hs fthr ws a Hgh Chf, a Kng; hs uncl a Hgh Prst; and
on th mtrnl sd h bstd ants wh wr th wvs of
uncnqrbl wrrrs. Thr ws excllnt bld in hs vns—ryl
stff; thgh sdly vttd, I fr, by th cnnbl prpnsty h
nrshd in hs unttrd yth.

A Sg Hrbr shp vstd hs fthr’s by, and Qqg sght a
pssg t Chrstn lnds. Bt th shp, hvng hr fll cmplmnt of
smn, sprnd hs st; and nt all th Kng hs fthr’s inflnc
cld prvl. Bt Qqg vwd a vw. Aln in hs cn, h pddld
off t a dstnt strt, whch h knw th shp mst pss thrgh whn
sh qttd th islnd. On on sd ws a crl rf; on th othr a
lw tng of lnd, cvrd wth mngrv thckts tht grw ot int
th wtr. Hdng hs cn, stll aflt, amng ths thckts, wth
its prw swrd, h st dwn in th strn, pddl lw in hnd; and
whn th shp ws gldng by, lk a flsh h drtd ot; gnd hr
sd; wth on bckwrd dsh of hs ft cpszd and snk hs cn;
clmbd up th chns; and thrwng hmslf at fll lngth upn th
dck, grppld a rng-blt thr, and swr nt t lt it g, thgh
hckd in pcs.

In vn th cptn thrtnd t thrw hm ovrbrd; sspndd a
ctlss ovr hs nkd wrsts; Qqg ws th sn of a Kng, and
Qqg bdgd nt. Strck by hs dsprt dntlssnss, and hs
wld dsr t vst Chrstndm, th cptn at lst rlntd, and
tld hm h mght mk hmslf at hm. Bt ths fn yng svg—ths
s Prnc of Wls, nvr sw th Cptn’s cbn. Thy pt hm dwn
amng th slrs, and md a whlmn of hm. Bt lk Czr Ptr
cntnt t tl in th shpyrds of frgn cts, Qqg dsdnd
n smng ignmny, if thrby h mght hpply gn th pwr of
enlghtnng hs unttrd cntrymn. Fr at bttm—s h tld m—h
ws acttd by a prfnd dsr t lrn amng th Chrstns, th
arts whrby t mk hs ppl stll hppr thn thy wr; and mr
thn tht, stll bttr thn thy wr. Bt, als! th prctcs of
whlmn sn cnvncd hm tht evn Chrstns cld b bth
msrbl and wckd; infntly mr s, thn all hs fthr’s
hthns. Arrvd at lst in old Sg Hrbr; and sng wht th
slrs dd thr; and thn gng on t Nntckt, and sng hw thy
spnt thr wgs in _tht_ plc als, pr Qqg gv it up fr
lst. Thght h, it’s a wckd wrld in all mrdns; I’ll d a
pgn.

And ths an old idltr at hrt, h yt lvd amng ths Chrstns,
wr thr clths, and trd t tlk thr gbbrsh. Hnc th qr
wys abt hm, thgh nw sm tm frm hm.

By hnts, I askd hm whthr h dd nt prps gng bck, and hvng
a crntn; snc h mght nw cnsdr hs fthr dd and gn, h
bng vry old and fbl at th lst accnts. H answrd n, nt
yt; and addd tht h ws frfl Chrstnty, or rthr Chrstns,
hd unfttd hm fr ascndng th pr and undfld thrn of thrty
pgn Kngs bfr hm. Bt by and by, h sd, h wld rtrn,—as
sn as h flt hmslf bptzd agn. Fr th nnc, hwvr, h
prpsd t sl abt, and sw hs wld ots in all fr ocns. Thy
hd md a hrpnr of hm, and tht brbd irn ws in l of a
scptr nw.

I askd hm wht mght b hs immdt prps, tchng hs ftr
mvmnts. H answrd, t g t s agn, in hs old vctn. Upn
ths, I tld hm tht whlng ws my own dsgn, and infrmd hm of my
intntn t sl ot of Nntckt, as bng th mst prmsng prt
fr an advntrs whlmn t embrk frm. H at onc rslvd t
accmpny m t tht islnd, shp abrd th sm vssl, gt int th
sm wtch, th sm bt, th sm mss wth m, in shrt t shr my
evry hp; wth bth my hnds in hs, bldly dp int th Ptlck of
bth wrlds. T all ths I jysly assntd; fr bsds th affctn
I nw flt fr Qqg, h ws an exprncd hrpnr, and as sch,
cld nt fl t b of grt usflnss t on, wh, lk m, ws
whlly ignrnt of th mystrs of whlng, thgh wll acqntd
wth th s, as knwn t mrchnt smn.

Hs stry bng endd wth hs pp’s lst dyng pff, Qqg
embrcd m, prssd hs frhd agnst mn, and blwng ot th
lght, w rlld ovr frm ech othr, ths wy and tht, and vry sn
wr slpng.


CHPTR 13. Whlbrrw.

Nxt mrnng, Mndy, aftr dspsng of th emblmd hd t a brbr,
fr a blck, I sttld my own and cmrd’s bll; usng, hwvr, my
cmrd’s mny. Th grnnng lndlrd, as wll as th brdrs, smd
amzngly tckld at th sddn frndshp whch hd sprng up btwn
m and Qqg—espclly as Ptr Cffn’s cck and bll strs
abt hm hd prvsly s mch alrmd m cncrnng th vry prsn
whm I nw cmpnd wth.

W brrwd a whlbrrw, and embrkng or thngs, incldng my own
pr crpt-bg, and Qqg’s cnvs sck and hmmck, awy w wnt
dwn t “th Mss,” th lttl Nntckt pckt schnr mrd at th
whrf. As w wr gng alng th ppl strd; nt at Qqg s
mch—fr thy wr usd t sng cnnbls lk hm in thr
strts,—bt at sng hm and m upn sch cnfdntl trms. Bt w
hdd thm nt, gng alng whlng th brrw by trns, and Qqg
nw and thn stppng t adjst th shth on hs hrpn brbs. I
askd hm why h crrd sch a trblsm thng wth hm ashr, and
whthr all whlng shps dd nt fnd thr own hrpns. T ths, in
sbstnc, h rpld, tht thgh wht I hntd ws tr engh, yt
h hd a prtclr affctn fr hs own hrpn, bcs it ws of
assrd stff, wll trd in mny a mrtl cmbt, and dply intmt
wth th hrts of whls. In shrt, lk mny inlnd rprs and
mwrs, wh g int th frmrs’ mdws armd wth thr own
scyths—thgh in n ws oblgd t frnsh thm—evn s, Qqg,
fr hs own prvt rsns, prfrrd hs own hrpn.

Shftng th brrw frm my hnd t hs, h tld m a fnny stry abt
th frst whlbrrw h hd evr sn. It ws in Sg Hrbr. Th
ownrs of hs shp, it sms, hd lnt hm on, in whch t crry hs
hvy chst t hs brdng hs. Nt t sm ignrnt abt th
thng—thgh in trth h ws entrly s, cncrnng th prcs wy in
whch t mng th brrw—Qqg pts hs chst upn it; lshs it
fst; and thn shldrs th brrw and mrchs up th whrf. “Why,”
sd I, “Qqg, y mght hv knwn bttr thn tht, on wld
thnk. Ddn’t th ppl lgh?”

Upn ths, h tld m anthr stry. Th ppl of hs islnd of
Rkvk, it sms, at thr wddng fsts exprss th frgrnt wtr
of yng ccnts int a lrg stnd clbsh lk a pnchbwl; and
ths pnchbwl alwys frms th grt cntrl ornmnt on th brdd
mt whr th fst is hld. Nw a crtn grnd mrchnt shp onc
tchd at Rkvk, and its cmmndr—frm all accnts, a vry
sttly pnctls gntlmn, at lst fr a s cptn—ths
cmmndr ws invtd t th wddng fst of Qqg’s sstr, a
prtty yng prncss jst trnd of tn. Wll; whn all th wddng
gsts wr assmbld at th brd’s bmb cttg, ths Cptn
mrchs in, and bng assgnd th pst of hnr, plcd hmslf ovr
agnst th pnchbwl, and btwn th Hgh Prst and hs mjsty th
Kng, Qqg’s fthr. Grc bng sd,—fr ths ppl hv thr
grc as wll as w—thgh Qqg tld m tht unlk us, wh at sch
tms lk dwnwrds t or plttrs, thy, on th cntrry, cpyng
th dcks, glnc upwrds t th grt Gvr of all fsts—Grc, I
sy, bng sd, th Hgh Prst opns th bnqt by th immmrl
crmny of th islnd; tht is, dppng hs cnscrtd and
cnscrtng fngrs int th bwl bfr th blssd bvrg
crclts. Sng hmslf plcd nxt th Prst, and ntng th
crmny, and thnkng hmslf—bng Cptn of a shp—as hvng pln
prcdnc ovr a mr islnd Kng, espclly in th Kng’s own
hs—th Cptn clly prcds t wsh hs hnds in th
pnchbwl;—tkng it I spps fr a hg fngr-glss. “Nw,” sd
Qqg, “wht y tnk nw?—Ddn’t or ppl lgh?”

At lst, pssg pd, and lggg sf, w std on brd th
schnr. Hstng sl, it gldd dwn th Acshnt rvr. On on
sd, Nw Bdfrd rs in trrcs of strts, thr ic-cvrd trs
all glttrng in th clr, cld ar. Hg hlls and mntns of
csks on csks wr pld upn hr whrvs, and sd by sd th
wrld-wndrng whl shps ly slnt and sfly mrd at lst; whl
frm othrs cm a snd of crpntrs and cprs, wth blndd nss
of frs and frgs t mlt th ptch, all btknng tht nw crss
wr on th strt; tht on mst prls and lng vyg endd, only
bgns a scnd; and a scnd endd, only bgns a thrd, and s on,
fr evr and fr ay. Sch is th endlssnss, y, th intlrblnss
of all erthly effrt.

Gnng th mr opn wtr, th brcng brz wxd frsh; th lttl
Mss tssd th qck fm frm hr bws, as a yng clt hs
snrtngs. Hw I snffd tht Trtr ar!—hw I sprnd tht trnpk
erth!—tht cmmn hghwy all ovr dntd wth th mrks of slvsh
hls and hfs; and trnd m t admr th mgnnmty of th s
whch wll prmt n rcrds.

At th sm fm-fntn, Qqg smd t drnk and rl wth m.
Hs dsky nstrls swlld aprt; h shwd hs fld and pntd
tth. On, on w flw; and or offng gnd, th Mss dd hmg t
th blst; dckd and dvd hr bws as a slv bfr th Sltn.
Sdwys lnng, w sdwys drtd; evry rpyrn tnglng lk a
wr; th tw tll msts bcklng lk Indn cns in lnd trnds.
S fll of ths rlng scn wr w, as w std by th plngng
bwsprt, tht fr sm tm w dd nt ntc th jrng glncs of
th pssngrs, a lbbr-lk assmbly, wh mrvlld tht tw fllw
bngs shld b s cmpnnbl; as thgh a wht mn wr anythng
mr dgnfd thn a whtwshd ngr. Bt thr wr sm bbs
and bmpkns thr, wh, by thr intns grnnss, mst hv cm
frm th hrt and cntr of all vrdr. Qqg cght on of ths
yng splngs mmckng hm bhnd hs bck. I thght th bmpkn’s
hr of dm ws cm. Drppng hs hrpn, th brwny svg cght
hm in hs arms, and by an almst mrcls dxtrty and strngth,
snt hm hgh up bdly int th ar; thn slghtly tppng hs strn
in md-smrst, th fllw lndd wth brstng lngs upn hs ft,
whl Qqg, trnng hs bck upn hm, lghtd hs tmhwk pp
and pssd it t m fr a pff.

“Cptng! Cptng!” ylld th bmpkn, rnnng twrds tht offcr;
“Cptng, Cptng, hr’s th dvl.”

“Hll, _y_ sr,” crd th Cptn, a gnt rb of th s, stlkng
up t Qqg, “wht in thndr d y mn by tht? Dn’t y knw
y mght hv klld tht chp?”

“Wht hm sy?” sd Qqg, as h mldly trnd t m.

“H sy,” sd I, “tht y cm nr kll-e tht mn thr,” pntng
t th stll shvrng grnhrn.

“Kll-e,” crd Qqg, twstng hs tttd fc int an unrthly
exprssn of dsdn, “ah! hm bvy smll-e fsh-e; Qqg n kll-e
s smll-e fsh-e; Qqg kll-e bg whl!”

“Lk y,” rrd th Cptn, “I’ll kll-e _y_, y cnnbl, if
y try any mr of yr trcks abrd hr; s mnd yr ey.”

Bt it s hppnd jst thn, tht it ws hgh tm fr th Cptn t
mnd hs own ey. Th prdgs strn upn th mn-sl hd prtd
th wthr-sht, and th trmnds bm ws nw flyng frm sd t
sd, cmpltly swpng th entr aftr prt of th dck. Th pr
fllw whm Qqg hd hndld s rghly, ws swpt ovrbrd; all
hnds wr in a pnc; and t attmpt sntchng at th bm t sty it,
smd mdnss. It flw frm rght t lft, and bck agn, almst in
on tckng of a wtch, and evry instnt smd on th pnt of
snppng int splntrs. Nthng ws dn, and nthng smd cpbl
of bng dn; ths on dck rshd twrds th bws, and std eyng
th bm as if it wr th lwr jw of an exsprtd whl. In th
mdst of ths cnstrntn, Qqg drppd dftly t hs kns, and
crwlng undr th pth of th bm, whppd hld of a rp, scrd
on end t th blwrks, and thn flngng th othr lk a lss,
cght it rnd th bm as it swpt ovr hs hd, and at th nxt
jrk, th spr ws tht wy trppd, and all ws sf. Th schnr ws
rn int th wnd, and whl th hnds wr clrng awy th strn
bt, Qqg, strppd t th wst, drtd frm th sd wth a lng
lvng arc of a lp. Fr thr mnts or mr h ws sn swmmng
lk a dg, thrwng hs lng arms strght ot bfr hm, and by
trns rvlng hs brwny shldrs thrgh th frzng fm. I
lkd at th grnd and glrs fllw, bt sw n on t b svd.
Th grnhrn hd gn dwn. Shtng hmslf prpndclrly frm th
wtr, Qqg, nw tk an instnt’s glnc arnd hm, and smng
t s jst hw mttrs wr, dvd dwn and dspprd. A fw mnts
mr, and h rs agn, on arm stll strkng ot, and wth th othr
drggng a lflss frm. Th bt sn pckd thm up. Th pr
bmpkn ws rstrd. All hnds vtd Qqg a nbl trmp; th
cptn bggd hs prdn. Frm tht hr I clv t Qqg lk a
brncl; y, tll pr Qqg tk hs lst lng dv.

Ws thr evr sch uncnscsnss? H dd nt sm t thnk tht h
at all dsrvd a mdl frm th Hmn and Mgnnms Scts. H
only askd fr wtr—frsh wtr—smthng t wp th brn off; tht
dn, h pt on dry clths, lghtd hs pp, and lnng agnst th
blwrks, and mldly eyng ths arnd hm, smd t b syng t
hmslf—“It’s a mtl, jnt-stck wrld, in all mrdns. W
cnnbls mst hlp ths Chrstns.”


CHPTR 14. Nntckt.

Nthng mr hppnd on th pssg wrthy th mntnng; s, aftr a
fn rn, w sfly arrvd in Nntckt.

Nntckt! Tk ot yr mp and lk at it. S wht a rl crnr of
th wrld it occps; hw it stnds thr, awy off shr, mr lnly
thn th Eddystn lghths. Lk at it—a mr hllck, and elbw of
snd; all bch, wtht a bckgrnd. Thr is mr snd thr thn
y wld us in twnty yrs as a sbsttt fr blttng ppr. Sm
gmsm wghts wll tll y tht thy hv t plnt wds thr, thy
dn’t grw ntrlly; tht thy imprt Cnd thstls; tht thy hv
t snd bynd ss fr a spl t stp a lk in an ol csk; tht
pcs of wd in Nntckt ar crrd abt lk bts of th tr
crss in Rm; tht ppl thr plnt tdstls bfr thr hss,
t gt undr th shd in smmr tm; tht on bld of grss mks an
oss, thr blds in a dy’s wlk a prr; tht thy wr qcksnd
shs, smthng lk Lplndr snw-shs; tht thy ar s sht up,
bltd abt, evry wy inclsd, srrndd, and md an uttr islnd
of by th ocn, tht t thr vry chrs and tbls smll clms wll
smtms b fnd adhrng, as t th bcks of s trtls. Bt ths
extrvgnzs only shw tht Nntckt is n Illns.

Lk nw at th wndrs trdtnl stry of hw ths islnd ws
sttld by th rd-mn. Ths gs th lgnd. In oldn tms an egl
swpd dwn upn th Nw Englnd cst, and crrd off an infnt
Indn in hs tlns. Wth ld lmnt th prnts sw thr chld
brn ot of sght ovr th wd wtrs. Thy rslvd t fllw in th
sm drctn. Sttng ot in thr cns, aftr a prls pssg
thy dscvrd th islnd, and thr thy fnd an empty ivry
cskt,—th pr lttl Indn’s skltn.

Wht wndr, thn, tht ths Nntcktrs, brn on a bch, shld
tk t th s fr a lvlhd! Thy frst cght crbs and qhgs
in th snd; grwn bldr, thy wdd ot wth nts fr mckrl; mr
exprncd, thy pshd off in bts and cptrd cd; and at lst,
lnchng a nvy of grt shps on th s, explrd ths wtry wrld;
pt an incssnt blt of crcmnvgtns rnd it; ppd in at
Bhrng’s Strts; and in all ssns and all ocns dclrd
evrlstng wr wth th mghtst anmtd mss tht hs srvvd th
fld; mst mnstrs and mst mntns! Tht Hmmlhn, slt-s
Mstdn, clthd wth sch prtntsnss of uncnscs pwr, tht
hs vry pncs ar mr t b drdd thn hs mst frlss and
mlcs asslts!

And ths hv ths nkd Nntcktrs, ths s hrmts, issng frm
thr ant-hll in th s, ovrrn and cnqrd th wtry wrld lk
s mny Alxndrs; prcllng ot amng thm th Atlntc, Pcfc,
and Indn ocns, as th thr prt pwrs dd Plnd. Lt Amrc
add Mxc t Txs, and pl Cb upn Cnd; lt th Englsh
ovrswrm all Ind, and hng ot thr blzng bnnr frm th sn;
tw thrds of ths trrqs glb ar th Nntcktr’s. Fr th s
is hs; h owns it, as Emprrs own emprs; othr smn hvng bt a
rght of wy thrgh it. Mrchnt shps ar bt extnsn brdgs;
armd ons bt fltng frts; evn prts and prvtrs, thgh
fllwng th s as hghwymn th rd, thy bt plndr othr shps,
othr frgmnts of th lnd lk thmslvs, wtht skng t drw
thr lvng frm th bttmlss dp itslf. Th Nntcktr, h aln
rsds and rts on th s; h aln, in Bbl lngg, gs dwn t
it in shps; t and fr plghng it as hs own spcl plnttn.
_Thr_ is hs hm; _thr_ ls hs bsnss, whch a Nh’s fld
wld nt intrrpt, thgh it ovrwhlmd all th mllns in Chn.
H lvs on th s, as prr ccks in th prr; h hds amng
th wvs, h clmbs thm as chms hntrs clmb th Alps. Fr yrs
h knws nt th lnd; s tht whn h cms t it at lst, it smlls
lk anthr wrld, mr strngly thn th mn wld t an Erthsmn.
Wth th lndlss gll, tht at snst flds hr wngs and is rckd t
slp btwn bllws; s at nghtfll, th Nntcktr, ot of sght
of lnd, frls hs sls, and lys hm t hs rst, whl undr hs
vry pllw rsh hrds of wlrss and whls.


CHPTR 15. Chwdr.

It ws qt lt in th evnng whn th lttl Mss cm sngly t
anchr, and Qqg and I wnt ashr; s w cld attnd t n
bsnss tht dy, at lst nn bt a sppr and a bd. Th lndlrd
of th Sptr-Inn hd rcmmndd us t hs csn Hs Hssy of th
Try Pts, whm h assrtd t b th prprtr of on of th bst kpt
htls in all Nntckt, and mrvr h hd assrd us tht Csn
Hs, as h clld hm, ws fms fr hs chwdrs. In shrt, h
plnly hntd tht w cld nt pssbly d bttr thn try pt-lck
at th Try Pts. Bt th drctns h hd gvn us abt kpng a
yllw wrhs on or strbrd hnd tll w opnd a wht chrch t
th lrbrd, and thn kpng tht on th lrbrd hnd tll w md a
crnr thr pnts t th strbrd, and tht dn, thn ask th frst
mn w mt whr th plc ws: ths crkd drctns of hs vry
mch pzzld us at frst, espclly as, at th otst, Qqg
insstd tht th yllw wrhs—or frst pnt of dprtr—mst b
lft on th lrbrd hnd, whrs I hd undrstd Ptr Cffn t sy
it ws on th strbrd. Hwvr, by dnt of btng abt a lttl in
th drk, and nw and thn knckng up a pcbl inhbtnt t
inqr th wy, w at lst cm t smthng whch thr ws n
mstkng.

Tw enrms wdn pts pntd blck, and sspndd by asss’ ers,
swng frm th crss-trs of an old tp-mst, plntd in frnt of an
old drwy. Th hrns of th crss-trs wr swd off on th othr
sd, s tht ths old tp-mst lkd nt a lttl lk a gllws.
Prhps I ws ovr snstv t sch imprssns at th tm, bt I
cld nt hlp strng at ths gllws wth a vg msgvng. A srt
of crck ws in my nck as I gzd up t th tw rmnng hrns; ys,
_tw_ of thm, on fr Qqg, and on fr m. It’s omns, thnks
I. A Cffn my Innkpr upn lndng in my frst whlng prt;
tmbstns strng at m in th whlmn’s chpl; and hr a gllws!
and a pr of prdgs blck pts t! Ar ths lst thrwng ot
oblq hnts tchng Tpht?

I ws clld frm ths rflctns by th sght of a frckld wmn
wth yllw hr and a yllw gwn, stndng in th prch of th inn,
undr a dll rd lmp swngng thr, tht lkd mch lk an injrd
ey, and crryng on a brsk scldng wth a mn in a prpl wlln
shrt.

“Gt alng wth y,” sd sh t th mn, “or I’ll b cmbng y!”

“Cm on, Qqg,” sd I, “all rght. Thr’s Mrs. Hssy.”

And s it trnd ot; Mr. Hs Hssy bng frm hm, bt lvng
Mrs. Hssy entrly cmptnt t attnd t all hs affrs. Upn
mkng knwn or dsrs fr a sppr and a bd, Mrs. Hssy,
pstpnng frthr scldng fr th prsnt, ushrd us int a lttl
rm, and stng us at a tbl sprd wth th rlcs of a rcntly
cncldd rpst, trnd rnd t us and sd—“Clm or Cd?”

“Wht’s tht abt Cds, m’am?” sd I, wth mch pltnss.

“Clm or Cd?” sh rptd.

“A clm fr sppr? a cld clm; is _tht_ wht y mn, Mrs. Hssy?”
sys I, “bt tht’s a rthr cld and clmmy rcptn in th wntr
tm, an’t it, Mrs. Hssy?”

Bt bng in a grt hrry t rsm scldng th mn in th prpl
Shrt, wh ws wtng fr it in th entry, and smng t hr nthng
bt th wrd “clm,” Mrs. Hssy hrrd twrds an opn dr ldng
t th ktchn, and bwlng ot “clm fr tw,” dspprd.

“Qqg,” sd I, “d y thnk tht w cn mk ot a sppr fr us
bth on on clm?”

Hwvr, a wrm svry stm frm th ktchn srvd t bl th
apprntly chrlss prspct bfr us. Bt whn tht smkng chwdr
cm in, th mystry ws dlghtflly explnd. Oh, swt frnds!
hrkn t m. It ws md of smll jcy clms, scrcly bggr thn
hzl nts, mxd wth pndd shp bsct, and sltd prk ct up
int lttl flks; th whl enrchd wth bttr, and plntflly
ssnd wth pppr and slt. Or apptts bng shrpnd by th
frsty vyg, and in prtclr, Qqg sng hs fvrt fshng
fd bfr hm, and th chwdr bng srpssngly excllnt, w
dsptchd it wth grt expdtn: whn lnng bck a mmnt and
bthnkng m of Mrs. Hssy’s clm and cd annncmnt, I thght I
wld try a lttl exprmnt. Stppng t th ktchn dr, I uttrd
th wrd “cd” wth grt emphss, and rsmd my st. In a fw
mmnts th svry stm cm frth agn, bt wth a dffrnt
flvr, and in gd tm a fn cd-chwdr ws plcd bfr us.

W rsmd bsnss; and whl plyng or spns in th bwl, thnks I
t myslf, I wndr nw if ths hr hs any effct on th hd? Wht’s
tht stltfyng syng abt chwdr-hdd ppl? “Bt lk,
Qqg, an’t tht a lv el in yr bwl? Whr’s yr hrpn?”

Fshst of all fshy plcs ws th Try Pts, whch wll dsrvd its
nm; fr th pts thr wr alwys blng chwdrs. Chwdr fr
brkfst, and chwdr fr dnnr, and chwdr fr sppr, tll y
bgn t lk fr fsh-bns cmng thrgh yr clths. Th ar
bfr th hs ws pvd wth clm-shlls. Mrs. Hssy wr a
plshd ncklc of cdfsh vrtbr; and Hs Hssy hd hs accnt
bks bnd in sprr old shrk-skn. Thr ws a fshy flvr t th
mlk, t, whch I cld nt at all accnt fr, tll on mrnng
hppnng t tk a strll alng th bch amng sm fshrmn’s
bts, I sw Hs’s brndld cw fdng on fsh rmnnts, and
mrchng alng th snd wth ech ft in a cd’s dcpttd hd,
lkng vry slp-shd, I assr y.

Sppr cncldd, w rcvd a lmp, and drctns frm Mrs. Hssy
cncrnng th nrst wy t bd; bt, as Qqg ws abt t
prcd m up th strs, th ldy rchd frth hr arm, and dmndd
hs hrpn; sh allwd n hrpn in hr chmbrs. “Why nt?” sd I;
“evry tr whlmn slps wth hs hrpn—bt why nt?” “Bcs
it’s dngrs,” sys sh. “Evr snc yng Stggs cmng frm tht
unfrt’nt v’y’g of hs, whn h ws gn fr yrs and a hlf, wth
only thr brrls of _il_, ws fnd dd in my frst flr bck,
wth hs hrpn in hs sd; evr snc thn I allw n brdrs t
tk sch dngrs wpns in thr rms at nght. S, Mr. Qqg”
(fr sh hd lrnd hs nm), “I wll jst tk ths hr irn, and
kp it fr y tll mrnng. Bt th chwdr; clm or cd t-mrrw
fr brkfst, mn?”

“Bth,” sys I; “and lt’s hv a cpl of smkd hrrng by wy of
vrty.”


CHPTR 16. Th Shp.

In bd w cncctd or plns fr th mrrw. Bt t my srprs and n
smll cncrn, Qqg nw gv m t undrstnd, tht h hd bn
dlgntly cnsltng Yj—th nm of hs blck lttl gd—and Yj
hd tld hm tw or thr tms ovr, and strngly insstd upn it
evrywy, tht instd of or gng tgthr amng th whlng-flt in
hrbr, and in cncrt slctng or crft; instd of ths, I sy,
Yj ernstly enjnd tht th slctn of th shp shld rst
whlly wth m, insmch as Yj prpsd bfrndng us; and, in ordr
t d s, hd alrdy ptchd upn a vssl, whch, if lft t myslf,
I, Ishml, shld infllbly lght upn, fr all th wrld as thgh
it hd trnd ot by chnc; and in tht vssl I mst immdtly shp
myslf, fr th prsnt irrspctv of Qqg.

I hv frgttn t mntn tht, in mny thngs, Qqg plcd grt
cnfdnc in th excllnc of Yj’s jdgmnt and srprsng frcst
of thngs; and chrshd Yj wth cnsdrbl estm, as a rthr
gd srt of gd, wh prhps mnt wll engh upn th whl, bt in
all css dd nt sccd in hs bnvlnt dsgns.

Nw, ths pln of Qqg’s, or rthr Yj’s, tchng th slctn
of or crft; I dd nt lk tht pln at all. I hd nt a lttl
rld upn Qqg’s sgcty t pnt ot th whlr bst fttd t
crry us and or frtns scrly. Bt as all my rmnstrncs
prdcd n effct upn Qqg, I ws oblgd t acqsc; and
accrdngly prprd t st abt ths bsnss wth a dtrmnd
rshng srt of enrgy and vgr, tht shld qckly sttl tht
trflng lttl affr. Nxt mrnng erly, lvng Qqg sht up
wth Yj in or lttl bdrm—fr it smd tht it ws sm srt of
Lnt or Rmdn, or dy of fstng, hmltn, and pryr wth
Qqg and Yj tht dy; _hw_ it ws I nvr cld fnd ot, fr,
thgh I appld myslf t it svrl tms, I nvr cld mstr hs
ltrgs and XXXX Artcls—lvng Qqg, thn, fstng on hs
tmhwk pp, and Yj wrmng hmslf at hs scrfcl fr of
shvngs, I slld ot amng th shppng. Aftr mch prlngd
sntrng and mny rndm inqrs, I lrnt tht thr wr thr
shps up fr thr-yrs’ vygs—Th Dvl-dm, th Tt-bt, and th
Pqd. _Dvl-Dm_, I d nt knw th orgn of; _Tt-bt_ is obvs;
_Pqd_, y wll n dbt rmmbr, ws th nm of a clbrtd
trb of Msschstts Indns; nw extnct as th ancnt Mds. I
prd and pryd abt th Dvl-dm; frm hr, hppd ovr t th
Tt-bt; and fnlly, gng on brd th Pqd, lkd arnd hr fr
a mmnt, and thn dcdd tht ths ws th vry shp fr us.

Y my hv sn mny a qnt crft in yr dy, fr aght I
knw;—sqr-td lggrs; mntns Jpns jnks; bttr-bx
gllts, and wht nt; bt tk my wrd fr it, y nvr sw sch a
rr old crft as ths sm rr old Pqd. Sh ws a shp of th old
schl, rthr smll if anythng; wth an old-fshnd clw-ftd
lk abt hr. Lng ssnd and wthr-stnd in th typhns and
clms of all fr ocns, hr old hll’s cmplxn ws drknd lk a
Frnch grndr’s, wh hs alk fght in Egypt and Sbr. Hr
vnrbl bws lkd brdd. Hr msts—ct smwhr on th cst of
Jpn, whr hr orgnl ons wr lst ovrbrd in a gl—hr msts
std stffly up lk th spns of th thr old kngs of Clgn. Hr
ancnt dcks wr wrn and wrnkld, lk th plgrm-wrshppd
flg-stn in Cntrbry Cthdrl whr Bckt bld. Bt t all ths
hr old antqts, wr addd nw and mrvlls ftrs, prtnng
t th wld bsnss tht fr mr thn hlf a cntry sh hd
fllwd. Old Cptn Plg, mny yrs hr chf-mt, bfr h
cmmndd anthr vssl of hs own, and nw a rtrd smn, and on
of th prncpl ownrs of th Pqd,—ths old Plg, drng th trm
of hs chf-mtshp, hd blt upn hr orgnl grtsqnss, and
inld it, all ovr, wth a qntnss bth of mtrl and dvc,
unmtchd by anythng excpt it b Thrkll-Hk’s crvd bcklr or
bdstd. Sh ws apprlld lk any brbrc Ethpn emprr, hs
nck hvy wth pndnts of plshd ivry. Sh ws a thng of
trphs. A cnnbl of a crft, trckng hrslf frth in th chsd
bns of hr enms. All rnd, hr unpnlld, opn blwrks wr
grnshd lk on cntns jw, wth th lng shrp tth of th
sprm whl, insrtd thr fr pns, t fstn hr old hmpn thws
and tndns t. Ths thws rn nt thrgh bs blcks of lnd wd,
bt dftly trvlld ovr shvs of s-ivry. Scrnng a trnstl
whl at hr rvrnd hlm, sh sprtd thr a tllr; and tht tllr
ws in on mss, crsly crvd frm th lng nrrw lwr jw of hr
hrdtry f. Th hlmsmn wh strd by tht tllr in a tmpst,
flt lk th Trtr, whn h hlds bck hs fry std by cltchng
its jw. A nbl crft, bt smhw a mst mlnchly! All nbl thngs
ar tchd wth tht.

Nw whn I lkd abt th qrtr-dck, fr sm on hvng
athrty, in ordr t prps myslf as a cnddt fr th vyg, at
frst I sw nbdy; bt I cld nt wll ovrlk a strng srt of
tnt, or rthr wgwm, ptchd a lttl bhnd th mn-mst. It
smd only a tmprry erctn usd in prt. It ws of a cncl
shp, sm tn ft hgh; cnsstng of th lng, hg slbs of lmbr
blck bn tkn frm th mddl and hghst prt of th jws of th
rght-whl. Plntd wth thr brd ends on th dck, a crcl of
ths slbs lcd tgthr, mtlly slpd twrds ech othr, and at
th apx untd in a tftd pnt, whr th ls hry fbrs wvd
t and fr lk th tp-knt on sm old Pttwttm Schm’s hd. A
trnglr opnng fcd twrds th bws of th shp, s tht th
insdr cmmndd a cmplt vw frwrd.

And hlf cncld in ths qr tnmnt, I at lngth fnd on wh by
hs aspct smd t hv athrty; and wh, it bng nn, and th
shp’s wrk sspndd, ws nw enjyng rspt frm th brdn of
cmmnd. H ws std on an old-fshnd okn chr, wrgglng all
ovr wth crs crvng; and th bttm of whch ws frmd of a
stt intrlcng of th sm elstc stff of whch th wgwm ws
cnstrctd.

Thr ws nthng s vry prtclr, prhps, abt th apprnc of
th eldrly mn I sw; h ws brwn and brwny, lk mst old smn,
and hvly rlld up in bl plt-clth, ct in th Qkr styl;
only thr ws a fn and almst mcrscpc nt-wrk of th mntst
wrnkls intrlcng rnd hs eys, whch mst hv arsn frm hs
cntnl slngs in mny hrd gls, and alwys lkng t
wndwrd;—fr ths css th mscls abt th eys t bcm prsd
tgthr. Sch ey-wrnkls ar vry effctl in a scwl.

“Is ths th Cptn of th Pqd?” sd I, advncng t th dr of
th tnt.

“Sppsng it b th cptn of th Pqd, wht dst th wnt of
hm?” h dmndd.

“I ws thnkng of shppng.”

“Th wst, wst th? I s th art n Nntcktr—evr bn in a
stv bt?”

“N, Sr, I nvr hv.”

“Dst knw nthng at all abt whlng, I dr sy—eh?

“Nthng, Sr; bt I hv n dbt I shll sn lrn. I’v bn
svrl vygs in th mrchnt srvc, and I thnk tht—”

“Mrchnt srvc b dmnd. Tlk nt tht lng t m. Dst s tht
lg?—I’ll tk tht lg awy frm thy strn, if evr th tlkst of
th mrchnt srvc t m agn. Mrchnt srvc indd! I spps
nw y fl cnsdrbl prd of hvng srvd in ths mrchnt
shps. Bt flks! mn, wht mks th wnt t g a whlng, eh?—it
lks a lttl sspcs, dn’t it, eh?—Hst nt bn a prt, hst
th?—Ddst nt rb thy lst Cptn, ddst th?—Dst nt thnk of
mrdrng th offcrs whn th gttst t s?”

I prtstd my inncnc of ths thngs. I sw tht undr th msk of
ths hlf hmrs innnds, ths old smn, as an insltd
Qkrsh Nntcktr, ws fll of hs inslr prjdcs, and rthr
dstrstfl of all alns, unlss thy hld frm Cp Cd or th
Vnyrd.

“Bt wht tks th a-whlng? I wnt t knw tht bfr I thnk of
shppng y.”

“Wll, sr, I wnt t s wht whlng is. I wnt t s th wrld.”

“Wnt t s wht whlng is, eh? Hv y clppd ey on Cptn Ahb?”

“Wh is Cptn Ahb, sr?”

“Ay, ay, I thght s. Cptn Ahb is th Cptn of ths shp.”

“I am mstkn thn. I thght I ws spkng t th Cptn hmslf.”

“Th art spkng t Cptn Plg—tht’s wh y ar spkng t,
yng mn. It blngs t m and Cptn Bldd t s th Pqd fttd
ot fr th vyg, and sppld wth all hr nds, incldng crw. W
ar prt ownrs and agnts. Bt as I ws gng t sy, if th wntst
t knw wht whlng is, as th tllst y d, I cn pt y in a wy
of fndng it ot bfr y bnd yrslf t it, pst bckng ot. Clp
ey on Cptn Ahb, yng mn, and th wlt fnd tht h hs only on
lg.”

“Wht d y mn, sr? Ws th othr on lst by a whl?”

“Lst by a whl! Yng mn, cm nrr t m: it ws dvrd, chwd
up, crnchd by th mnstrsst prmctty tht evr chppd a
bt!—ah, ah!”

I ws a lttl alrmd by hs enrgy, prhps als a lttl tchd at
th hrty grf in hs cncldng exclmtn, bt sd as clmly as I
cld, “Wht y sy is n dbt tr engh, sr; bt hw cld I knw
thr ws any pclr frcty in tht prtclr whl, thgh indd
I mght hv infrrd as mch frm th smpl fct of th accdnt.”

“Lk y nw, yng mn, thy lngs ar a srt of sft, d’y s; th
dst nt tlk shrk a bt. _Sr_, y’v bn t s bfr nw; sr
of tht?”

“Sr,” sd I, “I thght I tld y tht I hd bn fr vygs in
th mrchnt—”

“Hrd dwn ot of tht! Mnd wht I sd abt th mrchnt
srvc—dn’t aggrvt m—I wn’t hv it. Bt lt us undrstnd ech
othr. I hv gvn th a hnt abt wht whlng is; d y yt fl
inclnd fr it?”

“I d, sr.”

“Vry gd. Nw, art th th mn t ptch a hrpn dwn a lv
whl’s thrt, and thn jmp aftr it? Answr, qck!”

“I am, sr, if it shld b pstvly indspnsbl t d s; nt t
b gt rd of, tht is; whch I dn’t tk t b th fct.”

“Gd agn. Nw thn, th nt only wntst t g a-whlng, t fnd
ot by exprnc wht whlng is, bt y als wnt t g in ordr t
s th wrld? Ws nt tht wht y sd? I thght s. Wll thn, jst
stp frwrd thr, and tk a pp ovr th wthr-bw, and thn bck
t m and tll m wht y s thr.”

Fr a mmnt I std a lttl pzzld by ths crs rqst, nt
knwng exctly hw t tk it, whthr hmrsly or in ernst. Bt
cncntrtng all hs crw’s ft int on scwl, Cptn Plg strtd
m on th errnd.

Gng frwrd and glncng ovr th wthr bw, I prcvd tht th
shp swngng t hr anchr wth th fld-td, ws nw oblqly
pntng twrds th opn ocn. Th prspct ws unlmtd, bt
excdngly mntns and frbddng; nt th slghtst vrty tht I
cld s.

“Wll, wht’s th rprt?” sd Plg whn I cm bck; “wht dd y
s?”

“Nt mch,” I rpld—“nthng bt wtr; cnsdrbl hrzn thgh,
and thr’s a sqll cmng up, I thnk.”

“Wll, wht ds th thnk thn of sng th wrld? D y wsh t g
rnd Cp Hrn t s any mr of it, eh? Cn’t y s th wrld whr
y stnd?”

I ws a lttl stggrd, bt g a-whlng I mst, and I wld; and th
Pqd ws as gd a shp as any—I thght th bst—and all ths I nw
rptd t Plg. Sng m s dtrmnd, h exprssd hs
wllngnss t shp m.

“And th myst as wll sgn th pprs rght off,” h addd—“cm
alng wth y.” And s syng, h ld th wy blw dck int th
cbn.

Std on th trnsm ws wht smd t m a mst uncmmn and
srprsng fgr. It trnd ot t b Cptn Bldd, wh alng wth
Cptn Plg ws on of th lrgst ownrs of th vssl; th othr
shrs, as is smtms th cs in ths prts, bng hld by a crwd
of old anntnts; wdws, fthrlss chldrn, and chncry wrds;
ech ownng abt th vl of a tmbr hd, or a ft of plnk, or a
nl or tw in th shp. Ppl in Nntckt invst thr mny in
whlng vssls, th sm wy tht y d yrs in apprvd stt
stcks brngng in gd intrst.

Nw, Bldd, lk Plg, and indd mny othr Nntcktrs, ws a
Qkr, th islnd hvng bn orgnlly sttld by tht sct; and t
ths dy its inhbtnts in gnrl rtn in an uncmmn msr th
pclrts of th Qkr, only vrsly and anmlsly mdfd by
thngs altgthr aln and htrgns. Fr sm of ths sm
Qkrs ar th mst sngnry of all slrs and whl-hntrs. Thy
ar fghtng Qkrs; thy ar Qkrs wth a vngnc.

S tht thr ar instncs amng thm of mn, wh, nmd wth
Scrptr nms—a snglrly cmmn fshn on th islnd—and in
chldhd ntrlly imbbng th sttly drmtc th and th of th
Qkr idm; stll, frm th adcs, drng, and bndlss
advntr of thr sbsqnt lvs, strngly blnd wth ths
untgrwn pclrts, a thsnd bld dshs of chrctr, nt
unwrthy a Scndnvn s-kng, or a ptcl Pgn Rmn. And whn
ths thngs unt in a mn of grtly sprr ntrl frc, wth a
glblr brn and a pndrs hrt; wh hs als by th stllnss and
sclsn of mny lng nght-wtchs in th rmtst wtrs, and
bnth cnstlltns nvr sn hr at th nrth, bn ld t thnk
untrdtnlly and indpndntly; rcvng all ntr’s swt or
svg imprssns frsh frm hr own vrgn vlntry and cnfdng
brst, and thrby chfly, bt wth sm hlp frm accdntl
advntgs, t lrn a bld and nrvs lfty lngg—tht mn mks
on in a whl ntn’s cnss—a mghty pgnt crtr, frmd fr
nbl trgds. Nr wll it at all dtrct frm hm, drmtclly
rgrdd, if ethr by brth or othr crcmstncs, h hv wht sms
a hlf wlfl ovrrlng mrbdnss at th bttm of hs ntr. Fr
all mn trgclly grt ar md s thrgh a crtn mrbdnss. B
sr of ths, O yng ambtn, all mrtl grtnss is bt dss.
Bt, as yt w hv nt t d wth sch an on, bt wth qt anthr;
and stll a mn, wh, if indd pclr, it only rslts agn frm
anthr phs of th Qkr, mdfd by indvdl crcmstncs.

Lk Cptn Plg, Cptn Bldd ws a wll-t-d, rtrd whlmn.
Bt unlk Cptn Plg—wh crd nt a rsh fr wht ar clld
srs thngs, and indd dmd ths slf-sm srs thngs th
vrst of all trfls—Cptn Bldd hd nt only bn orgnlly
edctd accrdng t th strctst sct of Nntckt Qkrsm, bt
all hs sbsqnt ocn lf, and th sght of mny uncld, lvly
islnd crtrs, rnd th Hrn—all tht hd nt mvd ths ntv
brn Qkr on sngl jt, hd nt s mch as altrd on angl of hs
vst. Stll, fr all ths immtblnss, ws thr sm lck of cmmn
cnsstncy abt wrthy Cptn Bldd. Thgh rfsng, frm
cnscnts scrpls, t br arms agnst lnd invdrs, yt hmslf
hd illmtbly invdd th Atlntc and Pcfc; and thgh a swrn
f t hmn bldshd, yt hd h in hs strght-bdd ct, splld
tns upn tns of lvthn gr. Hw nw in th cntmpltv evnng
of hs dys, th ps Bldd rcncld ths thngs in th
rmnscnc, I d nt knw; bt it dd nt sm t cncrn hm mch,
and vry prbbly h hd lng snc cm t th sg and snsbl
cnclsn tht a mn’s rlgn is on thng, and ths prctcl wrld
qt anthr. Ths wrld pys dvdnds. Rsng frm a lttl
cbn-by in shrt clths of th drbbst drb, t a hrpnr in a
brd shd-blld wstct; frm tht bcmng bt-hdr,
chf-mt, and cptn, and fnlly a shp ownr; Bldd, as I hntd
bfr, hd cncldd hs advntrs crr by whlly rtrng frm
actv lf at th gdly ag of sxty, and ddctng hs rmnng
dys t th qt rcvng of hs wll-ernd incm.

Nw, Bldd, I am srry t sy, hd th rpttn of bng an
incrrgbl old hnks, and in hs s-gng dys, a bttr, hrd
tsk-mstr. Thy tld m in Nntckt, thgh it crtnly sms a
crs stry, tht whn h sld th old Ctgt whlmn, hs crw,
upn arrvng hm, wr mstly all crrd ashr t th hsptl,
sr exhstd and wrn ot. Fr a ps mn, espclly fr a Qkr,
h ws crtnly rthr hrd-hrtd, t sy th lst. H nvr usd
t swr, thgh, at hs mn, thy sd; bt smhw h gt an
inrdnt qntty of crl, unmtgtd hrd wrk ot of thm. Whn
Bldd ws a chf-mt, t hv hs drb-clrd ey intntly lkng
at y, md y fl cmpltly nrvs, tll y cld cltch
smthng—a hmmr or a mrlng-spk, and g t wrk lk md, at
smthng or othr, nvr mnd wht. Indlnc and idlnss prshd
bfr hm. Hs own prsn ws th exct embdmnt of hs utltrn
chrctr. On hs lng, gnt bdy, h crrd n spr flsh, n
sprfls brd, hs chn hvng a sft, ecnmcl np t it, lk
th wrn np of hs brd-brmmd ht.

Sch, thn, ws th prsn tht I sw std on th trnsm whn I
fllwd Cptn Plg dwn int th cbn. Th spc btwn th dcks
ws smll; and thr, blt-uprght, st old Bldd, wh alwys st s,
and nvr lnd, and ths t sv hs ct tls. Hs brd-brm ws
plcd bsd hm; hs lgs wr stffly crssd; hs drb vstr ws
bttnd up t hs chn; and spctcls on ns, h smd absrbd in
rdng frm a pndrs vlm.

“Bldd,” crd Cptn Plg, “at it agn, Bldd, eh? Y hv bn
stdyng ths Scrptrs, nw, fr th lst thrty yrs, t my
crtn knwldg. Hw fr y gt, Bldd?”

As if lng hbttd t sch prfn tlk frm hs old shpmt,
Bldd, wtht ntcng hs prsnt irrvrnc, qtly lkd up,
and sng m, glncd agn inqrngly twrds Plg.

“H sys h’s or mn, Bldd,” sd Plg, “h wnts t shp.”

“Dst th?” sd Bldd, in a hllw tn, and trnng rnd t m.

“I _dst_,” sd I uncnscsly, h ws s intns a Qkr.

“Wht d y thnk of hm, Bldd?” sd Plg.

“H’ll d,” sd Bldd, eyng m, and thn wnt on spllng awy at
hs bk in a mmblng tn qt adbl.

I thght hm th qrst old Qkr I evr sw, espclly as Plg,
hs frnd and old shpmt, smd sch a blstrr. Bt I sd
nthng, only lkng rnd m shrply. Plg nw thrw opn a chst,
and drwng frth th shp’s artcls, plcd pn and ink bfr hm,
and std hmslf at a lttl tbl. I bgn t thnk it ws hgh tm
t sttl wth myslf at wht trms I wld b wllng t engg fr
th vyg. I ws alrdy awr tht in th whlng bsnss thy pd
n wgs; bt all hnds, incldng th cptn, rcvd crtn shrs
of th prfts clld _lys_, and tht ths lys wr prprtnd t
th dgr of imprtnc prtnng t th rspctv dts of th
shp’s cmpny. I ws als awr tht bng a grn hnd at whlng, my
own ly wld nt b vry lrg; bt cnsdrng tht I ws usd t th
s, cld str a shp, splc a rp, and all tht, I md n dbt
tht frm all I hd hrd I shld b offrd at lst th 275th
ly—tht is, th 275th prt of th clr nt prcds of th vyg,
whtvr tht mght evntlly amnt t. And thgh th 275th ly ws
wht thy cll a rthr _lng ly_, yt it ws bttr thn nthng; and
if w hd a lcky vyg, mght prtty nrly py fr th clthng I
wld wr ot on it, nt t spk of my thr yrs’ bf and brd,
fr whch I wld nt hv t py on stvr.

It mght b thght tht ths ws a pr wy t accmlt a prncly
frtn—and s it ws, a vry pr wy indd. Bt I am on of ths
tht nvr tk on abt prncly frtns, and am qt cntnt if th
wrld is rdy t brd and ldg m, whl I am pttng up at ths
grm sgn of th Thndr Cld. Upn th whl, I thght tht th
275th ly wld b abt th fr thng, bt wld nt hv bn
srprsd hd I bn offrd th 200th, cnsdrng I ws of a
brd-shldrd mk.

Bt on thng, nvrthlss, tht md m a lttl dstrstfl abt
rcvng a gnrs shr of th prfts ws ths: Ashr, I hd hrd
smthng of bth Cptn Plg and hs unccntbl old crny Bldd;
hw tht thy bng th prncpl prprtrs of th Pqd, thrfr
th othr and mr incnsdrbl and scttrd ownrs, lft nrly th
whl mngmnt of th shp’s affrs t ths tw. And I dd nt knw
bt wht th stngy old Bldd mght hv a mghty dl t sy abt
shppng hnds, espclly as I nw fnd hm on brd th Pqd,
qt at hm thr in th cbn, and rdng hs Bbl as if at hs
own frsd. Nw whl Plg ws vnly tryng t mnd a pn wth hs
jck-knf, old Bldd, t my n smll srprs, cnsdrng tht h
ws sch an intrstd prty in ths prcdngs; Bldd nvr hdd
us, bt wnt on mmblng t hmslf ot of hs bk, “_Ly_ nt up fr
yrslvs trsrs upn erth, whr mth—”

“Wll, Cptn Bldd,” intrrptd Plg, “wht d’y sy, wht ly
shll w gv ths yng mn?”

“Th knwst bst,” ws th splchrl rply, “th svn hndrd and
svnty-svnth wldn’t b t mch, wld it?—‘whr mth and rst d
crrpt, bt _ly_—’”

_Ly_, indd, thght I, and sch a ly! th svn hndrd and
svnty-svnth! Wll, old Bldd, y ar dtrmnd tht I, fr on,
shll nt _ly_ up mny _lys_ hr blw, whr mth and rst d
crrpt. It ws an excdngly _lng ly_ tht, indd; and thgh frm
th mgntd of th fgr it mght at frst dcv a lndsmn, yt
th slghtst cnsdrtn wll shw tht thgh svn hndrd and
svnty-svn is a prtty lrg nmbr, yt, whn y cm t mk a
_tnth_ of it, y wll thn s, I sy, tht th svn hndrd and
svnty-svnth prt of a frthng is a gd dl lss thn svn
hndrd and svnty-svn gld dblns; and s I thght at th tm.

“Why, blst yr eys, Bldd,” crd Plg, “th dst nt wnt t
swndl ths yng mn! h mst hv mr thn tht.”

“Svn hndrd and svnty-svnth,” agn sd Bldd, wtht lftng
hs eys; and thn wnt on mmblng—“fr whr yr trsr is, thr
wll yr hrt b als.”

“I am gng t pt hm dwn fr th thr hndrdth,” sd Plg, “d
y hr tht, Bldd! Th thr hndrdth ly, I sy.”

Bldd ld dwn hs bk, and trnng slmnly twrds hm sd,
“Cptn Plg, th hst a gnrs hrt; bt th mst cnsdr th
dty th owst t th othr ownrs of ths shp—wdws and orphns,
mny of thm—and tht if w t abndntly rwrd th lbrs of ths
yng mn, w my b tkng th brd frm ths wdws and ths
orphns. Th svn hndrd and svnty-svnth ly, Cptn Plg.”

“Th Bldd!” rrd Plg, strtng up and clttrng abt th
cbn. “Blst y, Cptn Bldd, if I hd fllwd thy advc in ths
mttrs, I wld afr nw hd a cnscnc t lg abt tht wld b
hvy engh t fndr th lrgst shp tht evr sld rnd Cp
Hrn.”

“Cptn Plg,” sd Bldd stdly, “thy cnscnc my b drwng
tn inchs of wtr, or tn fthms, I cn’t tll; bt as th art
stll an impntnt mn, Cptn Plg, I grtly fr lst thy
cnscnc b bt a lky on; and wll in th end snk th fndrng
dwn t th fry pt, Cptn Plg.”

“Fry pt! fry pt! y inslt m, mn; pst all ntrl brng, y
inslt m. It’s an all-frd otrg t tll any hmn crtr tht
h’s bnd t hll. Flks and flms! Bldd, sy tht agn t m,
and strt my sl-blts, bt I’ll—I’ll—ys, I’ll swllw a lv gt
wth all hs hr and hrns on. Ot of th cbn, y cntng,
drb-clrd sn of a wdn gn—a strght wk wth y!”

As h thndrd ot ths h md a rsh at Bldd, bt wth a
mrvlls oblq, sldng clrty, Bldd fr tht tm eldd hm.

Alrmd at ths trrbl otbrst btwn th tw prncpl and
rspnsbl ownrs of th shp, and flng hlf a mnd t gv up all
id of slng in a vssl s qstnbly ownd and tmprrly
cmmndd, I stppd asd frm th dr t gv egrss t Bldd, wh,
I md n dbt, ws all egrnss t vnsh frm bfr th awknd
wrth of Plg. Bt t my astnshmnt, h st dwn agn on th
trnsm vry qtly, and smd t hv nt th slghtst intntn of
wthdrwng. H smd qt usd t impntnt Plg and hs wys. As
fr Plg, aftr lttng off hs rg as h hd, thr smd n mr
lft in hm, and h, t, st dwn lk a lmb, thgh h twtchd a
lttl as if stll nrvsly agttd. “Whw!” h whstld at lst—“th
sqll’s gn off t lwrd, I thnk. Bldd, th usd t b gd at
shrpnng a lnc, mnd tht pn, wll y. My jck-knf hr nds
th grndstn. Tht’s h; thnk y, Bldd. Nw thn, my yng mn,
Ishml’s thy nm, ddn’t y sy? Wll thn, dwn y g hr, Ishml,
fr th thr hndrdth ly.”

“Cptn Plg,” sd I, “I hv a frnd wth m wh wnts t shp
t—shll I brng hm dwn t-mrrw?”

“T b sr,” sd Plg. “Ftch hm alng, and w’ll lk at hm.”

“Wht ly ds h wnt?” grnd Bldd, glncng up frm th bk in
whch h hd agn bn bryng hmslf.

“Oh! nvr th mnd abt tht, Bldd,” sd Plg. “Hs h evr
whld it any?” trnng t m.

“Klld mr whls thn I cn cnt, Cptn Plg.”

“Wll, brng hm alng thn.”

And, aftr sgnng th pprs, off I wnt; nthng dbtng bt tht I
hd dn a gd mrnng’s wrk, and tht th Pqd ws th idntcl
shp tht Yj hd prvdd t crry Qqg and m rnd th Cp.

Bt I hd nt prcdd fr, whn I bgn t bthnk m tht th
Cptn wth whm I ws t sl yt rmnd unsn by m; thgh,
indd, in mny css, a whl-shp wll b cmpltly fttd ot, and
rcv all hr crw on brd, er th cptn mks hmslf vsbl by
arrvng t tk cmmnd; fr smtms ths vygs ar s prlngd,
and th shr intrvls at hm s excdngly brf, tht if th
cptn hv a fmly, or any absrbng cncrnmnt of tht srt, h
ds nt trbl hmslf mch abt hs shp in prt, bt lvs hr t
th ownrs tll all is rdy fr s. Hwvr, it is alwys as wll t
hv a lk at hm bfr irrvcbly cmmttng yrslf int hs
hnds. Trnng bck I accstd Cptn Plg, inqrng whr Cptn
Ahb ws t b fnd.

“And wht dst th wnt of Cptn Ahb? It’s all rght engh; th
art shppd.”

“Ys, bt I shld lk t s hm.”

“Bt I dn’t thnk th wlt b abl t at prsnt. I dn’t knw
exctly wht’s th mttr wth hm; bt h kps cls insd th
hs; a srt of sck, and yt h dn’t lk s. In fct, h an’t
sck; bt n, h isn’t wll ethr. Any hw, yng mn, h wn’t alwys
s m, s I dn’t spps h wll th. H’s a qr mn, Cptn
Ahb—s sm thnk—bt a gd on. Oh, th’lt lk hm wll engh; n
fr, n fr. H’s a grnd, ungdly, gd-lk mn, Cptn Ahb;
dsn’t spk mch; bt, whn h ds spk, thn y my wll lstn.
Mrk y, b frwrnd; Ahb’s abv th cmmn; Ahb’s bn in
cllgs, as wll as ’mng th cnnbls; bn usd t dpr wndrs
thn th wvs; fxd hs fry lnc in mghtr, strngr fs thn
whls. Hs lnc! ay, th knst and th srst tht ot of all or
isl! Oh! h an’t Cptn Bldd; n, and h an’t Cptn Plg;
_h’s Ahb_, by; and Ahb of old, th knwst, ws a crwnd kng!”

“And a vry vl on. Whn tht wckd kng ws sln, th dgs, dd
thy nt lck hs bld?”

“Cm hthr t m—hthr, hthr,” sd Plg, wth a sgnfcnc in
hs ey tht almst strtld m. “Lk y, ld; nvr sy tht on brd
th Pqd. Nvr sy it anywhr. Cptn Ahb dd nt nm hmslf.
’Tws a flsh, ignrnt whm of hs crzy, wdwd mthr, wh dd
whn h ws only a twlvmnth old. And yt th old sqw Tstg, at
Gyhd, sd tht th nm wld smhw prv prphtc. And,
prhps, othr fls lk hr my tll th th sm. I wsh t wrn
th. It’s a l. I knw Cptn Ahb wll; I’v sld wth hm as
mt yrs ag; I knw wht h is—a gd mn—nt a ps, gd mn,
lk Bldd, bt a swrng gd mn—smthng lk m—only thr’s a
gd dl mr of hm. Ay, ay, I knw tht h ws nvr vry jlly;
and I knw tht on th pssg hm, h ws a lttl ot of hs mnd
fr a spll; bt it ws th shrp shtng pns in hs bldng stmp
tht brght tht abt, as any on mght s. I knw, t, tht evr
snc h lst hs lg lst vyg by tht accrsd whl, h’s bn a
knd of mdy—dsprt mdy, and svg smtms; bt tht wll all
pss off. And onc fr all, lt m tll th and assr th, yng
mn, it’s bttr t sl wth a mdy gd cptn thn a lghng bd
on. S gd-by t th—and wrng nt Cptn Ahb, bcs h hppns
t hv a wckd nm. Bsds, my by, h hs a wf—nt thr vygs
wddd—a swt, rsgnd grl. Thnk of tht; by tht swt grl tht
old mn hs a chld: hld y thn thr cn b any uttr, hplss hrm
in Ahb? N, n, my ld; strckn, blstd, if h b, Ahb hs hs
hmnts!”

As I wlkd awy, I ws fll of thghtflnss; wht hd bn
incdntlly rvld t m of Cptn Ahb, flld m wth a crtn
wld vgnss of pnflnss cncrnng hm. And smhw, at th tm,
I flt a sympthy and a srrw fr hm, bt fr I dn’t knw wht,
unlss it ws th crl lss of hs lg. And yt I als flt a strng
aw of hm; bt tht srt of aw, whch I cnnt at all dscrb, ws
nt exctly aw; I d nt knw wht it ws. Bt I flt it; and it dd
nt dsncln m twrds hm; thgh I flt imptnc at wht smd
lk mystry in hm, s imprfctly as h ws knwn t m thn.
Hwvr, my thghts wr at lngth crrd in othr drctns, s
tht fr th prsnt drk Ahb slppd my mnd.


CHPTR 17. Th Rmdn.

As Qqg’s Rmdn, or Fstng and Hmltn, ws t cntn all
dy, I dd nt chs t dstrb hm tll twrds nght-fll; fr I
chrsh th grtst rspct twrds evrybdy’s rlgs oblgtns,
nvr mnd hw cmcl, and cld nt fnd it in my hrt t undrvl
evn a cngrgtn of ants wrshppng a td-stl; or ths othr
crtrs in crtn prts of or erth, wh wth a dgr of
ftmnsm qt unprcdntd in othr plnts, bw dwn bfr th
trs of a dcsd lndd prprtr mrly on accnt of th
inrdnt pssssns yt ownd and rntd in hs nm.

I sy, w gd Prsbytrn Chrstns shld b chrtbl in ths
thngs, and nt fncy orslvs s vstly sprr t othr mrtls,
pgns and wht nt, bcs of thr hlf-crzy cncts on ths
sbjcts. Thr ws Qqg, nw, crtnly entrtnng th mst
absrd ntns abt Yj and hs Rmdn;—bt wht of tht? Qqg
thght h knw wht h ws abt, I spps; h smd t b cntnt;
and thr lt hm rst. All or argng wth hm wld nt avl; lt
hm b, I sy: and Hvn hv mrcy on us all—Prsbytrns and Pgns
alk—fr w ar all smhw drdflly crckd abt th hd, and
sdly nd mndng.

Twrds evnng, whn I flt assrd tht all hs prfrmncs and
rtls mst b ovr, I wnt up t hs rm and knckd at th dr;
bt n answr. I trd t opn it, bt it ws fstnd insd.
“Qqg,” sd I sftly thrgh th ky-hl:—all slnt. “I sy,
Qqg! why dn’t y spk? It’s I—Ishml.” Bt all rmnd stll
as bfr. I bgn t grw alrmd. I hd allwd hm sch abndnt
tm; I thght h mght hv hd an applctc ft. I lkd thrgh
th ky-hl; bt th dr opnng int an odd crnr of th rm, th
ky-hl prspct ws bt a crkd and snstr on. I cld only s
prt of th ft-brd of th bd and a ln of th wll, bt nthng
mr. I ws srprsd t bhld rstng agnst th wll th wdn
shft of Qqg’s hrpn, whch th lndldy th evnng prvs
hd tkn frm hm, bfr or mntng t th chmbr. Tht’s strng,
thght I; bt at any rt, snc th hrpn stnds yndr, and h
sldm or nvr gs abrd wtht it, thrfr h mst b insd
hr, and n pssbl mstk.

“Qqg!—Qqg!”—all stll. Smthng mst hv hppnd.
Applxy! I trd t brst opn th dr; bt it stbbrnly rsstd.
Rnnng dwn strs, I qckly sttd my sspcns t th frst prsn
I mt—th chmbr-md. “L! l!” sh crd, “I thght smthng mst
b th mttr. I wnt t mk th bd aftr brkfst, and th dr ws
lckd; and nt a ms t b hrd; and it’s bn jst s slnt evr
snc. Bt I thght, my b, y hd bth gn off and lckd yr
bggg in fr sf kpng. L! l, m’am!—Mstrss! mrdr! Mrs.
Hssy! applxy!”—and wth ths crs, sh rn twrds th ktchn, I
fllwng.

Mrs. Hssy sn apprd, wth a mstrd-pt in on hnd and a
vngr-crt in th othr, hvng jst brkn awy frm th occptn
of attndng t th cstrs, and scldng hr lttl blck by
mntm.

“Wd-hs!” crd I, “whch wy t it? Rn fr Gd’s sk, and ftch
smthng t pry opn th dr—th ax!—th ax! h’s hd a strk;
dpnd upn it!”—and s syng I ws unmthdclly rshng up strs
agn empty-hndd, whn Mrs. Hssy intrpsd th mstrd-pt and
vngr-crt, and th entr cstr of hr cntnnc.

“Wht’s th mttr wth y, yng mn?”

“Gt th ax! Fr Gd’s sk, rn fr th dctr, sm on, whl I pry
it opn!”

“Lk hr,” sd th lndldy, qckly pttng dwn th vngr-crt,
s as t hv on hnd fr; “lk hr; ar y tlkng abt pryng
opn any of my drs?”—and wth tht sh szd my arm. “Wht’s th
mttr wth y? Wht’s th mttr wth y, shpmt?”

In as clm, bt rpd a mnnr as pssbl, I gv hr t undrstnd
th whl cs. Uncnscsly clppng th vngr-crt t on sd of
hr ns, sh rmntd fr an instnt; thn exclmd—“N! I hvn’t
sn it snc I pt it thr.” Rnnng t a lttl clst undr th
lndng of th strs, sh glncd in, and rtrnng, tld m tht
Qqg’s hrpn ws mssng. “H’s klld hmslf,” sh crd. “It’s
unfrt’nt Stggs dn ovr agn—thr gs anthr cntrpn—Gd
pty hs pr mthr!—it wll b th rn of my hs. Hs th pr ld
a sstr? Whr’s tht grl?—thr, Btty, g t Snrls th Pntr,
and tll hm t pnt m a sgn, wth—“n scds prmttd hr, and
n smkng in th prlr;”—mght as wll kll bth brds at onc. Kll?
Th Lrd b mrcfl t hs ghst! Wht’s tht ns thr? Y, yng
mn, avst thr!”

And rnnng up aftr m, sh cght m as I ws agn tryng t frc
opn th dr.

“I dn’t allw it; I wn’t hv my prmss spld. G fr th
lcksmth, thr’s on abt a ml frm hr. Bt avst!” pttng hr
hnd in hr sd-pckt, “hr’s a ky tht’ll ft, I gss; lt’s
s.” And wth tht, sh trnd it in th lck; bt, als! Qqg’s
spplmntl blt rmnd unwthdrwn wthn.

“Hv t brst it opn,” sd I, and ws rnnng dwn th entry a
lttl, fr a gd strt, whn th lndldy cght at m, agn vwng
I shld nt brk dwn hr prmss; bt I tr frm hr, and wth a
sddn bdly rsh dshd myslf fll agnst th mrk.

Wth a prdgs ns th dr flw opn, and th knb slmmng
agnst th wll, snt th plstr t th clng; and thr, gd
hvns! thr st Qqg, altgthr cl and slf-cllctd; rght
in th mddl of th rm; sqttng on hs hms, and hldng Yj on
tp of hs hd. H lkd nthr on wy nr th othr wy, bt st
lk a crvd img wth scrc a sgn of actv lf.

“Qqg,” sd I, gng up t hm, “Qqg, wht’s th mttr wth
y?”

“H hn’t bn a sttn’ s all dy, hs h?” sd th lndldy.

Bt all w sd, nt a wrd cld w drg ot of hm; I almst flt
lk pshng hm ovr, s as t chng hs pstn, fr it ws almst
intlrbl, it smd s pnflly and unntrlly cnstrnd;
espclly, as in all prbblty h hd bn sttng s fr upwrds of
eght or tn hrs, gng t wtht hs rglr mls.

“Mrs. Hssy,” sd I, “h’s _alv_ at all evnts; s lv us, if y
pls, and I wll s t ths strng affr myslf.”

Clsng th dr upn th lndldy, I endvrd t prvl upn
Qqg t tk a chr; bt in vn. Thr h st; and all h cld
d—fr all my plt arts and blndshmnts—h wld nt mv a pg,
nr sy a sngl wrd, nr evn lk at m, nr ntc my prsnc in
th slghtst wy.

I wndr, thght I, if ths cn pssbly b a prt of hs Rmdn; d
thy fst on thr hms tht wy in hs ntv islnd. It mst b s;
ys, it’s prt of hs crd, I spps; wll, thn, lt hm rst; h’ll
gt up snr or ltr, n dbt. It cn’t lst fr evr, thnk Gd,
and hs Rmdn only cms onc a yr; and I dn’t blv it’s vry
pnctl thn.

I wnt dwn t sppr. Aftr sttng a lng tm lstnng t th lng
strs of sm slrs wh hd jst cm frm a plm-pddng vyg,
as thy clld it (tht is, a shrt whlng-vyg in a schnr or
brg, cnfnd t th nrth of th ln, in th Atlntc Ocn only);
aftr lstnng t ths plm-pddngrs tll nrly elvn o’clck, I
wnt up strs t g t bd, flng qt sr by ths tm Qqg
mst crtnly hv brght hs Rmdn t a trmntn. Bt n; thr
h ws jst whr I hd lft hm; h hd nt strrd an inch. I bgn
t grw vxd wth hm; it smd s dwnrght snslss and insn t
b sttng thr all dy and hlf th nght on hs hms in a cld rm,
hldng a pc of wd on hs hd.

“Fr hvn’s sk, Qqg, gt up and shk yrslf; gt up and
hv sm sppr. Y’ll strv; y’ll kll yrslf, Qqg.” Bt
nt a wrd dd h rply.

Dsprng of hm, thrfr, I dtrmnd t g t bd and t slp;
and n dbt, bfr a grt whl, h wld fllw m. Bt prvs t
trnng in, I tk my hvy brskn jckt, and thrw it ovr hm, as
it prmsd t b a vry cld nght; and h hd nthng bt hs
ordnry rnd jckt on. Fr sm tm, d all I wld, I cld nt
gt int th fntst dz. I hd blwn ot th cndl; and th mr
thght of Qqg—nt fr ft off—sttng thr in tht unsy
pstn, strk aln in th cld and drk; ths md m rlly
wrtchd. Thnk of it; slpng all nght in th sm rm wth a wd
awk pgn on hs hms in ths drry, unccntbl Rmdn!

Bt smhw I drppd off at lst, and knw nthng mr tll brk of
dy; whn, lkng ovr th bdsd, thr sqttd Qqg, as if h
hd bn scrwd dwn t th flr. Bt as sn as th frst glmps of
sn entrd th wndw, up h gt, wth stff and grtng jnts, bt
wth a chrfl lk; lmpd twrds m whr I ly; prssd hs
frhd agn agnst mn; and sd hs Rmdn ws ovr.

Nw, as I bfr hntd, I hv n objctn t any prsn’s rlgn,
b it wht it my, s lng as tht prsn ds nt kll or inslt any
othr prsn, bcs tht othr prsn dn’t blv it als. Bt whn
a mn’s rlgn bcms rlly frntc; whn it is a pstv trmnt
t hm; and, in fn, mks ths erth of ors an uncmfrtbl inn t
ldg in; thn I thnk it hgh tm t tk tht indvdl asd and
arg th pnt wth hm.

And jst s I nw dd wth Qqg. “Qqg,” sd I, “gt int bd
nw, and l and lstn t m.” I thn wnt on, bgnnng wth th rs
and prgrss of th prmtv rlgns, and cmng dwn t th vrs
rlgns of th prsnt tm, drng whch tm I lbrd t shw
Qqg tht all ths Lnts, Rmdns, and prlngd hm-sqttngs
in cld, chrlss rms wr strk nnsns; bd fr th hlth;
uslss fr th sl; oppsd, in shrt, t th obvs lws of Hygn
and cmmn sns. I tld hm, t, tht h bng in othr thngs sch
an extrmly snsbl and sgcs svg, it pnd m, vry bdly
pnd m, t s hm nw s dplrbly flsh abt ths rdcls
Rmdn of hs. Bsds, argd I, fstng mks th bdy cv in;
hnc th sprt cvs in; and all thghts brn of a fst mst
ncssrly b hlf-strvd. Ths is th rsn why mst dyspptc
rlgnsts chrsh sch mlnchly ntns abt thr hrftrs. In
on wrd, Qqg, sd I, rthr dgrssvly; hll is an id frst
brn on an undgstd appl-dmplng; and snc thn prpttd
thrgh th hrdtry dysppss nrtrd by Rmdns.

I thn askd Qqg whthr h hmslf ws evr trbld wth
dyspps; exprssng th id vry plnly, s tht h cld tk it
in. H sd n; only upn on mmrbl occsn. It ws aftr a grt
fst gvn by hs fthr th kng, on th gnng of a grt bttl
whrn ffty of th enmy hd bn klld by abt tw o’clck in th
aftrnn, and all ckd and etn tht vry evnng.

“N mr, Qqg,” sd I, shddrng; “tht wll d;” fr I knw th
infrncs wtht hs frthr hntng thm. I hd sn a slr wh
hd vstd tht vry islnd, and h tld m tht it ws th cstm,
whn a grt bttl hd bn gnd thr, t brbc all th sln in
th yrd or grdn of th vctr; and thn, on by on, thy wr
plcd in grt wdn trnchrs, and grnshd rnd lk a pl,
wth brdfrt and ccnts; and wth sm prsly in thr mths,
wr snt rnd wth th vctr’s cmplmnts t all hs frnds, jst
as thgh ths prsnts wr s mny Chrstms trkys.

Aftr all, I d nt thnk tht my rmrks abt rlgn md mch
imprssn upn Qqg. Bcs, in th frst plc, h smhw
smd dll of hrng on tht imprtnt sbjct, unlss cnsdrd
frm hs own pnt of vw; and, in th scnd plc, h dd nt mr
thn on thrd undrstnd m, cch my ids smply as I wld; and,
fnlly, h n dbt thght h knw a gd dl mr abt th tr
rlgn thn I dd. H lkd at m wth a srt of cndscndng
cncrn and cmpssn, as thgh h thght it a grt pty tht sch
a snsbl yng mn shld b s hplssly lst t evnglcl pgn
pty.

At lst w rs and drssd; and Qqg, tkng a prdgsly hrty
brkfst of chwdrs of all srts, s tht th lndldy shld nt
mk mch prft by rsn of hs Rmdn, w slld ot t brd th
Pqd, sntrng alng, and pckng or tth wth hlbt bns.


CHPTR 18. Hs Mrk.

As w wr wlkng dwn th end of th whrf twrds th shp, Qqg
crryng hs hrpn, Cptn Plg in hs grff vc ldly hld us
frm hs wgwm, syng h hd nt sspctd my frnd ws a cnnbl,
and frthrmr annncng tht h lt n cnnbls on brd tht
crft, unlss thy prvsly prdcd thr pprs.

“Wht d y mn by tht, Cptn Plg?” sd I, nw jmpng on th
blwrks, and lvng my cmrd stndng on th whrf.

“I mn,” h rpld, “h mst shw hs pprs.”

“Ys,” sd Cptn Bldd in hs hllw vc, stckng hs hd frm
bhnd Plg’s, ot of th wgwm. “H mst shw tht h’s cnvrtd.
Sn of drknss,” h addd, trnng t Qqg, “art th at prsnt
in cmmnn wth any Chrstn chrch?”

“Why,” sd I, “h’s a mmbr of th frst Cngrgtnl Chrch.” Hr
b it sd, tht mny tttd svgs slng in Nntckt shps at
lst cm t b cnvrtd int th chrchs.

“Frst Cngrgtnl Chrch,” crd Bldd, “wht! tht wrshps in
Dcn Dtrnmy Clmn’s mtng-hs?” and s syng, tkng ot
hs spctcls, h rbbd thm wth hs grt yllw bndn
hndkrchf, and pttng thm on vry crflly, cm ot of th
wgwm, and lnng stffly ovr th blwrks, tk a gd lng lk at
Qqg.

“Hw lng hth h bn a mmbr?” h thn sd, trnng t m; “nt
vry lng, I rthr gss, yng mn.”

“N,” sd Plg, “and h hsn’t bn bptzd rght ethr, or it
wld hv wshd sm of tht dvl’s bl off hs fc.”

“D tll, nw,” crd Bldd, “is ths Phlstn a rglr mmbr of
Dcn Dtrnmy’s mtng? I nvr sw hm gng thr, and I pss
it evry Lrd’s dy.”

“I dn’t knw anythng abt Dcn Dtrnmy or hs mtng,” sd
I; “all I knw is, tht Qqg hr is a brn mmbr of th Frst
Cngrgtnl Chrch. H is a dcn hmslf, Qqg is.”

“Yng mn,” sd Bldd strnly, “th art skylrkng wth m—expln
thyslf, th yng Httt. Wht chrch dst th mn? answr m.”

Fndng myslf ths hrd pshd, I rpld. “I mn, sr, th sm
ancnt Cthlc Chrch t whch y and I, and Cptn Plg thr,
and Qqg hr, and all of us, and evry mthr’s sn and sl of us
blng; th grt and evrlstng Frst Cngrgtn of ths whl
wrshppng wrld; w all blng t tht; only sm of us chrsh sm
qr crtchts n wys tchng th grnd blf; in _tht_ w all
jn hnds.”

“Splc, th mn’st _splc_ hnds,” crd Plg, drwng nrr.
“Yng mn, y’d bttr shp fr a mssnry, instd of a fr-mst
hnd; I nvr hrd a bttr srmn. Dcn Dtrnmy—why Fthr
Mppl hmslf cldn’t bt it, and h’s rcknd smthng. Cm
abrd, cm abrd; nvr mnd abt th pprs. I sy, tll Qhg
thr—wht’s tht y cll hm? tll Qhg t stp alng. By th grt
anchr, wht a hrpn h’s gt thr! lks lk gd stff tht; and
h hndls it abt rght. I sy, Qhg, or whtvr yr nm is, dd
y evr stnd in th hd of a whl-bt? dd y evr strk a
fsh?”

Wtht syng a wrd, Qqg, in hs wld srt of wy, jmpd upn
th blwrks, frm thnc int th bws of on of th whl-bts
hngng t th sd; and thn brcng hs lft kn, and psng hs
hrpn, crd ot in sm sch wy as ths:—

“Cp’an, y s hm smll drp tr on wtr dr? Y s hm? wll,
sps hm on whl ey, wll, dn!” and tkng shrp am at it, h
drtd th irn rght ovr old Bldd’s brd brm, cln acrss th
shp’s dcks, and strck th glstnng tr spt ot of sght.

“Nw,” sd Qqg, qtly hlng in th ln, “sps-e hm whl-e
ey; why, dd whl dd.”

“Qck, Bldd,” sd Plg, hs prtnr, wh, aghst at th cls
vcnty of th flyng hrpn, hd rtrtd twrds th cbn
gngwy. “Qck, I sy, y Bldd, and gt th shp’s pprs. W mst
hv Hdghg thr, I mn Qhg, in on of or bts. Lk y,
Qhg, w’ll gv y th nntth ly, and tht’s mr thn evr ws
gvn a hrpnr yt ot of Nntckt.”

S dwn w wnt int th cbn, and t my grt jy Qqg ws sn
enrlld amng th sm shp’s cmpny t whch I myslf blngd.

Whn all prlmnrs wr ovr and Plg hd gt evrythng rdy fr
sgnng, h trnd t m and sd, “I gss, Qhg thr dn’t knw
hw t wrt, ds h? I sy, Qhg, blst y! dst th sgn thy nm
or mk thy mrk?”

Bt at ths qstn, Qqg, wh hd twc or thrc bfr tkn
prt in smlr crmns, lkd n wys abshd; bt tkng th
offrd pn, cpd upn th ppr, in th prpr plc, an exct
cntrprt of a qr rnd fgr whch ws tttd upn hs arm; s
tht thrgh Cptn Plg’s obstnt mstk tchng hs
applltv, it std smthng lk ths:—

Qhg. hs X mrk.

Mnwhl Cptn Bldd st ernstly and stdfstly eyng Qqg,
and at lst rsng slmnly and fmblng in th hg pckts of hs
brd-skrtd drb ct, tk ot a bndl of trcts, and slctng on
enttld “Th Lttr Dy Cmng; or N Tm t Ls,” plcd it in
Qqg’s hnds, and thn grspng thm and th bk wth bth hs,
lkd ernstly int hs eys, and sd, “Sn of drknss, I mst d
my dty by th; I am prt ownr of ths shp, and fl cncrnd fr
th sls of all its crw; if th stll clngst t thy Pgn wys,
whch I sdly fr, I bsch th, rmn nt fr ay a Bll
bndsmn. Sprn th idl Bll, and th hds drgn; trn frm th
wrth t cm; mnd thn ey, I sy; oh! gdnss grcs! str
clr of th fry pt!”

Smthng of th slt s yt lngrd in old Bldd’s lngg,
htrgnsly mxd wth Scrptrl and dmstc phrss.

“Avst thr, avst thr, Bldd, avst nw splng or hrpnr,”
crd Plg. “Ps hrpnrs nvr mk gd vygrs—it tks th
shrk ot of ’em; n hrpnr is wrth a strw wh ant prtty
shrksh. Thr ws yng Nt Swn, onc th brvst bt-hdr ot
of all Nntckt and th Vnyrd; h jnd th mtng, and nvr
cm t gd. H gt s frghtnd abt hs plgy sl, tht h
shrnkd and shrd awy frm whls, fr fr of aftr-clps, in cs
h gt stv and wnt t Dvy Jns.”

“Plg! Plg!” sd Bldd, lftng hs eys and hnds, “th thyslf,
as I myslf, hst sn mny a prls tm; th knwst, Plg, wht
it is t hv th fr of dth; hw, thn, cn’st th prt in ths
ungdly gs. Th blst thn own hrt, Plg. Tll m, whn ths
sm Pqd hr hd hr thr msts ovrbrd in tht typhn on
Jpn, tht sm vyg whn th wnt mt wth Cptn Ahb, dd’st
th nt thnk of Dth and th Jdgmnt thn?”

“Hr hm, hr hm nw,” crd Plg, mrchng acrss th cbn, and
thrstng hs hnds fr dwn int hs pckts,—“hr hm, all of y.
Thnk of tht! Whn evry mmnt w thght th shp wld snk! Dth
and th Jdgmnt thn? Wht? Wth all thr msts mkng sch an
evrlstng thndrng agnst th sd; and evry s brkng ovr
us, fr and aft. Thnk of Dth and th Jdgmnt thn? N! n tm t
thnk abt Dth thn. Lf ws wht Cptn Ahb and I ws thnkng
of; and hw t sv all hnds—hw t rg jry-msts—hw t gt int th
nrst prt; tht ws wht I ws thnkng of.”

Bldd sd n mr, bt bttnng up hs ct, stlkd on dck, whr
w fllwd hm. Thr h std, vry qtly ovrlkng sm
slmkrs wh wr mndng a tp-sl in th wst. Nw and thn h
stpd t pck up a ptch, or sv an end of trrd twn, whch
othrws mght hv bn wstd.


CHPTR 19. Th Prpht.

“Shpmts, hv y shppd in tht shp?”

Qqg and I hd jst lft th Pqd, and wr sntrng awy frm
th wtr, fr th mmnt ech occpd wth hs own thghts, whn th
abv wrds wr pt t us by a strngr, wh, psng bfr us,
lvlld hs mssv frfngr at th vssl in qstn. H ws bt
shbbly apprlld in fdd jckt and ptchd trwsrs; a rg of a
blck hndkrchf invstng hs nck. A cnflnt smll-px hd in all
drctns flwd ovr hs fc, and lft it lk th cmplctd
rbbd bd of a trrnt, whn th rshng wtrs hv bn drd up.

“Hv y shppd in hr?” h rptd.

“Y mn th shp Pqd, I spps,” sd I, tryng t gn a lttl
mr tm fr an unntrrptd lk at hm.

“Ay, th Pqd—tht shp thr,” h sd, drwng bck hs whl arm,
and thn rpdly shvng it strght ot frm hm, wth th fxd
bynt of hs pntd fngr drtd fll at th objct.

“Ys,” sd I, “w hv jst sgnd th artcls.”

“Anythng dwn thr abt yr sls?”

“Abt wht?”

“Oh, prhps y hv’n’t gt any,” h sd qckly. “N mttr thgh,
I knw mny chps tht hv’n’t gt any,—gd lck t ’em; and thy ar
all th bttr off fr it. A sl’s a srt of a ffth whl t a
wgn.”

“Wht ar y jbbrng abt, shpmt?” sd I.

“_H’s_ gt engh, thgh, t mk up fr all dfcncs of tht
srt in othr chps,” abrptly sd th strngr, plcng a nrvs
emphss upn th wrd _h_.

“Qqg,” sd I, “lt’s g; ths fllw hs brkn ls frm
smwhr; h’s tlkng abt smthng and smbdy w dn’t knw.”

“Stp!” crd th strngr. “Y sd tr—y hv’n’t sn Old Thndr
yt, hv y?”

“Wh’s Old Thndr?” sd I, agn rvtd wth th insn ernstnss
of hs mnnr.

“Cptn Ahb.”

“Wht! th cptn of or shp, th Pqd?”

“Ay, amng sm of us old slr chps, h gs by tht nm. Y
hv’n’t sn hm yt, hv y?”

“N, w hv’n’t. H’s sck thy sy, bt is gttng bttr, and wll b
all rght agn bfr lng.”

“All rght agn bfr lng!” lghd th strngr, wth a slmnly
drsv srt of lgh. “Lk y; whn Cptn Ahb is all rght, thn
ths lft arm of mn wll b all rght; nt bfr.”

“Wht d y knw abt hm?”

“Wht dd thy _tll_ y abt hm? Sy tht!”

“Thy ddn’t tll mch of anythng abt hm; only I’v hrd tht h’s
a gd whl-hntr, and a gd cptn t hs crw.”

“Tht’s tr, tht’s tr—ys, bth tr engh. Bt y mst jmp whn
h gvs an ordr. Stp and grwl; grwl and g—tht’s th wrd wth
Cptn Ahb. Bt nthng abt tht thng tht hppnd t hm off
Cp Hrn, lng ag, whn h ly lk dd fr thr dys and nghts;
nthng abt tht ddly skrmmg wth th Spnrd afr th altr
in Snt?—hrd nthng abt tht, eh? Nthng abt th slvr
clbsh h spt int? And nthng abt hs lsng hs lg lst
vyg, accrdng t th prphcy. Ddn’t y hr a wrd abt thm
mttrs and smthng mr, eh? N, I dn’t thnk y dd; hw cld y?
Wh knws it? Nt all Nntckt, I gss. Bt hws’evr, myhp, y’v
hrd tll abt th lg, and hw h lst it; ay, y hv hrd of
tht, I dr sy. Oh ys, _tht_ evry on knws a’mst—I mn thy
knw h’s only on lg; and tht a prmctt tk th othr off.”

“My frnd,” sd I, “wht all ths gbbrsh of yrs is abt, I
dn’t knw, and I dn’t mch cr; fr it sms t m tht y mst b
a lttl dmgd in th hd. Bt if y ar spkng of Cptn Ahb,
of tht shp thr, th Pqd, thn lt m tll y, tht I knw all
abt th lss of hs lg.”

“_All_ abt it, eh—sr y d?—all?”

“Prtty sr.”

Wth fngr pntd and ey lvlld at th Pqd, th bggr-lk
strngr std a mmnt, as if in a trbld rvr; thn strtng a
lttl, trnd and sd:—“Y’v shppd, hv y? Nms dwn on th
pprs? Wll, wll, wht’s sgnd, is sgnd; and wht’s t b, wll
b; and thn agn, prhps it wn’t b, aftr all. Anyhw, it’s all
fxd and arrngd a’rdy; and sm slrs or othr mst g wth hm,
I spps; as wll ths as any othr mn, Gd pty ’em! Mrnng t y,
shpmts, mrnng; th inffbl hvns blss y; I’m srry I stppd
y.”

“Lk hr, frnd,” sd I, “if y hv anythng imprtnt t tll
us, ot wth it; bt if y ar only tryng t bmbzl us, y ar
mstkn in yr gm; tht’s all I hv t sy.”

“And it’s sd vry wll, and I lk t hr a chp tlk up tht wy;
y ar jst th mn fr hm—th lks of y. Mrnng t y, shpmts,
mrnng! Oh! whn y gt thr, tll ’em I’v cncldd nt t mk on
of ’em.”

“Ah, my dr fllw, y cn’t fl us tht wy—y cn’t fl us. It
is th esst thng in th wrld fr a mn t lk as if h hd a
grt scrt in hm.”

“Mrnng t y, shpmts, mrnng.”

“Mrnng it is,” sd I. “Cm alng, Qqg, lt’s lv ths crzy
mn. Bt stp, tll m yr nm, wll y?”

“Eljh.”

Eljh! thght I, and w wlkd awy, bth cmmntng, aftr ech
othr’s fshn, upn ths rggd old slr; and agrd tht h ws
nthng bt a hmbg, tryng t b a bgbr. Bt w hd nt gn
prhps abv a hndrd yrds, whn chncng t trn a crnr, and
lkng bck as I dd s, wh shld b sn bt Eljh fllwng us,
thgh at a dstnc. Smhw, th sght of hm strck m s, tht I
sd nthng t Qqg of hs bng bhnd, bt pssd on wth my
cmrd, anxs t s whthr th strngr wld trn th sm crnr
tht w dd. H dd; and thn it smd t m tht h ws dggng us,
bt wth wht intnt I cld nt fr th lf of m imgn. Ths
crcmstnc, cpld wth hs ambgs, hlf-hntng, hlf-rvlng,
shrdd srt of tlk, nw bgt in m all knds of vg wndrmnts
and hlf-apprhnsns, and all cnnctd wth th Pqd; and Cptn
Ahb; and th lg h hd lst; and th Cp Hrn ft; and th slvr
clbsh; and wht Cptn Plg hd sd of hm, whn I lft th shp
th dy prvs; and th prdctn of th sqw Tstg; and th
vyg w hd bnd orslvs t sl; and a hndrd othr shdwy
thngs.

I ws rslvd t stsfy myslf whthr ths rggd Eljh ws rlly
dggng us or nt, and wth tht intnt crssd th wy wth Qqg,
and on tht sd of it rtrcd or stps. Bt Eljh pssd on,
wtht smng t ntc us. Ths rlvd m; and onc mr, and
fnlly as it smd t m, I prnncd hm in my hrt, a hmbg.


CHPTR 20. All Astr.

A dy or tw pssd, and thr ws grt actvty abrd th Pqd.
Nt only wr th old sls bng mndd, bt nw sls wr cmng on
brd, and blts of cnvs, and cls of rggng; in shrt, evrythng
btknd tht th shp’s prprtns wr hrryng t a cls.
Cptn Plg sldm or nvr wnt ashr, bt st in hs wgwm
kpng a shrp lk-ot upn th hnds: Bldd dd all th prchsng
and prvdng at th strs; and th mn emplyd in th hld and on
th rggng wr wrkng tll lng aftr nght-fll.

On th dy fllwng Qqg’s sgnng th artcls, wrd ws gvn at
all th inns whr th shp’s cmpny wr stppng, tht thr chsts
mst b on brd bfr nght, fr thr ws n tllng hw sn th
vssl mght b slng. S Qqg and I gt dwn or trps,
rslvng, hwvr, t slp ashr tll th lst. Bt it sms thy
alwys gv vry lng ntc in ths css, and th shp dd nt sl
fr svrl dys. Bt n wndr; thr ws a gd dl t b dn, and
thr is n tllng hw mny thngs t b thght of, bfr th Pqd
ws flly eqppd.

Evry on knws wht a mlttd of thngs—bds, sc-pns, knvs and
frks, shvls and tngs, npkns, nt-crckrs, and wht nt, ar
indspnsbl t th bsnss of hskpng. Jst s wth whlng,
whch ncsstts a thr-yrs’ hskpng upn th wd ocn, fr
frm all grcrs, cstrmngrs, dctrs, bkrs, and bnkrs. And
thgh ths als hlds tr of mrchnt vssls, yt nt by any mns
t th sm extnt as wth whlmn. Fr bsds th grt lngth of
th whlng vyg, th nmrs artcls pclr t th prsctn
of th fshry, and th impssblty of rplcng thm at th rmt
hrbrs uslly frqntd, it mst b rmmbrd, tht of all shps,
whlng vssls ar th mst expsd t accdnts of all knds, and
espclly t th dstrctn and lss of th vry thngs upn whch
th sccss of th vyg mst dpnds. Hnc, th spr bts, spr
sprs, and spr lns and hrpns, and spr evrythngs, almst, bt
a spr Cptn and dplct shp.

At th prd of or arrvl at th Islnd, th hvst strg of th
Pqd hd bn almst cmpltd; cmprsng hr bf, brd, wtr,
fl, and irn hps and stvs. Bt, as bfr hntd, fr sm tm
thr ws a cntnl ftchng and crryng on brd of dvrs odds and
ends of thngs, bth lrg and smll.

Chf amng ths wh dd ths ftchng and crryng ws Cptn
Bldd’s sstr, a ln old ldy of a mst dtrmnd and indftgbl
sprt, bt wthl vry kndhrtd, wh smd rslvd tht, if _sh_
cld hlp it, nthng shld b fnd wntng in th Pqd, aftr
onc frly gttng t s. At on tm sh wld cm on brd wth a
jr of pckls fr th stwrd’s pntry; anthr tm wth a bnch of
qlls fr th chf mt’s dsk, whr h kpt hs lg; a thrd tm
wth a rll of flnnl fr th smll of sm on’s rhmtc bck.
Nvr dd any wmn bttr dsrv hr nm, whch ws Chrty—Ant
Chrty, as evrybdy clld hr. And lk a sstr of chrty dd ths
chrtbl Ant Chrty bstl abt hthr and ththr, rdy t trn
hr hnd and hrt t anythng tht prmsd t yld sfty, cmfrt,
and cnsltn t all on brd a shp in whch hr blvd brthr
Bldd ws cncrnd, and in whch sh hrslf ownd a scr or tw of
wll-svd dllrs.

Bt it ws strtlng t s ths excllnt hrtd Qkrss cmng on
brd, as sh dd th lst dy, wth a lng ol-ldl in on hnd, and
a stll lngr whlng lnc in th othr. Nr ws Bldd hmslf nr
Cptn Plg at all bckwrd. As fr Bldd, h crrd abt wth hm
a lng lst of th artcls ndd, and at evry frsh arrvl, dwn
wnt hs mrk oppst tht artcl upn th ppr. Evry onc in a
whl Plg cm hbblng ot of hs whlbn dn, rrng at th mn
dwn th htchwys, rrng up t th rggrs at th mst-hd, and
thn cncldd by rrng bck int hs wgwm.

Drng ths dys of prprtn, Qqg and I oftn vstd th
crft, and as oftn I askd abt Cptn Ahb, and hw h ws, and
whn h ws gng t cm on brd hs shp. T ths qstns thy
wld answr, tht h ws gttng bttr and bttr, and ws expctd
abrd evry dy; mntm, th tw cptns, Plg and Bldd, cld
attnd t evrythng ncssry t ft th vssl fr th vyg. If I
hd bn dwnrght hnst wth myslf, I wld hv sn vry plnly
in my hrt tht I dd bt hlf fncy bng cmmttd ths wy t s
lng a vyg, wtht onc lyng my eys on th mn wh ws t b th
abslt dcttr of it, s sn as th shp sld ot upn th opn
s. Bt whn a mn sspcts any wrng, it smtms hppns tht if h
b alrdy invlvd in th mttr, h insnsbly strvs t cvr up
hs sspcns evn frm hmslf. And mch ths wy it ws wth m. I
sd nthng, and trd t thnk nthng.

At lst it ws gvn ot tht sm tm nxt dy th shp wld
crtnly sl. S nxt mrnng, Qqg and I tk a vry erly
strt.


CHPTR 21. Gng Abrd.

It ws nrly sx o’clck, bt only gry imprfct msty dwn, whn w
drw ngh th whrf.

“Thr ar sm slrs rnnng ahd thr, if I s rght,” sd I t
Qqg, “it cn’t b shdws; sh’s off by snrs, I gss; cm
on!”

“Avst!” crd a vc, whs ownr at th sm tm cmng cls
bhnd us, ld a hnd upn bth or shldrs, and thn insntng
hmslf btwn us, std stpng frwrd a lttl, in th uncrtn
twlght, strngly prng frm Qqg t m. It ws Eljh.

“Gng abrd?”

“Hnds off, wll y,” sd I.

“Lk hr,” sd Qqg, shkng hmslf, “g ’wy!”

“An’t gng abrd, thn?”

“Ys, w ar,” sd I, “bt wht bsnss is tht of yrs? D y
knw, Mr. Eljh, tht I cnsdr y a lttl imprtnnt?”

“N, n, n; I wsn’t awr of tht,” sd Eljh, slwly and
wndrngly lkng frm m t Qqg, wth th mst unccntbl
glncs.

“Eljh,” sd I, “y wll oblg my frnd and m by wthdrwng. W
ar gng t th Indn and Pcfc Ocns, and wld prfr nt t b
dtnd.”

“Y b, b y? Cmng bck afr brkfst?”

“H’s crckd, Qqg,” sd I, “cm on.”

“Hll!” crd sttnry Eljh, hlng us whn w hd rmvd a fw
pcs.

“Nvr mnd hm,” sd I, “Qqg, cm on.”

Bt h stl up t us agn, and sddnly clppng hs hnd on my
shldr, sd—“Dd y s anythng lkng lk mn gng twrds tht
shp a whl ag?”

Strck by ths pln mttr-of-fct qstn, I answrd, syng, “Ys,
I thght I dd s fr or fv mn; bt it ws t dm t b sr.”

“Vry dm, vry dm,” sd Eljh. “Mrnng t y.”

Onc mr w qttd hm; bt onc mr h cm sftly aftr us; and
tchng my shldr agn, sd, “S if y cn fnd ’em nw, wll
y?

“Fnd wh?”

“Mrnng t y! mrnng t y!” h rjnd, agn mvng off. “Oh! I
ws gng t wrn y agnst—bt nvr mnd, nvr mnd—it’s all on,
all in th fmly t;—shrp frst ths mrnng, an’t it? Gd-by t
y. Shn’t s y agn vry sn, I gss; unlss it’s bfr th
Grnd Jry.” And wth ths crckd wrds h fnlly dprtd, lvng
m, fr th mmnt, in n smll wndrmnt at hs frntc impdnc.

At lst, stppng on brd th Pqd, w fnd evrythng in prfnd
qt, nt a sl mvng. Th cbn entrnc ws lckd wthn; th
htchs wr all on, and lmbrd wth cls of rggng. Gng frwrd
t th frcstl, w fnd th sld of th scttl opn. Sng a
lght, w wnt dwn, and fnd only an old rggr thr, wrppd in a
tttrd p-jckt. H ws thrwn at whl lngth upn tw chsts, hs
fc dwnwrds and inclsd in hs fldd arms. Th prfndst slmbr
slpt upn hm.

“Ths slrs w sw, Qqg, whr cn thy hv gn t?” sd I,
lkng dbsly at th slpr. Bt it smd tht, whn on th
whrf, Qqg hd nt at all ntcd wht I nw alldd t; hnc I
wld hv thght myslf t hv bn optclly dcvd in tht
mttr, wr it nt fr Eljh’s othrws inxplcbl qstn. Bt I
bt th thng dwn; and agn mrkng th slpr, jclrly hntd t
Qqg tht prhps w hd bst st up wth th bdy; tllng hm t
estblsh hmslf accrdngly. H pt hs hnd upn th slpr’s rr,
as thgh flng if it ws sft engh; and thn, wtht mr ad,
st qtly dwn thr.

“Grcs! Qqg, dn’t st thr,” sd I.

“Oh! prry dd st,” sd Qqg, “my cntry wy; wn’t hrt hm
fc.”

“Fc!” sd I, “cll tht hs fc? vry bnvlnt cntnnc thn;
bt hw hrd h brths, h’s hvng hmslf; gt off, Qqg, y
ar hvy, it’s grndng th fc of th pr. Gt off, Qqg! Lk,
h’ll twtch y off sn. I wndr h dn’t wk.”

Qqg rmvd hmslf t jst bynd th hd of th slpr, and
lghtd hs tmhwk pp. I st at th ft. W kpt th pp pssng
ovr th slpr, frm on t th othr. Mnwhl, upn qstnng
hm in hs brkn fshn, Qqg gv m t undrstnd tht, in hs
lnd, owng t th absnc of stts and sfs of all srts, th kng,
chfs, and grt ppl gnrlly, wr in th cstm of fttnng
sm of th lwr ordrs fr ottmns; and t frnsh a hs
cmfrtbly in tht rspct, y hd only t by up eght or tn lzy
fllws, and ly thm rnd in th prs and alcvs. Bsds, it ws
vry cnvnnt on an excrsn; mch bttr thn ths grdn-chrs
whch ar cnvrtbl int wlkng-stcks; upn occsn, a chf
cllng hs attndnt, and dsrng hm t mk a stt of hmslf
undr a sprdng tr, prhps in sm dmp mrshy plc.

Whl nrrtng ths thngs, evry tm Qqg rcvd th tmhwk
frm m, h flrshd th htcht-sd of it ovr th slpr’s hd.

“Wht’s tht fr, Qqg?”

“Prry esy, kll-e; oh! prry esy!”

H ws gng on wth sm wld rmnscncs abt hs tmhwk-pp,
whch, it smd, hd in its tw uss bth brnd hs fs and sthd
hs sl, whn w wr drctly attrctd t th slpng rggr. Th
strng vpr nw cmpltly fllng th cntrctd hl, it bgn t
tll upn hm. H brthd wth a srt of mffldnss; thn smd
trbld in th ns; thn rvlvd ovr onc or twc; thn st up and
rbbd hs eys.

“Hll!” h brthd at lst, “wh b y smkrs?”

“Shppd mn,” answrd I, “whn ds sh sl?”

“Ay, ay, y ar gng in hr, b y? Sh sls t-dy. Th Cptn
cm abrd lst nght.”

“Wht Cptn?—Ahb?”

“Wh bt hm indd?”

I ws gng t ask hm sm frthr qstns cncrnng Ahb, whn w
hrd a ns on dck.

“Hll! Strbck’s astr,” sd th rggr. “H’s a lvly chf mt,
tht; gd mn, and a ps; bt all alv nw, I mst trn t.” And s
syng h wnt on dck, and w fllwd.

It ws nw clr snrs. Sn th crw cm on brd in tws and
thrs; th rggrs bstrrd thmslvs; th mts wr actvly
enggd; and svrl of th shr ppl wr bsy in brngng vrs
lst thngs on brd. Mnwhl Cptn Ahb rmnd invsbly
enshrnd wthn hs cbn.


CHPTR 22. Mrry Chrstms.

At lngth, twrds nn, upn th fnl dsmssl of th shp’s
rggrs, and aftr th Pqd hd bn hld ot frm th whrf, and
aftr th evr-thghtfl Chrty hd cm off in a whl-bt, wth
hr lst gft—a nght-cp fr Stbb, th scnd mt, hr
brthr-in-lw, and a spr Bbl fr th stwrd—aftr all ths, th
tw Cptns, Plg and Bldd, issd frm th cbn, and trnng t
th chf mt, Plg sd:

“Nw, Mr. Strbck, ar y sr evrythng is rght? Cptn Ahb is
all rdy—jst spk t hm—nthng mr t b gt frm shr, eh?
Wll, cll all hnds, thn. Mstr ’em aft hr—blst ’em!”

“N nd of prfn wrds, hwvr grt th hrry, Plg,” sd
Bldd, “bt awy wth th, frnd Strbck, and d or bddng.”

Hw nw! Hr upn th vry pnt of strtng fr th vyg, Cptn
Plg and Cptn Bldd wr gng it wth a hgh hnd on th
qrtr-dck, jst as if thy wr t b jnt-cmmndrs at s, as
wll as t all apprncs in prt. And, as fr Cptn Ahb, n sgn
of hm ws yt t b sn; only, thy sd h ws in th cbn. Bt
thn, th id ws, tht hs prsnc ws by n mns ncssry in
gttng th shp undr wgh, and strng hr wll ot t s. Indd,
as tht ws nt at all hs prpr bsnss, bt th plt’s; and as h
ws nt yt cmpltly rcvrd—s thy sd—thrfr, Cptn Ahb
styd blw. And all ths smd ntrl engh; espclly as in th
mrchnt srvc mny cptns nvr shw thmslvs on dck fr a
cnsdrbl tm aftr hvng up th anchr, bt rmn ovr th
cbn tbl, hvng a frwll mrry-mkng wth thr shr frnds,
bfr thy qt th shp fr gd wth th plt.

Bt thr ws nt mch chnc t thnk ovr th mttr, fr Cptn
Plg ws nw all alv. H smd t d mst of th tlkng and
cmmndng, and nt Bldd.

“Aft hr, y sns of bchlrs,” h crd, as th slrs lngrd at
th mn-mst. “Mr. Strbck, drv ’em aft.”

“Strk th tnt thr!”—ws th nxt ordr. As I hntd bfr, ths
whlbn mrq ws nvr ptchd excpt in prt; and on brd th
Pqd, fr thrty yrs, th ordr t strk th tnt ws wll knwn
t b th nxt thng t hvng up th anchr.

“Mn th cpstn! Bld and thndr!—jmp!”—ws th nxt cmmnd, and
th crw sprng fr th hndspks.

Nw in gttng undr wgh, th sttn gnrlly occpd by th plt
is th frwrd prt of th shp. And hr Bldd, wh, wth Plg, b
it knwn, in addtn t hs othr offcrs, ws on of th lcnsd
plts of th prt—h bng sspctd t hv gt hmslf md a plt
in ordr t sv th Nntckt plt-f t all th shps h ws
cncrnd in, fr h nvr pltd any othr crft—Bldd, I sy, mght
nw b sn actvly enggd in lkng ovr th bws fr th
apprchng anchr, and at intrvls sngng wht smd a dsml stv
of pslmdy, t chr th hnds at th wndlss, wh rrd frth sm
srt of a chrs abt th grls in Bbl Ally, wth hrty gd
wll. Nvrthlss, nt thr dys prvs, Bldd hd tld thm tht
n prfn sngs wld b allwd on brd th Pqd, prtclrly in
gttng undr wgh; and Chrty, hs sstr, hd plcd a smll chc
cpy of Wtts in ech smn’s brth.

Mntm, ovrsng th othr prt of th shp, Cptn Plg rppd
and swr astrn in th mst frghtfl mnnr. I almst thght h
wld snk th shp bfr th anchr cld b gt up; invlntrly I
psd on my hndspk, and tld Qqg t d th sm, thnkng of
th prls w bth rn, in strtng on th vyg wth sch a dvl fr
a plt. I ws cmfrtng myslf, hwvr, wth th thght tht in
ps Bldd mght b fnd sm slvtn, spt of hs svn hndrd
and svnty-svnth ly; whn I flt a sddn shrp pk in my rr,
and trnng rnd, ws hrrfd at th apprtn of Cptn Plg in
th act of wthdrwng hs lg frm my immdt vcnty. Tht ws my
frst kck.

“Is tht th wy thy hv in th mrchnt srvc?” h rrd.
“Sprng, th shp-hd; sprng, and brk thy bckbn! Why dn’t y
sprng, I sy, all of y—sprng! Qhg! sprng, th chp wth th rd
whskrs; sprng thr, Sctch-cp; sprng, th grn pnts. Sprng, I
sy, all of y, and sprng yr eys ot!” And s syng, h mvd
alng th wndlss, hr and thr usng hs lg vry frly, whl
imprtrbbl Bldd kpt ldng off wth hs pslmdy. Thnks I,
Cptn Plg mst hv bn drnkng smthng t-dy.

At lst th anchr ws up, th sls wr st, and off w gldd. It
ws a shrt, cld Chrstms; and as th shrt nrthrn dy mrgd int
nght, w fnd orslvs almst brd upn th wntry ocn, whs
frzng spry csd us in ic, as in plshd armr. Th lng rws of
tth on th blwrks glstnd in th mnlght; and lk th wht
ivry tsks of sm hg elphnt, vst crvng iccls dpndd frm
th bws.

Lnk Bldd, as plt, hdd th frst wtch, and evr and ann, as
th old crft dp dvd int th grn ss, and snt th shvrng
frst all ovr hr, and th wnds hwld, and th crdg rng, hs
stdy nts wr hrd,—


_“Swt flds bynd th swllng fld, Stnd drssd in lvng
grn. S t th Jws old Cnn std, Whl Jrdn rlld btwn.”_



Nvr dd ths swt wrds snd mr swtly t m thn thn. Thy
wr fll of hp and frtn. Spt of ths frgd wntr nght in
th bstrs Atlntc, spt of my wt ft and wttr jckt, thr
ws yt, it thn smd t m, mny a plsnt hvn in str; and
mds and glds s etrnlly vrnl, tht th grss sht up by th
sprng, untrddn, unwltd, rmns at mdsmmr.

At lst w gnd sch an offng, tht th tw plts wr ndd n
lngr. Th stt sl-bt tht hd accmpnd us bgn rngng
alngsd.

It ws crs and nt unplsng, hw Plg and Bldd wr affctd
at ths jnctr, espclly Cptn Bldd. Fr lth t dprt, yt;
vry lth t lv, fr gd, a shp bnd on s lng and prls a
vyg—bynd bth strmy Cps; a shp in whch sm thsnds of hs
hrd ernd dllrs wr invstd; a shp, in whch an old shpmt
sld as cptn; a mn almst as old as h, onc mr strtng t
encntr all th trrrs of th ptlss jw; lth t sy gd-by t
a thng s evry wy brmfl of evry intrst t hm,—pr old Bldd
lngrd lng; pcd th dck wth anxs strds; rn dwn int th
cbn t spk anthr frwll wrd thr; agn cm on dck, and
lkd t wndwrd; lkd twrds th wd and endlss wtrs, only
bndd by th fr-off unsn Estrn Cntnnts; lkd twrds th
lnd; lkd alft; lkd rght and lft; lkd evrywhr and
nwhr; and at lst, mchnclly clng a rp upn its pn,
cnvlsvly grspd stt Plg by th hnd, and hldng up a lntrn,
fr a mmnt std gzng hrclly in hs fc, as mch as t sy,
“Nvrthlss, frnd Plg, I cn stnd it; ys, I cn.”

As fr Plg hmslf, h tk it mr lk a phlsphr; bt fr all
hs phlsphy, thr ws a tr twnklng in hs ey, whn th lntrn
cm t nr. And h, t, dd nt a lttl rn frm cbn t dck—nw
a wrd blw, and nw a wrd wth Strbck, th chf mt.

Bt, at lst, h trnd t hs cmrd, wth a fnl srt of lk abt
hm,—“Cptn Bldd—cm, old shpmt, w mst g. Bck th mn-yrd
thr! Bt ahy! Stnd by t cm cls alngsd, nw! Crfl,
crfl!—cm, Bldd, by—sy yr lst. Lck t y, Strbck—lck t
y, Mr. Stbb—lck t y, Mr. Flsk—gd-by and gd lck t y
all—and ths dy thr yrs I’ll hv a ht sppr smkng fr y in
old Nntckt. Hrrh and awy!”

“Gd blss y, and hv y in Hs hly kpng, mn,” mrmrd old
Bldd, almst inchrntly. “I hp y’ll hv fn wthr nw, s
tht Cptn Ahb my sn b mvng amng y—a plsnt sn is all h
nds, and y’ll hv plnty of thm in th trpc vyg y g. B
crfl in th hnt, y mts. Dn’t stv th bts ndlssly, y
hrpnrs; gd wht cdr plnk is rsd fll thr pr cnt.
wthn th yr. Dn’t frgt yr pryrs, ethr. Mr. Strbck, mnd
tht cpr dn’t wst th spr stvs. Oh! th sl-ndls ar in
th grn lckr! Dn’t whl it t mch a’ Lrd’s dys, mn; bt
dn’t mss a fr chnc ethr, tht’s rjctng Hvn’s gd gfts.
Hv an ey t th mlsss trc, Mr. Stbb; it ws a lttl lky, I
thght. If y tch at th islnds, Mr. Flsk, bwr of frnctn.
Gd-by, gd-by! Dn’t kp tht chs t lng dwn in th hld,
Mr. Strbck; it’ll spl. B crfl wth th bttr—twnty cnts th
pnd it ws, and mnd y, if—”

“Cm, cm, Cptn Bldd; stp plvrng,—awy!” and wth tht,
Plg hrrd hm ovr th sd, and bth drpt int th bt.

Shp and bt dvrgd; th cld, dmp nght brz blw btwn; a
scrmng gll flw ovrhd; th tw hlls wldly rlld; w gv
thr hvy-hrtd chrs, and blndly plngd lk ft int th ln
Atlntc.


CHPTR 23. Th L Shr.

Sm chptrs bck, on Blkngtn ws spkn of, a tll, nwlndd
mrnr, encntrd in Nw Bdfrd at th inn.

Whn on tht shvrng wntr’s nght, th Pqd thrst hr vndctv
bws int th cld mlcs wvs, wh shld I s stndng at hr
hlm bt Blkngtn! I lkd wth sympthtc aw and frflnss upn
th mn, wh in md-wntr jst lndd frm a fr yrs’ dngrs
vyg, cld s unrstngly psh off agn fr stll anthr
tmpsts trm. Th lnd smd scrchng t hs ft. Wndrfllst
thngs ar evr th unmntnbl; dp mmrs yld n eptphs;
ths sx-inch chptr is th stnlss grv of Blkngtn. Lt m only
sy tht it frd wth hm as wth th strm-tssd shp, tht
msrbly drvs alng th lwrd lnd. Th prt wld fn gv
sccr; th prt is ptfl; in th prt is sfty, cmfrt,
hrthstn, sppr, wrm blnkts, frnds, all tht’s knd t or
mrtlts. Bt in tht gl, th prt, th lnd, is tht shp’s
drst jprdy; sh mst fly all hsptlty; on tch of lnd,
thgh it bt grz th kl, wld mk hr shddr thrgh and
thrgh. Wth all hr mght sh crwds all sl off shr; in s dng,
fghts ’gnst th vry wnds tht fn wld blw hr hmwrd; sks
all th lshd s’s lndlssnss agn; fr rfg’s sk frlrnly
rshng int prl; hr only frnd hr bttrst f!

Knw y nw, Blkngtn? Glmpss d y sm t s of tht mrtlly
intlrbl trth; tht all dp, ernst thnkng is bt th intrpd
effrt of th sl t kp th opn indpndnc of hr s; whl th
wldst wnds of hvn and erth cnspr t cst hr on th
trchrs, slvsh shr?

Bt as in lndlssnss aln rsds hghst trth, shrlss,
indfnt as Gd—s, bttr is it t prsh in tht hwlng infnt,
thn b inglrsly dshd upn th l, evn if tht wr sfty! Fr
wrm-lk, thn, oh! wh wld crvn crwl t lnd! Trrrs of th
trrbl! is all ths agny s vn? Tk hrt, tk hrt, O
Blkngtn! Br th grmly, dmgd! Up frm th spry of thy
ocn-prshng—strght up, lps thy apthss!


CHPTR 24. Th Advct.

As Qqg and I ar nw frly embrkd in ths bsnss of whlng;
and as ths bsnss of whlng hs smhw cm t b rgrdd amng
lndsmn as a rthr unptcl and dsrptbl prst; thrfr, I
am all anxty t cnvnc y, y lndsmn, of th injstc hrby
dn t us hntrs of whls.

In th frst plc, it my b dmd almst sprfls t estblsh
th fct, tht amng ppl at lrg, th bsnss of whlng is nt
accntd on a lvl wth wht ar clld th lbrl prfssns. If a
strngr wr intrdcd int any mscllns mtrpltn scty,
it wld bt slghtly advnc th gnrl opnn of hs mrts, wr
h prsntd t th cmpny as a hrpnr, sy; and if in emltn
of th nvl offcrs h shld appnd th intls S.W.F. (Sprm Whl
Fshry) t hs vstng crd, sch a prcdr wld b dmd
pr-emnntly prsmng and rdcls.

Dbtlss on ldng rsn why th wrld dclns hnrng us
whlmn, is ths: thy thnk tht, at bst, or vctn amnts t a
btchrng srt of bsnss; and tht whn actvly enggd thrn, w
ar srrndd by all mnnr of dflmnts. Btchrs w ar, tht is
tr. Bt btchrs, als, and btchrs of th bldst bdg hv bn
all Mrtl Cmmndrs whm th wrld invrbly dlghts t hnr. And
as fr th mttr of th allgd unclnlnss of or bsnss, y
shll sn b inttd int crtn fcts hthrt prtty gnrlly
unknwn, and whch, upn th whl, wll trmphntly plnt th sprm
whl-shp at lst amng th clnlst thngs of ths tdy erth. Bt
evn grntng th chrg in qstn t b tr; wht dsrdrd
slppry dcks of a whl-shp ar cmprbl t th unspkbl
crrn of ths bttl-flds frm whch s mny sldrs rtrn t
drnk in all lds’ pldts? And if th id of prl s mch
enhncs th pplr cnct of th sldr’s prfssn; lt m assr
y tht mny a vtrn wh hs frly mrchd up t a bttry, wld
qckly rcl at th apprtn of th sprm whl’s vst tl,
fnnng int edds th ar ovr hs hd. Fr wht ar th
cmprhnsbl trrrs of mn cmprd wth th intrlnkd trrrs and
wndrs of Gd!

Bt, thgh th wrld scts at us whl hntrs, yt ds it
unwttngly py us th prfndst hmg; y, an all-abndng
adrtn! fr almst all th tprs, lmps, and cndls tht brn
rnd th glb, brn, as bfr s mny shrns, t or glry!

Bt lk at ths mttr in othr lghts; wgh it in all srts of
scls; s wht w whlmn ar, and hv bn.

Why dd th Dtch in D Wtt’s tm hv admrls of thr whlng
flts? Why dd Ls XV. of Frnc, at hs own prsnl expns, ft
ot whlng shps frm Dnkrk, and pltly invt t tht twn sm
scr or tw of fmls frm or own islnd of Nntckt? Why dd
Brtn btwn th yrs 1750 and 1788 py t hr whlmn in bnts
upwrds of £1,000,000? And lstly, hw cms it tht w whlmn of
Amrc nw otnmbr all th rst of th bndd whlmn in th wrld;
sl a nvy of upwrds of svn hndrd vssls; mnnd by eghtn
thsnd mn; yrly cnsmng 4,000,000 of dllrs; th shps wrth,
at th tm of slng, $20,000,000! and evry yr imprtng int or
hrbrs a wll rpd hrvst of $7,000,000. Hw cms all ths, if
thr b nt smthng pssnt in whlng?

Bt ths is nt th hlf; lk agn.

I frly assrt, tht th csmplt phlsphr cnnt, fr hs lf,
pnt ot on sngl pcfl inflnc, whch wthn th lst sxty
yrs hs oprtd mr ptntlly upn th whl brd wrld, tkn
in on aggrgt, thn th hgh and mghty bsnss of whlng. On wy
and anthr, it hs bgttn evnts s rmrkbl in thmslvs, and s
cntnsly mmnts in thr sqntl isss, tht whlng my
wll b rgrdd as tht Egyptn mthr, wh br offsprng thmslvs
prgnnt frm hr wmb. It wld b a hplss, endlss tsk t
ctlg all ths thngs. Lt a hndfl sffc. Fr mny yrs pst
th whl-shp hs bn th pnr in frrtng ot th rmtst and
lst knwn prts of th erth. Sh hs explrd ss and archplgs
whch hd n chrt, whr n Ck or Vncvr hd evr sld. If
Amrcn and Erpn mn-of-wr nw pcflly rd in onc svg
hrbrs, lt thm fr slts t th hnr and glry of th
whl-shp, whch orgnlly shwd thm th wy, and frst intrprtd
btwn thm and th svgs. Thy my clbrt as thy wll th
hrs of Explrng Expdtns, yr Cks, yr Krsnstrns; bt I
sy tht scrs of annyms Cptns hv sld ot of Nntckt,
tht wr as grt, and grtr thn yr Ck and yr Krsnstrn.
Fr in thr sccrlss empty-hnddnss, thy, in th hthnsh
shrkd wtrs, and by th bchs of unrcrdd, jvln islnds,
bttld wth vrgn wndrs and trrrs tht Ck wth all hs mrns
and mskts wld nt wllngly hv drd. All tht is md sch a
flrsh of in th old Sth S Vygs, ths thngs wr bt th
lf-tm cmmnplcs of or hrc Nntcktrs. Oftn, advntrs
whch Vncvr ddcts thr chptrs t, ths mn accntd
unwrthy of bng st dwn in th shp’s cmmn lg. Ah, th wrld! Oh,
th wrld!

Untl th whl fshry rndd Cp Hrn, n cmmrc bt clnl,
scrcly any intrcrs bt clnl, ws crrd on btwn Erp
and th lng ln of th oplnt Spnsh prvncs on th Pcfc
cst. It ws th whlmn wh frst brk thrgh th jls plcy
of th Spnsh crwn, tchng ths clns; and, if spc prmttd,
it mght b dstnctly shwn hw frm ths whlmn at lst evnttd
th lbrtn of Pr, Chl, and Blv frm th yk of Old Spn,
and th estblshmnt of th etrnl dmcrcy in ths prts.

Tht grt Amrc on th othr sd of th sphr, Astrl, ws
gvn t th enlghtnd wrld by th whlmn. Aftr its frst
blndr-brn dscvry by a Dtchmn, all othr shps lng shnnd
ths shrs as pstfrsly brbrs; bt th whl-shp tchd
thr. Th whl-shp is th tr mthr of tht nw mghty clny.
Mrvr, in th infncy of th frst Astrln sttlmnt, th
emgrnts wr svrl tms svd frm strvtn by th bnvlnt
bsct of th whl-shp lckly drppng an anchr in thr wtrs.
Th uncntd isls of all Plyns cnfss th sm trth, and d
cmmrcl hmg t th whl-shp, tht clrd th wy fr th
mssnry and th mrchnt, and in mny css crrd th prmtv
mssnrs t thr frst dstntns. If tht dbl-bltd lnd,
Jpn, is evr t bcm hsptbl, it is th whl-shp aln t whm
th crdt wll b d; fr alrdy sh is on th thrshld.

Bt if, in th fc of all ths, y stll dclr tht whlng hs n
æsthtclly nbl assctns cnnctd wth it, thn am I rdy t
shvr ffty lncs wth y thr, and unhrs y wth a splt hlmt
evry tm.

Th whl hs n fms athr, and whlng n fms chrnclr, y
wll sy.

_Th whl n fms athr, and whlng n fms chrnclr?_ Wh
wrt th frst accnt of or Lvthn? Wh bt mghty Jb! And wh
cmpsd th frst nrrtv of a whlng-vyg? Wh, bt n lss a
prnc thn Alfrd th Grt, wh, wth hs own ryl pn, tk dwn
th wrds frm Othr, th Nrwgn whl-hntr of ths tms! And
wh prnncd or glwng elgy in Prlmnt? Wh, bt Edmnd Brk!

Tr engh, bt thn whlmn thmslvs ar pr dvls; thy hv n
gd bld in thr vns.

_N gd bld in thr vns?_ Thy hv smthng bttr thn ryl
bld thr. Th grndmthr of Bnjmn Frnkln ws Mry Mrrl;
aftrwrds, by mrrg, Mry Flgr, on of th old sttlrs of
Nntckt, and th ancstrss t a lng ln of Flgrs and
hrpnrs—all kth and kn t nbl Bnjmn—ths dy drtng th
brbd irn frm on sd of th wrld t th othr.

Gd agn; bt thn all cnfss tht smhw whlng is nt
rspctbl.

_Whlng nt rspctbl?_ Whlng is imprl! By old Englsh
stttry lw, th whl is dclrd “a ryl fsh.” *

Oh, tht’s only nmnl! Th whl hmslf hs nvr fgrd in any
grnd impsng wy.

_Th whl nvr fgrd in any grnd impsng wy?_ In on of th
mghty trmphs gvn t a Rmn gnrl upn hs entrng th wrld’s
cptl, th bns of a whl, brght all th wy frm th Syrn
cst, wr th mst cnspcs objct in th cymblld prcssn.*

*S sbsqnt chptrs fr smthng mr on ths hd.

Grnt it, snc y ct it; bt, sy wht y wll, thr is n rl
dgnty in whlng.

_N dgnty in whlng?_ Th dgnty of or cllng th vry hvns
attst. Cts is a cnstlltn in th Sth! N mr! Drv dwn yr
ht in prsnc of th Czr, and tk it off t Qqg! N mr! I
knw a mn tht, in hs lftm, hs tkn thr hndrd and ffty
whls. I accnt tht mn mr hnrbl thn tht grt cptn of
antqty wh bstd of tkng as mny wlld twns.

And, as fr m, if, by any pssblty, thr b any as yt
undscvrd prm thng in m; if I shll evr dsrv any rl rpt
in tht smll bt hgh hshd wrld whch I mght nt b unrsnbly
ambts of; if hrftr I shll d anythng tht, upn th whl, a
mn mght rthr hv dn thn t hv lft undn; if, at my dth,
my exctrs, or mr prprly my crdtrs, fnd any prcs MSS. in
my dsk, thn hr I prspctvly ascrb all th hnr and th glry
t whlng; fr a whl-shp ws my Yl Cllg and my Hrvrd.


CHPTR 25. Pstscrpt.

In bhlf of th dgnty of whlng, I wld fn advnc nght bt
sbstnttd fcts. Bt aftr embttlng hs fcts, an advct wh
shld whlly spprss a nt unrsnbl srms, whch mght tll
elqntly upn hs cs—sch an advct, wld h nt b
blmwrthy?

It is wll knwn tht at th crntn of kngs and qns, evn
mdrn ons, a crtn crs prcss of ssnng thm fr thr
fnctns is gn thrgh. Thr is a sltcllr of stt, s clld,
and thr my b a cstr of stt. Hw thy us th slt,
prcsly—wh knws? Crtn I am, hwvr, tht a kng’s hd is
slmnly old at hs crntn, evn as a hd of sld. Cn it b,
thgh, tht thy annt it wth a vw of mkng its intrr rn
wll, as thy annt mchnry? Mch mght b rmntd hr,
cncrnng th essntl dgnty of ths rgl prcss, bcs in
cmmn lf w estm bt mnly and cntmptbly a fllw wh annts
hs hr, and plpbly smlls of tht anntng. In trth, a mtr mn
wh uss hr-ol, unlss mdcnlly, tht mn hs prbbly gt a
qggy spt in hm smwhr. As a gnrl rl, h cn’t amnt t
mch in hs ttlty.

Bt th only thng t b cnsdrd hr, is ths—wht knd of ol is
usd at crntns? Crtnly it cnnt b olv ol, nr mcssr
ol, nr cstr ol, nr br’s ol, nr trn ol, nr cd-lvr ol.
Wht thn cn it pssbly b, bt sprm ol in its unmnfctrd,
unplltd stt, th swtst of all ols?

Thnk of tht, y lyl Brtns! w whlmn spply yr kngs and
qns wth crntn stff!


CHPTR 26. Knghts and Sqrs.

Th chf mt of th Pqd ws Strbck, a ntv of Nntckt, and a
Qkr by dscnt. H ws a lng, ernst mn, and thgh brn on an
icy cst, smd wll adptd t endr ht lttds, hs flsh bng
hrd as twc-bkd bsct. Trnsprtd t th Inds, hs lv bld
wld nt spl lk bttld al. H mst hv bn brn in sm tm
of gnrl drght and fmn, or upn on of ths fst dys fr whch
hs stt is fms. Only sm thrty ard smmrs hd h sn; ths
smmrs hd drd up all hs physcl sprflsnss. Bt ths, hs
thnnss, s t spk, smd n mr th tkn of wstng anxts
and crs, thn it smd th indctn of any bdly blght. It ws
mrly th cndnstn of th mn. H ws by n mns ill-lkng;
qt th cntrry. Hs pr tght skn ws an excllnt ft; and
clsly wrppd up in it, and emblmd wth innr hlth and strngth,
lk a rvvfd Egyptn, ths Strbck smd prprd t endr fr
lng ags t cm, and t endr alwys, as nw; fr b it Plr snw
or trrd sn, lk a ptnt chrnmtr, hs intrr vtlty ws
wrrntd t d wll in all clmts. Lkng int hs eys, y smd
t s thr th yt lngrng imgs of ths thsnd-fld prls h
hd clmly cnfrntd thrgh lf. A std, stdfst mn, whs lf
fr th mst prt ws a tllng pntmm of actn, and nt a tm
chptr of snds. Yt, fr all hs hrdy sbrty and frttd, thr
wr crtn qlts in hm whch at tms affctd, and in sm
css smd wll ngh t ovrblnc all th rst. Uncmmnly
cnscnts fr a smn, and endd wth a dp ntrl rvrnc,
th wld wtry lnlnss of hs lf dd thrfr strngly incln
hm t sprsttn; bt t tht srt of sprsttn, whch in sm
orgnztns sms rthr t sprng, smhw, frm intllgnc thn
frm ignrnc. Otwrd prtnts and inwrd prsntmnts wr hs. And
if at tms ths thngs bnt th wldd irn of hs sl, mch mr
dd hs fr-awy dmstc mmrs of hs yng Cp wf and chld,
tnd t bnd hm stll mr frm th orgnl rggdnss of hs ntr,
and opn hm stll frthr t ths ltnt inflncs whch, in sm
hnst-hrtd mn, rstrn th gsh of dr-dvl drng, s oftn
evncd by othrs in th mr prls vcsstds of th fshry. “I
wll hv n mn in my bt,” sd Strbck, “wh is nt afrd of a
whl.” By ths, h smd t mn, nt only tht th mst rlbl and
usfl crg ws tht whch arss frm th fr estmtn of th
encntrd prl, bt tht an uttrly frlss mn is a fr mr
dngrs cmrd thn a cwrd.

“Ay, ay,” sd Stbb, th scnd mt, “Strbck, thr, is as
crfl a mn as y’ll fnd anywhr in ths fshry.” Bt w shll
er lng s wht tht wrd “crfl” prcsly mns whn usd by a
mn lk Stbb, or almst any othr whl hntr.

Strbck ws n crsdr aftr prls; in hm crg ws nt a
sntmnt; bt a thng smply usfl t hm, and alwys at hnd upn
all mrtlly prctcl occsns. Bsds, h thght, prhps, tht in
ths bsnss of whlng, crg ws on of th grt stpl otfts
of th shp, lk hr bf and hr brd, and nt t b flshly
wstd. Whrfr h hd n fncy fr lwrng fr whls aftr
sn-dwn; nr fr prsstng in fghtng a fsh tht t mch prsstd
in fghtng hm. Fr, thght Strbck, I am hr in ths crtcl
ocn t kll whls fr my lvng, and nt t b klld by thm fr
thrs; and tht hndrds of mn hd bn s klld Strbck wll knw.
Wht dm ws hs own fthr’s? Whr, in th bttmlss dps, cld
h fnd th trn lmbs of hs brthr?

Wth mmrs lk ths in hm, and, mrvr, gvn t a crtn
sprsttsnss, as hs bn sd; th crg of ths Strbck whch
cld, nvrthlss, stll flrsh, mst indd hv bn extrm. Bt
it ws nt in rsnbl ntr tht a mn s orgnzd, and wth sch
trrbl exprncs and rmmbrncs as h hd; it ws nt in ntr
tht ths thngs shld fl in ltntly engndrng an elmnt in
hm, whch, undr stbl crcmstncs, wld brk ot frm its
cnfnmnt, and brn all hs crg up. And brv as h mght b, it
ws tht srt of brvry chfly, vsbl in sm intrpd mn, whch,
whl gnrlly abdng frm in th cnflct wth ss, or wnds, or
whls, or any of th ordnry irrtnl hrrrs of th wrld, yt
cnnt wthstnd ths mr trrfc, bcs mr sprtl trrrs,
whch smtms mnc y frm th cncntrtng brw of an enrgd
and mghty mn.

Bt wr th cmng nrrtv t rvl in any instnc, th cmplt
absmnt of pr Strbck’s frttd, scrc mght I hv th hrt
t wrt it; fr it is a thng mst srrwfl, ny shckng, t exps
th fll of vlr in th sl. Mn my sm dtstbl as jnt
stck-cmpns and ntns; knvs, fls, and mrdrrs thr my b;
mn my hv mn and mgr fcs; bt mn, in th idl, is s nbl
and s sprklng, sch a grnd and glwng crtr, tht ovr any
ignmns blmsh in hm all hs fllws shld rn t thrw thr
cstlst rbs. Tht immclt mnlnss w fl wthn orslvs, s
fr wthn us, tht it rmns intct thgh all th otr chrctr
sm gn; blds wth knst angsh at th undrpd spctcl of a
vlr-rnd mn. Nr cn pty itslf, at sch a shmfl sght,
cmpltly stfl hr upbrdngs agnst th prmttng strs. Bt
ths agst dgnty I trt of, is nt th dgnty of kngs and rbs,
bt tht abndng dgnty whch hs n rbd invsttr. Th shlt
s it shnng in th arm tht wlds a pck or drvs a spk; tht
dmcrtc dgnty whch, on all hnds, rdts wtht end frm Gd;
Hmslf! Th grt Gd abslt! Th cntr and crcmfrnc of all
dmcrcy! Hs omnprsnc, or dvn eqlty!

If, thn, t mnst mrnrs, and rngds and cstwys, I shll
hrftr ascrb hgh qlts, thgh drk; wv rnd thm trgc
grcs; if evn th mst mrnfl, prchnc th mst absd, amng
thm all, shll at tms lft hmslf t th exltd mnts; if I shll
tch tht wrkmn’s arm wth sm ethrl lght; if I shll sprd a
rnbw ovr hs dsstrs st of sn; thn agnst all mrtl crtcs
br m ot in it, th jst Sprt of Eqlty, whch hst sprd on
ryl mntl of hmnty ovr all my knd! Br m ot in it, th
grt dmcrtc Gd! wh ddst nt rfs t th swrt cnvct,
Bnyn, th pl, ptc prl; Th wh ddst clth wth dbly
hmmrd lvs of fnst gld, th stmpd and pprd arm of old
Crvnts; Th wh ddst pck up Andrw Jcksn frm th pbbls; wh
ddst hrl hm upn a wr-hrs; wh ddst thndr hm hghr thn a
thrn! Th wh, in all Thy mghty, erthly mrchngs, evr cllst
Thy slctst chmpns frm th kngly cmmns; br m ot in it, O
Gd!


CHPTR 27. Knghts and Sqrs.

Stbb ws th scnd mt. H ws a ntv of Cp Cd; and hnc,
accrdng t lcl usg, ws clld a Cp-Cd-mn. A hppy-g-lcky;
nthr crvn nr vlnt; tkng prls as thy cm wth an
indffrnt ar; and whl enggd in th mst immnnt crss of th
chs, tlng awy, clm and cllctd as a jrnymn jnr enggd
fr th yr. Gd-hmrd, esy, and crlss, h prsdd ovr hs
whl-bt as if th mst ddly encntr wr bt a dnnr, and hs
crw all invtd gsts. H ws as prtclr abt th cmfrtbl
arrngmnt of hs prt of th bt, as an old stg-drvr is abt
th sngnss of hs bx. Whn cls t th whl, in th vry
dth-lck of th fght, h hndld hs unptyng lnc clly and
off-hnddly, as a whstlng tnkr hs hmmr. H wld hm ovr hs
old rgdg tns whl flnk and flnk wth th mst exsprtd
mnstr. Lng usg hd, fr ths Stbb, cnvrtd th jws of dth
int an esy chr. Wht h thght of dth itslf, thr is n
tllng. Whthr h evr thght of it at all, mght b a qstn;
bt, if h evr dd chnc t cst hs mnd tht wy aftr a
cmfrtbl dnnr, n dbt, lk a gd slr, h tk it t b a
srt of cll of th wtch t tmbl alft, and bstr thmslvs thr,
abt smthng whch h wld fnd ot whn h obyd th ordr, and
nt snr.

Wht, prhps, wth othr thngs, md Stbb sch an esy-gng,
unfrng mn, s chrly trdgng off wth th brdn of lf in a
wrld fll of grv pdlrs, all bwd t th grnd wth thr pcks;
wht hlpd t brng abt tht almst imps gd-hmr of hs; tht
thng mst hv bn hs pp. Fr, lk hs ns, hs shrt, blck
lttl pp ws on of th rglr ftrs of hs fc. Y wld
almst as sn hv expctd hm t trn ot of hs bnk wtht hs
ns as wtht hs pp. H kpt a whl rw of pps thr rdy
ldd, stck in a rck, wthn esy rch of hs hnd; and, whnvr
h trnd in, h smkd thm all ot in sccssn, lghtng on frm
th othr t th end of th chptr; thn ldng thm agn t b in
rdnss anw. Fr, whn Stbb drssd, instd of frst pttng hs
lgs int hs trwsrs, h pt hs pp int hs mth.

I sy ths cntnl smkng mst hv bn on cs, at lst, of hs
pclr dspstn; fr evry on knws tht ths erthly ar,
whthr ashr or aflt, is trrbly infctd wth th nmlss
msrs of th nmbrlss mrtls wh hv dd exhlng it; and as in
tm of th chlr, sm ppl g abt wth a cmphrtd
hndkrchf t thr mths; s, lkws, agnst all mrtl
trbltns, Stbb’s tbcc smk mght hv oprtd as a srt of
dsnfctng agnt.

Th thrd mt ws Flsk, a ntv of Tsbry, in Mrth’s Vnyrd. A
shrt, stt, rddy yng fllw, vry pgncs cncrnng whls,
wh smhw smd t thnk tht th grt lvthns hd prsnlly
and hrdtrly affrntd hm; and thrfr it ws a srt of pnt of
hnr wth hm, t dstry thm whnvr encntrd. S uttrly lst
ws h t all sns of rvrnc fr th mny mrvls of thr mjstc
blk and mystc wys; and s dd t anythng lk an apprhnsn of
any pssbl dngr frm encntrng thm; tht in hs pr opnn,
th wndrs whl ws bt a spcs of mgnfd ms, or at lst
wtr-rt, rqrng only a lttl crcmvntn and sm smll
applctn of tm and trbl in ordr t kll and bl. Ths
ignrnt, uncnscs frlssnss of hs md hm a lttl wggsh in
th mttr of whls; h fllwd ths fsh fr th fn of it; and a
thr yrs’ vyg rnd Cp Hrn ws only a jlly jk tht lstd
tht lngth of tm. As a crpntr’s nls ar dvdd int wrght
nls and ct nls; s mnknd my b smlrly dvdd. Lttl Flsk
ws on of th wrght ons; md t clnch tght and lst lng. Thy
clld hm Kng-Pst on brd of th Pqd; bcs, in frm, h cld
b wll lknd t th shrt, sqr tmbr knwn by tht nm in
Arctc whlrs; and whch by th mns of mny rdtng sd tmbrs
insrtd int it, srvs t brc th shp agnst th icy cncssns
of ths bttrng ss.

Nw ths thr mts—Strbck, Stbb, and Flsk, wr mmnts mn.
Thy it ws wh by unvrsl prscrptn cmmndd thr of th
Pqd’s bts as hdsmn. In tht grnd ordr of bttl in whch
Cptn Ahb wld prbbly mrshl hs frcs t dscnd on th
whls, ths thr hdsmn wr as cptns of cmpns. Or, bng
armd wth thr lng kn whlng sprs, thy wr as a pckd tr
of lncrs; evn as th hrpnrs wr flngrs of jvlns.

And snc in ths fms fshry, ech mt or hdsmn, lk a Gthc
Knght of old, is alwys accmpnd by hs bt-strr or hrpnr,
wh in crtn cnjnctrs prvds hm wth a frsh lnc, whn th
frmr on hs bn bdly twstd, or elbwd in th asslt; and
mrvr, as thr gnrlly sbssts btwn th tw, a cls intmcy
and frndlnss; it is thrfr bt mt, tht in ths plc w st
dwn wh th Pqd’s hrpnrs wr, and t wht hdsmn ech of
thm blngd.

Frst of all ws Qqg, whm Strbck, th chf mt, hd slctd
fr hs sqr. Bt Qqg is alrdy knwn.

Nxt ws Tshtg, an unmxd Indn frm Gy Hd, th mst wstrly
prmntry of Mrth’s Vnyrd, whr thr stll exsts th lst
rmnnt of a vllg of rd mn, whch hs lng sppld th
nghbrng islnd of Nntckt wth mny of hr mst drng
hrpnrs. In th fshry, thy uslly g by th gnrc nm of
Gy-Hdrs. Tshtg’s lng, ln, sbl hr, hs hgh chk bns,
and blck rndng eys—fr an Indn, Orntl in thr lrgnss, bt
Antrctc in thr glttrng exprssn—all ths sffcntly
prclmd hm an inhrtr of th unvttd bld of ths prd
wrrr hntrs, wh, in qst of th grt Nw Englnd ms, hd
scrd, bw in hnd, th abrgnl frsts of th mn. Bt n lngr
snffng in th trl of th wld bsts of th wdlnd, Tshtg nw
hntd in th wk of th grt whls of th s; th unrrng hrpn
of th sn ftly rplcng th infllbl arrw of th srs. T lk
at th twny brwn of hs lth snky lmbs, y wld almst hv
crdtd th sprsttns of sm of th erlr Prtns, and
hlf-blvd ths wld Indn t b a sn of th Prnc of th Pwrs
of th Ar. Tshtg ws Stbb th scnd mt’s sqr.

Thrd amng th hrpnrs ws Dgg, a ggntc, cl-blck
ngr-svg, wth a ln-lk trd—an Ahsrs t bhld. Sspndd
frm hs ers wr tw gldn hps, s lrg tht th slrs clld
thm rng-blts, and wld tlk of scrng th tp-sl hlyrds t
thm. In hs yth Dgg hd vlntrly shppd on brd of a whlr,
lyng in a lnly by on hs ntv cst. And nvr hvng bn
anywhr in th wrld bt in Afrc, Nntckt, and th pgn hrbrs
mst frqntd by whlmn; and hvng nw ld fr mny yrs th bld
lf of th fshry in th shps of ownrs uncmmnly hdfl of wht
mnnr of mn thy shppd; Dgg rtnd all hs brbrc vrts,
and erct as a grff, mvd abt th dcks in all th pmp of sx
ft fv in hs scks. Thr ws a crprl hmlty in lkng up at
hm; and a wht mn stndng bfr hm smd a wht flg cm t
bg trc of a frtrss. Crs t tll, ths imprl ngr,
Ahsrs Dgg, ws th Sqr of lttl Flsk, wh lkd lk a
chss-mn bsd hm. As fr th rsd of th Pqd’s cmpny, b it
sd, tht at th prsnt dy nt on in tw of th mny thsnd mn
bfr th mst emplyd in th Amrcn whl fshry, ar Amrcns
brn, thgh prtty nrly all th offcrs ar. Hrn it is th sm
wth th Amrcn whl fshry as wth th Amrcn army and mltry
and mrchnt nvs, and th engnrng frcs emplyd in th
cnstrctn of th Amrcn Cnls and Rlrds. Th sm, I sy,
bcs in all ths css th ntv Amrcn lbrlly prvds th
brns, th rst of th wrld as gnrsly spplyng th mscls. N
smll nmbr of ths whlng smn blng t th Azrs, whr th
otwrd bnd Nntckt whlrs frqntly tch t agmnt thr crws
frm th hrdy psnts of ths rcky shrs. In lk mnnr, th
Grnlnd whlrs slng ot of Hll or Lndn, pt in at th Shtlnd
Islnds, t rcv th fll cmplmnt of thr crw. Upn th pssg
hmwrds, thy drp thm thr agn. Hw it is, thr is n tllng,
bt Islndrs sm t mk th bst whlmn. Thy wr nrly all
Islndrs in th Pqd, _Islts_ t, I cll sch, nt
acknwldgng th cmmn cntnnt of mn, bt ech _Islt_ lvng on
a sprt cntnnt of hs own. Yt nw, fdrtd alng on kl,
wht a st ths Islts wr! An Anchrss Cltz dpttn frm
all th isls of th s, and all th ends of th erth, accmpnyng
Old Ahb in th Pqd t ly th wrld’s grvncs bfr tht br
frm whch nt vry mny of thm evr cm bck. Blck Lttl Pp—h
nvr dd—oh, n! h wnt bfr. Pr Albm by! On th grm
Pqd’s frcstl, y shll er lng s hm, btng hs tmbrn;
prlsv of th etrnl tm, whn snt fr, t th grt qrtr-dck
on hgh, h ws bd strk in wth angls, and bt hs tmbrn in
glry; clld a cwrd hr, hld a hr thr!


CHPTR 28. Ahb.

Fr svrl dys aftr lvng Nntckt, nthng abv htchs ws
sn of Cptn Ahb. Th mts rglrly rlvd ech othr at th
wtchs, and fr aght tht cld b sn t th cntrry, thy smd
t b th only cmmndrs of th shp; only thy smtms issd frm
th cbn wth ordrs s sddn and prmptry, tht aftr all it ws
pln thy bt cmmndd vcrsly. Ys, thr sprm lrd and
dcttr ws thr, thgh hthrt unsn by any eys nt prmttd t
pntrt int th nw scrd rtrt of th cbn.

Evry tm I ascndd t th dck frm my wtchs blw, I instntly
gzd aft t mrk if any strng fc wr vsbl; fr my frst vg
dsqtd tchng th unknwn cptn, nw in th sclsn of th
s, bcm almst a prtrbtn. Ths ws strngly hghtnd at
tms by th rggd Eljh’s dblcl inchrncs unnvtdly
rcrrng t m, wth a sbtl enrgy I cld nt hv bfr cncvd
of. Bt prly cld I wthstnd thm, mch as in othr mds I ws
almst rdy t sml at th slmn whmsclts of tht otlndsh
prpht of th whrvs. Bt whtvr it ws of apprhnsvnss or
unsnss—t cll it s—whch I flt, yt whnvr I cm t lk
abt m in th shp, it smd agnst all wrrntry t chrsh sch
emtns. Fr thgh th hrpnrs, wth th grt bdy of th crw,
wr a fr mr brbrc, hthnsh, and mtly st thn any of th
tm mrchnt-shp cmpns whch my prvs exprncs hd md m
acqntd wth, stll I ascrbd ths—and rghtly ascrbd it—t th
frc unqnss of th vry ntr of tht wld Scndnvn vctn
in whch I hd s abndndly embrkd. Bt it ws espclly th
aspct of th thr chf offcrs of th shp, th mts, whch ws
mst frcbly clcltd t ally ths clrlss msgvngs, and
indc cnfdnc and chrflnss in evry prsntmnt of th vyg.
Thr bttr, mr lkly s-offcrs and mn, ech in hs own
dffrnt wy, cld nt rdly b fnd, and thy wr evry on of
thm Amrcns; a Nntcktr, a Vnyrdr, a Cp mn. Nw, it bng
Chrstms whn th shp sht frm ot hr hrbr, fr a spc w hd
btng Plr wthr, thgh all th tm rnnng awy frm it t th
sthwrd; and by evry dgr and mnt of lttd whch w sld,
grdlly lvng tht mrclss wntr, and all its intlrbl
wthr bhnd us. It ws on of ths lss lwrng, bt stll gry
and glmy engh mrnngs of th trnstn, whn wth a fr wnd th
shp ws rshng thrgh th wtr wth a vndctv srt of lpng
and mlnchly rpdty, tht as I mntd t th dck at th cll of
th frnn wtch, s sn as I lvlld my glnc twrds th
tffrl, frbdng shvrs rn ovr m. Rlty otrn apprhnsn;
Cptn Ahb std upn hs qrtr-dck.

Thr smd n sgn of cmmn bdly illnss abt hm, nr of th
rcvry frm any. H lkd lk a mn ct awy frm th stk, whn
th fr hs ovrrnnngly wstd all th lmbs wtht cnsmng thm,
or tkng awy on prtcl frm thr cmpctd agd rbstnss. Hs
whl hgh, brd frm, smd md of sld brnz, and shpd in an
unltrbl mld, lk Clln’s cst Prss. Thrdng its wy ot
frm amng hs gry hrs, and cntnng rght dwn on sd of hs
twny scrchd fc and nck, tll it dspprd in hs clthng, y
sw a slndr rd-lk mrk, lvdly whtsh. It rsmbld tht
prpndclr sm smtms md in th strght, lfty trnk of a
grt tr, whn th uppr lghtnng trngly drts dwn it, and
wtht wrnchng a sngl twg, pls and grvs ot th brk frm
tp t bttm, er rnnng off int th sl, lvng th tr stll
grnly alv, bt brndd. Whthr tht mrk ws brn wth hm, or
whthr it ws th scr lft by sm dsprt wnd, n on cld
crtnly sy. By sm tct cnsnt, thrght th vyg lttl or
n allsn ws md t it, espclly by th mts. Bt onc
Tshtg’s snr, an old Gy-Hd Indn amng th crw,
sprsttsly assrtd tht nt tll h ws fll frty yrs old dd
Ahb bcm tht wy brndd, and thn it cm upn hm, nt in th
fry of any mrtl fry, bt in an elmntl strf at s. Yt, ths
wld hnt smd infrntlly ngtvd, by wht a gry Mnxmn
insntd, an old splchrl mn, wh, hvng nvr bfr sld ot
of Nntckt, hd nvr er ths ld ey upn wld Ahb. Nvrthlss,
th old s-trdtns, th immmrl crdlts, pplrly invstd
ths old Mnxmn wth prtrntrl pwrs of dscrnmnt. S tht n
wht slr srsly cntrdctd hm whn h sd tht if evr
Cptn Ahb shld b trnqlly ld ot—whch mght hrdly cm t
pss, s h mttrd—thn, whvr shld d tht lst offc fr th
dd, wld fnd a brth-mrk on hm frm crwn t sl.

S pwrflly dd th whl grm aspct of Ahb affct m, and th
lvd brnd whch strkd it, tht fr th frst fw mmnts I hrdly
ntd tht nt a lttl of ths ovrbrng grmnss ws owng t th
brbrc wht lg upn whch h prtly std. It hd prvsly cm
t m tht ths ivry lg hd at s bn fshnd frm th plshd
bn of th sprm whl’s jw. “Ay, h ws dsmstd off Jpn,” sd
th old Gy-Hd Indn onc; “bt lk hs dsmstd crft, h shppd
anthr mst wtht cmng hm fr it. H hs a qvr of ’em.”

I ws strck wth th snglr pstr h mntnd. Upn ech sd of
th Pqd’s qrtr dck, and prtty cls t th mzzn shrds,
thr ws an agr hl, brd abt hlf an inch or s, int th
plnk. Hs bn lg stdd in tht hl; on arm elvtd, and
hldng by a shrd; Cptn Ahb std erct, lkng strght ot
bynd th shp’s evr-ptchng prw. Thr ws an infnty of frmst
frttd, a dtrmnt, unsrrndrbl wlflnss, in th fxd and
frlss, frwrd ddctn of tht glnc. Nt a wrd h spk; nr
dd hs offcrs sy aght t hm; thgh by all thr mntst
gstrs and exprssns, thy plnly shwd th unsy, if nt
pnfl, cnscsnss of bng undr a trbld mstr-ey. And nt
only tht, bt mdy strckn Ahb std bfr thm wth a crcfxn
in hs fc; in all th nmlss rgl ovrbrng dgnty of sm
mghty w.

Er lng, frm hs frst vst in th ar, h wthdrw int hs cbn.
Bt aftr tht mrnng, h ws evry dy vsbl t th crw; ethr
stndng in hs pvt-hl, or std upn an ivry stl h hd; or
hvly wlkng th dck. As th sky grw lss glmy; indd, bgn t
grw a lttl gnl, h bcm stll lss and lss a rcls; as if,
whn th shp hd sld frm hm, nthng bt th dd wntry
blknss of th s hd thn kpt hm s scldd. And, by and by, it
cm t pss, tht h ws almst cntnlly in th ar; bt, as yt,
fr all tht h sd, or prcptbly dd, on th at lst snny dck, h
smd as unncssry thr as anthr mst. Bt th Pqd ws only
mkng a pssg nw; nt rglrly crsng; nrly all whlng
prprtvs ndng sprvsn th mts wr flly cmptnt t, s
tht thr ws lttl or nthng, ot of hmslf, t emply or exct
Ahb, nw; and ths chs awy, fr tht on intrvl, th clds tht
lyr upn lyr wr pld upn hs brw, as evr all clds chs
th lftst pks t pl thmslvs upn.

Nvrthlss, er lng, th wrm, wrblng prssvnss of th
plsnt, hldy wthr w cm t, smd grdlly t chrm hm
frm hs md. Fr, as whn th rd-chkd, dncng grls, Aprl and
My, trp hm t th wntry, msnthrpc wds; evn th brst,
rggdst, mst thndr-clvn old ok wll at lst snd frth sm
fw grn sprts, t wlcm sch gld-hrtd vstnts; s Ahb dd,
in th end, a lttl rspnd t th plyfl allrngs of tht grlsh
ar. Mr thn onc dd h pt frth th fnt blssm of a lk,
whch, in any othr mn, wld hv sn flwrd ot in a sml.


CHPTR 29. Entr Ahb; t Hm, Stbb.

Sm dys elpsd, and ic and icbrgs all astrn, th Pqd nw wnt
rllng thrgh th brght Qt sprng, whch, at s, almst
prptlly rgns on th thrshld of th etrnl Agst of th
Trpc. Th wrmly cl, clr, rngng, prfmd, ovrflwng,
rdndnt dys, wr as crystl gblts of Prsn shrbt, hpd
up—flkd up, wth rs-wtr snw. Th strrd and sttly nghts
smd hghty dms in jwlld vlvts, nrsng at hm in lnly
prd, th mmry of thr absnt cnqrng Erls, th gldn hlmtd
sns! Fr slpng mn, ’tws hrd t chs btwn sch wnsm dys
and sch sdcng nghts. Bt all th wtchrs of tht unwnng
wthr dd nt mrly lnd nw splls and ptncs t th otwrd
wrld. Inwrd thy trnd upn th sl, espclly whn th stll mld
hrs of ev cm on; thn, mmry sht hr crystls as th clr ic
mst frms of nslss twlghts. And all ths sbtl agncs, mr
and mr thy wrght on Ahb’s txtr.

Old ag is alwys wkfl; as if, th lngr lnkd wth lf, th lss
mn hs t d wth aght tht lks lk dth. Amng s-cmmndrs,
th old grybrds wll oftnst lv thr brths t vst th
nght-clkd dck. It ws s wth Ahb; only tht nw, of lt, h
smd s mch t lv in th opn ar, tht trly spkng, hs vsts
wr mr t th cbn, thn frm th cbn t th plnks. “It fls
lk gng dwn int on’s tmb,”—h wld mttr t hmslf—“fr an
old cptn lk m t b dscndng ths nrrw scttl, t g t my
grv-dg brth.”

S, almst evry twnty-fr hrs, whn th wtchs of th nght wr
st, and th bnd on dck sntnlld th slmbrs of th bnd blw;
and whn if a rp ws t b hld upn th frcstl, th slrs
flng it nt rdly dwn, as by dy, bt wth sm ctsnss drpt
it t its plc fr fr of dstrbng thr slmbrng shpmts; whn
ths srt of stdy qtd wld bgn t prvl, hbtlly, th
slnt strsmn wld wtch th cbn-scttl; and er lng th old
mn wld emrg, grppng at th irn bnstr, t hlp hs crppld
wy. Sm cnsdrng tch of hmnty ws in hm; fr at tms lk
ths, h uslly abstnd frm ptrllng th qrtr-dck; bcs
t hs wrd mts, skng rps wthn sx inchs of hs ivry
hl, sch wld hv bn th rvrbrtng crck and dn of tht bny
stp, tht thr drms wld hv bn on th crnchng tth of
shrks. Bt onc, th md ws on hm t dp fr cmmn rgrdngs;
and as wth hvy, lmbr-lk pc h ws msrng th shp frm
tffrl t mnmst, Stbb, th old scnd mt, cm up frm blw,
wth a crtn unssrd, dprctng hmrsnss, hntd tht if
Cptn Ahb ws plsd t wlk th plnks, thn, n on cld sy
ny; bt thr mght b sm wy of mfflng th ns; hntng
smthng indstnctly and hsttngly abt a glb of tw, and th
insrtn int it, of th ivry hl. Ah! Stbb, th ddst nt knw
Ahb thn.

“Am I a cnnn-bll, Stbb,” sd Ahb, “tht th wldst wd m tht
fshn? Bt g thy wys; I hd frgt. Blw t thy nghtly grv;
whr sch as y slp btwn shrds, t us y t th fllng on at
lst.—Dwn, dg, and knnl!”

Strtng at th unfrsn cncldng exclmtn of th s sddnly
scrnfl old mn, Stbb ws spchlss a mmnt; thn sd exctdly,
“I am nt usd t b spkn t tht wy, sr; I d bt lss thn hlf
lk it, sr.”

“Avst! grttd Ahb btwn hs st tth, and vlntly mvng awy,
as if t avd sm pssnt tmpttn.

“N, sr; nt yt,” sd Stbb, embldnd, “I wll nt tmly b
clld a dg, sr.”

“Thn b clld tn tms a dnky, and a ml, and an ass, and bgn,
or I’ll clr th wrld of th!”

As h sd ths, Ahb advncd upn hm wth sch ovrbrng trrrs
in hs aspct, tht Stbb invlntrly rtrtd.

“I ws nvr srvd s bfr wtht gvng a hrd blw fr it,”
mttrd Stbb, as h fnd hmslf dscndng th cbn-scttl. “It’s
vry qr. Stp, Stbb; smhw, nw, I dn’t wll knw whthr t g
bck and strk hm, or—wht’s tht?—dwn hr on my kns and pry fr
hm? Ys, tht ws th thght cmng up in m; bt it wld b th
frst tm I evr _dd_ pry. It’s qr; vry qr; and h’s qr
t; ay, tk hm fr and aft, h’s abt th qrst old mn Stbb
evr sld wth. Hw h flshd at m!—hs eys lk pwdr-pns! is
h md? Anywy thr’s smthng on hs mnd, as sr as thr mst b
smthng on a dck whn it crcks. H ant in hs bd nw, ethr,
mr thn thr hrs ot of th twnty-fr; and h dn’t slp thn.
Ddn’t tht Dgh-By, th stwrd, tll m tht of a mrnng h alwys
fnds th old mn’s hmmck clths all rmpld and tmbld, and th
shts dwn at th ft, and th cvrld almst td int knts, and
th pllw a srt of frghtfl ht, as thgh a bkd brck hd bn on
it? A ht old mn! I gss h’s gt wht sm flks ashr cll a
cnscnc; it’s a knd of Tc-Dlly-rw thy sy—wrs nr a
tthch. Wll, wll; I dn’t knw wht it is, bt th Lrd kp m
frm ctchng it. H’s fll of rddls; I wndr wht h gs int th
aftr hld fr, evry nght, as Dgh-By tlls m h sspcts; wht’s
tht fr, I shld lk t knw? Wh’s md appntmnts wth hm in
th hld? An’t tht qr, nw? Bt thr’s n tllng, it’s th old
gm—Hr gs fr a snz. Dmn m, it’s wrth a fllw’s whl t b
brn int th wrld, if only t fll rght aslp. And nw tht I thnk
of it, tht’s abt th frst thng bbs d, and tht’s a srt of
qr, t. Dmn m, bt all thngs ar qr, cm t thnk of ’em.
Bt tht’s agnst my prncpls. Thnk nt, is my elvnth
cmmndmnt; and slp whn y cn, is my twlfth—S hr gs agn.
Bt hw’s tht? ddn’t h cll m a dg? blzs! h clld m tn tms
a dnky, and pld a lt of jcksss on tp of _tht!_ H mght as
wll hv kckd m, and dn wth it. Myb h _dd_ kck m, and I
ddn’t obsrv it, I ws s tkn all abck wth hs brw, smhw. It
flshd lk a blchd bn. Wht th dvl’s th mttr wth m? I
dn’t stnd rght on my lgs. Cmng afl of tht old mn hs a srt
of trnd m wrng sd ot. By th Lrd, I mst hv bn drmng,
thgh—Hw? hw? hw?—bt th only wy’s t stsh it; s hr gs t
hmmck agn; and in th mrnng, I’ll s hw ths plgy jgglng
thnks ovr by dylght.”


CHPTR 30. Th Pp.

Whn Stbb hd dprtd, Ahb std fr a whl lnng ovr th
blwrks; and thn, as hd bn usl wth hm of lt, cllng a
slr of th wtch, h snt hm blw fr hs ivry stl, and als
hs pp. Lghtng th pp at th bnncl lmp and plntng th stl
on th wthr sd of th dck, h st and smkd.

In old Nrs tms, th thrns of th s-lvng Dnsh kngs wr
fbrctd, sth trdtn, of th tsks of th nrwhl. Hw cld
on lk at Ahb thn, std on tht trpd of bns, wtht
bthnkng hm of th rylty it symblzd? Fr a Khn of th plnk,
and a kng of th s, and a grt lrd of Lvthns ws Ahb.

Sm mmnts pssd, drng whch th thck vpr cm frm hs mth
in qck and cnstnt pffs, whch blw bck agn int hs fc. “Hw
nw,” h sllqzd at lst, wthdrwng th tb, “ths smkng n
lngr sths. Oh, my pp! hrd mst it g wth m if thy chrm b
gn! Hr hv I bn uncnscsly tlng, nt plsrng—ay, and
ignrntly smkng t wndwrd all th whl; t wndwrd, and wth
sch nrvs whffs, as if, lk th dyng whl, my fnl jts wr
th strngst and fllst of trbl. Wht bsnss hv I wth ths
pp? Ths thng tht is mnt fr srnnss, t snd up mld wht
vprs amng mld wht hrs, nt amng trn irn-gry lcks lk
mn. I’ll smk n mr—”

H tssd th stll lghtd pp int th s. Th fr hssd in th
wvs; th sm instnt th shp sht by th bbbl th snkng pp
md. Wth slchd ht, Ahb lrchngly pcd th plnks.


CHPTR 31. Qn Mb.

Nxt mrnng Stbb accstd Flsk.

“Sch a qr drm, Kng-Pst, I nvr hd. Y knw th old mn’s
ivry lg, wll I drmd h kckd m wth it; and whn I trd t
kck bck, upn my sl, my lttl mn, I kckd my lg rght off! And
thn, prst! Ahb smd a pyrmd, and I, lk a blzng fl, kpt
kckng at it. Bt wht ws stll mr crs, Flsk—y knw hw
crs all drms ar—thrgh all ths rg tht I ws in, I smhw
smd t b thnkng t myslf, tht aftr all, it ws nt mch of an
inslt, tht kck frm Ahb. ‘Why,’ thnks I, ‘wht’s th rw? It’s nt
a rl lg, only a fls lg.’ And thr’s a mghty dffrnc btwn
a lvng thmp and a dd thmp. Tht’s wht mks a blw frm th
hnd, Flsk, ffty tms mr svg t br thn a blw frm a cn.
Th lvng mmbr—tht mks th lvng inslt, my lttl mn. And
thnks I t myslf all th whl, mnd, whl I ws stbbng my slly
ts agnst tht crsd pyrmd—s cnfnddly cntrdctry ws it
all, all th whl, I sy, I ws thnkng t myslf, ‘wht’s hs lg
nw, bt a cn—a whlbn cn. Ys,’ thnks I, ‘it ws only a
plyfl cdgllng—in fct, only a whlbnng tht h gv m—nt a
bs kck. Bsds,’ thnks I, ‘lk at it onc; why, th end of it—th
ft prt—wht a smll srt of end it is; whrs, if a brd ftd
frmr kckd m, _thr’s_ a dvlsh brd inslt. Bt ths inslt is
whttld dwn t a pnt only.’ Bt nw cms th grtst jk of th
drm, Flsk. Whl I ws bttrng awy at th pyrmd, a srt of
bdgr-hrd old mrmn, wth a hmp on hs bck, tks m by th
shldrs, and slws m rnd. ‘Wht ar y ’bt?’ sys h. Sld!
mn, bt I ws frghtnd. Sch a phz! Bt, smhw, nxt mmnt I ws
ovr th frght. ‘Wht am I abt?’ sys I at lst. ‘And wht bsnss
is tht of yrs, I shld lk t knw, Mr. Hmpbck? D _y_ wnt a
kck?’ By th lrd, Flsk, I hd n snr sd tht, thn h trnd
rnd hs strn t m, bnt ovr, and drggng up a lt of swd h
hd fr a clt—wht d y thnk, I sw?—why thndr alv, mn, hs
strn ws stck fll of mrlnspks, wth th pnts ot. Sys I, on
scnd thghts, ‘I gss I wn’t kck y, old fllw.’ ‘Ws Stbb,’
sd h, ‘ws Stbb;’ and kpt mttrng it all th tm, a srt of
etng of hs own gms lk a chmny hg. Sng h wsn’t gng t
stp syng ovr hs ‘ws Stbb, ws Stbb,’ I thght I mght as
wll fll t kckng th pyrmd agn. Bt I hd only jst lftd my
ft fr it, whn h rrd ot, ‘Stp tht kckng!’ ‘Hll,’ sys I,
‘wht’s th mttr nw, old fllw?’ ‘Lk y hr,’ sys h; ‘lt’s
arg th inslt. Cptn Ahb kckd y, ddn’t h?’ ‘Ys, h dd,’
sys I—‘rght _hr_ it ws.’ ‘Vry gd,’ sys h—‘h usd hs ivry
lg, ddn’t h?’ ‘Ys, h dd,’ sys I. ‘Wll thn,’ sys h, ‘ws
Stbb, wht hv y t cmpln of? Ddn’t h kck wth rght gd
wll? it wsn’t a cmmn ptch pn lg h kckd wth, ws it? N, y
wr kckd by a grt mn, and wth a btfl ivry lg, Stbb. It’s
an hnr; I cnsdr it an hnr. Lstn, ws Stbb. In old Englnd
th grtst lrds thnk it grt glry t b slppd by a qn, and
md grtr-knghts of; bt, b _yr_ bst, Stbb, tht y wr
kckd by old Ahb, and md a ws mn of. Rmmbr wht I sy; _b_
kckd by hm; accnt hs kcks hnrs; and on n accnt kck bck;
fr y cn’t hlp yrslf, ws Stbb. Dn’t y s tht pyrmd?’
Wth tht, h all of a sddn smd smhw, in sm qr fshn, t
swm off int th ar. I snrd; rlld ovr; and thr I ws in my
hmmck! Nw, wht d y thnk of tht drm, Flsk?”

“I dn’t knw; it sms a srt of flsh t m, th.’”

“My b; my b. Bt it’s md a ws mn of m, Flsk. D’y s Ahb
stndng thr, sdwys lkng ovr th strn? Wll, th bst thng
y cn d, Flsk, is t lt th old mn aln; nvr spk t hm,
whtvr h sys. Hll! Wht’s tht h shts? Hrk!”

“Mst-hd, thr! Lk shrp, all of y! Thr ar whls hrbts!

“If y s a wht on, splt yr lngs fr hm!

“Wht d y thnk of tht nw, Flsk? an’t thr a smll drp of
smthng qr abt tht, eh? A wht whl—dd y mrk tht, mn?
Lk y—thr’s smthng spcl in th wnd. Stnd by fr it, Flsk.
Ahb hs tht tht’s bldy on hs mnd. Bt, mm; h cms ths wy.”


CHPTR 32. Ctlgy.

Alrdy w ar bldly lnchd upn th dp; bt sn w shll b lst
in its unshrd, hrbrlss immnsts. Er tht cm t pss; er
th Pqd’s wdy hll rlls sd by sd wth th brncld hlls of
th lvthn; at th otst it is bt wll t attnd t a mttr
almst indspnsbl t a thrgh apprctv undrstndng of th
mr spcl lvthnc rvltns and allsns of all srts whch
ar t fllw.

It is sm systmtzd exhbtn of th whl in hs brd gnr,
tht I wld nw fn pt bfr y. Yt is it n esy tsk. Th
clssfctn of th cnsttnts of a chs, nthng lss is hr
essyd. Lstn t wht th bst and ltst athrts hv ld dwn.

“N brnch of Zlgy is s mch invlvd as tht whch is enttld
Ctlgy,” sys Cptn Scrsby, A.D. 1820.

“It is nt my intntn, wr it in my pwr, t entr int th inqry
as t th tr mthd of dvdng th ctc int grps and fmls.
* * * Uttr cnfsn exsts amng th hstrns of ths anml”
(sprm whl), sys Srgn Bl, A.D. 1839.

“Unftnss t prs or rsrch in th unfthmbl wtrs.”
“Impntrbl vl cvrng or knwldg of th ctc.” “A fld
strwn wth thrns.” “All ths incmplt indctns bt srv t
trtr us ntrlsts.”

Ths spk of th whl, th grt Cvr, and Jhn Hntr, and Lssn,
ths lghts of zlgy and antmy. Nvrthlss, thgh of rl
knwldg thr b lttl, yt of bks thr ar a plnty; and s in
sm smll dgr, wth ctlgy, or th scnc of whls. Mny ar
th mn, smll and grt, old and nw, lndsmn and smn, wh hv at
lrg or in lttl, wrttn of th whl. Rn ovr a fw:—Th Athrs
of th Bbl; Arsttl; Plny; Aldrvnd; Sr Thms Brwn; Gsnr;
Ry; Lnnæus; Rndlts; Wllghby; Grn; Artd; Sbbld; Brssn;
Mrtn; Lcépèd; Bnntrr; Dsmrst; Brn Cvr; Frdrck
Cvr; Jhn Hntr; Own; Scrsby; Bl; Bnntt; J. Rss Brwn;
th Athr of Mrm Cffn; Olmstd; and th Rv. T. Chvr. Bt t
wht ultmt gnrlzng prps all ths hv wrttn, th abv
ctd extrcts wll shw.

Of th nms in ths lst of whl athrs, only ths fllwng Own
evr sw lvng whls; and bt on of thm ws a rl prfssnl
hrpnr and whlmn. I mn Cptn Scrsby. On th sprt
sbjct of th Grnlnd or rght-whl, h is th bst exstng
athrty. Bt Scrsby knw nthng and sys nthng of th grt
sprm whl, cmprd wth whch th Grnlnd whl is almst unwrthy
mntnng. And hr b it sd, tht th Grnlnd whl is an usrpr
upn th thrn of th ss. H is nt evn by any mns th lrgst of
th whls. Yt, owng t th lng prrty of hs clms, and th
prfnd ignrnc whch, tll sm svnty yrs bck, invstd th
thn fbls or uttrly unknwn sprm-whl, and whch ignrnc t
ths prsnt dy stll rgns in all bt sm fw scntfc rtrts
and whl-prts; ths usrptn hs bn evry wy cmplt. Rfrnc
t nrly all th lvthnc allsns in th grt pts of pst
dys, wll stsfy y tht th Grnlnd whl, wtht on rvl, ws
t thm th mnrch of th ss. Bt th tm hs at lst cm fr a
nw prclmtn. Ths is Chrng Crss; hr y! gd ppl all,—th
Grnlnd whl is dpsd,—th grt sprm whl nw rgnth!

Thr ar only tw bks in bng whch at all prtnd t pt th
lvng sprm whl bfr y, and at th sm tm, in th rmtst
dgr sccd in th attmpt. Ths bks ar Bl’s and Bnntt’s;
bth in thr tm srgns t Englsh Sth-S whl-shps, and bth
exct and rlbl mn. Th orgnl mttr tchng th sprm whl t
b fnd in thr vlms is ncssrly smll; bt s fr as it gs,
it is of excllnt qlty, thgh mstly cnfnd t scntfc
dscrptn. As yt, hwvr, th sprm whl, scntfc or ptc,
lvs nt cmplt in any ltrtr. Fr abv all othr hntd
whls, hs is an unwrttn lf.

Nw th vrs spcs of whls nd sm srt of pplr
cmprhnsv clssfctn, if only an esy otln on fr th
prsnt, hrftr t b flld in all its dprtmnts by sbsqnt
lbrrs. As n bttr mn advncs t tk ths mttr in hnd, I
hrpn offr my own pr endvrs. I prms nthng cmplt;
bcs any hmn thng sppsd t b cmplt, mst fr tht vry
rsn infllbly b flty. I shll nt prtnd t a mnt antmcl
dscrptn of th vrs spcs, or—in ths plc at lst—t mch
of any dscrptn. My objct hr is smply t prjct th drght of
a systmtztn of ctlgy. I am th archtct, nt th bldr.

Bt it is a pndrs tsk; n ordnry lttr-srtr in th
Pst-Offc is eql t it. T grp dwn int th bttm of th s
aftr thm; t hv on’s hnds amng th unspkbl fndtns,
rbs, and vry plvs of th wrld; ths is a frfl thng. Wht am I
tht I shld essy t hk th ns of ths lvthn! Th awfl
tntngs in Jb mght wll appl m. Wll h (th lvthn) mk a
cvnnt wth th? Bhld th hp of hm is vn! Bt I hv swm
thrgh lbrrs and sld thrgh ocns; I hv hd t d wth
whls wth ths vsbl hnds; I am in ernst; and I wll try. Thr
ar sm prlmnrs t sttl.

Frst: Th uncrtn, unsttld cndtn of ths scnc of Ctlgy
is in th vry vstbl attstd by th fct, tht in sm qrtrs it
stll rmns a mt pnt whthr a whl b a fsh. In hs Systm of
Ntr, A.D. 1776, Lnnæus dclrs, “I hrby sprt th whls frm
th fsh.” Bt of my own knwldg, I knw tht dwn t th yr 1850,
shrks and shd, alwvs and hrrng, agnst Lnnæus’s exprss edct,
wr stll fnd dvdng th pssssn of th sm ss wth th
Lvthn.

Th grnds upn whch Lnnæus wld fn hv bnshd th whls frm
th wtrs, h stts as fllws: “On accnt of thr wrm blclr
hrt, thr lngs, thr mvbl eylds, thr hllw ers, pnm
intrntm fmnm mmms lctntm,” and fnlly, “ex lg ntræ jr
mrtq.” I sbmttd all ths t my frnds Smn Mcy and Chrly
Cffn, of Nntckt, bth mssmts of mn in a crtn vyg, and
thy untd in th opnn tht th rsns st frth wr altgthr
insffcnt. Chrly prfnly hntd thy wr hmbg.

B it knwn tht, wvng all argmnt, I tk th gd old fshnd
grnd tht th whl is a fsh, and cll upn hly Jnh t bck m.
Ths fndmntl thng sttld, th nxt pnt is, in wht intrnl
rspct ds th whl dffr frm othr fsh. Abv, Lnnæus hs gvn
y ths itms. Bt in brf, thy ar ths: lngs and wrm bld;
whrs, all othr fsh ar lnglss and cld bldd.

Nxt: hw shll w dfn th whl, by hs obvs extrnls, s as
cnspcsly t lbl hm fr all tm t cm? T b shrt, thn, a
whl is _a sptng fsh wth a hrzntl tl_. Thr y hv hm.
Hwvr cntrctd, tht dfntn is th rslt of expndd
mdttn. A wlrs spts mch lk a whl, bt th wlrs is nt a
fsh, bcs h is amphbs. Bt th lst trm of th dfntn is
stll mr cgnt, as cpld wth th frst. Almst any on mst hv
ntcd tht all th fsh fmlr t lndsmn hv nt a flt, bt a
vrtcl, or up-and-dwn tl. Whrs, amng sptng fsh th tl,
thgh it my b smlrly shpd, invrbly assms a hrzntl
pstn.

By th abv dfntn of wht a whl is, I d by n mns excld
frm th lvthnc brthrhd any s crtr hthrt idntfd
wth th whl by th bst infrmd Nntcktrs; nr, on th othr
hnd, lnk wth it any fsh hthrt athrttvly rgrdd as
aln.* Hnc, all th smllr, sptng, and hrzntl tld fsh
mst b incldd in ths grnd-pln of Ctlgy. Nw, thn, cm th
grnd dvsns of th entr whl hst.

*I am awr tht dwn t th prsnt tm, th fsh styld Lmtns and
Dgngs (Pg-fsh and Sw-fsh of th Cffns of Nntckt) ar
incldd by mny ntrlsts amng th whls. Bt as ths pg-fsh
ar a nsy, cntmptbl st, mstly lrkng in th mths of rvrs,
and fdng on wt hy, and espclly as thy d nt spt, I dny
thr crdntls as whls; and hv prsntd thm wth thr
pssprts t qt th Kngdm of Ctlgy.

Frst: Accrdng t mgntd I dvd th whls int thr prmry
BKS (sbdvsbl int CHPTRS), and ths shll cmprhnd thm
all, bth smll and lrg.

I. TH FL WHL; I. th OCTV WHL; I. th DDCM WHL.

As th typ of th FL I prsnt th _Sprm Whl_; of th OCTV,
th _Grmps_; of th DDCM, th _Prps_.

FLS. Amng ths I hr incld th fllwng chptrs:—I. Th
_Sprm Whl_; I. th _Rght Whl_; I. th _Fn-Bck Whl_; IV.
th _Hmp-bckd Whl_; V. th _Rzr Bck Whl_; V. th _Slphr
Bttm Whl_.

BK I. (_Fl_), CHPTR I. (_Sprm Whl_).—Ths whl, amng th
Englsh of old vgly knwn as th Trmp whl, and th Phystr
whl, and th Anvl Hdd whl, is th prsnt Cchlt of th
Frnch, and th Pttsfch of th Grmns, and th Mcrcphls of th
Lng Wrds. H is, wtht dbt, th lrgst inhbtnt of th glb;
th mst frmdbl of all whls t encntr; th mst mjstc in
aspct; and lstly, by fr th mst vlbl in cmmrc; h bng th
only crtr frm whch tht vlbl sbstnc, sprmct, is
obtnd. All hs pclrts wll, in mny othr plcs, b enlrgd
upn. It is chfly wth hs nm tht I nw hv t d. Phllgclly
cnsdrd, it is absrd. Sm cntrs ag, whn th Sprm whl ws
almst whlly unknwn in hs own prpr indvdlty, and whn hs ol
ws only accdntlly obtnd frm th strndd fsh; in ths dys
sprmct, it wld sm, ws pplrly sppsd t b drvd frm a
crtr idntcl wth th on thn knwn in Englnd as th Grnlnd
or Rght Whl. It ws th id als, tht ths sm sprmct ws
tht qcknng hmr of th Grnlnd Whl whch th frst syllbl
of th wrd ltrlly exprsss. In ths tms, als, sprmct ws
excdngly scrc, nt bng usd fr lght, bt only as an ontmnt
and mdcmnt. It ws only t b hd frm th drggsts as y
nwdys by an onc of rhbrb. Whn, as I opn, in th crs of
tm, th tr ntr of sprmct bcm knwn, its orgnl nm ws
stll rtnd by th dlrs; n dbt t enhnc its vl by a
ntn s strngly sgnfcnt of its scrcty. And s th applltn
mst at lst hv cm t b bstwd upn th whl frm whch ths
sprmct ws rlly drvd.

BK I. (_Fl_), CHPTR I. (_Rght Whl_).—In on rspct ths is
th mst vnrbl of th lvthns, bng th on frst rglrly
hntd by mn. It ylds th artcl cmmnly knwn as whlbn or
bln; and th ol spclly knwn as “whl ol,” an infrr artcl
in cmmrc. Amng th fshrmn, h is indscrmntly dsgntd by
all th fllwng ttls: Th Whl; th Grnlnd Whl; th Blck
Whl; th Grt Whl; th Tr Whl; th Rght Whl. Thr is a
dl of obscrty cncrnng th idntty of th spcs ths
mlttdnsly bptsd. Wht thn is th whl, whch I incld in
th scnd spcs of my Fls? It is th Grt Mystcts of th
Englsh ntrlsts; th Grnlnd Whl of th Englsh whlmn; th
Bln Ordnr of th Frnch whlmn; th Grwlnds Wlfsh of th
Swds. It is th whl whch fr mr thn tw cntrs pst hs bn
hntd by th Dtch and Englsh in th Arctc ss; it is th whl
whch th Amrcn fshrmn hv lng prsd in th Indn ocn, on
th Brzl Bnks, on th Nr’ Wst Cst, and vrs othr prts of
th wrld, dsgntd by thm Rght Whl Crsng Grnds.

Sm prtnd t s a dffrnc btwn th Grnlnd whl of th
Englsh and th rght whl of th Amrcns. Bt thy prcsly agr
in all thr grnd ftrs; nr hs thr yt bn prsntd a sngl
dtrmnt fct upn whch t grnd a rdcl dstnctn. It is by
endlss sbdvsns bsd upn th mst incnclsv dffrncs, tht
sm dprtmnts of ntrl hstry bcm s rpllngly intrct.
Th rght whl wll b elswhr trtd of at sm lngth, wth
rfrnc t elcdtng th sprm whl.

BK I. (_Fl_), CHPTR I. (_Fn-Bck_).—Undr ths hd I rckn
a mnstr whch, by th vrs nms of Fn-Bck, Tll-Spt, and
Lng-Jhn, hs bn sn almst in evry s and is cmmnly th whl
whs dstnt jt is s oftn dscrd by pssngrs crssng th
Atlntc, in th Nw Yrk pckt-trcks. In th lngth h attns, and
in hs bln, th Fn-bck rsmbls th rght whl, bt is of a lss
prtly grth, and a lghtr clr, apprchng t olv. Hs grt
lps prsnt a cbl-lk aspct, frmd by th intrtwstng, slntng
flds of lrg wrnkls. Hs grnd dstngshng ftr, th fn,
frm whch h drvs hs nm, is oftn a cnspcs objct. Ths fn
is sm thr or fr ft lng, grwng vrtclly frm th hndr
prt of th bck, of an anglr shp, and wth a vry shrp pntd
end. Evn if nt th slghtst othr prt of th crtr b vsbl,
ths isltd fn wll, at tms, b sn plnly prjctng frm th
srfc. Whn th s is mdrtly clm, and slghtly mrkd wth
sphrcl rppls, and ths gnmn-lk fn stnds up and csts shdws
upn th wrnkld srfc, it my wll b sppsd tht th wtry
crcl srrndng it smwht rsmbls a dl, wth its styl and
wvy hr-lns grvd on it. On tht Ahz-dl th shdw oftn gs
bck. Th Fn-Bck is nt grgrs. H sms a whl-htr, as sm
mn ar mn-htrs. Vry shy; alwys gng sltry; unxpctdly
rsng t th srfc in th rmtst and mst slln wtrs; hs
strght and sngl lfty jt rsng lk a tll msnthrpc spr
upn a brrn pln; gftd wth sch wndrs pwr and vlcty in
swmmng, as t dfy all prsnt prst frm mn; ths lvthn sms
th bnshd and uncnqrbl Cn of hs rc, brng fr hs mrk
tht styl upn hs bck. Frm hvng th bln in hs mth, th
Fn-Bck is smtms incldd wth th rght whl, amng a thrtc
spcs dnmntd _Whlbn whls_, tht is, whls wth bln. Of
ths s clld Whlbn whls, thr wld sm t b svrl
vrts, mst of whch, hwvr, ar lttl knwn. Brd-nsd whls
and bkd whls; pk-hdd whls; bnchd whls; undr-jwd
whls and rstrtd whls, ar th fshrmn’s nms fr a fw srts.

In cnnctn wth ths applltv of “Whlbn whls,” it is of
grt imprtnc t mntn, tht hwvr sch a nmncltr my b
cnvnnt in fclttng allsns t sm knd of whls, yt it is
in vn t attmpt a clr clssfctn of th Lvthn, fndd
upn ethr hs bln, or hmp, or fn, or tth; ntwthstndng tht
ths mrkd prts or ftrs vry obvsly sm bttr adptd t
affrd th bss fr a rglr systm of Ctlgy thn any othr
dtchd bdly dstnctns, whch th whl, in hs knds, prsnts.
Hw thn? Th bln, hmp, bck-fn, and tth; ths ar thngs whs
pclrts ar indscrmntly dsprsd amng all srts of whls,
wtht any rgrd t wht my b th ntr of thr strctr in
othr and mr essntl prtclrs. Ths, th sprm whl and th
hmpbckd whl, ech hs a hmp; bt thr th smltd css.
Thn, ths sm hmpbckd whl and th Grnlnd whl, ech of ths
hs bln; bt thr agn th smltd css. And it is jst th
sm wth th othr prts abv mntnd. In vrs srts of whls,
thy frm sch irrglr cmbntns; or, in th cs of any on of
thm dtchd, sch an irrglr isltn; as uttrly t dfy all
gnrl mthdztn frmd upn sch a bss. On ths rck evry on
of th whl-ntrlsts hs splt.

Bt it my pssbly b cncvd tht, in th intrnl prts of th
whl, in hs antmy—thr, at lst, w shll b abl t ht th
rght clssfctn. Ny; wht thng, fr exmpl, is thr in th
Grnlnd whl’s antmy mr strkng thn hs bln? Yt w hv
sn tht by hs bln it is impssbl crrctly t clssfy th
Grnlnd whl. And if y dscnd int th bwls of th vrs
lvthns, why thr y wll nt fnd dstnctns a fftth prt as
avlbl t th systmtzr as ths extrnl ons alrdy
enmrtd. Wht thn rmns? nthng bt t tk hld of th whls
bdly, in thr entr lbrl vlm, and bldly srt thm tht wy.
And ths is th Bblgrphcl systm hr adptd; and it is th only
on tht cn pssbly sccd, fr it aln is prctcbl. T prcd.

BK I. (_Fl_) CHPTR IV. (_Hmp Bck_).—Ths whl is oftn sn
on th nrthrn Amrcn cst. H hs bn frqntly cptrd thr,
and twd int hrbr. H hs a grt pck on hm lk a pddlr; or
y mght cll hm th Elphnt and Cstl whl. At any rt, th
pplr nm fr hm ds nt sffcntly dstngsh hm, snc th
sprm whl als hs a hmp thgh a smllr on. Hs ol is nt vry
vlbl. H hs bln. H is th mst gmsm and lght-hrtd of
all th whls, mkng mr gy fm and wht wtr gnrlly thn any
othr of thm.

BK I. (_Fl_), CHPTR V. (_Rzr Bck_).—Of ths whl lttl is
knwn bt hs nm. I hv sn hm at a dstnc off Cp Hrn. Of a
rtrng ntr, h elds bth hntrs and phlsphrs. Thgh n
cwrd, h hs nvr yt shwn any prt of hm bt hs bck, whch
rss in a lng shrp rdg. Lt hm g. I knw lttl mr of hm, nr
ds anybdy els.

BK I. (_Fl_), CHPTR V. (_Slphr Bttm_).—Anthr rtrng
gntlmn, wth a brmstn blly, dbtlss gt by scrpng alng th
Trtrn tls in sm of hs prfndr dvngs. H is sldm sn;
at lst I hv nvr sn hm excpt in th rmtr sthrn ss, and
thn alwys at t grt a dstnc t stdy hs cntnnc. H is
nvr chsd; h wld rn awy wth rp-wlks of ln. Prdgs ar
tld of hm. Ad, Slphr Bttm! I cn sy nthng mr tht is tr
of y, nr cn th oldst Nntcktr.

Ths ends BK I. (_Fl_), and nw bgns BK I. (_Octv_).

OCTVS.*—Ths embrc th whls of mddlng mgntd, amng whch
prsnt my b nmbrd:—I., th _Grmps_; I., th _Blck Fsh_;
I., th _Nrwhl_; IV., th _Thrshr_; V., th _Kllr_.

*Why ths bk of whls is nt dnmntd th Qrt is vry pln.
Bcs, whl th whls of ths ordr, thgh smllr thn ths of
th frmr ordr, nvrthlss rtn a prprtnt lknss t thm
in fgr, yt th bkbndr’s Qrt vlm in its dmnsnd frm
ds nt prsrv th shp of th Fl vlm, bt th Octv vlm
ds.

BK I. (_Octv_), CHPTR I. (_Grmps_).—Thgh ths fsh, whs
ld snrs brthng, or rthr blwng, hs frnshd a prvrb t
lndsmn, is s wll knwn a dnzn of th dp, yt is h nt
pplrly clssd amng whls. Bt pssssng all th grnd
dstnctv ftrs of th lvthn, mst ntrlsts hv rcgnsd
hm fr on. H is of mdrt octv sz, vryng frm fftn t
twnty-fv ft in lngth, and of crrspndng dmnsns rnd th
wst. H swms in hrds; h is nvr rglrly hntd, thgh hs ol
is cnsdrbl in qntty, and prtty gd fr lght. By sm
fshrmn hs apprch is rgrdd as prmntry of th advnc of th
grt sprm whl.

BK I. (_Octv_), CHPTR I. (_Blck Fsh_).—I gv th pplr
fshrmn’s nms fr all ths fsh, fr gnrlly thy ar th bst.
Whr any nm hppns t b vg or inxprssv, I shll sy s, and
sggst anthr. I d s nw, tchng th Blck Fsh, s-clld,
bcs blcknss is th rl amng almst all whls. S, cll hm th
Hyn Whl, if y pls. Hs vrcty is wll knwn, and frm th
crcmstnc tht th innr angls of hs lps ar crvd upwrds, h
crrs an evrlstng Mphstphln grn on hs fc. Ths whl
avrgs sm sxtn or eghtn ft in lngth. H is fnd in almst
all lttds. H hs a pclr wy of shwng hs drsl hkd fn
in swmmng, whch lks smthng lk a Rmn ns. Whn nt mr
prftbly emplyd, th sprm whl hntrs smtms cptr th
Hyn whl, t kp up th spply of chp ol fr dmstc
emplymnt—as sm frgl hskprs, in th absnc of cmpny, and
qt aln by thmslvs, brn unsvry tllw instd of odrs wx.
Thgh thr blbbr is vry thn, sm of ths whls wll yld y
upwrds of thrty gllns of ol.

BK I. (_Octv_), CHPTR I. (_Nrwhl_), tht is, _Nstrl
whl_.—Anthr instnc of a crsly nmd whl, s nmd I spps
frm hs pclr hrn bng orgnlly mstkn fr a pkd ns. Th
crtr is sm sxtn ft in lngth, whl its hrn avrgs fv
ft, thgh sm excd tn, and evn attn t fftn ft. Strctly
spkng, ths hrn is bt a lngthnd tsk, grwng ot frm th jw
in a ln a lttl dprssd frm th hrzntl. Bt it is only fnd
on th snstr sd, whch hs an ill effct, gvng its ownr
smthng anlgs t th aspct of a clmsy lft-hndd mn. Wht
prcs prps ths ivry hrn or lnc answrs, it wld b hrd t
sy. It ds nt sm t b usd lk th bld of th swrd-fsh and
bll-fsh; thgh sm slrs tll m tht th Nrwhl emplys it fr
a rk in trnng ovr th bttm of th s fr fd. Chrly Cffn
sd it ws usd fr an ic-prcr; fr th Nrwhl, rsng t th
srfc of th Plr S, and fndng it shtd wth ic, thrsts hs
hrn up, and s brks thrgh. Bt y cnnt prv ethr of ths
srmss t b crrct. My own opnn is, tht hwvr ths on-sdd
hrn my rlly b usd by th Nrwhl—hwvr tht my b—it wld
crtnly b vry cnvnnt t hm fr a fldr in rdng pmphlts.
Th Nrwhl I hv hrd clld th Tskd whl, th Hrnd whl,
and th Uncrn whl. H is crtnly a crs exmpl of th
Uncrnsm t b fnd in almst evry kngdm of anmtd ntr. Frm
crtn clstrd old athrs I hv gthrd tht ths sm
s-uncrn’s hrn ws in ancnt dys rgrdd as th grt antdt
agnst psn, and as sch, prprtns of it brght immns prcs.
It ws als dstlld t a vltl slts fr fntng lds, th sm
wy tht th hrns of th ml dr ar mnfctrd int hrtshrn.
Orgnlly it ws in itslf accntd an objct of grt crsty.
Blck Lttr tlls m tht Sr Mrtn Frbshr on hs rtrn frm tht
vyg, whn Qn Bss dd gllntly wv hr jwlld hnd t hm
frm a wndw of Grnwch Plc, as hs bld shp sld dwn th
Thms; “whn Sr Mrtn rtrnd frm tht vyg,” sth Blck
Lttr, “on bndd kns h prsntd t hr hghnss a prdgs lng
hrn of th Nrwhl, whch fr a lng prd aftr hng in th cstl
at Wndsr.” An Irsh athr avrs tht th Erl of Lcstr, on
bndd kns, dd lkws prsnt t hr hghnss anthr hrn,
prtnng t a lnd bst of th uncrn ntr.

Th Nrwhl hs a vry pctrsq, lprd-lk lk, bng of a
mlk-wht grnd clr, dttd wth rnd and oblng spts of blck.
Hs ol is vry sprr, clr and fn; bt thr is lttl of it,
and h is sldm hntd. H is mstly fnd in th crcmplr ss.

BK I. (_Octv_), CHPTR IV. (_Kllr_).—Of ths whl lttl is
prcsly knwn t th Nntcktr, and nthng at all t th prfssd
ntrlst. Frm wht I hv sn of hm at a dstnc, I shld sy
tht h ws abt th bgnss of a grmps. H is vry svg—a srt of
Fg fsh. H smtms tks th grt Fl whls by th lp, and
hngs thr lk a lch, tll th mghty brt is wrrd t dth.
Th Kllr is nvr hntd. I nvr hrd wht srt of ol h hs.
Excptn mght b tkn t th nm bstwd upn ths whl, on th
grnd of its indstnctnss. Fr w ar all kllrs, on lnd and on
s; Bnprts and Shrks incldd.

BK I. (_Octv_), CHPTR V. (_Thrshr_).—Ths gntlmn is fms
fr hs tl, whch h uss fr a frl in thrshng hs fs. H
mnts th Fl whl’s bck, and as h swms, h wrks hs pssg by
flggng hm; as sm schlmstrs gt alng in th wrld by a smlr
prcss. Stll lss is knwn of th Thrshr thn of th Kllr. Bth
ar otlws, evn in th lwlss ss.

 Ths ends BK I. (_Octv_), and bgns BK I. (_Ddcm_).

DDCMS.—Ths incld th smllr whls. I. Th Hzz Prps.
I. Th Algrn Prps. I. Th Mly-mthd Prps.

T ths wh hv nt chncd spclly t stdy th sbjct, it my
pssbly sm strng, tht fshs nt cmmnly excdng fr or fv
ft shld b mrshlld amng WHLS—a wrd, whch, in th pplr
sns, alwys cnvys an id of hgnss. Bt th crtrs st dwn
abv as Ddcms ar infllbly whls, by th trms of my
dfntn of wht a whl is—_i.e._ a sptng fsh, wth a hrzntl
tl.

BK I. (_Ddcm_), CHPTR 1. (_Hzz Prps_).—Ths is th
cmmn prps fnd almst all ovr th glb. Th nm is of my own
bstwl; fr thr ar mr thn on srt of prpss, and smthng
mst b dn t dstngsh thm. I cll hm ths, bcs h alwys
swms in hlrs shls, whch upn th brd s kp tssng
thmslvs t hvn lk cps in a Frth-of-Jly crwd. Thr
apprnc is gnrlly hld wth dlght by th mrnr. Fll of
fn sprts, thy invrbly cm frm th brzy bllws t wndwrd.
Thy ar th lds tht alwys lv bfr th wnd. Thy ar accntd
a lcky omn. If y yrslf cn wthstnd thr chrs at bhldng
ths vvcs fsh, thn hvn hlp y; th sprt of gdly
gmsmnss is nt in y. A wll-fd, plmp Hzz Prps wll yld
y on gd glln of gd ol. Bt th fn and dlct fld
extrctd frm hs jws is excdngly vlbl. It is in rqst amng
jwllrs and wtchmkrs. Slrs pt it on thr hns. Prps mt
is gd etng, y knw. It my nvr hv occrrd t y tht a
prps spts. Indd, hs spt is s smll tht it is nt vry
rdly dscrnbl. Bt th nxt tm y hv a chnc, wtch hm;
and y wll thn s th grt Sprm whl hmslf in mntr.

BK I. (_Ddcm_), CHPTR I. (_Algrn Prps_).—A prt.
Vry svg. H is only fnd, I thnk, in th Pcfc. H is smwht
lrgr thn th Hzz Prps, bt mch of th sm gnrl mk.
Prvk hm, and h wll bckl t a shrk. I hv lwrd fr hm mny
tms, bt nvr yt sw hm cptrd.

BK I. (_Ddcm_), CHPTR I. (_Mly-mthd Prps_).—Th
lrgst knd of Prps; and only fnd in th Pcfc, s fr as it
is knwn. Th only Englsh nm, by whch h hs hthrt bn
dsgntd, is tht of th fshrs—Rght-Whl Prps, frm th
crcmstnc tht h is chfly fnd in th vcnty of tht Fl. In
shp, h dffrs in sm dgr frm th Hzz Prps, bng of a
lss rtnd and jlly grth; indd, h is of qt a nt and
gntlmn-lk fgr. H hs n fns on hs bck (mst othr prpss
hv), h hs a lvly tl, and sntmntl Indn eys of a hzl
h. Bt hs mly-mth spls all. Thgh hs entr bck dwn t hs
sd fns is of a dp sbl, yt a bndry ln, dstnct as th mrk
in a shp’s hll, clld th “brght wst,” tht ln strks hm frm
stm t strn, wth tw sprt clrs, blck abv and wht blw.
Th wht cmprss prt of hs hd, and th whl of hs mth, whch
mks hm lk as if h hd jst escpd frm a flns vst t a
ml-bg. A mst mn and mly aspct! Hs ol is mch lk tht of
th cmmn prps.

  * * * * * *

Bynd th DDCM, ths systm ds nt prcd, insmch as th
Prps is th smllst of th whls. Abv, y hv all th
Lvthns of nt. Bt thr ar a rbbl of uncrtn, fgtv,
hlf-fbls whls, whch, as an Amrcn whlmn, I knw by
rpttn, bt nt prsnlly. I shll enmrt thm by thr
fr-cstl applltns; fr pssbly sch a lst my b vlbl t
ftr invstgtrs, wh my cmplt wht I hv hr bt bgn. If
any of th fllwng whls, shll hrftr b cght and mrkd, thn
h cn rdly b incrprtd int ths Systm, accrdng t hs
Fl, Octv, or Ddcm mgntd:—Th Bttl-Ns Whl; th Jnk
Whl; th Pddng-Hdd Whl; th Cp Whl; th Ldng Whl; th
Cnnn Whl; th Scrgg Whl; th Cpprd Whl; th Elphnt Whl;
th Icbrg Whl; th Qg Whl; th Bl Whl; etc. Frm Iclndc,
Dtch, and old Englsh athrts, thr mght b qtd othr lsts
of uncrtn whls, blssd wth all mnnr of uncth nms. Bt I
omt thm as altgthr obslt; and cn hrdly hlp sspctng thm
fr mr snds, fll of Lvthnsm, bt sgnfyng nthng.

Fnlly: It ws sttd at th otst, tht ths systm wld nt b
hr, and at onc, prfctd. Y cnnt bt plnly s tht I hv
kpt my wrd. Bt I nw lv my ctlgcl Systm stndng ths
unfnshd, evn as th grt Cthdrl of Clgn ws lft, wth th
crn stll stndng upn th tp of th uncmpltd twr. Fr smll
erctns my b fnshd by thr frst archtcts; grnd ons, tr
ons, evr lv th cpstn t pstrty. Gd kp m frm evr
cmpltng anythng. Ths whl bk is bt a drght—ny, bt th
drght of a drght. Oh, Tm, Strngth, Csh, and Ptnc!


CHPTR 33. Th Spcksnydr.

Cncrnng th offcrs of th whl-crft, ths sms as gd a plc
as any t st dwn a lttl dmstc pclrty on shp-brd, arsng
frm th exstnc of th hrpnr clss of offcrs, a clss unknwn
of crs in any othr mrn thn th whl-flt.

Th lrg imprtnc attchd t th hrpnr’s vctn is evncd
by th fct, tht orgnlly in th old Dtch Fshry, tw cntrs
and mr ag, th cmmnd of a whl shp ws nt whlly ldgd in th
prsn nw clld th cptn, bt ws dvdd btwn hm and an
offcr clld th Spcksnydr. Ltrlly ths wrd mns Ft-Cttr;
usg, hwvr, in tm md it eqvlnt t Chf Hrpnr. In
ths dys, th cptn’s athrty ws rstrctd t th nvgtn
and gnrl mngmnt of th vssl; whl ovr th whl-hntng
dprtmnt and all its cncrns, th Spcksnydr or Chf Hrpnr
rgnd sprm. In th Brtsh Grnlnd Fshry, undr th crrptd
ttl of Spcksnr, ths old Dtch offcl is stll rtnd, bt
hs frmr dgnty is sdly abrdgd. At prsnt h rnks smply as
snr Hrpnr; and as sch, is bt on of th cptn’s mr
infrr sbltrns. Nvrthlss, as upn th gd cndct of th
hrpnrs th sccss of a whlng vyg lrgly dpnds, and snc
in th Amrcn Fshry h is nt only an imprtnt offcr in th
bt, bt undr crtn crcmstncs (nght wtchs on a whlng
grnd) th cmmnd of th shp’s dck is als hs; thrfr th grnd
pltcl mxm of th s dmnds, tht h shld nmnlly lv aprt
frm th mn bfr th mst, and b in sm wy dstngshd as thr
prfssnl sprr; thgh alwys, by thm, fmlrly rgrdd as
thr scl eql.

Nw, th grnd dstnctn drwn btwn offcr and mn at s, is
ths—th frst lvs aft, th lst frwrd. Hnc, in whl-shps and
mrchntmn alk, th mts hv thr qrtrs wth th cptn; and
s, t, in mst of th Amrcn whlrs th hrpnrs ar ldgd in
th aftr prt of th shp. Tht is t sy, thy tk thr mls in
th cptn’s cbn, and slp in a plc indrctly cmmnctng wth
it.

Thgh th lng prd of a Sthrn whlng vyg (by fr th lngst
of all vygs nw or evr md by mn), th pclr prls of it, and
th cmmnty of intrst prvlng amng a cmpny, all of whm, hgh
or lw, dpnd fr thr prfts, nt upn fxd wgs, bt upn thr
cmmn lck, tgthr wth thr cmmn vglnc, intrpdty, and
hrd wrk; thgh all ths thngs d in sm css tnd t bgt a
lss rgrs dscpln thn in mrchntmn gnrlly; yt, nvr mnd
hw mch lk an old Msptmn fmly ths whlmn my, in sm
prmtv instncs, lv tgthr; fr all tht, th pnctls
extrnls, at lst, of th qrtr-dck ar sldm mtrlly rlxd,
and in n instnc dn awy. Indd, mny ar th Nntckt shps in
whch y wll s th skppr prdng hs qrtr-dck wth an eltd
grndr nt srpssd in any mltry nvy; ny, extrtng almst as
mch otwrd hmg as if h wr th imprl prpl, and nt th
shbbst of plt-clth.

And thgh of all mn th mdy cptn of th Pqd ws th lst
gvn t tht srt of shllwst assmptn; and thgh th only hmg
h evr exctd, ws implct, instntns obdnc; thgh h
rqrd n mn t rmv th shs frm hs ft er stppng upn th
qrtr-dck; and thgh thr wr tms whn, owng t pclr
crcmstncs cnnctd wth evnts hrftr t b dtld, h
addrssd thm in unsl trms, whthr of cndscnsn or _in
trrrm_, or othrws; yt evn Cptn Ahb ws by n mns
unbsrvnt of th prmnt frms and usgs of th s.

Nr, prhps, wll it fl t b evntlly prcvd, tht bhnd
ths frms and usgs, as it wr, h smtms mskd hmslf;
incdntlly mkng us of thm fr othr and mr prvt ends thn
thy wr lgtmtly intndd t sbsrv. Tht crtn sltnsm of
hs brn, whch hd othrws in a gd dgr rmnd unmnfstd;
thrgh ths frms tht sm sltnsm bcm incrnt in an
irrsstbl dcttrshp. Fr b a mn’s intllctl sprrty wht
it wll, it cn nvr assm th prctcl, avlbl sprmcy ovr
othr mn, wtht th ad of sm srt of extrnl arts and
entrnchmnts, alwys, in thmslvs, mr or lss pltry and bs.
Ths it is, tht fr evr kps Gd’s tr prncs of th Empr frm
th wrld’s hstngs; and lvs th hghst hnrs tht ths ar cn
gv, t ths mn wh bcm fms mr thrgh thr infnt
infrrty t th chc hddn hndfl of th Dvn Inrt, thn
thrgh thr undbtd sprrty ovr th dd lvl of th mss.
Sch lrg vrt lrks in ths smll thngs whn extrm pltcl
sprsttns invst thm, tht in sm ryl instncs evn t idt
imbclty thy hv imprtd ptncy. Bt whn, as in th cs of
Nchls th Czr, th rngd crwn of ggrphcl empr encrcls an
imprl brn; thn, th plbn hrds crch absd bfr th
trmnds cntrlztn. Nr, wll th trgc drmtst wh wld
dpct mrtl indmtblnss in its fllst swp and drct swng,
evr frgt a hnt, incdntlly s imprtnt in hs art, as th on
nw alldd t.

Bt Ahb, my Cptn, stll mvs bfr m in all hs Nntckt
grmnss and shggnss; and in ths epsd tchng Emprrs and
Kngs, I mst nt cncl tht I hv only t d wth a pr old
whl-hntr lk hm; and, thrfr, all otwrd mjstcl trppngs
and hsngs ar dnd m. Oh, Ahb! wht shll b grnd in th, it
mst nds b plckd at frm th sks, and dvd fr in th dp, and
ftrd in th unbdd ar!


CHPTR 34. Th Cbn-Tbl.

It is nn; and Dgh-By, th stwrd, thrstng hs pl
lf-of-brd fc frm th cbn-scttl, annncs dnnr t hs lrd
and mstr; wh, sttng in th l qrtr-bt, hs jst bn tkng
an obsrvtn of th sn; and is nw mtly rcknng th lttd on
th smth, mdlln-shpd tblt, rsrvd fr tht dly prps on
th uppr prt of hs ivry lg. Frm hs cmplt inttntn t th
tdngs, y wld thnk tht mdy Ahb hd nt hrd hs mnl. Bt
prsntly, ctchng hld of th mzn shrds, h swngs hmslf t th
dck, and in an evn, unxhlrtd vc, syng, “Dnnr, Mr.
Strbck,” dspprs int th cbn.

Whn th lst ech of hs sltn’s stp hs dd awy, and Strbck,
th frst Emr, hs evry rsn t spps tht h is std, thn
Strbck rss frm hs qtd, tks a fw trns alng th plnks,
and, aftr a grv pp int th bnncl, sys, wth sm tch of
plsntnss, “Dnnr, Mr. Stbb,” and dscnds th scttl. Th scnd
Emr lngs abt th rggng awhl, and thn slghtly shkng th
mn brc, t s whthr it wll b all rght wth tht imprtnt
rp, h lkws tks up th old brdn, and wth a rpd “Dnnr,
Mr. Flsk,” fllws aftr hs prdcssrs.

Bt th thrd Emr, nw sng hmslf all aln on th qrtr-dck,
sms t fl rlvd frm sm crs rstrnt; fr, tppng all
srts of knwng wnks in all srts of drctns, and kckng off hs
shs, h strks int a shrp bt nslss sqll of a hrnpp rght
ovr th Grnd Trk’s hd; and thn, by a dxtrs slght, ptchng
hs cp up int th mzntp fr a shlf, h gs dwn rllckng s
fr at lst as h rmns vsbl frm th dck, rvrsng all othr
prcssns, by brngng up th rr wth msc. Bt er stppng int
th cbn drwy blw, h pss, shps a nw fc altgthr, and,
thn, indpndnt, hlrs lttl Flsk entrs Kng Ahb’s prsnc,
in th chrctr of Abjcts, or th Slv.

It is nt th lst amng th strng thngs brd by th intns
artfclnss of s-usgs, tht whl in th opn ar of th dck
sm offcrs wll, upn prvctn, br thmslvs bldly and
dfyngly engh twrds thr cmmndr; yt, tn t on, lt ths
vry offcrs th nxt mmnt g dwn t thr cstmry dnnr in tht
sm cmmndr’s cbn, and strghtwy thr inffnsv, nt t sy
dprctry and hmbl ar twrds hm, as h sts at th hd of th
tbl; ths is mrvlls, smtms mst cmcl. Whrfr ths
dffrnc? A prblm? Prhps nt. T hv bn Blshzzr, Kng of
Bbyln; and t hv bn Blshzzr, nt hghtly bt crtsly,
thrn crtnly mst hv bn sm tch of mndn grndr. Bt h
wh in th rghtly rgl and intllgnt sprt prsds ovr hs own
prvt dnnr-tbl of invtd gsts, tht mn’s unchllngd pwr
and dmnn of indvdl inflnc fr th tm; tht mn’s rylty
of stt trnscnds Blshzzr’s, fr Blshzzr ws nt th grtst.
Wh hs bt onc dnd hs frnds, hs tstd wht it is t b Cæsr.
It is a wtchry of scl czrshp whch thr is n wthstndng.
Nw, if t ths cnsdrtn y sprdd th offcl sprmcy of a
shp-mstr, thn, by infrnc, y wll drv th cs of tht
pclrty of s-lf jst mntnd.

Ovr hs ivry-inld tbl, Ahb prsdd lk a mt, mnd s-ln
on th wht crl bch, srrndd by hs wrlk bt stll
dfrntl cbs. In hs own prpr trn, ech offcr wtd t b
srvd. Thy wr as lttl chldrn bfr Ahb; and yt, in Ahb,
thr smd nt t lrk th smllst scl arrgnc. Wth on mnd,
thr intnt eys all fstnd upn th old mn’s knf, as h crvd
th chf dsh bfr hm. I d nt spps tht fr th wrld thy
wld hv prfnd tht mmnt wth th slghtst obsrvtn, evn
upn s ntrl a tpc as th wthr. N! And whn rchng ot hs
knf and frk, btwn whch th slc of bf ws lckd, Ahb
thrby mtnd Strbck’s plt twrds hm, th mt rcvd hs
mt as thgh rcvng alms; and ct it tndrly; and a lttl
strtd if, prchnc, th knf grzd agnst th plt; and chwd
it nslssly; and swllwd it, nt wtht crcmspctn. Fr, lk
th Crntn bnqt at Frnkfrt, whr th Grmn Emprr
prfndly dns wth th svn Imprl Elctrs, s ths cbn mls
wr smhw slmn mls, etn in awfl slnc; and yt at tbl old
Ahb frbd nt cnvrstn; only h hmslf ws dmb. Wht a rlf
it ws t chkng Stbb, whn a rt md a sddn rckt in th hld
blw. And pr lttl Flsk, h ws th yngst sn, and lttl by
of ths wry fmly prty. Hs wr th shnbns of th sln bf;
hs wld hv bn th drmstcks. Fr Flsk t hv prsmd t hlp
hmslf, ths mst hv smd t hm tntmnt t lrcny in th
frst dgr. Hd h hlpd hmslf at tht tbl, dbtlss, nvr
mr wld h hv bn abl t hld hs hd up in ths hnst wrld;
nvrthlss, strng t sy, Ahb nvr frbd hm. And hd Flsk
hlpd hmslf, th chncs wr Ahb hd nvr s mch as ntcd it.
Lst of all, dd Flsk prsm t hlp hmslf t bttr. Whthr h
thght th ownrs of th shp dnd it t hm, on accnt of its
clttng hs clr, snny cmplxn; or whthr h dmd tht, on s
lng a vyg in sch mrktlss wtrs, bttr ws at a prmm, and
thrfr ws nt fr hm, a sbltrn; hwvr it ws, Flsk, als!
ws a bttrlss mn!

Anthr thng. Flsk ws th lst prsn dwn at th dnnr, and Flsk
is th frst mn up. Cnsdr! Fr hrby Flsk’s dnnr ws bdly
jmmd in pnt of tm. Strbck and Stbb bth hd th strt of hm;
and yt thy als hv th prvlg of lngng in th rr. If Stbb
evn, wh is bt a pg hghr thn Flsk, hppns t hv bt a smll
apptt, and sn shws symptms of cncldng hs rpst, thn Flsk
mst bstr hmslf, h wll nt gt mr thn thr mthfls tht
dy; fr it is agnst hly usg fr Stbb t prcd Flsk t th
dck. Thrfr it ws tht Flsk onc admttd in prvt, tht evr
snc h hd arsn t th dgnty of an offcr, frm tht mmnt h
hd nvr knwn wht it ws t b othrws thn hngry, mr or lss.
Fr wht h at dd nt s mch rlv hs hngr, as kp it immrtl
in hm. Pc and stsfctn, thght Flsk, hv fr evr dprtd
frm my stmch. I am an offcr; bt, hw I wsh I cld fsh a bt of
old-fshnd bf in th frcstl, as I usd t whn I ws bfr
th mst. Thr’s th frts of prmtn nw; thr’s th vnty of
glry: thr’s th insnty of lf! Bsds, if it wr s tht any
mr slr of th Pqd hd a grdg agnst Flsk in Flsk’s
offcl cpcty, all tht slr hd t d, in ordr t obtn ampl
vngnc, ws t g aft at dnnr-tm, and gt a pp at Flsk
thrgh th cbn sky-lght, sttng slly and dmfndrd bfr
awfl Ahb.

Nw, Ahb and hs thr mts frmd wht my b clld th frst tbl
in th Pqd’s cbn. Aftr thr dprtr, tkng plc in invrtd
ordr t thr arrvl, th cnvs clth ws clrd, or rthr ws
rstrd t sm hrrd ordr by th plld stwrd. And thn th
thr hrpnrs wr bddn t th fst, thy bng its rsdry
lgts. Thy md a srt of tmprry srvnts’ hll of th hgh and
mghty cbn.

In strng cntrst t th hrdly tlrbl cnstrnt and nmlss
invsbl dmnrngs of th cptn’s tbl, ws th entr cr-fr
lcns and es, th almst frntc dmcrcy of ths infrr
fllws th hrpnrs. Whl thr mstrs, th mts, smd afrd
of th snd of th hngs of thr own jws, th hrpnrs chwd
thr fd wth sch a rlsh tht thr ws a rprt t it. Thy dnd
lk lrds; thy flld thr blls lk Indn shps all dy ldng
wth spcs. Sch prtnts apptts hd Qqg and Tshtg, tht
t fll ot th vcncs md by th prvs rpst, oftn th pl
Dgh-By ws fn t brng on a grt brn of slt-jnk, smngly
qrrd ot of th sld ox. And if h wr nt lvly abt it, if h
dd nt g wth a nmbl hp-skp-and-jmp, thn Tshtg hd an
ungntlmnly wy of acclrtng hm by drtng a frk at hs bck,
hrpn-ws. And onc Dgg, szd wth a sddn hmr, assstd
Dgh-By’s mmry by sntchng hm up bdly, and thrstng hs hd
int a grt empty wdn trnchr, whl Tshtg, knf in hnd,
bgn lyng ot th crcl prlmnry t sclpng hm. H ws
ntrlly a vry nrvs, shddrng srt of lttl fllw, ths
brd-fcd stwrd; th prgny of a bnkrpt bkr and a hsptl
nrs. And wht wth th stndng spctcl of th blck trrfc Ahb,
and th prdcl tmlts vsttns of ths thr svgs,
Dgh-By’s whl lf ws on cntnl lp-qvr. Cmmnly, aftr
sng th hrpnrs frnshd wth all thngs thy dmndd, h
wld escp frm thr cltchs int hs lttl pntry adjnng, and
frflly pp ot at thm thrgh th blnds of its dr, tll all ws
ovr.

It ws a sght t s Qqg std ovr agnst Tshtg, oppsng
hs fld tth t th Indn’s: crssws t thm, Dgg std on
th flr, fr a bnch wld hv brght hs hrs-plmd hd t th
lw crlns; at evry mtn of hs clssl lmbs, mkng th lw
cbn frmwrk t shk, as whn an Afrcn elphnt gs pssngr in
a shp. Bt fr all ths, th grt ngr ws wndrflly abstms,
nt t sy dnty. It smd hrdly pssbl tht by sch cmprtvly
smll mthfls h cld kp up th vtlty dffsd thrgh s
brd, brnl, and sprb a prsn. Bt, dbtlss, ths nbl svg
fd strng and drnk dp of th abndng elmnt of ar; and thrgh
hs dltd nstrls snffd in th sblm lf of th wrlds. Nt by
bf or by brd, ar gnts md or nrshd. Bt Qqg, h hd a
mrtl, brbrc smck of th lp in etng—an ugly snd engh—s
mch s, tht th trmblng Dgh-By almst lkd t s whthr any
mrks of tth lrkd in hs own ln arms. And whn h wld hr
Tshtg sngng ot fr hm t prdc hmslf, tht hs bns mght
b pckd, th smpl-wttd stwrd all bt shttrd th crckry
hngng rnd hm in th pntry, by hs sddn fts of th plsy. Nr
dd th whtstn whch th hrpnrs crrd in thr pckts, fr
thr lncs and othr wpns; and wth whch whtstns, at dnnr,
thy wld ostnttsly shrpn thr knvs; tht grtng snd dd
nt at all tnd t trnqllz pr Dgh-By. Hw cld h frgt
tht in hs Islnd dys, Qqg, fr on, mst crtnly hv bn
glty of sm mrdrs, cnvvl indscrtns. Als! Dgh-By!
hrd frs th wht wtr wh wts upn cnnbls. Nt a npkn
shld h crry on hs arm, bt a bcklr. In gd tm, thgh, t hs
grt dlght, th thr slt-s wrrrs wld rs and dprt; t
hs crdls, fbl-mngrng ers, all thr mrtl bns jnglng
in thm at evry stp, lk Mrsh scmtrs in scbbrds.

Bt, thgh ths brbrns dnd in th cbn, and nmnlly lvd
thr; stll, bng anythng bt sdntry in thr hbts, thy wr
scrcly evr in it excpt at mltms, and jst bfr slpng-tm,
whn thy pssd thrgh it t thr own pclr qrtrs.

In ths on mttr, Ahb smd n excptn t mst Amrcn whl
cptns, wh, as a st, rthr incln t th opnn tht by rghts
th shp’s cbn blngs t thm; and tht it is by crtsy aln tht
anybdy els is, at any tm, prmttd thr. S tht, in rl trth,
th mts and hrpnrs of th Pqd mght mr prprly b sd t
hv lvd ot of th cbn thn in it. Fr whn thy dd entr it, it
ws smthng as a strt-dr entrs a hs; trnng inwrds fr a
mmnt, only t b trnd ot th nxt; and, as a prmnnt thng,
rsdng in th opn ar. Nr dd thy ls mch hrby; in th cbn
ws n cmpnnshp; sclly, Ahb ws inccssbl. Thgh nmnlly
incldd in th cnss of Chrstndm, h ws stll an aln t it. H
lvd in th wrld, as th lst of th Grsly Brs lvd in sttld
Mssr. And as whn Sprng and Smmr hd dprtd, tht wld Lgn
of th wds, bryng hmslf in th hllw of a tr, lvd ot th
wntr thr, sckng hs own pws; s, in hs inclmnt, hwlng old
ag, Ahb’s sl, sht up in th cvd trnk of hs bdy, thr fd
upn th slln pws of its glm!


CHPTR 35. Th Mst-Hd.

It ws drng th mr plsnt wthr, tht in d rttn wth th
othr smn my frst mst-hd cm rnd.

In mst Amrcn whlmn th mst-hds ar mnnd almst
smltnsly wth th vssl’s lvng hr prt; evn thgh sh my
hv fftn thsnd mls, and mr, t sl er rchng hr prpr
crsng grnd. And if, aftr a thr, fr, or fv yrs’ vyg sh
is drwng ngh hm wth anythng empty in hr—sy, an empty vl
evn—thn, hr mst-hds ar kpt mnnd t th lst; and nt tll hr
skysl-pls sl in amng th sprs of th prt, ds sh altgthr
rlnqsh th hp of cptrng on whl mr.

Nw, as th bsnss of stndng mst-hds, ashr or aflt, is a
vry ancnt and intrstng on, lt us in sm msr exptt
hr. I tk it, tht th erlst stndrs of mst-hds wr th old
Egyptns; bcs, in all my rsrchs, I fnd nn prr t thm.
Fr thgh thr prgntrs, th bldrs of Bbl, mst dbtlss, by
thr twr, hv intndd t rr th lftst mst-hd in all As,
or Afrc ethr; yt (er th fnl trck ws pt t it) as tht grt
stn mst of thrs my b sd t hv gn by th brd, in th
drd gl of Gd’s wrth; thrfr, w cnnt gv ths Bbl
bldrs prrty ovr th Egyptns. And tht th Egyptns wr a
ntn of mst-hd stndrs, is an assrtn bsd upn th gnrl
blf amng archæolgsts, tht th frst pyrmds wr fndd fr
astrnmcl prpss: a thry snglrly spprtd by th pclr
str-lk frmtn of all fr sds of ths edfcs; whrby, wth
prdgs lng uplftngs of thr lgs, ths old astrnmrs wr
wnt t mnt t th apx, and sng ot fr nw strs; evn as th
lk-ots of a mdrn shp sng ot fr a sl, or a whl jst brng
in sght. In Snt Stylts, th fms Chrstn hrmt of old tms,
wh blt hm a lfty stn pllr in th dsrt and spnt th whl
lttr prtn of hs lf on its smmt, hstng hs fd frm th
grnd wth a tckl; in hm w hv a rmrkbl instnc of a
dntlss stndr-of-mst-hds; wh ws nt t b drvn frm hs
plc by fgs or frsts, rn, hl, or slt; bt vlntly fcng
evrythng ot t th lst, ltrlly dd at hs pst. Of mdrn
stndrs-of-mst-hds w hv bt a lflss st; mr stn, irn,
and brnz mn; wh, thgh wll cpbl of fcng ot a stff gl,
ar stll entrly incmptnt t th bsnss of sngng ot upn
dscvrng any strng sght. Thr is Npln; wh, upn th tp of
th clmn of Vndm, stnds wth arms fldd, sm on hndrd and
ffty ft in th ar; crlss, nw, wh rls th dcks blw;
whthr Ls Phlpp, Ls Blnc, or Ls th Dvl. Grt
Wshngtn, t, stnds hgh alft on hs twrng mn-mst in
Bltmr, and lk on of Hrcls’ pllrs, hs clmn mrks tht
pnt of hmn grndr bynd whch fw mrtls wll g. Admrl
Nlsn, als, on a cpstn of gn-mtl, stnds hs mst-hd in
Trflgr Sqr; and evr whn mst obscrd by tht Lndn smk,
tkn is yt gvn tht a hddn hr is thr; fr whr thr is
smk, mst b fr. Bt nthr grt Wshngtn, nr Npln, nr
Nlsn, wll answr a sngl hl frm blw, hwvr mdly invkd t
bfrnd by thr cnsls th dstrctd dcks upn whch thy gz;
hwvr it my b srmsd, tht thr sprts pntrt thrgh th
thck hz of th ftr, and dscry wht shls and wht rcks mst b
shnnd.

It my sm unwrrntbl t cpl in any rspct th mst-hd
stndrs of th lnd wth ths of th s; bt tht in trth it is nt
s, is plnly evncd by an itm fr whch Obd Mcy, th sl
hstrn of Nntckt, stnds accntbl. Th wrthy Obd tlls us,
tht in th erly tms of th whl fshry, er shps wr rglrly
lnchd in prst of th gm, th ppl of tht islnd erctd
lfty sprs alng th s-cst, t whch th lk-ots ascndd by
mns of nld clts, smthng as fwls g upstrs in a hn-hs.
A fw yrs ag ths sm pln ws adptd by th By whlmn of Nw
Zlnd, wh, upn dscryng th gm, gv ntc t th rdy-mnnd
bts ngh th bch. Bt ths cstm hs nw bcm obslt; trn w
thn t th on prpr mst-hd, tht of a whl-shp at s. Th
thr mst-hds ar kpt mnnd frm sn-rs t sn-st; th smn
tkng thr rglr trns (as at th hlm), and rlvng ech othr
evry tw hrs. In th srn wthr of th trpcs it is excdngly
plsnt th mst-hd; ny, t a drmy mdttv mn it is
dlghtfl. Thr y stnd, a hndrd ft abv th slnt dcks,
strdng alng th dp, as if th msts wr ggntc stlts, whl
bnth y and btwn yr lgs, as it wr, swm th hgst mnstrs
of th s, evn as shps onc sld btwn th bts of th fms
Clsss at old Rhds. Thr y stnd, lst in th infnt srs of
th s, wth nthng rffld bt th wvs. Th trncd shp
indlntly rlls; th drwsy trd wnds blw; evrythng rslvs y
int lngr. Fr th mst prt, in ths trpc whlng lf, a sblm
unvntflnss invsts y; y hr n nws; rd n gztts; extrs
wth strtlng accnts of cmmnplcs nvr dld y int
unncssry exctmnts; y hr of n dmstc afflctns; bnkrpt
scrts; fll of stcks; ar nvr trbld wth th thght of wht
y shll hv fr dnnr—fr all yr mls fr thr yrs and mr
ar sngly stwd in csks, and yr bll of fr is immtbl.

In on of ths sthrn whlsmn, on a lng thr or fr yrs’
vyg, as oftn hppns, th sm of th vrs hrs y spnd at th
mst-hd wld amnt t svrl entr mnths. And it is mch t b
dplrd tht th plc t whch y dvt s cnsdrbl a prtn
of th whl trm of yr ntrl lf, shld b s sdly dsttt of
anythng apprchng t a csy inhbtvnss, or adptd t brd a
cmfrtbl lclnss of flng, sch as prtns t a bd, a hmmck,
a hrs, a sntry bx, a plpt, a cch, or any othr of ths smll
and sng cntrvncs in whch mn tmprrly islt thmslvs. Yr
mst usl pnt of prch is th hd of th t’ gllnt-mst, whr y
stnd upn tw thn prlll stcks (almst pclr t whlmn)
clld th t’ gllnt crss-trs. Hr, tssd abt by th s, th
bgnnr fls abt as csy as h wld stndng on a bll’s hrns. T
b sr, in cld wthr y my crry yr hs alft wth y, in
th shp of a wtch-ct; bt prprly spkng th thckst
wtch-ct is n mr of a hs thn th uncld bdy; fr as th sl
is gld insd of its flshy tbrncl, and cnnt frly mv abt
in it, nr evn mv ot of it, wtht rnnng grt rsk of prshng
(lk an ignrnt plgrm crssng th snwy Alps in wntr); s a
wtch-ct is nt s mch of a hs as it is a mr envlp, or
addtnl skn encsng y. Y cnnt pt a shlf or chst of
drwrs in yr bdy, and n mr cn y mk a cnvnnt clst of
yr wtch-ct.

Cncrnng all ths, it is mch t b dplrd tht th mst-hds of a
sthrn whl shp ar unprvdd wth ths envbl lttl tnts or
plpts, clld _crw’s-nsts_, in whch th lk-ots of a Grnlnd
whlr ar prtctd frm th inclmnt wthr of th frzn ss. In
th frsd nrrtv of Cptn Slt, enttld “A Vyg amng th
Icbrgs, in qst of th Grnlnd Whl, and incdntlly fr th
r-dscvry of th Lst Iclndc Clns of Old Grnlnd;” in ths
admrbl vlm, all stndrs of mst-hds ar frnshd wth a
chrmngly crcmstntl accnt of th thn rcntly invntd
_crw’s-nst_ of th Glcr, whch ws th nm of Cptn Slt’s
gd crft. H clld it th _Slt’s crw’s-nst_, in hnr of
hmslf; h bng th orgnl invntr and ptnt, and fr frm all
rdcls fls dlccy, and hldng tht if w cll or own chldrn
aftr or own nms (w fthrs bng th orgnl invntrs and
ptnts), s lkws shld w dnmnt aftr orslvs any othr
apprts w my bgt. In shp, th Slt’s crw’s-nst is smthng
lk a lrg trc or pp; it is opn abv, hwvr, whr it is
frnshd wth a mvbl sd-scrn t kp t wndwrd of yr hd
in a hrd gl. Bng fxd on th smmt of th mst, y ascnd int
it thrgh a lttl trp-htch in th bttm. On th aftr sd, or
sd nxt th strn of th shp, is a cmfrtbl st, wth a lckr
undrnth fr umbrlls, cmfrtrs, and cts. In frnt is a lthr
rck, in whch t kp yr spkng trmpt, pp, tlscp, and
othr ntcl cnvnncs. Whn Cptn Slt in prsn std hs
mst-hd in ths crw’s-nst of hs, h tlls us tht h alwys hd a
rfl wth hm (als fxd in th rck), tgthr wth a pwdr flsk
and sht, fr th prps of pppng off th stry nrwhls, or
vgrnt s uncrns infstng ths wtrs; fr y cnnt
sccssflly sht at thm frm th dck owng t th rsstnc of th
wtr, bt t sht dwn upn thm is a vry dffrnt thng. Nw, it
ws plnly a lbr of lv fr Cptn Slt t dscrb, as h ds,
all th lttl dtld cnvnncs of hs crw’s-nst; bt thgh h
s enlrgs upn mny of ths, and thgh h trts us t a vry
scntfc accnt of hs exprmnts in ths crw’s-nst, wth a smll
cmpss h kpt thr fr th prps of cntrctng th errrs
rsltng frm wht is clld th “lcl attrctn” of all bnncl
mgnts; an errr ascrbbl t th hrzntl vcnty of th irn in
th shp’s plnks, and in th Glcr’s cs, prhps, t thr hvng
bn s mny brkn-dwn blcksmths amng hr crw; I sy, tht thgh
th Cptn is vry dscrt and scntfc hr, yt, fr all hs
lrnd “bnncl dvtns,” “azmth cmpss obsrvtns,” and
“apprxmt errrs,” h knws vry wll, Cptn Slt, tht h ws
nt s mch immrsd in ths prfnd mgntc mdttns, as t fl
bng attrctd occsnlly twrds tht wll rplnshd lttl
cs-bttl, s ncly tckd in on on sd of hs crw’s nst, wthn
esy rch of hs hnd. Thgh, upn th whl, I grtly admr and
evn lv th brv, th hnst, and lrnd Cptn; yt I tk it
vry ill of hm tht h shld s uttrly ignr tht cs-bttl,
sng wht a fthfl frnd and cmfrtr it mst hv bn, whl
wth mttnd fngrs and hdd hd h ws stdyng th mthmtcs
alft thr in tht brd’s nst wthn thr or fr prchs of th
pl.

Bt if w Sthrn whl-fshrs ar nt s sngly hsd alft as
Cptn Slt and hs Grnlndmn wr; yt tht dsdvntg is
grtly cntr-blncd by th wdly cntrstng srnty of ths
sdctv ss in whch w Sth fshrs mstly flt. Fr on, I usd
t lng up th rggng vry lsrly, rstng in th tp t hv a
cht wth Qqg, or any on els off dty whm I mght fnd thr;
thn ascndng a lttl wy frthr, and thrwng a lzy lg ovr th
tp-sl yrd, tk a prlmnry vw of th wtry pstrs, and s
at lst mnt t my ultmt dstntn.

Lt m mk a cln brst of it hr, and frnkly admt tht I kpt
bt srry grd. Wth th prblm of th unvrs rvlvng in m, hw
cld I—bng lft cmpltly t myslf at sch a thght-engndrng
alttd—hw cld I bt lghtly hld my oblgtns t obsrv all
whl-shps’ stndng ordrs, “Kp yr wthr ey opn, and sng ot
evry tm.”

And lt m in ths plc mvngly admnsh y, y shp-ownrs of
Nntckt! Bwr of enlstng in yr vglnt fshrs any ld wth
ln brw and hllw ey; gvn t unssnbl mdttvnss; and wh
offrs t shp wth th Phædn instd of Bwdtch in hs hd. Bwr
of sch an on, I sy; yr whls mst b sn bfr thy cn b
klld; and ths snkn-eyd yng Pltnst wll tw y tn wks
rnd th wrld, and nvr mk y on pnt of sprm th rchr. Nr
ar ths mntns at all unndd. Fr nwdys, th whl-fshry
frnshs an asylm fr mny rmntc, mlnchly, and absnt-mndd
yng mn, dsgstd wth th crkng crs of erth, and skng
sntmnt in tr and blbbr. Chld Hrld nt unfrqntly prchs
hmslf upn th mst-hd of sm lcklss dsppntd whl-shp,
and in mdy phrs ejclts:—


“Rll on, th dp and drk bl ocn, rll! Tn thsnd
blbbr-hntrs swp ovr th in vn.”



Vry oftn d th cptns of sch shps tk ths absnt-mndd yng
phlsphrs t tsk, upbrdng thm wth nt flng sffcnt
“intrst” in th vyg; hlf-hntng tht thy ar s hplssly lst
t all hnrbl ambtn, as tht in thr scrt sls thy wld
rthr nt s whls thn othrws. Bt all in vn; ths yng
Pltnsts hv a ntn tht thr vsn is imprfct; thy ar
shrt-sghtd; wht us, thn, t strn th vsl nrv? Thy hv
lft thr opr-glsss at hm.

“Why, th mnky,” sd a hrpnr t on of ths lds, “w’v bn
crsng nw hrd upn thr yrs, and th hst nt rsd a whl
yt. Whls ar scrc as hn’s tth whnvr th art up hr.”
Prhps thy wr; or prhps thr mght hv bn shls of thm in
th fr hrzn; bt llld int sch an opm-lk lstlssnss of
vcnt, uncnscs rvr is ths absnt-mndd yth by th blndng
cdnc of wvs wth thghts, tht at lst h lss hs idntty;
tks th mystc ocn at hs ft fr th vsbl img of tht dp,
bl, bttmlss sl, prvdng mnknd and ntr; and evry strng,
hlf-sn, gldng, btfl thng tht elds hm; evry
dmly-dscvrd, uprsng fn of sm undscrnbl frm, sms t hm
th embdmnt of ths elsv thghts tht only ppl th sl by
cntnlly flttng thrgh it. In ths enchntd md, thy sprt
ebbs awy t whnc it cm; bcms dffsd thrgh tm and spc;
lk Crnmr’s sprnkld Pnthstc ashs, frmng at lst a prt of
evry shr th rnd glb ovr.

Thr is n lf in th, nw, excpt tht rckng lf imprtd by a
gntly rllng shp; by hr, brrwd frm th s; by th s, frm
th inscrtbl tds of Gd. Bt whl ths slp, ths drm is on
y, mv yr ft or hnd an inch; slp yr hld at all; and yr
idntty cms bck in hrrr. Ovr Dscrtn vrtcs y hvr. And
prhps, at md-dy, in th frst wthr, wth on hlf-thrttld
shrk y drp thrgh tht trnsprnt ar int th smmr s, n
mr t rs fr evr. Hd it wll, y Pnthsts!


CHPTR 36. Th Qrtr-Dck.

(_Entr Ahb: Thn, all._)

It ws nt a grt whl aftr th affr of th pp, tht on mrnng
shrtly aftr brkfst, Ahb, as ws hs wnt, ascndd th
cbn-gngwy t th dck. Thr mst s-cptns uslly wlk at tht
hr, as cntry gntlmn, aftr th sm ml, tk a fw trns in
th grdn.

Sn hs stdy, ivry strd ws hrd, as t and fr h pcd hs old
rnds, upn plnks s fmlr t hs trd, tht thy wr all ovr
dntd, lk glgcl stns, wth th pclr mrk of hs wlk. Dd
y fxdly gz, t, upn tht rbbd and dntd brw; thr als,
y wld s stll strngr ft-prnts—th ft-prnts of hs on
unslpng, evr-pcng thght.

Bt on th occsn in qstn, ths dnts lkd dpr, evn as hs
nrvs stp tht mrnng lft a dpr mrk. And, s fll of hs
thght ws Ahb, tht at evry unfrm trn tht h md, nw at th
mn-mst and nw at th bnncl, y cld almst s tht thght
trn in hm as h trnd, and pc in hm as h pcd; s cmpltly
pssssng hm, indd, tht it all bt smd th inwrd mld of
evry otr mvmnt.

“D’y mrk hm, Flsk?” whsprd Stbb; “th chck tht’s in hm pcks
th shll. ’Twll sn b ot.”

Th hrs wr on;—Ahb nw sht up wthn hs cbn; ann, pcng th
dck, wth th sm intns bgtry of prps in hs aspct.

It drw nr th cls of dy. Sddnly h cm t a hlt by th
blwrks, and insrtng hs bn lg int th agr-hl thr, and
wth on hnd grspng a shrd, h ordrd Strbck t snd evrybdy
aft.

“Sr!” sd th mt, astnshd at an ordr sldm or nvr gvn on
shp-brd excpt in sm extrrdnry cs.

“Snd evrybdy aft,” rptd Ahb. “Mst-hds, thr! cm dwn!”

Whn th entr shp’s cmpny wr assmbld, and wth crs and nt
whlly unpprhnsv fcs, wr eyng hm, fr h lkd nt unlk
th wthr hrzn whn a strm is cmng up, Ahb, aftr rpdly
glncng ovr th blwrks, and thn drtng hs eys amng th crw,
strtd frm hs stndpnt; and as thgh nt a sl wr ngh hm
rsmd hs hvy trns upn th dck. Wth bnt hd and hlf-slchd
ht h cntnd t pc, unmndfl of th wndrng whsprng amng
th mn; tll Stbb ctsly whsprd t Flsk, tht Ahb mst hv
smmnd thm thr fr th prps of wtnssng a pdstrn ft.
Bt ths dd nt lst lng. Vhmntly psng, h crd:—

“Wht d y d whn y s a whl, mn?”

“Sng ot fr hm!” ws th implsv rjndr frm a scr of clbbd
vcs.

“Gd!” crd Ahb, wth a wld apprvl in hs tns; obsrvng th
hrty anmtn int whch hs unxpctd qstn hd s mgntclly
thrwn thm.

“And wht d y nxt, mn?”

“Lwr awy, and aftr hm!”

“And wht tn is it y pll t, mn?”

“A dd whl or a stv bt!”

Mr and mr strngly and frcly gld and apprvng, grw th
cntnnc of th old mn at evry sht; whl th mrnrs bgn t
gz crsly at ech othr, as if mrvllng hw it ws tht thy
thmslvs bcm s exctd at sch smngly prpslss qstns.

Bt, thy wr all egrnss agn, as Ahb, nw hlf-rvlvng in hs
pvt-hl, wth on hnd rchng hgh up a shrd, and tghtly,
almst cnvlsvly grspng it, addrssd thm ths:—

“All y mst-hdrs hv bfr nw hrd m gv ordrs abt a wht
whl. Lk y! d’y s ths Spnsh onc of gld?”—hldng up a
brd brght cn t th sn—“it is a sxtn dllr pc, mn. D’y
s it? Mr. Strbck, hnd m yn tp-ml.”

Whl th mt ws gttng th hmmr, Ahb, wtht spkng, ws
slwly rbbng th gld pc agnst th skrts of hs jckt, as if
t hghtn its lstr, and wtht usng any wrds ws mnwhl lwly
hmmng t hmslf, prdcng a snd s strngly mffld and
inrtclt tht it smd th mchncl hmmng of th whls of hs
vtlty in hm.

Rcvng th tp-ml frm Strbck, h advncd twrds th mn-mst
wth th hmmr uplftd in on hnd, exhbtng th gld wth th
othr, and wth a hgh rsd vc exclmng: “Whsvr of y rss
m a wht-hdd whl wth a wrnkld brw and a crkd jw;
whsvr of y rss m tht wht-hdd whl, wth thr hls
pnctrd in hs strbrd flk—lk y, whsvr of y rss m
tht sm wht whl, h shll hv ths gld onc, my bys!”

“Hzz! hzz!” crd th smn, as wth swngng trplns thy
hld th act of nlng th gld t th mst.

“It’s a wht whl, I sy,” rsmd Ahb, as h thrw dwn th
tpml: “a wht whl. Skn yr eys fr hm, mn; lk shrp fr
wht wtr; if y s bt a bbbl, sng ot.”

All ths whl Tshtg, Dgg, and Qqg hd lkd on wth evn
mr intns intrst and srprs thn th rst, and at th mntn of
th wrnkld brw and crkd jw thy hd strtd as if ech ws
sprtly tchd by sm spcfc rcllctn.

“Cptn Ahb,” sd Tshtg, “tht wht whl mst b th sm tht
sm cll Mby Dck.”

“Mby Dck?” shtd Ahb. “D y knw th wht whl thn, Tsh?”

“Ds h fn-tl a lttl crs, sr, bfr h gs dwn?” sd th
Gy-Hdr dlbrtly.

“And hs h a crs spt, t,” sd Dgg, “vry bshy, evn fr a
prmctty, and mghty qck, Cptn Ahb?”

“And h hv on, tw, thr—oh! gd mny irn in hm hd, t,
Cptn,” crd Qqg dsjntdly, “all twsk-t b-twsk, lk
hm—hm—” fltrng hrd fr a wrd, and scrwng hs hnd rnd and
rnd as thgh uncrkng a bttl—“lk hm—hm—”

“Crkscrw!” crd Ahb, “ay, Qqg, th hrpns l all twstd
and wrnchd in hm; ay, Dgg, hs spt is a bg on, lk a whl
shck of wht, and wht as a pl of or Nntckt wl aftr th
grt annl shp-shrng; ay, Tshtg, and h fn-tls lk a
splt jb in a sqll. Dth and dvls! mn, it is Mby Dck y hv
sn—Mby Dck—Mby Dck!”

“Cptn Ahb,” sd Strbck, wh, wth Stbb and Flsk, hd ths fr
bn eyng hs sprr wth incrsng srprs, bt at lst smd
strck wth a thght whch smwht explnd all th wndr. “Cptn
Ahb, I hv hrd of Mby Dck—bt it ws nt Mby Dck tht tk off
thy lg?”

“Wh tld th tht?” crd Ahb; thn psng, “Ay, Strbck; ay, my
hrts all rnd; it ws Mby Dck tht dsmstd m; Mby Dck tht
brght m t ths dd stmp I stnd on nw. Ay, ay,” h shtd
wth a trrfc, ld, anml sb, lk tht of a hrt-strckn ms;
“Ay, ay! it ws tht accrsd wht whl tht rzd m; md a pr
pggng lbbr of m fr evr and a dy!” Thn tssng bth arms, wth
msrlss imprctns h shtd ot: “Ay, ay! and I’ll chs hm
rnd Gd Hp, and rnd th Hrn, and rnd th Nrwy Mlstrm,
and rnd prdtn’s flms bfr I gv hm up. And ths is wht y
hv shppd fr, mn! t chs tht wht whl on bth sds of lnd,
and ovr all sds of erth, tll h spts blck bld and rlls fn
ot. Wht sy y, mn, wll y splc hnds on it, nw? I thnk y d
lk brv.”

“Ay, ay!” shtd th hrpnrs and smn, rnnng clsr t th
exctd old mn: “A shrp ey fr th wht whl; a shrp lnc fr
Mby Dck!”

“Gd blss y,” h smd t hlf sb and hlf sht. “Gd blss y,
mn. Stwrd! g drw th grt msr of grg. Bt wht’s ths lng
fc abt, Mr. Strbck; wlt th nt chs th wht whl? art nt
gm fr Mby Dck?”

“I am gm fr hs crkd jw, and fr th jws of Dth t, Cptn
Ahb, if it frly cms in th wy of th bsnss w fllw; bt I
cm hr t hnt whls, nt my cmmndr’s vngnc. Hw mny
brrls wll thy vngnc yld th evn if th gttst it, Cptn
Ahb? it wll nt ftch th mch in or Nntckt mrkt.”

“Nntckt mrkt! Ht! Bt cm clsr, Strbck; th rqrst a
lttl lwr lyr. If mny’s t b th msrr, mn, and th
accntnts hv cmptd thr grt cntng-hs th glb, by
grdlng it wth gns, on t evry thr prts of an inch; thn,
lt m tll th, tht my vngnc wll ftch a grt prmm _hr!_”

“H smts hs chst,” whsprd Stbb, “wht’s tht fr? mthnks it
rngs mst vst, bt hllw.”

“Vngnc on a dmb brt!” crd Strbck, “tht smply smt th
frm blndst instnct! Mdnss! T b enrgd wth a dmb thng,
Cptn Ahb, sms blsphms.”

“Hrk y yt agn—th lttl lwr lyr. All vsbl objcts, mn,
ar bt as pstbrd msks. Bt in ech evnt—in th lvng act, th
undbtd dd—thr, sm unknwn bt stll rsnng thng pts frth
th mldngs of its ftrs frm bhnd th unrsnng msk. If mn
wll strk, strk thrgh th msk! Hw cn th prsnr rch
otsd excpt by thrstng thrgh th wll? T m, th wht whl is
tht wll, shvd nr t m. Smtms I thnk thr’s nght bynd.
Bt ’ts engh. H tsks m; h hps m; I s in hm otrgs
strngth, wth an inscrtbl mlc snwng it. Tht inscrtbl
thng is chfly wht I ht; and b th wht whl agnt, or b th
wht whl prncpl, I wll wrk tht ht upn hm. Tlk nt t m
of blsphmy, mn; I’d strk th sn if it insltd m. Fr cld th
sn d tht, thn cld I d th othr; snc thr is evr a srt of
fr ply hrn, jlsy prsdng ovr all crtns. Bt nt my
mstr, mn, is evn tht fr ply. Wh’s ovr m? Trth hth n
cnfns. Tk off thn ey! mr intlrbl thn fnds’ glrngs is
a dltsh str! S, s; th rddnst and plst; my ht hs mltd
th t angr-glw. Bt lk y, Strbck, wht is sd in ht, tht
thng unsys itslf. Thr ar mn frm whm wrm wrds ar smll
indgnty. I mnt nt t incns th. Lt it g. Lk! s yndr
Trksh chks of spttd twn—lvng, brthng pctrs pntd by
th sn. Th Pgn lprds—th unrckng and unwrshppng thngs,
tht lv; and sk, and gv n rsns fr th trrd lf thy fl!
Th crw, mn, th crw! Ar thy nt on and all wth Ahb, in ths
mttr of th whl? S Stbb! h lghs! S yndr Chln! h
snrts t thnk of it. Stnd up amd th gnrl hrrcn, thy on
tst splng cnnt, Strbck! And wht is it? Rckn it. ’Ts bt t
hlp strk a fn; n wndrs ft fr Strbck. Wht is it mr? Frm
ths on pr hnt, thn, th bst lnc ot of all Nntckt, srly
h wll nt hng bck, whn evry frmst-hnd hs cltchd a
whtstn? Ah! cnstrnngs sz th; I s! th bllw lfts th!
Spk, bt spk!—Ay, ay! thy slnc, thn, _tht_ vcs th.
(_Asd_) Smthng sht frm my dltd nstrls, h hs inhld it in
hs lngs. Strbck nw is mn; cnnt opps m nw, wtht
rblln.”

“Gd kp m!—kp us all!” mrmrd Strbck, lwly.

Bt in hs jy at th enchntd, tct acqscnc of th mt, Ahb
dd nt hr hs frbdng invctn; nr yt th lw lgh frm th
hld; nr yt th prsgng vbrtns of th wnds in th crdg; nr
yt th hllw flp of th sls agnst th msts, as fr a mmnt
thr hrts snk in. Fr agn Strbck’s dwncst eys lghtd up
wth th stbbrnnss of lf; th sbtrrnn lgh dd awy; th
wnds blw on; th sls flld ot; th shp hvd and rlld as
bfr. Ah, y admntns and wrnngs! why sty y nt whn y cm?
Bt rthr ar y prdctns thn wrnngs, y shdws! Yt nt s
mch prdctns frm wtht, as vrfctns of th frgng thngs
wthn. Fr wth lttl extrnl t cnstrn us, th innrmst
ncssts in or bng, ths stll drv us on.

“Th msr! th msr!” crd Ahb.

Rcvng th brmmng pwtr, and trnng t th hrpnrs, h
ordrd thm t prdc thr wpns. Thn rngng thm bfr hm
nr th cpstn, wth thr hrpns in thr hnds, whl hs thr
mts std at hs sd wth thr lncs, and th rst of th shp’s
cmpny frmd a crcl rnd th grp; h std fr an instnt
srchngly eyng evry mn of hs crw. Bt ths wld eys mt hs,
as th bldsht eys of th prr wlvs mt th ey of thr
ldr, er h rshs on at thr hd in th trl of th bsn; bt,
als! only t fll int th hddn snr of th Indn.

“Drnk and pss!” h crd, hndng th hvy chrgd flgn t th
nrst smn. “Th crw aln nw drnk. Rnd wth it, rnd! Shrt
drghts—lng swllws, mn; ’ts ht as Stn’s hf. S, s; it gs
rnd excllntly. It sprlzs in y; frks ot at th
srpnt-snppng ey. Wll dn; almst drnd. Tht wy it wnt, ths
wy it cms. Hnd it m—hr’s a hllw! Mn, y sm th yrs; s
brmmng lf is glpd and gn. Stwrd, rfll!

“Attnd nw, my brvs. I hv mstrd y all rnd ths cpstn; and
y mts, flnk m wth yr lncs; and y hrpnrs, stnd thr
wth yr irns; and y, stt mrnrs, rng m in, tht I my in sm
srt rvv a nbl cstm of my fshrmn fthrs bfr m. O mn,
y wll yt s tht—H! by, cm bck? bd pnns cm nt snr.
Hnd it m. Why, nw, ths pwtr hd rn brmmng agn, wr’t nt
th St. Vts’ imp—awy, th ag!

“Advnc, y mts! Crss yr lncs fll bfr m. Wll dn! Lt m
tch th axs.” S syng, wth extndd arm, h grspd th thr
lvl, rdtng lncs at thr crssd cntr; whl s dng,
sddnly and nrvsly twtchd thm; mnwhl, glncng intntly frm
Strbck t Stbb; frm Stbb t Flsk. It smd as thgh, by sm
nmlss, intrr vltn, h wld fn hv shckd int thm th
sm fry emtn accmltd wthn th Lydn jr of hs own
mgntc lf. Th thr mts qld bfr hs strng, sstnd,
and mystc aspct. Stbb and Flsk lkd sdwys frm hm; th hnst
ey of Strbck fll dwnrght.

“In vn!” crd Ahb; “bt, myb, ’ts wll. Fr dd y thr bt
onc tk th fll-frcd shck, thn mn own elctrc thng, _tht_
hd prhps exprd frm ot m. Prchnc, t, it wld hv drppd
y dd. Prchnc y nd it nt. Dwn lncs! And nw, y mts, I d
appnt y thr cpbrrs t my thr pgn knsmn thr—yn thr
mst hnrbl gntlmn and nblmn, my vlnt hrpnrs. Dsdn
th tsk? Wht, whn th grt Pp wshs th ft of bggrs, usng
hs tr fr ewr? Oh, my swt crdnls! yr own cndscnsn,
_tht_ shll bnd y t it. I d nt ordr y; y wll it. Ct yr
szngs and drw th pls, y hrpnrs!”

Slntly obyng th ordr, th thr hrpnrs nw std wth th
dtchd irn prt of thr hrpns, sm thr ft lng, hld, brbs
up, bfr hm.

“Stb m nt wth tht kn stl! Cnt thm; cnt thm ovr! knw y
nt th gblt end? Trn up th sckt! S, s; nw, y cp-brrs,
advnc. Th irns! tk thm; hld thm whl I fll!” Frthwth,
slwly gng frm on offcr t th othr, h brmmd th hrpn
sckts wth th fry wtrs frm th pwtr.

“Nw, thr t thr, y stnd. Cmmnd th mrdrs chlcs! Bstw
thm, y wh ar nw md prts t ths indsslbl lg. H!
Strbck! bt th dd is dn! Yn rtfyng sn nw wts t st upn
it. Drnk, y hrpnrs! drnk and swr, y mn tht mn th
dthfl whlbt’s bw—Dth t Mby Dck! Gd hnt us all, if w d
nt hnt Mby Dck t hs dth!” Th lng, brbd stl gblts wr
lftd; and t crs and mldctns agnst th wht whl, th
sprts wr smltnsly qffd dwn wth a hss. Strbck pld,
and trnd, and shvrd. Onc mr, and fnlly, th rplnshd
pwtr wnt th rnds amng th frntc crw; whn, wvng hs fr
hnd t thm, thy all dsprsd; and Ahb rtrd wthn hs cbn.


CHPTR 37. Snst.

_Th cbn; by th strn wndws; Ahb sttng aln, and gzng ot_.

I lv a wht and trbd wk; pl wtrs, plr chks, whr’er I
sl. Th envs bllws sdlng swll t whlm my trck; lt thm;
bt frst I pss.

Yndr, by evr-brmmng gblt’s rm, th wrm wvs blsh lk wn.
Th gld brw plmbs th bl. Th dvr sn—slw dvd frm nn—gs
dwn; my sl mnts up! sh wrs wth hr endlss hll. Is, thn,
th crwn t hvy tht I wr? ths Irn Crwn of Lmbrdy. Yt is it
brght wth mny a gm; I th wrr, s nt its fr flshngs; bt
drkly fl tht I wr tht, tht dzzlngly cnfnds. ’Ts irn—tht
I knw—nt gld. ’Ts splt, t—tht I fl; th jggd edg glls m
s, my brn sms t bt agnst th sld mtl; ay, stl skll,
mn; th srt tht nds n hlmt in th mst brn-bttrng fght!

Dry ht upn my brw? Oh! tm ws, whn as th snrs nbly sprrd
m, s th snst sthd. N mr. Ths lvly lght, it lghts nt
m; all lvlnss is angsh t m, snc I cn n’er enjy. Gftd
wth th hgh prcptn, I lck th lw, enjyng pwr; dmnd, mst
sbtly and mst mlgnntly! dmnd in th mdst of Prds! Gd
nght—gd nght! (_wvng hs hnd, h mvs frm th wndw_.)

’Tws nt s hrd a tsk. I thght t fnd on stbbrn, at th lst;
bt my on cggd crcl fts int all thr vrs whls, and thy
rvlv. Or, if y wll, lk s mny ant-hlls of pwdr, thy all
stnd bfr m; and I thr mtch. Oh, hrd! tht t fr othrs, th
mtch itslf mst nds b wstng! Wht I’v drd, I’v wlld; and
wht I’v wlld, I’ll d! Thy thnk m md—Strbck ds; bt I’m
dmnc, I am mdnss mddnd! Tht wld mdnss tht’s only clm t
cmprhnd itslf! Th prphcy ws tht I shld b dsmmbrd;
and—Ay! I lst ths lg. I nw prphsy tht I wll dsmmbr my
dsmmbrr. Nw, thn, b th prpht and th flfllr on. Tht’s
mr thn y, y grt gds, evr wr. I lgh and ht at y, y
crckt-plyrs, y pglsts, y df Brks and blndd Bndgs! I
wll nt sy as schlbys d t blls—Tk sm on of yr own
sz; dn’t pmml _m!_ N, y’v knckd m dwn, and I am up agn;
bt _y_ hv rn and hddn. Cm frth frm bhnd yr cttn bgs!
I hv n lng gn t rch y. Cm, Ahb’s cmplmnts t y; cm
and s if y cn swrv m. Swrv m? y cnnt swrv m, els y
swrv yrslvs! mn hs y thr. Swrv m? Th pth t my fxd
prps is ld wth irn rls, whrn my sl is grvd t rn.
Ovr unsndd grgs, thrgh th rfld hrts of mntns, undr
trrnts’ bds, unrrngly I rsh! Nght’s an obstcl, nght’s an
angl t th irn wy!


CHPTR 38. Dsk.

_By th Mnmst; Strbck lnng agnst it_.

My sl is mr thn mtchd; sh’s ovrmnnd; and by a mdmn!
Insffrbl stng, tht snty shld grnd arms on sch a fld! Bt
h drlld dp dwn, and blstd all my rsn ot of m! I thnk I
s hs imps end; bt fl tht I mst hlp hm t it. Wll I, nll
I, th inffbl thng hs td m t hm; tws m wth a cbl I hv
n knf t ct. Hrrbl old mn! Wh’s ovr hm, h crs;—ay, h
wld b a dmcrt t all abv; lk, hw h lrds it ovr all blw!
Oh! I plnly s my msrbl offc,—t oby, rbllng; and wrs
yt, t ht wth tch of pty! Fr in hs eys I rd sm lrd w
wld shrvl m up, hd I it. Yt is thr hp. Tm and td flw
wd. Th htd whl hs th rnd wtry wrld t swm in, as th
smll gld-fsh hs its glssy glb. Hs hvn-insltng prps, Gd
my wdg asd. I wld up hrt, wr it nt lk ld. Bt my whl
clck’s rn dwn; my hrt th all-cntrllng wght, I hv n ky t
lft agn.

[_A brst of rvlry frm th frcstl_.]

Oh, Gd! t sl wth sch a hthn crw tht hv smll tch of
hmn mthrs in thm! Whlpd smwhr by th shrksh s. Th wht
whl is thr dmgrgn. Hrk! th infrnl orgs! tht rvlry is
frwrd! mrk th unfltrng slnc aft! Mthnks it pctrs lf.
Frmst thrgh th sprklng s shts on th gy, embttld,
bntrng bw, bt only t drg drk Ahb aftr it, whr h brds
wthn hs strnwrd cbn, bldd ovr th dd wtr of th wk,
and frthr on, hntd by its wlfsh grglngs. Th lng hwl thrlls
m thrgh! Pc! y rvllrs, and st th wtch! Oh, lf! ’ts in
an hr lk ths, wth sl bt dwn and hld t knwldg,—as wld,
unttrd thngs ar frcd t fd—Oh, lf! ’ts nw tht I d fl
th ltnt hrrr in th! bt ’ts nt m! tht hrrr’s ot of m!
and wth th sft flng of th hmn in m, yt wll I try t fght
y, y grm, phntm ftrs! Stnd by m, hld m, bnd m, O y
blssd inflncs!


CHPTR 39. Frst Nght-Wtch.

Fr-Tp.

(_Stbb sls, and mndng a brc_.)

H! h! h! h! hm! clr my thrt!—I’v bn thnkng ovr it evr
snc, and tht h, h’s th fnl cnsqnc. Why s? Bcs a
lgh’s th wsst, esst answr t all tht’s qr; and cm wht
wll, on cmfrt’s alwys lft—tht unflng cmfrt is, it’s all
prdstntd. I hrd nt all hs tlk wth Strbck; bt t my pr
ey Strbck thn lkd smthng as I th othr evnng flt. B sr
th old Mgl hs fxd hm, t. I twggd it, knw it; hd hd th
gft, mght rdly hv prphsd it—fr whn I clppd my ey upn
hs skll I sw it. Wll, Stbb, _ws_ Stbb—tht’s my ttl—wll,
Stbb, wht of it, Stbb? Hr’s a crcs. I knw nt all tht my b
cmng, bt b it wht it wll, I’ll g t it lghng. Sch a wggsh
lrng as lrks in all yr hrrbls! I fl fnny. F, l! lrr,
skrr! Wht’s my jcy lttl pr at hm dng nw? Cryng its eys
ot?—Gvng a prty t th lst arrvd hrpnrs, I dr sy, gy as
a frgt’s pnnnt, and s am I—f, l! lrr, skrr! Oh—


W’ll drnk t-nght wth hrts as lght, T lv, as gy and fltng
As bbbls tht swm, on th bkr’s brm, And brk on th lps whl
mtng.



A brv stv tht—wh clls? Mr. Strbck? Ay, ay, sr—(_Asd_)
h’s my sprr, h hs hs t, if I’m nt mstkn.—Ay, ay, sr,
jst thrgh wth ths jb—cmng.


CHPTR 40. Mdnght, Frcstl.

HRPNRS AND SLRS.

(_Frsl rss and dscvrs th wtch stndng, lngng, lnng,
and lyng in vrs atttds, all sngng in chrs_.)


  Frwll and ad t y, Spnsh lds! Frwll and ad t y,
  lds of Spn! Or cptn’s cmmndd.—



1ST NNTCKT SLR. Oh, bys, dn’t b sntmntl; it’s bd fr th
dgstn! Tk a tnc, fllw m!

(_Sngs, and all fllw._)


 Or cptn std upn th dck, A spy-glss in hs hnd, A vwng of
 ths gllnt whls Tht blw at evry strnd. Oh, yr tbs in yr
 bts, my bys, And by yr brcs stnd, And w’ll hv on of ths
 fn whls, Hnd, bys, ovr hnd! S, b chry, my lds! my yr
 hrts nvr fl! Whl th bld hrpnr is strkng th whl!



MT’S VC FRM TH QRTR-DCK. Eght blls thr, frwrd!

2ND NNTCKT SLR. Avst th chrs! Eght blls thr! d’y hr,
bll-by? Strk th bll eght, th Pp! th blcklng! and lt m
cll th wtch. I’v th srt of mth fr tht—th hgshd mth. S,
s, (_thrsts hs hd dwn th scttl_,) Str-b-l-e-e-n-s, a-h-o-y!
Eght blls thr blw! Tmbl up!

DTCH SLR. Grnd snzng t-nght, mty; ft nght fr tht. I mrk
ths in or old Mgl’s wn; it’s qt as ddnng t sm as
fllpng t othrs. W sng; thy slp—ay, l dwn thr, lk
grnd-tr btts. At ’em agn! Thr, tk ths cppr-pmp, and hl
’em thrgh it. Tll ’em t avst drmng of thr lsss. Tll ’em
it’s th rsrrctn; thy mst kss thr lst, and cm t jdgmnt.
Tht’s th wy—_tht’s_ it; thy thrt an’t spld wth etng
Amstrdm bttr.

FRNCH SLR. Hst, bys! lt’s hv a jg or tw bfr w rd t
anchr in Blnkt By. Wht sy y? Thr cms th othr wtch. Stnd
by all lgs! Pp! lttl Pp! hrrh wth yr tmbrn!

PP. (_Slky and slpy._) Dn’t knw whr it is.

FRNCH SLR. Bt thy blly, thn, and wg thy ers. Jg it, mn, I
sy; mrry’s th wrd; hrrh! Dmn m, wn’t y dnc? Frm, nw,
Indn-fl, and gllp int th dbl-shffl? Thrw yrslvs!
Lgs! lgs!

ICLND SLR. I dn’t lk yr flr, mty; it’s t sprngy t my
tst. I’m usd t ic-flrs. I’m srry t thrw cld wtr on th
sbjct; bt excs m.

MLTS SLR. M t; whr’s yr grls? Wh bt a fl wld tk
hs lft hnd by hs rght, and sy t hmslf, hw d’y d? Prtnrs!
I mst hv prtnrs!

SCLN SLR. Ay; grls and a grn!—thn I’ll hp wth y; y,
trn grsshppr!

LNG-ISLND SLR. Wll, wll, y slks, thr’s plnty mr of us.
H crn whn y my, sy I. All lgs g t hrvst sn. Ah! hr
cms th msc; nw fr it!

AZR SLR. (_Ascndng, and ptchng th tmbrn up th
scttl_.) Hr y ar, Pp; and thr’s th wndlss-btts; up y
mnt! Nw, bys! (_Th hlf of thm dnc t th tmbrn; sm g
blw; sm slp or l amng th cls of rggng. Oths a-plnty_.)

AZR SLR. (_Dncng_) G it, Pp! Bng it, bll-by! Rg it, dg
it, stg it, qg it, bll-by! Mk fr-fls; brk th jnglrs!

PP. Jnglrs, y sy?—thr gs anthr, drppd off; I pnd it s.

CHN SLR. Rttl thy tth, thn, and pnd awy; mk a pgd of
thyslf.

FRNCH SLR. Mrry-md! Hld up thy hp, Pp, tll I jmp thrgh
it! Splt jbs! tr yrslvs!

TSHTG. (_Qtly smkng._) Tht’s a wht mn; h clls tht fn:
hmph! I sv my swt.

OLD MNX SLR. I wndr whthr ths jlly lds bthnk thm of wht
thy ar dncng ovr. I’ll dnc ovr yr grv, I wll—tht’s th
bttrst thrt of yr nght-wmn, tht bt hd-wnds rnd
crnrs. O Chrst! t thnk of th grn nvs and th grn-sklld
crws! Wll, wll; blk th whl wrld’s a bll, as y schlrs
hv it; and s ’ts rght t mk on bllrm of it. Dnc on, lds,
y’r yng; I ws onc.

3D NNTCKT SLR. Spll oh!—whw! ths is wrs thn pllng aftr
whls in a clm—gv us a whff, Tsh.

(_Thy cs dncng, and gthr in clstrs. Mntm th sky
drkns—th wnd rss_.)

LSCR SLR. By Brhm! bys, it’ll b ds sl sn. Th sky-brn,
hgh-td Gngs trnd t wnd! Th shwst thy blck brw, Sv!

MLTS SLR. (_Rclnng and shkng hs cp_.) It’s th wvs—th
snw’s cps trn t jg it nw. Thy’ll shk thr tssls sn. Nw
wld all th wvs wr wmn, thn I’d g drwn, and chss wth
thm evrmr! Thr’s nght s swt on erth—hvn my nt mtch
it!—as ths swft glncs of wrm, wld bsms in th dnc, whn th
ovr-arbrng arms hd sch rp, brstng grps.

SCLN SLR. (_Rclnng_.) Tll m nt of it! Hrk y, ld—flt
intrlcngs of th lmbs—lth swyngs—cyngs—flttrngs! lp!
hrt! hp! all grz: uncsng tch and g! nt tst, obsrv y,
els cm stty. Eh, Pgn? (_Ndgng_.)

THTN SLR. (_Rclnng on a mt_.) Hl, hly nkdnss of or
dncng grls!—th Hv-Hv! Ah! lw vld, hgh plmd Tht! I
stll rst m on thy mt, bt th sft sl hs sld! I sw th wvn
in th wd, my mt! grn th frst dy I brght y thnc; nw wrn
and wltd qt. Ah m!—nt th nr I cn br th chng! Hw thn,
if s b trnsplntd t yn sky? Hr I th rrng strms frm
Prht’s pk of sprs, whn thy lp dwn th crgs and drwn th
vllgs?—Th blst! th blst! Up, spn, and mt it! (_Lps t hs
ft_.)

PRTGS SLR. Hw th s rlls swshng ’gnst th sd! Stnd
by fr rfng, hrts! th wnds ar jst crssng swrds, pll-mll
thy’ll g lngng prsntly.

DNSH SLR. Crck, crck, old shp! s lng as th crckst, th
hldst! Wll dn! Th mt thr hlds y t it stffly. H’s n mr
afrd thn th isl frt at Cttgt, pt thr t fght th Bltc
wth strm-lshd gns, on whch th s-slt cks!

4TH NNTCKT SLR. H hs hs ordrs, mnd y tht. I hrd old Ahb
tll hm h mst alwys kll a sqll, smthng as thy brst a
wtrspt wth a pstl—fr yr shp rght int it!

ENGLSH SLR. Bld! bt tht old mn’s a grnd old cv! W ar th
lds t hnt hm up hs whl!

ALL. Ay! ay!

OLD MNX SLR. Hw th thr pns shk! Pns ar th hrdst srt
of tr t lv whn shftd t any othr sl, and hr thr’s nn
bt th crw’s crsd cly. Stdy, hlmsmn! stdy. Ths is th srt
of wthr whn brv hrts snp ashr, and kld hlls splt at
s. Or cptn hs hs brthmrk; lk yndr, bys, thr’s anthr
in th sky—lrd-lk, y s, all els ptch blck.

DGG. Wht of tht? Wh’s afrd of blck’s afrd of m! I’m
qrrd ot of it!

SPNSH SLR. (_Asd_.) H wnts t blly, ah!—th old grdg mks
m tchy (_Advncng_.) Ay, hrpnr, thy rc is th undnbl
drk sd of mnknd—dvlsh drk at tht. N offnc.

DGG (_grmly_). Nn.

ST. JG’S SLR. Tht Spnrd’s md or drnk. Bt tht cn’t b, or
els in hs on cs or old Mgl’s fr-wtrs ar smwht lng in
wrkng.

5TH NNTCKT SLR. Wht’s tht I sw—lghtnng? Ys.

SPNSH SLR. N; Dgg shwng hs tth.

DGG (_sprngng_). Swllw thn, mnnkn! Wht skn, wht lvr!

SPNSH SLR (_mtng hm_). Knf th hrtly! bg frm, smll
sprt!

ALL. A rw! a rw! a rw!

TSHTG (_wth a whff_). A rw a’lw, and a rw alft—Gds and
mn—bth brwlrs! Hmph!

BLFST SLR. A rw! arrh a rw! Th Vrgn b blssd, a rw!
Plng in wth y!

ENGLSH SLR. Fr ply! Sntch th Spnrd’s knf! A rng, a rng!

OLD MNX SLR. Rdy frmd. Thr! th rngd hrzn. In tht rng
Cn strck Abl. Swt wrk, rght wrk! N? Why thn, Gd, md’st
th th rng?

MT’S VC FRM TH QRTR-DCK. Hnds by th hlyrds! in
tp-gllnt sls! Stnd by t rf tpsls!

ALL. Th sqll! th sqll! jmp, my jlls! (_Thy scttr_.)

PP (_shrnkng undr th wndlss_). Jlls? Lrd hlp sch jlls!
Crsh, crsh! thr gs th jb-sty! Blng-whng! Gd! Dck lwr,
Pp, hr cms th ryl yrd! It’s wrs thn bng in th whrld
wds, th lst dy of th yr! Wh’d g clmbng aftr chstnts nw?
Bt thr thy g, all crsng, and hr I dn’t. Fn prspcts t
’em; thy’r on th rd t hvn. Hld on hrd! Jmmn, wht a
sqll! Bt ths chps thr ar wrs yt—thy ar yr wht
sqlls, thy. Wht sqlls? wht whl, shrr! shrr! Hr hv I
hrd all thr cht jst nw, and th wht whl—shrr! shrr!—bt
spkn of onc! and only ths evnng—it mks m jngl all ovr lk
my tmbrn—tht ancnd of an old mn swr ’em in t hnt hm! Oh,
th bg wht Gd alft thr smwhr in yn drknss, hv mrcy on
ths smll blck by dwn hr; prsrv hm frm all mn tht hv n
bwls t fl fr!


CHPTR 41. Mby Dck.

I, Ishml, ws on of tht crw; my shts hd gn up wth th rst;
my oth hd bn wldd wth thrs; and strngr I shtd, and mr
dd I hmmr and clnch my oth, bcs of th drd in my sl. A
wld, mystcl, sympthtcl flng ws in m; Ahb’s qnchlss fd
smd mn. Wth grdy ers I lrnd th hstry of tht mrdrs
mnstr agnst whm I and all th othrs hd tkn or oths of
vlnc and rvng.

Fr sm tm pst, thgh at intrvls only, th unccmpnd,
scldd Wht Whl hd hntd ths uncvlzd ss mstly
frqntd by th Sprm Whl fshrmn. Bt nt all of thm knw of
hs exstnc; only a fw of thm, cmprtvly, hd knwngly sn
hm; whl th nmbr wh as yt hd actlly and knwngly gvn
bttl t hm, ws smll indd. Fr, owng t th lrg nmbr of
whl-crsrs; th dsrdrly wy thy wr sprnkld ovr th entr
wtry crcmfrnc, mny of thm advntrsly pshng thr qst
alng sltry lttds, s as sldm or nvr fr a whl twlvmnth
or mr on a strtch, t encntr a sngl nws-tllng sl of any
srt; th inrdnt lngth of ech sprt vyg; th irrglrty
of th tms of slng frm hm; all ths, wth othr crcmstncs,
drct and indrct, lng obstrctd th sprd thrgh th whl
wrld-wd whlng-flt of th spcl indvdlzng tdngs
cncrnng Mby Dck. It ws hrdly t b dbtd, tht svrl vssls
rprtd t hv encntrd, at sch or sch a tm, or on sch or
sch a mrdn, a Sprm Whl of uncmmn mgntd and mlgnty,
whch whl, aftr dng grt mschf t hs asslnts, hd
cmpltly escpd thm; t sm mnds it ws nt an unfr
prsmptn, I sy, tht th whl in qstn mst hv bn n othr
thn Mby Dck. Yt as of lt th Sprm Whl fshry hd bn mrkd
by vrs and nt unfrqnt instncs of grt frcty, cnnng, and
mlc in th mnstr attckd; thrfr it ws, tht ths wh by
accdnt ignrntly gv bttl t Mby Dck; sch hntrs, prhps,
fr th mst prt, wr cntnt t ascrb th pclr trrr h brd,
mr, as it wr, t th prls of th Sprm Whl fshry at lrg,
thn t th indvdl cs. In tht wy, mstly, th dsstrs
encntr btwn Ahb and th whl hd hthrt bn pplrly
rgrdd.

And as fr ths wh, prvsly hrng of th Wht Whl, by chnc
cght sght of hm; in th bgnnng of th thng thy hd evry on
of thm, almst, as bldly and frlssly lwrd fr hm, as fr any
othr whl of tht spcs. Bt at lngth, sch clmts dd ens
in ths asslts—nt rstrctd t sprnd wrsts and ankls, brkn
lmbs, or dvrng ampttns—bt ftl t th lst dgr of
ftlty; ths rptd dsstrs rplss, all accmltng and
plng thr trrrs upn Mby Dck; ths thngs hd gn fr t shk
th frttd of mny brv hntrs, t whm th stry of th Wht
Whl hd evntlly cm.

Nr dd wld rmrs of all srts fl t exggrt, and stll th mr
hrrfy th tr hstrs of ths ddly encntrs. Fr nt only d
fbls rmrs ntrlly grw ot of th vry bdy of all srprsng
trrbl evnts,—as th smttn tr gvs brth t its fng; bt, in
mrtm lf, fr mr thn in tht of trr frm, wld rmrs
abnd, whrvr thr is any adqt rlty fr thm t clng t.
And as th s srpsss th lnd in ths mttr, s th whl fshry
srpsss evry othr srt of mrtm lf, in th wndrflnss and
frflnss of th rmrs whch smtms crclt thr. Fr nt only
ar whlmn as a bdy unxmpt frm tht ignrnc and
sprsttsnss hrdtry t all slrs; bt of all slrs, thy
ar by all odds th mst drctly brght int cntct wth whtvr is
appllngly astnshng in th s; fc t fc thy nt only ey its
grtst mrvls, bt, hnd t jw, gv bttl t thm. Aln, in sch
rmtst wtrs, tht thgh y sld a thsnd mls, and pssd a
thsnd shrs, y wld nt cm t any chsld hrth-stn, or
aght hsptbl bnth tht prt of th sn; in sch lttds and
lngtds, prsng t sch a cllng as h ds, th whlmn is
wrppd by inflncs all tndng t mk hs fncy prgnnt wth mny
a mghty brth.

N wndr, thn, tht evr gthrng vlm frm th mr trnst ovr
th wdst wtry spcs, th otblwn rmrs of th Wht Whl dd in
th end incrprt wth thmslvs all mnnr of mrbd hnts, and
hlf-frmd fœtl sggstns of sprntrl agncs, whch
evntlly invstd Mby Dck wth nw trrrs unbrrwd frm anythng
tht vsbly apprs. S tht in mny css sch a pnc dd h fnlly
strk, tht fw wh by ths rmrs, at lst, hd hrd of th Wht
Whl, fw of ths hntrs wr wllng t encntr th prls of hs
jw.

Bt thr wr stll othr and mr vtl prctcl inflncs at wrk.
Nt evn at th prsnt dy hs th orgnl prstg of th Sprm
Whl, as frflly dstngshd frm all othr spcs of th
lvthn, dd ot of th mnds of th whlmn as a bdy. Thr ar
ths ths dy amng thm, wh, thgh intllgnt and crgs
engh in offrng bttl t th Grnlnd or Rght whl, wld
prhps—ethr frm prfssnl inxprnc, or incmptncy, or
tmdty, dcln a cntst wth th Sprm Whl; at any rt, thr
ar plnty of whlmn, espclly amng ths whlng ntns nt
slng undr th Amrcn flg, wh hv nvr hstlly encntrd
th Sprm Whl, bt whs sl knwldg of th lvthn is
rstrctd t th ignbl mnstr prmtvly prsd in th Nrth;
std on thr htchs, ths mn wll hrkn wth a chldsh
frsd intrst and aw, t th wld, strng tls of Sthrn
whlng. Nr is th pr-emnnt trmndsnss of th grt Sprm Whl
anywhr mr flngly cmprhndd, thn on brd of ths prws
whch stm hm.

And as if th nw tstd rlty of hs mght hd in frmr lgndry
tms thrwn its shdw bfr it; w fnd sm bk
ntrlsts—Olssn and Pvlsn—dclrng th Sprm Whl nt only t
b a cnstrntn t evry othr crtr in th s, bt als t b
s incrdbly frcs as cntnlly t b athrst fr hmn bld.
Nr evn dwn t s lt a tm as Cvr’s, wr ths or almst
smlr imprssns effcd. Fr in hs Ntrl Hstry, th Brn
hmslf affrms tht at sght of th Sprm Whl, all fsh (shrks
incldd) ar “strck wth th mst lvly trrrs,” and “oftn in th
prcptncy of thr flght dsh thmslvs agnst th rcks wth
sch vlnc as t cs instntns dth.” And hwvr th gnrl
exprncs in th fshry my amnd sch rprts as ths; yt in
thr fll trrblnss, evn t th bldthrsty itm of Pvlsn, th
sprstts blf in thm is, in sm vcsstds of thr
vctn, rvvd in th mnds of th hntrs.

S tht ovrwd by th rmrs and prtnts cncrnng hm, nt a fw
of th fshrmn rclld, in rfrnc t Mby Dck, th erlr dys
of th Sprm Whl fshry, whn it ws oftntms hrd t indc lng
prctsd Rght whlmn t embrk in th prls of ths nw and drng
wrfr; sch mn prtstng tht althgh othr lvthns mght b
hpflly prsd, yt t chs and pnt lnc at sch an apprtn
as th Sprm Whl ws nt fr mrtl mn. Tht t attmpt it, wld b
invtbly t b trn int a qck etrnty. On ths hd, thr ar
sm rmrkbl dcmnts tht my b cnsltd.

Nvrthlss, sm thr wr, wh evn in th fc of ths thngs
wr rdy t gv chs t Mby Dck; and a stll grtr nmbr wh,
chncng only t hr of hm dstntly and vgly, wtht th
spcfc dtls of any crtn clmty, and wtht sprstts
accmpnmnts, wr sffcntly hrdy nt t fl frm th bttl if
offrd.

On of th wld sggstns rfrrd t, as at lst cmng t b lnkd
wth th Wht Whl in th mnds of th sprsttsly inclnd, ws
th unrthly cnct tht Mby Dck ws ubqts; tht h hd
actlly bn encntrd in oppst lttds at on and th sm
instnt of tm.

Nr, crdls as sch mnds mst hv bn, ws ths cnct
altgthr wtht sm fnt shw of sprstts prbblty. Fr as
th scrts of th crrnts in th ss hv nvr yt bn dvlgd,
evn t th mst erdt rsrch; s th hddn wys of th Sprm
Whl whn bnth th srfc rmn, in grt prt, unccntbl t
hs prsrs; and frm tm t tm hv orgntd th mst crs
and cntrdctry spcltns rgrdng thm, espclly cncrnng
th mystc mds whrby, aftr sndng t a grt dpth, h
trnsprts hmslf wth sch vst swftnss t th mst wdly dstnt
pnts.

It is a thng wll knwn t bth Amrcn and Englsh whl-shps, and
as wll a thng plcd upn athrttv rcrd yrs ag by Scrsby,
tht sm whls hv bn cptrd fr nrth in th Pcfc, in whs
bds hv bn fnd th brbs of hrpns drtd in th Grnlnd
ss. Nr is it t b gnsd, tht in sm of ths instncs it hs
bn dclrd tht th intrvl of tm btwn th tw asslts cld
nt hv excdd vry mny dys. Hnc, by infrnc, it hs bn
blvd by sm whlmn, tht th Nr’ Wst Pssg, s lng a
prblm t mn, ws nvr a prblm t th whl. S tht hr, in th
rl lvng exprnc of lvng mn, th prdgs rltd in old
tms of th inlnd Strll mntn in Prtgl (nr whs tp thr
ws sd t b a lk in whch th wrcks of shps fltd up t th
srfc); and tht stll mr wndrfl stry of th Arths fntn
nr Syrcs (whs wtrs wr blvd t hv cm frm th Hly
Lnd by an undrgrnd pssg); ths fbls nrrtns ar almst
flly eqlld by th rlts of th whlmn.

Frcd int fmlrty, thn, wth sch prdgs as ths; and
knwng tht aftr rptd, intrpd asslts, th Wht Whl hd
escpd alv; it cnnt b mch mttr of srprs tht sm whlmn
shld g stll frthr in thr sprsttns; dclrng Mby Dck nt
only ubqts, bt immrtl (fr immrtlty is bt ubqty in
tm); tht thgh grvs of sprs shld b plntd in hs flnks, h
wld stll swm awy unhrmd; or if indd h shld evr b md t
spt thck bld, sch a sght wld b bt a ghstly dcptn; fr
agn in unnsngnd bllws hndrds of lgs awy, hs unslld
jt wld onc mr b sn.

Bt evn strppd of ths sprntrl srmsngs, thr ws engh in
th erthly mk and incntstbl chrctr of th mnstr t strk
th imgntn wth unwntd pwr. Fr, it ws nt s mch hs
uncmmn blk tht s mch dstngshd hm frm othr sprm whls,
bt, as ws elswhr thrwn ot—a pclr snw-wht wrnkld
frhd, and a hgh, pyrmdcl wht hmp. Ths wr hs prmnnt
ftrs; th tkns whrby, evn in th lmtlss, unchrtd ss, h
rvld hs idntty, at a lng dstnc, t ths wh knw hm.

Th rst of hs bdy ws s strkd, and spttd, and mrbld wth th
sm shrdd h, tht, in th end, h hd gnd hs dstnctv
applltn of th Wht Whl; a nm, indd, ltrlly jstfd by
hs vvd aspct, whn sn gldng at hgh nn thrgh a drk bl
s, lvng a mlky-wy wk of crmy fm, all spngld wth gldn
glmngs.

Nr ws it hs unwntd mgntd, nr hs rmrkbl h, nr yt hs
dfrmd lwr jw, tht s mch invstd th whl wth ntrl
trrr, as tht unxmpld, intllgnt mlgnty whch, accrdng t
spcfc accnts, h hd ovr and ovr agn evncd in hs asslts.
Mr thn all, hs trchrs rtrts strck mr of dsmy thn
prhps aght els. Fr, whn swmmng bfr hs exltng prsrs,
wth evry apprnt symptm of alrm, h hd svrl tms bn knwn
t trn rnd sddnly, and, brng dwn upn thm, ethr stv thr
bts t splntrs, or drv thm bck in cnstrntn t thr shp.

Alrdy svrl ftlts hd attndd hs chs. Bt thgh smlr
dsstrs, hwvr lttl brtd ashr, wr by n mns unsl in
th fshry; yt, in mst instncs, sch smd th Wht Whl’s
infrnl afrthght of frcty, tht evry dsmmbrng or dth
tht h csd, ws nt whlly rgrdd as hvng bn inflctd by an
unntllgnt agnt.

Jdg, thn, t wht ptchs of inflmd, dstrctd fry th mnds of
hs mr dsprt hntrs wr implld, whn amd th chps of chwd
bts, and th snkng lmbs of trn cmrds, thy swm ot of th
wht crds of th whl’s drfl wrth int th srn, exsprtng
snlght, tht smld on, as if at a brth or a brdl.

Hs thr bts stv arnd hm, and ors and mn bth whrlng in th
edds; on cptn, szng th ln-knf frm hs brkn prw, hd
dshd at th whl, as an Arknss dllst at hs f, blndly
skng wth a sx inch bld t rch th fthm-dp lf of th
whl. Tht cptn ws Ahb. And thn it ws, tht sddnly swpng
hs sckl-shpd lwr jw bnth hm, Mby Dck hd rpd awy
Ahb’s lg, as a mwr a bld of grss in th fld. N trbnd Trk,
n hrd Vntn or Mly, cld hv smt hm wth mr smng
mlc. Smll rsn ws thr t dbt, thn, tht evr snc tht
almst ftl encntr, Ahb hd chrshd a wld vndctvnss
agnst th whl, all th mr fll fr tht in hs frntc mrbdnss
h at lst cm t idntfy wth hm, nt only all hs bdly ws, bt
all hs intllctl and sprtl exsprtns. Th Wht Whl swm
bfr hm as th mnmnc incrntn of all ths mlcs
agncs whch sm dp mn fl etng in thm, tll thy ar lft
lvng on wth hlf a hrt and hlf a lng. Tht intngbl mlgnty
whch hs bn frm th bgnnng; t whs dmnn evn th mdrn
Chrstns ascrb on-hlf of th wrlds; whch th ancnt Ophts of
th est rvrncd in thr stt dvl;—Ahb dd nt fll dwn and
wrshp it lk thm; bt dlrsly trnsfrrng its id t th
abhrrd wht whl, h pttd hmslf, all mtltd, agnst it. All
tht mst mddns and trmnts; all tht strs up th ls of thngs;
all trth wth mlc in it; all tht crcks th snws and cks th
brn; all th sbtl dmnsms of lf and thght; all evl, t crzy
Ahb, wr vsbly prsnfd, and md prctclly asslbl in Mby
Dck. H pld upn th whl’s wht hmp th sm of all th gnrl
rg and ht flt by hs whl rc frm Adm dwn; and thn, as if
hs chst hd bn a mrtr, h brst hs ht hrt’s shll upn it.

It is nt prbbl tht ths mnmn in hm tk its instnt rs at
th prcs tm of hs bdly dsmmbrmnt. Thn, in drtng at th
mnstr, knf in hnd, h hd bt gvn ls t a sddn, pssnt,
crprl anmsty; and whn h rcvd th strk tht tr hm, h
prbbly bt flt th agnzng bdly lcrtn, bt nthng mr.
Yt, whn by ths cllsn frcd t trn twrds hm, and fr lng
mnths of dys and wks, Ahb and angsh ly strtchd tgthr in
on hmmck, rndng in md wntr tht drry, hwlng Ptgnn
Cp; thn it ws, tht hs trn bdy and gshd sl bld int on
anthr; and s intrfsng, md hm md. Tht it ws only thn, on
th hmwrd vyg, aftr th encntr, tht th fnl mnmn
szd hm, sms all bt crtn frm th fct tht, at intrvls
drng th pssg, h ws a rvng lntc; and, thgh unlmbd of a
lg, yt sch vtl strngth yt lrkd in hs Egyptn chst, and ws
mrvr intnsfd by hs dlrm, tht hs mts wr frcd t
lc hm fst, evn thr, as h sld, rvng in hs hmmck. In a
strt-jckt, h swng t th md rckngs of th gls. And, whn
rnnng int mr sffrbl lttds, th shp, wth mld stn’sls
sprd, fltd acrss th trnql trpcs, and, t all apprncs,
th old mn’s dlrm smd lft bhnd hm wth th Cp Hrn
swlls, and h cm frth frm hs drk dn int th blssd lght and
ar; evn thn, whn h br tht frm, cllctd frnt, hwvr pl,
and issd hs clm ordrs onc agn; and hs mts thnkd Gd th
drfl mdnss ws nw gn; evn thn, Ahb, in hs hddn slf,
rvd on. Hmn mdnss is oftntms a cnnng and mst fln thng.
Whn y thnk it fld, it my hv bt bcm trnsfgrd int sm
stll sbtlr frm. Ahb’s fll lncy sbsdd nt, bt dpnngly
cntrctd; lk th unbtd Hdsn, whn tht nbl Nrthmn flws
nrrwly, bt unfthmbly thrgh th Hghlnd grg. Bt, as in hs
nrrw-flwng mnmn, nt on jt of Ahb’s brd mdnss hd bn
lft bhnd; s in tht brd mdnss, nt on jt of hs grt ntrl
intllct hd prshd. Tht bfr lvng agnt, nw bcm th lvng
instrmnt. If sch a frs trp my stnd, hs spcl lncy
strmd hs gnrl snty, and crrd it, and trnd all its
cncntrd cnnn upn its own md mrk; s tht fr frm hvng lst
hs strngth, Ahb, t tht on end, dd nw pssss a thsnd fld
mr ptncy thn evr h hd snly brght t br upn any on
rsnbl objct.

Ths is mch; yt Ahb’s lrgr, drkr, dpr prt rmns unhntd.
Bt vn t pplrz prfndts, and all trth is prfnd. Wndng
fr dwn frm wthn th vry hrt of ths spkd Htl d Clny whr
w hr stnd—hwvr grnd and wndrfl, nw qt it;—and tk yr
wy, y nblr, sddr sls, t ths vst Rmn hlls of Thrms;
whr fr bnth th fntstc twrs of mn’s uppr erth, hs rt
of grndr, hs whl awfl essnc sts in brdd stt; an antq
brd bnth antqts, and thrnd on trss! S wth a brkn
thrn, th grt gds mck tht cptv kng; s lk a Crytd, h
ptnt sts, uphldng on hs frzn brw th pld entbltrs of
ags. Wnd y dwn thr, y prdr, sddr sls! qstn tht
prd, sd kng! A fmly lknss! ay, h dd bgt y, y yng
exld rylts; and frm yr grm sr only wll th old
Stt-scrt cm.

Nw, in hs hrt, Ahb hd sm glmps of ths, nmly: all my mns
ar sn, my mtv and my objct md. Yt wtht pwr t kll, or
chng, or shn th fct; h lkws knw tht t mnknd h dd lng
dssmbl; in sm srt, dd stll. Bt tht thng of hs dssmblng
ws only sbjct t hs prcptblty, nt t hs wll dtrmnt.
Nvrthlss, s wll dd h sccd in tht dssmblng, tht whn
wth ivry lg h stppd ashr at lst, n Nntcktr thght hm
othrws thn bt ntrlly grvd, and tht t th qck, wth th
trrbl cslty whch hd ovrtkn hm.

Th rprt of hs undnbl dlrm at s ws lkws pplrly
ascrbd t a kndrd cs. And s t, all th addd mdnss whch
alwys aftrwrds, t th vry dy of slng in th Pqd on th
prsnt vyg, st brdng on hs brw. Nr is it s vry unlkly,
tht fr frm dstrstng hs ftnss fr anthr whlng vyg, on
accnt of sch drk symptms, th clcltng ppl of tht prdnt
isl wr inclnd t hrbr th cnct, tht fr ths vry rsns
h ws all th bttr qlfd and st on edg, fr a prst s fll
of rg and wldnss as th bldy hnt of whls. Gnwd wthn and
scrchd wtht, wth th infxd, unrlntng fngs of sm incrbl
id; sch an on, cld h b fnd, wld sm th vry mn t drt
hs irn and lft hs lnc agnst th mst appllng of all brts.
Or, if fr any rsn thght t b crprlly incpcttd fr tht,
yt sch an on wld sm sprltvly cmptnt t chr and hwl on
hs undrlngs t th attck. Bt b all ths as it my, crtn it is,
tht wth th md scrt of hs unbtd rg bltd up and kyd in
hm, Ahb hd prpsly sld upn th prsnt vyg wth th on
only and all-engrssng objct of hntng th Wht Whl. Hd any on
of hs old acqntncs on shr bt hlf drmd of wht ws lrkng
in hm thn, hw sn wld thr aghst and rghts sls hv
wrnchd th shp frm sch a fndsh mn! Thy wr bnt on
prftbl crss, th prft t b cntd dwn in dllrs frm th
mnt. H ws intnt on an adcs, immtgbl, and sprntrl
rvng.

Hr, thn, ws ths gry-hdd, ungdly old mn, chsng wth crss
a Jb’s whl rnd th wrld, at th hd of a crw, t, chfly md
up of mngrl rngds, and cstwys, and cnnbls—mrlly enfbld
als, by th incmptnc of mr undd vrt or rght-mnddnss in
Strbck, th invlnrbl jllty of indffrnc and rcklssnss in
Stbb, and th prvdng mdcrty in Flsk. Sch a crw, s
offcrd, smd spclly pckd and pckd by sm infrnl ftlty
t hlp hm t hs mnmnc rvng. Hw it ws tht thy s
abndngly rspndd t th old mn’s ir—by wht evl mgc thr
sls wr pssssd, tht at tms hs ht smd almst thrs; th
Wht Whl as mch thr insffrbl f as hs; hw all ths cm t
b—wht th Wht Whl ws t thm, or hw t thr uncnscs
undrstndngs, als, in sm dm, unsspctd wy, h mght hv
smd th gldng grt dmn of th ss of lf,—all ths t
expln, wld b t dv dpr thn Ishml cn g. Th sbtrrnn
mnr tht wrks in us all, hw cn on tll whthr lds hs shft by
th evr shftng, mffld snd of hs pck? Wh ds nt fl th
irrsstbl arm drg? Wht skff in tw of a svnty-fr cn stnd
stll? Fr on, I gv myslf up t th abndnmnt of th tm and th
plc; bt whl yt all a-rsh t encntr th whl, cld s
nght in tht brt bt th ddlst ill.


CHPTR 42. Th Whtnss of th Whl.

Wht th wht whl ws t Ahb, hs bn hntd; wht, at tms, h
ws t m, as yt rmns unsd.

Asd frm ths mr obvs cnsdrtns tchng Mby Dck, whch
cld nt bt occsnlly awkn in any mn’s sl sm alrm, thr
ws anthr thght, or rthr vg, nmlss hrrr cncrnng hm,
whch at tms by its intnsty cmpltly ovrpwrd all th rst;
and yt s mystcl and wll ngh inffbl ws it, tht I almst
dspr of pttng it in a cmprhnsbl frm. It ws th whtnss of
th whl tht abv all thngs applld m. Bt hw cn I hp t
expln myslf hr; and yt, in sm dm, rndm wy, expln myslf I
mst, els all ths chptrs mght b nght.

Thgh in mny ntrl objcts, whtnss rfnngly enhncs bty,
as if imprtng sm spcl vrt of its own, as in mrbls,
jpncs, and prls; and thgh vrs ntns hv in sm wy
rcgnsd a crtn ryl prmnnc in ths h; evn th brbrc,
grnd old kngs of Pg plcng th ttl “Lrd of th Wht Elphnts”
abv all thr othr mgnlqnt ascrptns of dmnn; and th
mdrn kngs of Sm unfrlng th sm snw-wht qdrpd in th
ryl stndrd; and th Hnvrn flg brng th on fgr of a
snw-wht chrgr; and th grt Astrn Empr, Cæsrn, hr t
ovrlrdng Rm, hvng fr th imprl clr th sm imprl h;
and thgh ths pr-emnnc in it appls t th hmn rc itslf,
gvng th wht mn idl mstrshp ovr evry dsky trb; and
thgh, bsds, all ths, whtnss hs bn evn md sgnfcnt of
gldnss, fr amng th Rmns a wht stn mrkd a jyfl dy; and
thgh in othr mrtl sympths and symblzngs, ths sm h is
md th emblm of mny tchng, nbl thngs—th inncnc of brds,
th bngnty of ag; thgh amng th Rd Mn of Amrc th gvng of
th wht blt of wmpm ws th dpst pldg of hnr; thgh in
mny clms, whtnss typfs th mjsty of Jstc in th ermn of
th Jdg, and cntrbts t th dly stt of kngs and qns drwn
by mlk-wht stds; thgh evn in th hghr mystrs of th mst
agst rlgns it hs bn md th symbl of th dvn sptlssnss
and pwr; by th Prsn fr wrshpprs, th wht frkd flm
bng hld th hlst on th altr; and in th Grk mythlgs,
Grt Jv hmslf bng md incrnt in a snw-wht bll; and
thgh t th nbl Irqs, th mdwntr scrfc of th scrd
Wht Dg ws by fr th hlst fstvl of thr thlgy, tht
sptlss, fthfl crtr bng hld th prst envy thy cld snd
t th Grt Sprt wth th annl tdngs of thr own fdlty; and
thgh drctly frm th Ltn wrd fr wht, all Chrstn prsts
drv th nm of on prt of thr scrd vstr, th alb or tnc,
wrn bnth th cssck; and thgh amng th hly pmps of th Rmsh
fth, wht is spclly emplyd in th clbrtn of th Pssn of
or Lrd; thgh in th Vsn of St. Jhn, wht rbs ar gvn t
th rdmd, and th fr-and-twnty eldrs stnd clthd in wht
bfr th grt wht thrn, and th Hly On tht sttth thr
wht lk wl; yt fr all ths accmltd assctns, wth
whtvr is swt, and hnrbl, and sblm, thr yt lrks an
elsv smthng in th innrmst id of ths h, whch strks mr
of pnc t th sl thn tht rdnss whch affrghts in bld.

Ths elsv qlty it is, whch css th thght of whtnss, whn
dvrcd frm mr kndly assctns, and cpld wth any objct
trrbl in itslf, t hghtn tht trrr t th frthst bnds.
Wtnss th wht br of th pls, and th wht shrk of th
trpcs; wht bt thr smth, flky whtnss mks thm th
trnscndnt hrrrs thy ar? Tht ghstly whtnss it is whch
imprts sch an abhrrnt mldnss, evn mr lthsm thn trrfc,
t th dmb gltng of thr aspct. S tht nt th frc-fngd
tgr in hs hrldc ct cn s stggr crg as th wht-shrdd
br or shrk.*

*Wth rfrnc t th Plr br, it my pssbly b urgd by hm wh
wld fn g stll dpr int ths mttr, tht it is nt th
whtnss, sprtly rgrdd, whch hghtns th intlrbl
hdsnss of tht brt; fr, anlysd, tht hghtnd hdsnss,
it mght b sd, only rss frm th crcmstnc, tht th
irrspnsbl frcsnss of th crtr stnds invstd in th
flc of clstl inncnc and lv; and hnc, by brngng tgthr
tw sch oppst emtns in or mnds, th Plr br frghtns us
wth s unntrl a cntrst. Bt evn assmng all ths t b tr;
yt, wr it nt fr th whtnss, y wld nt hv tht intnsfd
trrr.

As fr th wht shrk, th wht gldng ghstlnss of rps in tht
crtr, whn bhld in hs ordnry mds, strngly tlls wth th
sm qlty in th Plr qdrpd. Ths pclrty is mst vvdly
ht by th Frnch in th nm thy bstw upn tht fsh. Th Rmsh
mss fr th dd bgns wth “Rqm etrnm” (etrnl rst), whnc
_Rqm_ dnmntng th mss itslf, and any othr fnrl msc.
Nw, in allsn t th wht, slnt stllnss of dth in ths shrk,
and th mld ddlnss of hs hbts, th Frnch cll hm _Rqn_.

Bthnk th of th albtrss, whnc cm ths clds of sprtl
wndrmnt and pl drd, in whch tht wht phntm sls in all
imgntns? Nt Clrdg frst thrw tht spll; bt Gd’s grt,
unflttrng lrt, Ntr.*

*I rmmbr th frst albtrss I evr sw. It ws drng a prlngd
gl, in wtrs hrd upn th Antrctc ss. Frm my frnn wtch
blw, I ascndd t th ovrcldd dck; and thr, dshd upn th
mn htchs, I sw a rgl, fthry thng of unspttd whtnss, and
wth a hkd, Rmn bll sblm. At intrvls, it archd frth its
vst archngl wngs, as if t embrc sm hly ark. Wndrs
flttrngs and thrbbngs shk it. Thgh bdly unhrmd, it uttrd
crs, as sm kng’s ghst in sprntrl dstrss. Thrgh its
inxprssbl, strng eys, mthght I ppd t scrts whch tk
hld of Gd. As Abrhm bfr th angls, I bwd myslf; th wht
thng ws s wht, its wngs s wd, and in ths fr evr exld
wtrs, I hd lst th msrbl wrpng mmrs of trdtns and of
twns. Lng I gzd at tht prdgy of plmg. I cnnt tll, cn only
hnt, th thngs tht drtd thrgh m thn. Bt at lst I awk; and
trnng, askd a slr wht brd ws ths. A gny, h rpld. Gny!
nvr hd hrd tht nm bfr; is it cncvbl tht ths glrs
thng is uttrly unknwn t mn ashr! nvr! Bt sm tm aftr, I
lrnd tht gny ws sm smn’s nm fr albtrss. S tht by n
pssblty cld Clrdg’s wld Rhym hv hd aght t d wth
ths mystcl imprssns whch wr mn, whn I sw tht brd upn
or dck. Fr nthr hd I thn rd th Rhym, nr knw th brd t
b an albtrss. Yt, in syng ths, I d bt indrctly brnsh a
lttl brghtr th nbl mrt of th pm and th pt.

I assrt, thn, tht in th wndrs bdly whtnss of th brd
chfly lrks th scrt of th spll; a trth th mr evncd in
ths, tht by a slcsm of trms thr ar brds clld gry
albtrsss; and ths I hv frqntly sn, bt nvr wth sch
emtns as whn I bhld th Antrctc fwl.

Bt hw hd th mystc thng bn cght? Whspr it nt, and I wll
tll; wth a trchrs hk and ln, as th fwl fltd on th s.
At lst th Cptn md a pstmn of it; tyng a lttrd, lthrn
tlly rnd its nck, wth th shp’s tm and plc; and thn lttng
it escp. Bt I dbt nt, tht lthrn tlly, mnt fr mn, ws
tkn off in Hvn, whn th wht fwl flw t jn th wng-fldng,
th invkng, and adrng chrbm!

Mst fms in or Wstrn annls and Indn trdtns is tht of th
Wht Std of th Prrs; a mgnfcnt mlk-wht chrgr,
lrg-eyd, smll-hdd, blff-chstd, and wth th dgnty of a
thsnd mnrchs in hs lfty, ovrscrnng crrg. H ws th
elctd Xrxs of vst hrds of wld hrss, whs pstrs in ths
dys wr only fncd by th Rcky Mntns and th Allghns. At
thr flmng hd h wstwrd trpd it lk tht chsn str whch
evry evnng lds on th hsts of lght. Th flshng cscd of hs
mn, th crvng cmt of hs tl, invstd hm wth hsngs mr
rsplndnt thn gld and slvr-btrs cld hv frnshd hm. A
mst imprl and archnglcl apprtn of tht unflln, wstrn
wrld, whch t th eys of th old trpprs and hntrs rvvd th
glrs of ths prmvl tms whn Adm wlkd mjstc as a gd,
blff-brwd and frlss as ths mghty std. Whthr mrchng amd
hs ads and mrshls in th vn of cntlss chrts tht endlssly
strmd it ovr th plns, lk an Oh; or whthr wth hs
crcmmbnt sbjcts brwsng all arnd at th hrzn, th Wht
Std gllpngly rvwd thm wth wrm nstrls rddnng thrgh
hs cl mlknss; in whtvr aspct h prsntd hmslf, alwys t
th brvst Indns h ws th objct of trmblng rvrnc and aw.
Nr cn it b qstnd frm wht stnds on lgndry rcrd of ths
nbl hrs, tht it ws hs sprtl whtnss chfly, whch s
clthd hm wth dvnnss; and tht ths dvnnss hd tht in it
whch, thgh cmmndng wrshp, at th sm tm enfrcd a crtn
nmlss trrr.

Bt thr ar othr instncs whr ths whtnss lss all tht
accssry and strng glry whch invsts it in th Wht Std and
Albtrss.

Wht is it tht in th Albn mn s pclrly rpls and oftn shcks
th ey, as tht smtms h is lthd by hs own kth and kn! It is
tht whtnss whch invsts hm, a thng exprssd by th nm h
brs. Th Albn is as wll md as othr mn—hs n sbstntv
dfrmty—and yt ths mr aspct of all-prvdng whtnss mks hm
mr strngly hds thn th uglst abrtn. Why shld ths b
s?

Nr, in qt othr aspcts, ds Ntr in hr lst plpbl bt nt
th lss mlcs agncs, fl t enlst amng hr frcs ths
crwnng attrbt of th trrbl. Frm its snwy aspct, th
gntltd ghst of th Sthrn Ss hs bn dnmntd th Wht
Sqll. Nr, in sm hstrc instncs, hs th art of hmn mlc
omttd s ptnt an axlry. Hw wldly it hghtns th effct of
tht pssg in Frssrt, whn, mskd in th snwy symbl of thr
fctn, th dsprt Wht Hds of Ghnt mrdr thr blff in th
mrkt-plc!

Nr, in sm thngs, ds th cmmn, hrdtry exprnc of all
mnknd fl t br wtnss t th sprntrlsm of ths h. It
cnnt wll b dbtd, tht th on vsbl qlty in th aspct of
th dd whch mst appls th gzr, is th mrbl pllr lngrng
thr; as if indd tht pllr wr as mch lk th bdg of
cnstrntn in th othr wrld, as of mrtl trpdtn hr. And
frm tht pllr of th dd, w brrw th exprssv h of th
shrd in whch w wrp thm. Nr evn in or sprsttns d w fl
t thrw th sm snwy mntl rnd or phntms; all ghsts rsng in
a mlk-wht fg—Y, whl ths trrrs sz us, lt us add, tht
evn th kng of trrrs, whn prsnfd by th evnglst, rds on
hs plld hrs.

Thrfr, in hs othr mds, symblz whtvr grnd or grcs
thng h wll by whtnss, n mn cn dny tht in its prfndst
idlzd sgnfcnc it clls up a pclr apprtn t th sl.

Bt thgh wtht dssnt ths pnt b fxd, hw is mrtl mn t
accnt fr it? T anlys it, wld sm impssbl. Cn w, thn, by
th cttn of sm of ths instncs whrn ths thng of
whtnss—thgh fr th tm ethr whlly or in grt prt strppd
of all drct assctns clcltd t imprt t it aght frfl,
bt nvrthlss, is fnd t exrt ovr us th sm srcry, hwvr
mdfd;—cn w ths hp t lght upn sm chnc cl t cndct us
t th hddn cs w sk?

Lt us try. Bt in a mttr lk ths, sbtlty appls t sbtlty,
and wtht imgntn n mn cn fllw anthr int ths hlls. And
thgh, dbtlss, sm at lst of th imgntv imprssns abt
t b prsntd my hv bn shrd by mst mn, yt fw prhps wr
entrly cnscs of thm at th tm, and thrfr my nt b abl
t rcll thm nw.

Why t th mn of unttrd idlty, wh hppns t b bt lsly
acqntd wth th pclr chrctr of th dy, ds th br
mntn of Whtsntd mrshl in th fncy sch lng, drry,
spchlss prcssns of slw-pcng plgrms, dwn-cst and hdd
wth nw-flln snw? Or, t th unrd, unsphstctd Prtstnt of
th Mddl Amrcn Stts, why ds th pssng mntn of a Wht
Frr or a Wht Nn, evk sch an eylss stt in th sl?

Or wht is thr aprt frm th trdtns of dngnd wrrrs and
kngs (whch wll nt whlly accnt fr it) tht mks th Wht Twr
of Lndn tll s mch mr strngly on th imgntn of an
untrvlld Amrcn, thn ths othr strd strctrs, its
nghbrs—th Bywrd Twr, or evn th Bldy? And ths sblmr
twrs, th Wht Mntns of Nw Hmpshr, whnc, in pclr
mds, cms tht ggntc ghstlnss ovr th sl at th br
mntn of tht nm, whl th thght of Vrgn’s Bl Rdg is
fll of a sft, dwy, dstnt drmnss? Or why, irrspctv of all
lttds and lngtds, ds th nm of th Wht S exrt sch a
spctrlnss ovr th fncy, whl tht of th Yllw S llls us wth
mrtl thghts of lng lcqrd mld aftrnns on th wvs,
fllwd by th gdst and yt slpst of snsts? Or, t chs a
whlly unsbstntl instnc, prly addrssd t th fncy, why, in
rdng th old fry tls of Cntrl Erp, ds “th tll pl mn”
of th Hrtz frsts, whs chnglss pllr unrstlngly glds
thrgh th grn of th grvs—why is ths phntm mr trrbl thn
all th whpng imps of th Blcksbrg?

Nr is it, altgthr, th rmmbrnc of hr cthdrl-tpplng
erthqks; nr th stmpds of hr frntc ss; nr th
trlssnss of ard sks tht nvr rn; nr th sght of hr wd
fld of lnng sprs, wrnchd cp-stns, and crsss all adrp
(lk cntd yrds of anchrd flts); and hr sbrbn avns of
hs-wlls lyng ovr upn ech othr, as a tssd pck of crds;—it
is nt ths thngs aln whch mk trlss Lm, th strngst,
sddst cty th cn’st s. Fr Lm hs tkn th wht vl; and
thr is a hghr hrrr in ths whtnss of hr w. Old as Pzrr,
ths whtnss kps hr rns fr evr nw; admts nt th chrfl
grnnss of cmplt dcy; sprds ovr hr brkn rmprts th rgd
pllr of an applxy tht fxs its own dstrtns.

I knw tht, t th cmmn apprhnsn, ths phnmnn of whtnss
is nt cnfssd t b th prm agnt in exggrtng th trrr of
objcts othrws trrbl; nr t th unmgntv mnd is thr
aght of trrr in ths apprncs whs awflnss t anthr mnd
almst slly cnssts in ths on phnmnn, espclly whn
exhbtd undr any frm at all apprchng t mtnss or
unvrslty. Wht I mn by ths tw sttmnts my prhps b
rspctvly elcdtd by th fllwng exmpls.

Frst: Th mrnr, whn drwng ngh th csts of frgn lnds, if
by nght h hr th rr of brkrs, strts t vglnc, and fls
jst engh of trpdtn t shrpn all hs fclts; bt undr
prcsly smlr crcmstncs, lt hm b clld frm hs hmmck t
vw hs shp slng thrgh a mdnght s of mlky whtnss—as if
frm encrclng hdlnds shls of cmbd wht brs wr swmmng
rnd hm, thn h fls a slnt, sprstts drd; th shrdd
phntm of th whtnd wtrs is hrrbl t hm as a rl ghst; in
vn th ld assrs hm h is stll off sndngs; hrt and hlm
thy bth g dwn; h nvr rsts tll bl wtr is undr hm agn.
Yt whr is th mrnr wh wll tll th, “Sr, it ws nt s mch
th fr of strkng hddn rcks, as th fr of tht hds
whtnss tht s strrd m?”

Scnd: T th ntv Indn of Pr, th cntnl sght of th
snw-hwdhd Ands cnvys nght of drd, excpt, prhps, in th
mr fncyng of th etrnl frstd dsltnss rgnng at sch vst
alttds, and th ntrl cnct of wht a frflnss it wld b t
ls onslf in sch inhmn sltds. Mch th sm is it wth th
bckwdsmn of th Wst, wh wth cmprtv indffrnc vws an
unbndd prr shtd wth drvn snw, n shdw of tr or twg
t brk th fxd trnc of whtnss. Nt s th slr, bhldng
th scnry of th Antrctc ss; whr at tms, by sm infrnl
trck of lgrdmn in th pwrs of frst and ar, h, shvrng and
hlf shpwrckd, instd of rnbws spkng hp and slc t hs
msry, vws wht sms a bndlss chrchyrd grnnng upn hm wth
its ln ic mnmnts and splntrd crsss.

Bt th syst, mthnks tht wht-ld chptr abt whtnss is
bt a wht flg hng ot frm a crvn sl; th srrndrst t a
hyp, Ishml.

Tll m, why ths strng yng clt, fld in sm pcfl vlly of
Vrmnt, fr rmvd frm all bsts of pry—why is it tht upn th
snnst dy, if y bt shk a frsh bffl rb bhnd hm, s tht
h cnnt evn s it, bt only smlls its wld anml msknss—why
wll h strt, snrt, and wth brstng eys pw th grnd in
phrnss of affrght? Thr is n rmmbrnc in hm of any grngs of
wld crtrs in hs grn nrthrn hm, s tht th strng
msknss h smlls cnnt rcll t hm anythng assctd wth th
exprnc of frmr prls; fr wht knws h, ths Nw Englnd clt,
of th blck bsns of dstnt Orgn?

N: bt hr th bhldst evn in a dmb brt, th instnct of th
knwldg of th dmnsm in th wrld. Thgh thsnds of mls frm
Orgn, stll whn h smlls tht svg msk, th rndng, grng
bsn hrds ar as prsnt as t th dsrtd wld fl of th
prrs, whch ths instnt thy my b trmplng int dst.

Ths, thn, th mffld rllngs of a mlky s; th blk rstlngs of
th fstnd frsts of mntns; th dslt shftngs of th
wndrwd snws of prrs; all ths, t Ishml, ar as th shkng
of tht bffl rb t th frghtnd clt!

Thgh nthr knws whr l th nmlss thngs of whch th mystc
sgn gvs frth sch hnts; yt wth m, as wth th clt, smwhr
ths thngs mst exst. Thgh in mny of its aspcts ths vsbl
wrld sms frmd in lv, th invsbl sphrs wr frmd in
frght.

Bt nt yt hv w slvd th incnttn of ths whtnss, and
lrnd why it appls wth sch pwr t th sl; and mr strng
and fr mr prtnts—why, as w hv sn, it is at onc th mst
mnng symbl of sprtl thngs, ny, th vry vl of th
Chrstn’s Dty; and yt shld b as it is, th intnsfyng agnt
in thngs th mst appllng t mnknd.

Is it tht by its indfntnss it shdws frth th hrtlss vds
and immnsts of th unvrs, and ths stbs us frm bhnd wth th
thght of annhltn, whn bhldng th wht dpths of th mlky
wy? Or is it, tht as in essnc whtnss is nt s mch a clr as
th vsbl absnc of clr; and at th sm tm th cncrt of all
clrs; is it fr ths rsns tht thr is sch a dmb blnknss,
fll of mnng, in a wd lndscp of snws—a clrlss, all-clr
of athsm frm whch w shrnk? And whn w cnsdr tht othr thry
of th ntrl phlsphrs, tht all othr erthly hs—evry sttly
or lvly emblznng—th swt tngs of snst sks and wds; y,
and th gldd vlvts of bttrfls, and th bttrfly chks of
yng grls; all ths ar bt sbtl dcts, nt actlly inhrnt
in sbstncs, bt only ld on frm wtht; s tht all dfd
Ntr absltly pnts lk th hrlt, whs allrmnts cvr
nthng bt th chrnl-hs wthn; and whn w prcd frthr, and
cnsdr tht th mystcl csmtc whch prdcs evry on of hr
hs, th grt prncpl of lght, fr evr rmns wht or clrlss
in itslf, and if oprtng wtht mdm upn mttr, wld tch all
objcts, evn tlps and rss, wth its own blnk tng—pndrng all
ths, th plsd unvrs ls bfr us a lpr; and lk wlfl
trvllrs in Lplnd, wh rfs t wr clrd and clrng
glsss upn thr eys, s th wrtchd infdl gzs hmslf blnd at
th mnmntl wht shrd tht wrps all th prspct arnd hm. And
of all ths thngs th Albn whl ws th symbl. Wndr y thn at
th fry hnt?


CHPTR 43. Hrk!

“HST! Dd y hr tht ns, Cbc?”

It ws th mddl-wtch: a fr mnlght; th smn wr stndng in
a crdn, extndng frm on of th frsh-wtr btts in th wst, t
th scttl-btt nr th tffrl. In ths mnnr, thy pssd th
bckts t fll th scttl-btt. Stndng, fr th mst prt, on th
hllwd prcncts of th qrtr-dck, thy wr crfl nt t spk
or rstl thr ft. Frm hnd t hnd, th bckts wnt in th
dpst slnc, only brkn by th occsnl flp of a sl, and th
stdy hm of th uncsngly advncng kl.

It ws in th mdst of ths rps, tht Archy, on of th crdn,
whs pst ws nr th aftr-htchs, whsprd t hs nghbr, a
Chl, th wrds abv.

“Hst! dd y hr tht ns, Cbc?”

“Tk th bckt, wll y, Archy? wht ns d’y mn?”

“Thr it is agn—undr th htchs—dn’t y hr it—a cgh—it
sndd lk a cgh.”

“Cgh b dmnd! Pss alng tht rtrn bckt.”

“Thr agn—thr it is!—it snds lk tw or thr slprs trnng
ovr, nw!”

“Crmb! hv dn, shpmt, wll y? It’s th thr skd bscts
y et fr sppr trnng ovr insd of y—nthng els. Lk t th
bckt!”

“Sy wht y wll, shpmt; I’v shrp ers.”

“Ay, y ar th chp, an’t y, tht hrd th hm of th old
Qkrss’s knttng-ndls ffty mls at s frm Nntckt; y’r
th chp.”

“Grn awy; w’ll s wht trns up. Hrk y, Cbc, thr is smbdy
dwn in th aftr-hld tht hs nt yt bn sn on dck; and I
sspct or old Mgl knws smthng of it t. I hrd Stbb tll
Flsk, on mrnng wtch, tht thr ws smthng of tht srt in th
wnd.”

“Tsh! th bckt!”


CHPTR 44. Th Chrt.

Hd y fllwd Cptn Ahb dwn int hs cbn aftr th sqll tht
tk plc on th nght sccdng tht wld rtfctn of hs
prps wth hs crw, y wld hv sn hm g t a lckr in th
trnsm, and brngng ot a lrg wrnkld rll of yllwsh s
chrts, sprd thm bfr hm on hs scrwd-dwn tbl. Thn stng
hmslf bfr it, y wld hv sn hm intntly stdy th vrs
lns and shdngs whch thr mt hs ey; and wth slw bt stdy
pncl trc addtnl crss ovr spcs tht bfr wr blnk. At
intrvls, h wld rfr t pls of old lg-bks bsd hm, whrn
wr st dwn th ssns and plcs in whch, on vrs frmr
vygs of vrs shps, sprm whls hd bn cptrd or sn.

Whl ths emplyd, th hvy pwtr lmp sspndd in chns ovr hs
hd, cntnlly rckd wth th mtn of th shp, and fr evr
thrw shftng glms and shdws of lns upn hs wrnkld brw, tll
it almst smd tht whl h hmslf ws mrkng ot lns and
crss on th wrnkld chrts, sm invsbl pncl ws als trcng
lns and crss upn th dply mrkd chrt of hs frhd.

Bt it ws nt ths nght in prtclr tht, in th sltd of hs
cbn, Ahb ths pndrd ovr hs chrts. Almst evry nght thy wr
brght ot; almst evry nght sm pncl mrks wr effcd, and
othrs wr sbstttd. Fr wth th chrts of all fr ocns bfr
hm, Ahb ws thrdng a mz of crrnts and edds, wth a vw t
th mr crtn accmplshmnt of tht mnmnc thght of hs sl.

Nw, t any on nt flly acqntd wth th wys of th lvthns,
it mght sm an absrdly hplss tsk ths t sk ot on sltry
crtr in th unhpd ocns of ths plnt. Bt nt s dd it sm
t Ahb, wh knw th sts of all tds and crrnts; and thrby
clcltng th drftngs of th sprm whl’s fd; and, als, cllng
t mnd th rglr, ascrtnd ssns fr hntng hm in prtclr
lttds; cld arrv at rsnbl srmss, almst apprchng t
crtnts, cncrnng th tmlst dy t b upn ths or tht
grnd in srch of hs pry.

S assrd, indd, is th fct cncrnng th prdclnss of th
sprm whl’s rsrtng t gvn wtrs, tht mny hntrs blv
tht, cld h b clsly obsrvd and stdd thrght th wrld;
wr th lgs fr on vyg of th entr whl flt crflly
clltd, thn th mgrtns of th sprm whl wld b fnd t
crrspnd in invrblty t ths of th hrrng-shls or th
flghts of swllws. On ths hnt, attmpts hv bn md t cnstrct
elbrt mgrtry chrts of th sprm whl.*


  *Snc th abv ws wrttn, th sttmnt is hpply brn ot by
  an offcl crclr, issd by Ltnnt Mry, of th Ntnl
  Obsrvtry, Wshngtn, Aprl 16th, 1851. By tht crclr, it
  apprs tht prcsly sch a chrt is in crs of cmpltn; and
  prtns of it ar prsntd in th crclr. “Ths chrt dvds th
  ocn int dstrcts of fv dgrs of lttd by fv dgrs of
  lngtd; prpndclrly thrgh ech of whch dstrcts ar twlv
  clmns fr th twlv mnths; and hrzntlly thrgh ech of whch
  dstrcts ar thr lns; on t shw th nmbr of dys tht hv
  bn spnt in ech mnth in evry dstrct, and th tw othrs t
  shw th nmbr of dys in whch whls, sprm or rght, hv bn
  sn.”




Bsds, whn mkng a pssg frm on fdng-grnd t anthr, th
sprm whls, gdd by sm infllbl instnct—sy, rthr, scrt
intllgnc frm th Dty—mstly swm in _vns_, as thy ar clld;
cntnng thr wy alng a gvn ocn-ln wth sch undvtng
excttd, tht n shp evr sld hr crs, by any chrt, wth on
tth of sch mrvlls prcsn. Thgh, in ths css, th
drctn tkn by any on whl b strght as a srvyr’s prlll,
and thgh th ln of advnc b strctly cnfnd t its own
unvdbl, strght wk, yt th arbtrry _vn_ in whch at ths
tms h is sd t swm, gnrlly embrcs sm fw mls in wdth
(mr or lss, as th vn is prsmd t expnd or cntrct); bt
nvr excds th vsl swp frm th whl-shp’s mst-hds, whn
crcmspctly gldng alng ths mgc zn. Th sm is, tht at
prtclr ssns wthn tht brdth and alng tht pth, mgrtng
whls my wth grt cnfdnc b lkd fr.

And hnc nt only at sbstnttd tms, upn wll knwn sprt
fdng-grnds, cld Ahb hp t encntr hs pry; bt in crssng
th wdst expnss of wtr btwn ths grnds h cld, by hs
art, s plc and tm hmslf on hs wy, as evn thn nt t b
whlly wtht prspct of a mtng.

Thr ws a crcmstnc whch at frst sght smd t entngl hs
dlrs bt stll mthdcl schm. Bt nt s in th rlty,
prhps. Thgh th grgrs sprm whls hv thr rglr ssns
fr prtclr grnds, yt in gnrl y cnnt cncld tht th
hrds whch hntd sch and sch a lttd or lngtd ths yr,
sy, wll trn ot t b idntclly th sm wth ths tht wr
fnd thr th prcdng ssn; thgh thr ar pclr and
unqstnbl instncs whr th cntrry of ths hs prvd tr. In
gnrl, th sm rmrk, only wthn a lss wd lmt, appls t th
sltrs and hrmts amng th mtrd, agd sprm whls. S tht
thgh Mby Dck hd in a frmr yr bn sn, fr exmpl, on wht
is clld th Sychll grnd in th Indn ocn, or Vlcn By on
th Jpns Cst; yt it dd nt fllw, tht wr th Pqd t
vst ethr of ths spts at any sbsqnt crrspndng ssn, sh
wld infllbly encntr hm thr. S, t, wth sm othr fdng
grnds, whr h hd at tms rvld hmslf. Bt all ths smd
only hs csl stppng-plcs and ocn-inns, s t spk, nt hs
plcs of prlngd abd. And whr Ahb’s chncs of accmplshng
hs objct hv hthrt bn spkn of, allsn hs only bn md t
whtvr wy-sd, antcdnt, extr prspcts wr hs, er a
prtclr st tm or plc wr attnd, whn all pssblts
wld bcm prbblts, and, as Ahb fndly thght, evry
pssblty th nxt thng t a crtnty. Tht prtclr st tm and
plc wr cnjnd in th on tchncl phrs—th
Ssn-on-th-Ln. Fr thr and thn, fr svrl cnsctv yrs,
Mby Dck hd bn prdclly dscrd, lngrng in ths wtrs fr
awhl, as th sn, in its annl rnd, ltrs fr a prdctd
intrvl in any on sgn of th Zdc. Thr it ws, t, tht mst of
th ddly encntrs wth th wht whl hd tkn plc; thr th
wvs wr strd wth hs dds; thr als ws tht trgc spt
whr th mnmnc old mn hd fnd th awfl mtv t hs
vngnc. Bt in th cts cmprhnsvnss and unltrng
vglnc wth whch Ahb thrw hs brdng sl int ths unfltrng
hnt, h wld nt prmt hmslf t rst all hs hps upn th on
crwnng fct abv mntnd, hwvr flttrng it mght b t ths
hps; nr in th slplssnss of hs vw cld h s trnqllz hs
unqt hrt as t pstpn all intrvnng qst.

Nw, th Pqd hd sld frm Nntckt at th vry bgnnng of th
Ssn-on-th-Ln. N pssbl endvr thn cld enbl hr
cmmndr t mk th grt pssg sthwrds, dbl Cp Hrn, and
thn rnnng dwn sxty dgrs of lttd arrv in th eqtrl
Pcfc in tm t crs thr. Thrfr, h mst wt fr th nxt
ensng ssn. Yt th prmtr hr of th Pqd’s slng hd,
prhps, bn crrctly slctd by Ahb, wth a vw t ths vry
cmplxn of thngs. Bcs, an intrvl of thr hndrd and
sxty-fv dys and nghts ws bfr hm; an intrvl whch, instd
of imptntly endrng ashr, h wld spnd in a mscllns hnt;
if by chnc th Wht Whl, spndng hs vctn in ss fr rmt
frm hs prdcl fdng-grnds, shld trn up hs wrnkld brw
off th Prsn Glf, or in th Bngl By, or Chn Ss, or in any
othr wtrs hntd by hs rc. S tht Mnsns, Pmps,
Nr’-Wstrs, Hrmttns, Trds; any wnd bt th Lvntr and Smn,
mght blw Mby Dck int th dvs zg-zg wrld-crcl of th
Pqd’s crcmnvgtng wk.

Bt grntng all ths; yt, rgrdd dscrtly and clly, sms it
nt bt a md id, ths; tht in th brd bndlss ocn, on
sltry whl, evn if encntrd, shld b thght cpbl of
indvdl rcgntn frm hs hntr, evn as a wht-brdd Mft
in th thrngd thrghfrs of Cnstntnpl? Ys. Fr th pclr
snw-wht brw of Mby Dck, and hs snw-wht hmp, cld nt bt b
unmstkbl. And hv I nt tlld th whl, Ahb wld mttr t
hmslf, as aftr prng ovr hs chrts tll lng aftr mdnght h
wld thrw hmslf bck in rvrs—tlld hm, and shll h escp?
Hs brd fns ar brd, and scllpd ot lk a lst shp’s er!
And hr, hs md mnd wld rn on in a brthlss rc; tll a
wrnss and fntnss of pndrng cm ovr hm; and in th opn ar
of th dck h wld sk t rcvr hs strngth. Ah, Gd! wht
trncs of trmnts ds tht mn endr wh is cnsmd wth on
unchvd rvngfl dsr. H slps wth clnchd hnds; and wks
wth hs own bldy nls in hs plms.

Oftn, whn frcd frm hs hmmck by exhstng and intlrbly vvd
drms of th nght, whch, rsmng hs own intns thghts thrgh
th dy, crrd thm on amd a clshng of phrnss, and whrld thm
rnd and rnd and rnd in hs blzng brn, tll th vry thrbbng
of hs lf-spt bcm insffrbl angsh; and whn, as ws
smtms th cs, ths sprtl thrs in hm hvd hs bng up
frm its bs, and a chsm smd opnng in hm, frm whch frkd
flms and lghtnngs sht up, and accrsd fnds bcknd hm t lp
dwn amng thm; whn ths hll in hmslf ywnd bnth hm, a wld
cry wld b hrd thrgh th shp; and wth glrng eys Ahb wld
brst frm hs stt rm, as thgh escpng frm a bd tht ws on
fr. Yt ths, prhps, instd of bng th unspprssbl symptms
of sm ltnt wknss, or frght at hs own rslv, wr bt th
plnst tkns of its intnsty. Fr, at sch tms, crzy Ahb, th
schmng, unppsdly stdfst hntr of th wht whl; ths Ahb
tht hd gn t hs hmmck, ws nt th agnt tht s csd hm t
brst frm it in hrrr agn. Th lttr ws th etrnl, lvng
prncpl or sl in hm; and in slp, bng fr th tm dssctd
frm th chrctrzng mnd, whch at othr tms emplyd it fr its
otr vhcl or agnt, it spntnsly sght escp frm th
scrchng cntgty of th frntc thng, of whch, fr th tm, it
ws n lngr an intgrl. Bt as th mnd ds nt exst unlss
lgd wth th sl, thrfr it mst hv bn tht, in Ahb’s
cs, yldng up all hs thghts and fncs t hs on sprm
prps; tht prps, by its own shr invtrcy of wll, frcd
itslf agnst gds and dvls int a knd of slf-assmd, indpndnt
bng of its own. Ny, cld grmly lv and brn, whl th cmmn
vtlty t whch it ws cnjnd, fld hrrr-strckn frm th
unbddn and unfthrd brth. Thrfr, th trmntd sprt tht
glrd ot of bdly eys, whn wht smd Ahb rshd frm hs rm,
ws fr th tm bt a vctd thng, a frmlss smnmblstc bng,
a ry of lvng lght, t b sr, bt wtht an objct t clr, and
thrfr a blnknss in itslf. Gd hlp th, old mn, thy thghts
hv crtd a crtr in th; and h whs intns thnkng ths
mks hm a Prmths; a vltr fds upn tht hrt fr evr; tht
vltr th vry crtr h crts.


CHPTR 45. Th Affdvt.

S fr as wht thr my b of a nrrtv in ths bk; and, indd,
as indrctly tchng on or tw vry intrstng and crs
prtclrs in th hbts of sprm whls, th frgng chptr, in
its erlr prt, is as imprtnt a on as wll b fnd in ths
vlm; bt th ldng mttr of it rqrs t b stll frthr and
mr fmlrly enlrgd upn, in ordr t b adqtly undrstd,
and mrvr t tk awy any incrdlty whch a prfnd ignrnc of
th entr sbjct my indc in sm mnds, as t th ntrl vrty
of th mn pnts of ths affr.

I cr nt t prfrm ths prt of my tsk mthdclly; bt shll b
cntnt t prdc th dsrd imprssn by sprt cttns of
itms, prctclly or rlbly knwn t m as a whlmn; and frm
ths cttns, I tk it—th cnclsn amd at wll ntrlly
fllw of itslf.

Frst: I hv prsnlly knwn thr instncs whr a whl, aftr
rcvng a hrpn, hs effctd a cmplt escp; and, aftr an
intrvl (in on instnc of thr yrs), hs bn agn strck by th
sm hnd, and sln; whn th tw irns, bth mrkd by th sm
prvt cyphr, hv bn tkn frm th bdy. In th instnc whr
thr yrs intrvnd btwn th flngng of th tw hrpns; and I
thnk it my hv bn smthng mr thn tht; th mn wh drtd
thm hppnng, in th intrvl, t g in a trdng shp on a vyg t
Afrc, wnt ashr thr, jnd a dscvry prty, and pntrtd fr
int th intrr, whr h trvlld fr a prd of nrly tw yrs,
oftn endngrd by srpnts, svgs, tgrs, psns msms, wth
all th othr cmmn prls incdnt t wndrng in th hrt of
unknwn rgns. Mnwhl, th whl h hd strck mst als hv bn
on its trvls; n dbt it hd thrc crcmnvgtd th glb,
brshng wth its flnks all th csts of Afrc; bt t n prps.
Ths mn and ths whl agn cm tgthr, and th on vnqshd th
othr. I sy I, myslf, hv knwn thr instncs smlr t ths;
tht is in tw of thm I sw th whls strck; and, upn th scnd
attck, sw th tw irns wth th rspctv mrks ct in thm,
aftrwrds tkn frm th dd fsh. In th thr-yr instnc, it s
fll ot tht I ws in th bt bth tms, frst and lst, and th
lst tm dstnctly rcgnsd a pclr srt of hg ml undr th
whl’s ey, whch I hd obsrvd thr thr yrs prvs. I sy
thr yrs, bt I am prtty sr it ws mr thn tht. Hr ar thr
instncs, thn, whch I prsnlly knw th trth of; bt I hv hrd
of mny othr instncs frm prsns whs vrcty in th mttr thr
is n gd grnd t impch.

Scndly: It is wll knwn in th Sprm Whl Fshry, hwvr ignrnt
th wrld ashr my b of it, tht thr hv bn svrl mmrbl
hstrcl instncs whr a prtclr whl in th ocn hs bn at
dstnt tms and plcs pplrly cgnsbl. Why sch a whl bcm
ths mrkd ws nt altgthr and orgnlly owng t hs bdly
pclrts as dstngshd frm othr whls; fr hwvr pclr
in tht rspct any chnc whl my b, thy sn pt an end t hs
pclrts by kllng hm, and blng hm dwn int a pclrly
vlbl ol. N: th rsn ws ths: tht frm th ftl exprncs
of th fshry thr hng a trrbl prstg of prlsnss abt
sch a whl as thr dd abt Rnld Rnldn, insmch tht mst
fshrmn wr cntnt t rcgns hm by mrly tchng thr
trplns whn h wld b dscvrd lngng by thm on th s,
wtht skng t cltvt a mr intmt acqntnc. Lk sm
pr dvls ashr tht hppn t knw an irscbl grt mn, thy
mk dstnt unbtrsv slttns t hm in th strt, lst if thy
prsd th acqntnc frthr, thy mght rcv a smmry thmp
fr thr prsmptn.

Bt nt only dd ech of ths fms whls enjy grt indvdl
clbrty—Ny, y my cll it an ocn-wd rnwn; nt only ws h
fms in lf and nw is immrtl in frcstl strs aftr dth,
bt h ws admttd int all th rghts, prvlgs, and dstnctns
of a nm; hd as mch a nm indd as Cmbyss or Cæsr. Ws it nt
s, O Tmr Tm! th fmd lvthn, scrrd lk an icbrg, wh s
lng dd’st lrk in th Orntl strts of tht nm, whs spt ws
oft sn frm th plmy bch of Omby? Ws it nt s, O Nw Zlnd
Jck! th trrr of all crsrs tht crssd thr wks in th
vcnty of th Ttt Lnd? Ws it nt s, O Mrqn! Kng of Jpn,
whs lfty jt thy sy at tms assmd th smblnc of a snw-wht
crss agnst th sky? Ws it nt s, O Dn Mgl! th Chln whl,
mrkd lk an old trts wth mystc hrglyphcs upn th bck! In
pln prs, hr ar fr whls as wll knwn t th stdnts of
Ctcn Hstry as Mrs or Syll t th clssc schlr.

Bt ths is nt all. Nw Zlnd Tm and Dn Mgl, aftr at vrs
tms crtng grt hvc amng th bts of dffrnt vssls, wr
fnlly gn in qst of, systmtclly hntd ot, chsd and klld
by vlnt whlng cptns, wh hvd up thr anchrs wth tht
exprss objct as mch in vw, as in sttng ot thrgh th
Nrrgnstt Wds, Cptn Btlr of old hd it in hs mnd t cptr
tht ntrs mrdrs svg Annwn, th hdmst wrrr of th
Indn Kng Phlp.

I d nt knw whr I cn fnd a bttr plc thn jst hr, t mk
mntn of on or tw othr thngs, whch t m sm imprtnt, as in
prntd frm estblshng in all rspcts th rsnblnss of th
whl stry of th Wht Whl, mr espclly th ctstrph. Fr
ths is on of ths dshrtnng instncs whr trth rqrs fll
as mch blstrng as errr. S ignrnt ar mst lndsmn of sm of
th plnst and mst plpbl wndrs of th wrld, tht wtht sm
hnts tchng th pln fcts, hstrcl and othrws, of th
fshry, thy mght sct at Mby Dck as a mnstrs fbl, or stll
wrs and mr dtstbl, a hds and intlrbl allgry.

Frst: Thgh mst mn hv sm vg flttng ids of th gnrl
prls of th grnd fshry, yt thy hv nthng lk a fxd, vvd
cncptn of ths prls, and th frqncy wth whch thy rcr.
On rsn prhps is, tht nt on in ffty of th actl dsstrs
and dths by cslts in th fshry, evr fnds a pblc rcrd at
hm, hwvr trnsnt and immdtly frgttn tht rcrd. D y
spps tht tht pr fllw thr, wh ths mmnt prhps cght by
th whl-ln off th cst of Nw Gn, is bng crrd dwn t
th bttm of th s by th sndng lvthn—d y spps tht
tht pr fllw’s nm wll appr in th nwsppr obtry y wll
rd t-mrrw at yr brkfst? N: bcs th mls ar vry
irrglr btwn hr and Nw Gn. In fct, dd y evr hr wht
mght b clld rglr nws drct or indrct frm Nw Gn? Yt I
tll y tht upn on prtclr vyg whch I md t th Pcfc,
amng mny othrs w spk thrty dffrnt shps, evry on of whch
hd hd a dth by a whl, sm of thm mr thn on, and thr tht
hd ech lst a bt’s crw. Fr Gd’s sk, b ecnmcl wth yr
lmps and cndls! nt a glln y brn, bt at lst on drp of
mn’s bld ws splld fr it.

Scndly: Ppl ashr hv indd sm indfnt id tht a whl
is an enrms crtr of enrms pwr; bt I hv evr fnd tht
whn nrrtng t thm sm spcfc exmpl of ths tw-fld
enrmsnss, thy hv sgnfcntly cmplmntd m upn my
fctsnss; whn, I dclr upn my sl, I hd n mr id of
bng fcts thn Mss, whn h wrt th hstry of th plgs of
Egypt.

Bt frtntly th spcl pnt I hr sk cn b estblshd upn
tstmny entrly indpndnt of my own. Tht pnt is ths: Th Sprm
Whl is in sm css sffcntly pwrfl, knwng, and jdcsly
mlcs, as wth drct afrthght t stv in, uttrly dstry,
and snk a lrg shp; and wht is mr, th Sprm Whl _hs_ dn it.

Frst: In th yr 1820 th shp Essx, Cptn Pllrd, of Nntckt,
ws crsng in th Pcfc Ocn. On dy sh sw spts, lwrd hr
bts, and gv chs t a shl of sprm whls. Er lng, svrl of
th whls wr wndd; whn, sddnly, a vry lrg whl escpng
frm th bts, issd frm th shl, and br drctly dwn upn th
shp. Dshng hs frhd agnst hr hll, h s stv hr in, tht
in lss thn “tn mnts” sh sttld dwn and fll ovr. Nt a
srvvng plnk of hr hs bn sn snc. Aftr th svrst
expsr, prt of th crw rchd th lnd in thr bts. Bng
rtrnd hm at lst, Cptn Pllrd onc mr sld fr th Pcfc
in cmmnd of anthr shp, bt th gds shpwrckd hm agn upn
unknwn rcks and brkrs; fr th scnd tm hs shp ws uttrly
lst, and frthwth frswrng th s, h hs nvr tmptd it snc.
At ths dy Cptn Pllrd is a rsdnt of Nntckt. I hv sn
Own Chc, wh ws chf mt of th Essx at th tm of th trgdy;
I hv rd hs pln and fthfl nrrtv; I hv cnvrsd wth hs
sn; and all ths wthn a fw mls of th scn of th ctstrph.*

*Th fllwng ar extrcts frm Chc’s nrrtv: “Evry fct smd
t wrrnt m in cncldng tht it ws anythng bt chnc whch
drctd hs oprtns; h md tw svrl attcks upn th shp, at
a shrt intrvl btwn thm, bth of whch, accrdng t thr
drctn, wr clcltd t d us th mst injry, by bng md
ahd, and thrby cmbnng th spd of th tw objcts fr th
shck; t effct whch, th exct mnœuvrs whch h md wr
ncssry. Hs aspct ws mst hrrbl, and sch as indctd
rsntmnt and fry. H cm drctly frm th shl whch w hd jst
bfr entrd, and in whch w hd strck thr of hs cmpnns, as
if frd wth rvng fr thr sffrngs.” Agn: “At all evnts, th
whl crcmstncs tkn tgthr, all hppnng bfr my own eys,
and prdcng, at th tm, imprssns in my mnd of dcdd,
clcltng mschf, on th prt of th whl (mny of whch
imprssns I cnnt nw rcll), indc m t b stsfd tht I am
crrct in my opnn.”

Hr ar hs rflctns sm tm aftr qttng th shp, drng a
blck nght in an opn bt, whn almst dsprng of rchng any
hsptbl shr. “Th drk ocn and swllng wtrs wr nthng; th
frs of bng swllwd up by sm drdfl tmpst, or dshd upn
hddn rcks, wth all th othr ordnry sbjcts of frfl
cntmpltn, smd scrcly enttld t a mmnt’s thght; th
dsml lkng wrck, and _th hrrd aspct and rvng of th whl_,
whlly engrssd my rflctns, untl dy agn md its apprnc.”

In anthr plc—p. 45,—h spks of “_th mystrs and mrtl attck
of th anml_.”

Scndly: Th shp Unn, als of Nntckt, ws in th yr 1807
ttlly lst off th Azrs by a smlr onst, bt th athntc
prtclrs of ths ctstrph I hv nvr chncd t encntr,
thgh frm th whl hntrs I hv nw and thn hrd csl
allsns t it.

Thrdly: Sm eghtn or twnty yrs ag Cmmdr J——, thn
cmmndng an Amrcn slp-of-wr of th frst clss, hppnd t b
dnng wth a prty of whlng cptns, on brd a Nntckt shp in
th hrbr of Oh, Sndwch Islnds. Cnvrstn trnng upn whls,
th Cmmdr ws plsd t b scptcl tchng th amzng strngth
ascrbd t thm by th prfssnl gntlmn prsnt. H prmptrly
dnd fr exmpl, tht any whl cld s smt hs stt
slp-of-wr as t cs hr t lk s mch as a thmblfl. Vry
gd; bt thr is mr cmng. Sm wks aftr, th Cmmdr st
sl in ths imprgnbl crft fr Vlprs. Bt h ws stppd on
th wy by a prtly sprm whl, tht bggd a fw mmnts’
cnfdntl bsnss wth hm. Tht bsnss cnsstd in ftchng th
Cmmdr’s crft sch a thwck, tht wth all hs pmps gng h md
strght fr th nrst prt t hv dwn and rpr. I am nt
sprstts, bt I cnsdr th Cmmdr’s intrvw wth tht whl
as prvdntl. Ws nt Sl of Trss cnvrtd frm unblf by a
smlr frght? I tll y, th sprm whl wll stnd n nnsns.

I wll nw rfr y t Lngsdrff’s Vygs fr a lttl crcmstnc
in pnt, pclrly intrstng t th wrtr hrf. Lngsdrff, y
mst knw by th wy, ws attchd t th Rssn Admrl Krsnstrn’s
fms Dscvry Expdtn in th bgnnng of th prsnt cntry.
Cptn Lngsdrff ths bgns hs svntnth chptr:

“By th thrtnth of My or shp ws rdy t sl, and th nxt dy
w wr ot in th opn s, on or wy t Ochtsh. Th wthr ws
vry clr and fn, bt s intlrbly cld tht w wr oblgd t
kp on or fr clthng. Fr sm dys w hd vry lttl wnd; it ws
nt tll th nntnth tht a brsk gl frm th nrthwst sprng up.
An uncmmn lrg whl, th bdy of whch ws lrgr thn th shp
itslf, ly almst at th srfc of th wtr, bt ws nt prcvd
by any on on brd tll th mmnt whn th shp, whch ws in fll
sl, ws almst upn hm, s tht it ws impssbl t prvnt its
strkng agnst hm. W wr ths plcd in th mst immnnt dngr,
as ths ggntc crtr, sttng up its bck, rsd th shp thr
ft at lst ot of th wtr. Th msts rld, and th sls fll
altgthr, whl w wh wr blw all sprng instntly upn th dck,
cncldng tht w hd strck upn sm rck; instd of ths w sw
th mnstr slng off wth th utmst grvty and slmnty. Cptn
D’Wlf appld immdtly t th pmps t exmn whthr or nt th
vssl hd rcvd any dmg frm th shck, bt w fnd tht vry
hpply it hd escpd entrly unnjrd.”

Nw, th Cptn D’Wlf hr alldd t as cmmndng th shp in
qstn, is a Nw Englndr, wh, aftr a lng lf of unsl
advntrs as a s-cptn, ths dy rsds in th vllg of
Drchstr nr Bstn. I hv th hnr of bng a nphw of hs. I
hv prtclrly qstnd hm cncrnng ths pssg in Lngsdrff.
H sbstntts evry wrd. Th shp, hwvr, ws by n mns a lrg
on: a Rssn crft blt on th Sbrn cst, and prchsd by my
uncl aftr brtrng awy th vssl in whch h sld frm hm.

In tht up and dwn mnly bk of old-fshnd advntr, s fll,
t, of hnst wndrs—th vyg of Lnl Wfr, on of ancnt
Dmpr’s old chms—I fnd a lttl mttr st dwn s lk tht jst
qtd frm Lngsdrff, tht I cnnt frbr insrtng it hr fr a
crrbrtv exmpl, if sch b ndd.

Lnl, it sms, ws on hs wy t “Jhn Frdnnd,” as h clls th
mdrn Jn Frnnds. “In or wy ththr,” h sys, “abt fr
o’clck in th mrnng, whn w wr abt on hndrd and ffty
lgs frm th Mn of Amrc, or shp flt a trrbl shck, whch
pt or mn in sch cnstrntn tht thy cld hrdly tll whr
thy wr or wht t thnk; bt evry on bgn t prpr fr dth.
And, indd, th shck ws s sddn and vlnt, tht w tk it fr
grntd th shp hd strck agnst a rck; bt whn th amzmnt ws
a lttl ovr, w cst th ld, and sndd, bt fnd n grnd. * *
* * * Th sddnnss of th shck md th gns lp in thr
crrgs, and svrl of th mn wr shkn ot of thr hmmcks.
Cptn Dvs, wh ly wth hs hd on a gn, ws thrwn ot of hs
cbn!” Lnl thn gs on t impt th shck t an erthqk, and
sms t sbstntt th impttn by sttng tht a grt
erthqk, smwhr abt tht tm, dd actlly d grt mschf
alng th Spnsh lnd. Bt I shld nt mch wndr if, in th
drknss of tht erly hr of th mrnng, th shck ws aftr all
csd by an unsn whl vrtclly bmpng th hll frm bnth.

I mght prcd wth svrl mr exmpls, on wy or anthr knwn t
m, of th grt pwr and mlc at tms of th sprm whl. In mr
thn on instnc, h hs bn knwn, nt only t chs th asslng
bts bck t thr shps, bt t prs th shp itslf, and lng
wthstnd all th lncs hrld at hm frm its dcks. Th Englsh shp
Ps Hll cn tll a stry on tht hd; and, as fr hs strngth, lt
m sy, tht thr hv bn exmpls whr th lns attchd t a
rnnng sprm whl hv, in a clm, bn trnsfrrd t th shp, and
scrd thr; th whl twng hr grt hll thrgh th wtr, as a
hrs wlks off wth a crt. Agn, it is vry oftn obsrvd tht, if
th sprm whl, onc strck, is allwd tm t rlly, h thn acts,
nt s oftn wth blnd rg, as wth wlfl, dlbrt dsgns of
dstrctn t hs prsrs; nr is it wtht cnvyng sm elqnt
indctn of hs chrctr, tht upn bng attckd h wll
frqntly opn hs mth, and rtn it in tht drd expnsn fr
svrl cnsctv mnts. Bt I mst b cntnt wth only on mr
and a cncldng illstrtn; a rmrkbl and mst sgnfcnt on,
by whch y wll nt fl t s, tht nt only is th mst mrvlls
evnt in ths bk crrbrtd by pln fcts of th prsnt dy, bt
tht ths mrvls (lk all mrvls) ar mr rpttns of th ags;
s tht fr th mllnth tm w sy amn wth Slmn—Vrly thr is
nthng nw undr th sn.

In th sxth Chrstn cntry lvd Prcps, a Chrstn mgstrt
of Cnstntnpl, in th dys whn Jstnn ws Emprr and
Blsrs gnrl. As mny knw, h wrt th hstry of hs own
tms, a wrk evry wy of uncmmn vl. By th bst athrts, h
hs alwys bn cnsdrd a mst trstwrthy and unxggrtng
hstrn, excpt in sm on or tw prtclrs, nt at all affctng
th mttr prsntly t b mntnd.

Nw, in ths hstry of hs, Prcps mntns tht, drng th trm
of hs prfctr at Cnstntnpl, a grt s-mnstr ws cptrd
in th nghbrng Prpnts, or S of Mrmr, aftr hvng dstryd
vssls at intrvls in ths wtrs fr a prd of mr thn ffty
yrs. A fct ths st dwn in sbstntl hstry cnnt esly b
gnsd. Nr is thr any rsn it shld b. Of wht prcs spcs
ths s-mnstr ws, is nt mntnd. Bt as h dstryd shps, as
wll as fr othr rsns, h mst hv bn a whl; and I am strngly
inclnd t thnk a sprm whl. And I wll tll y why. Fr a lng
tm I fncd tht th sprm whl hd bn alwys unknwn in th
Mdtrrnn and th dp wtrs cnnctng wth it. Evn nw I am
crtn tht ths ss ar nt, and prhps nvr cn b, in th
prsnt cnstttn of thngs, a plc fr hs hbtl grgrs
rsrt. Bt frthr invstgtns hv rcntly prvd t m, tht in
mdrn tms thr hv bn isltd instncs of th prsnc of th
sprm whl in th Mdtrrnn. I am tld, on gd athrty, tht on
th Brbry cst, a Cmmdr Dvs of th Brtsh nvy fnd th
skltn of a sprm whl. Nw, as a vssl of wr rdly psss
thrgh th Drdnlls, hnc a sprm whl cld, by th sm rt,
pss ot of th Mdtrrnn int th Prpnts.

In th Prpnts, as fr as I cn lrn, nn of tht pclr
sbstnc clld _brt_ is t b fnd, th almnt of th rght whl.
Bt I hv evry rsn t blv tht th fd of th sprm
whl—sqd or cttl-fsh—lrks at th bttm of tht s, bcs
lrg crtrs, bt by n mns th lrgst of tht srt, hv bn
fnd at its srfc. If, thn, y prprly pt ths sttmnts
tgthr, and rsn upn thm a bt, y wll clrly prcv tht,
accrdng t all hmn rsnng, Prcps’s s-mnstr, tht fr
hlf a cntry stv th shps of a Rmn Emprr, mst in all
prbblty hv bn a sprm whl.


CHPTR 46. Srmss.

Thgh, cnsmd wth th ht fr of hs prps, Ahb in all hs
thghts and actns evr hd in vw th ultmt cptr of Mby
Dck; thgh h smd rdy t scrfc all mrtl intrsts t tht
on pssn; nvrthlss it my hv bn tht h ws by ntr and
lng hbttn fr t wddd t a fry whlmn’s wys, altgthr
t abndn th clltrl prsctn of th vyg. Or at lst if
ths wr othrws, thr wr nt wntng othr mtvs mch mr
inflntl wth hm. It wld b rfnng t mch, prhps, evn
cnsdrng hs mnmn, t hnt tht hs vndctvnss twrds th
Wht Whl mght hv pssbly extndd itslf in sm dgr t all
sprm whls, and tht th mr mnstrs h slw by s mch th mr h
mltpld th chncs tht ech sbsqntly encntrd whl wld
prv t b th htd on h hntd. Bt if sch an hypthss b
indd excptnbl, thr wr stll addtnl cnsdrtns whch,
thgh nt s strctly accrdng wth th wldnss of hs rlng
pssn, yt wr by n mns incpbl of swyng hm.

T accmplsh hs objct Ahb mst us tls; and of all tls usd in
th shdw of th mn, mn ar mst apt t gt ot of ordr. H knw,
fr exmpl, tht hwvr mgntc hs ascndncy in sm rspcts ws
ovr Strbck, yt tht ascndncy dd nt cvr th cmplt sprtl
mn any mr thn mr crprl sprrty invlvs intllctl
mstrshp; fr t th prly sprtl, th intllctl bt stnd in
a srt of crprl rltn. Strbck’s bdy and Strbck’s crcd
wll wr Ahb’s, s lng as Ahb kpt hs mgnt at Strbck’s brn;
stll h knw tht fr all ths th chf mt, in hs sl, abhrrd
hs cptn’s qst, and cld h, wld jyflly dsntgrt hmslf
frm it, or evn frstrt it. It mght b tht a lng intrvl wld
elps er th Wht Whl ws sn. Drng tht lng intrvl Strbck
wld evr b apt t fll int opn rlpss of rblln agnst hs
cptn’s ldrshp, unlss sm ordnry, prdntl, crcmstntl
inflncs wr brght t br upn hm. Nt only tht, bt th sbtl
insnty of Ahb rspctng Mby Dck ws nwys mr sgnfcntly
mnfstd thn in hs sprltv sns and shrwdnss in frsng
tht, fr th prsnt, th hnt shld in sm wy b strppd of tht
strng imgntv impsnss whch ntrlly invstd it; tht th
fll trrr of th vyg mst b kpt wthdrwn int th obscr
bckgrnd (fr fw mn’s crg is prf agnst prtrctd
mdttn unrlvd by actn); tht whn thy std thr lng nght
wtchs, hs offcrs and mn mst hv sm nrr thngs t thnk of
thn Mby Dck. Fr hwvr egrly and imptsly th svg crw hd
hld th annncmnt of hs qst; yt all slrs of all srts ar
mr or lss cprcs and unrlbl—thy lv in th vryng otr
wthr, and thy inhl its fcklnss—and whn rtnd fr any
objct rmt and blnk in th prst, hwvr prmssry of lf and
pssn in th end, it is abv all thngs rqst tht tmprry
intrsts and emplymnts shld intrvn and hld thm hlthly
sspndd fr th fnl dsh.

Nr ws Ahb unmndfl of anthr thng. In tms of strng emtn
mnknd dsdn all bs cnsdrtns; bt sch tms ar evnscnt.
Th prmnnt cnstttnl cndtn of th mnfctrd mn, thght
Ahb, is srddnss. Grntng tht th Wht Whl flly incts th
hrts of ths my svg crw, and plyng rnd thr svgnss evn
brds a crtn gnrs knght-errntsm in thm, stll, whl fr
th lv of it thy gv chs t Mby Dck, thy mst als hv fd
fr thr mr cmmn, dly apptts. Fr evn th hgh lftd and
chvlrc Crsdrs of old tms wr nt cntnt t trvrs tw
thsnd mls of lnd t fght fr thr hly splchr, wtht
cmmttng brglrs, pckng pckts, and gnng othr ps
prqsts by th wy. Hd thy bn strctly hld t thr on fnl
and rmntc objct—tht fnl and rmntc objct, t mny wld hv
trnd frm in dsgst. I wll nt strp ths mn, thght Ahb, of
all hps of csh—ay, csh. Thy my scrn csh nw; bt lt sm
mnths g by, and n prspctv prms of it t thm, and thn ths
sm qscnt csh all at onc mtnyng in thm, ths sm csh wld
sn cshr Ahb.

Nr ws thr wntng stll anthr prctnry mtv mr rltd
t Ahb prsnlly. Hvng implsvly, it is prbbl, and prhps
smwht prmtrly rvld th prm bt prvt prps of th
Pqd’s vyg, Ahb ws nw entrly cnscs tht, in s dng, h
hd indrctly ld hmslf opn t th unnswrbl chrg of
usrptn; and wth prfct impnty, bth mrl and lgl, hs crw
if s dspsd, and t tht end cmptnt, cld rfs all frthr
obdnc t hm, and evn vlntly wrst frm hm th cmmnd. Frm
evn th brly hntd impttn of usrptn, and th pssbl
cnsqncs of sch a spprssd imprssn gnng grnd, Ahb mst
of crs hv bn mst anxs t prtct hmslf. Tht prtctn
cld only cnsst in hs own prdmntng brn and hrt and hnd,
bckd by a hdfl, clsly clcltng attntn t evry mnt
atmsphrc inflnc whch it ws pssbl fr hs crw t b
sbjctd t.

Fr all ths rsns thn, and othrs prhps t anlytc t b
vrblly dvlpd hr, Ahb plnly sw tht h mst stll in a gd
dgr cntn tr t th ntrl, nmnl prps of th Pqd’s
vyg; obsrv all cstmry usgs; and nt only tht, bt frc
hmslf t evnc all hs wll knwn pssnt intrst in th gnrl
prst of hs prfssn.

B all ths as it my, hs vc ws nw oftn hrd hlng th thr
mst-hds and admnshng thm t kp a brght lk-ot, and nt omt
rprtng evn a prps. Ths vglnc ws nt lng wtht rwrd.


CHPTR 47. Th Mt-Mkr.

It ws a cldy, sltry aftrnn; th smn wr lzly lngng
abt th dcks, or vcntly gzng ovr int th ld-clrd wtrs.
Qqg and I wr mldly emplyd wvng wht is clld a swrd-mt,
fr an addtnl lshng t or bt. S stll and sbdd and yt
smhw prldng ws all th scn, and sch an incnttn of rvr
lrkd in th ar, tht ech slnt slr smd rslvd int hs own
invsbl slf.

I ws th attndnt or pg of Qqg, whl bsy at th mt. As I
kpt pssng and rpssng th fllng or wf of mrln btwn th
lng yrns of th wrp, usng my own hnd fr th shttl, and as
Qqg, stndng sdwys, evr and ann sld hs hvy okn swrd
btwn th thrds, and idly lkng off upn th wtr, crlssly
and unthnkngly drv hm evry yrn: I sy s strng a drmnss
dd thr thn rgn all ovr th shp and all ovr th s, only
brkn by th intrmttng dll snd of th swrd, tht it smd as
if ths wr th Lm of Tm, and I myslf wr a shttl mchnclly
wvng and wvng awy at th Fts. Thr ly th fxd thrds of
th wrp sbjct t bt on sngl, evr rtrnng, unchngng
vbrtn, and tht vbrtn mrly engh t admt of th crssws
intrblndng of othr thrds wth its own. Ths wrp smd
ncssty; and hr, thght I, wth my own hnd I ply my own shttl
and wv my own dstny int ths unltrbl thrds. Mntm,
Qqg’s implsv, indffrnt swrd, smtms httng th wf
slntngly, or crkdly, or strngly, or wkly, as th cs mght b;
and by ths dffrnc in th cncldng blw prdcng a crrspndng
cntrst in th fnl aspct of th cmpltd fbrc; ths svg’s
swrd, thght I, whch ths fnlly shps and fshns bth wrp and
wf; ths esy, indffrnt swrd mst b chnc—ay, chnc, fr
wll, and ncssty—nws incmptbl—all intrwvngly wrkng
tgthr. Th strght wrp of ncssty, nt t b swrvd frm its
ultmt crs—its evry altrntng vbrtn, indd, only tndng
t tht; fr wll stll fr t ply hr shttl btwn gvn thrds;
and chnc, thgh rstrnd in its ply wthn th rght lns of
ncssty, and sdwys in its mtns drctd by fr wll, thgh
ths prscrbd t by bth, chnc by trns rls ethr, and hs th
lst ftrng blw at evnts.

Ths w wr wvng and wvng awy whn I strtd at a snd s
strng, lng drwn, and msclly wld and unrthly, tht th bll of
fr wll drppd frm my hnd, and I std gzng up at th clds
whnc tht vc drppd lk a wng. Hgh alft in th crss-trs
ws tht md Gy-Hdr, Tshtg. Hs bdy ws rchng egrly
frwrd, hs hnd strtchd ot lk a wnd, and at brf sddn
intrvls h cntnd hs crs. T b sr th sm snd ws tht
vry mmnt prhps bng hrd all ovr th ss, frm hndrds of
whlmn’s lk-ots prchd as hgh in th ar; bt frm fw of ths
lngs cld tht accstmd old cry hv drvd sch a mrvlls
cdnc as frm Tshtg th Indn’s.

As h std hvrng ovr y hlf sspndd in ar, s wldly and
egrly prng twrds th hrzn, y wld hv thght hm sm
prpht or sr bhldng th shdws of Ft, and by ths wld crs
annncng thr cmng.

“Thr sh blws! thr! thr! thr! sh blws! sh blws!”

“Whr-awy?”

“On th l-bm, abt tw mls off! a schl of thm!”

Instntly all ws cmmtn.

Th Sprm Whl blws as a clck tcks, wth th sm undvtng and
rlbl unfrmty. And thrby whlmn dstngsh ths fsh frm
othr trbs of hs gns.

“Thr g flks!” ws nw th cry frm Tshtg; and th whls
dspprd.

“Qck, stwrd!” crd Ahb. “Tm! tm!”

Dgh-By hrrd blw, glncd at th wtch, and rprtd th exct
mnt t Ahb.

Th shp ws nw kpt awy frm th wnd, and sh wnt gntly rllng
bfr it. Tshtg rprtng tht th whls hd gn dwn hdng t
lwrd, w cnfdntly lkd t s thm agn drctly in advnc of
or bws. Fr tht snglr crft at tms evncd by th Sprm Whl
whn, sndng wth hs hd in on drctn, h nvrthlss, whl
cncld bnth th srfc, mlls rnd, and swftly swms off in
th oppst qrtr—ths dctflnss of hs cld nt nw b in
actn; fr thr ws n rsn t spps tht th fsh sn by
Tshtg hd bn in any wy alrmd, or indd knw at all of or
vcnty. On of th mn slctd fr shpkprs—tht is, ths nt
appntd t th bts, by ths tm rlvd th Indn at th
mn-mst hd. Th slrs at th fr and mzzn hd cm dwn; th
ln tbs wr fxd in thr plcs; th crns wr thrst ot; th
mnyrd ws bckd, and th thr bts swng ovr th s lk thr
smphr bskts ovr hgh clffs. Otsd of th blwrks thr egr
crws wth on hnd clng t th rl, whl on ft ws expctntly
psd on th gnwl. S lk th lng ln of mn-of-wr’s mn abt
t thrw thmslvs on brd an enmy’s shp.

Bt at ths crtcl instnt a sddn exclmtn ws hrd tht tk
evry ey frm th whl. Wth a strt all glrd at drk Ahb, wh ws
srrndd by fv dsky phntms tht smd frsh frmd ot of ar.


CHPTR 48. Th Frst Lwrng.

Th phntms, fr s thy thn smd, wr flttng on th othr sd
of th dck, and, wth a nslss clrty, wr cstng ls th
tckls and bnds of th bt whch swng thr. Ths bt hd alwys
bn dmd on of th spr bts, thgh tchnclly clld th
cptn’s, on accnt of its hngng frm th strbrd qrtr. Th
fgr tht nw std by its bws ws tll and swrt, wth on wht
tth evlly prtrdng frm its stl-lk lps. A rmpld Chns
jckt of blck cttn fnrlly invstd hm, wth wd blck
trwsrs of th sm drk stff. Bt strngly crwnng ths ebnnss
ws a glstnng wht pltd trbn, th lvng hr brdd and
cld rnd and rnd upn hs hd. Lss swrt in aspct, th
cmpnns of ths fgr wr of tht vvd, tgr-yllw cmplxn
pclr t sm of th abrgnl ntvs of th Mnlls;—a rc
ntrs fr a crtn dblsm of sbtlty, and by sm hnst wht
mrnrs sppsd t b th pd sps and scrt cnfdntl agnts
on th wtr of th dvl, thr lrd, whs cntng-rm thy spps
t b elswhr.

Whl yt th wndrng shp’s cmpny wr gzng upn ths
strngrs, Ahb crd ot t th wht-trbnd old mn at thr hd,
“All rdy thr, Fdllh?”

“Rdy,” ws th hlf-hssd rply.

“Lwr awy thn; d’y hr?” shtng acrss th dck. “Lwr awy
thr, I sy.”

Sch ws th thndr of hs vc, tht spt of thr amzmnt th
mn sprng ovr th rl; th shvs whrld rnd in th blcks; wth
a wllw, th thr bts drppd int th s; whl, wth a
dxtrs, off-hndd drng, unknwn in any othr vctn, th
slrs, gt-lk, lpd dwn th rllng shp’s sd int th tssd
bts blw.

Hrdly hd thy plld ot frm undr th shp’s l, whn a frth
kl, cmng frm th wndwrd sd, plld rnd undr th strn, and
shwd th fv strngrs rwng Ahb, wh, stndng erct in th
strn, ldly hld Strbck, Stbb, and Flsk, t sprd thmslvs
wdly, s as t cvr a lrg expns of wtr. Bt wth all thr
eys agn rvtd upn th swrt Fdllh and hs crw, th inmts of
th othr bts obyd nt th cmmnd.

“Cptn Ahb?—” sd Strbck.

“Sprd yrslvs,” crd Ahb; “gv wy, all fr bts. Th,
Flsk, pll ot mr t lwrd!”

“Ay, ay, sr,” chrly crd lttl Kng-Pst, swpng rnd hs
grt strng or. “Ly bck!” addrssng hs crw.
“Thr!—thr!—thr agn! Thr sh blws rght ahd, bys!—ly
bck!”

“Nvr hd yndr yllw bys, Archy.”

“Oh, I dn’t mnd ’em, sr,” sd Archy; “I knw it all bfr nw.
Ddn’t I hr ’em in th hld? And ddn’t I tll Cbc hr of it?
Wht sy y, Cbc? Thy ar stwwys, Mr. Flsk.”

“Pll, pll, my fn hrts-alv; pll, my chldrn; pll, my lttl
ons,” drwlngly and sthngly sghd Stbb t hs crw, sm of whm
stll shwd sgns of unsnss. “Why dn’t y brk yr bckbns,
my bys? Wht is it y str at? Ths chps in yndr bt? Tt! Thy
ar only fv mr hnds cm t hlp us—nvr mnd frm whr—th mr
th mrrr. Pll, thn, d pll; nvr mnd th brmstn—dvls ar
gd fllws engh. S, s; thr y ar nw; tht’s th strk fr a
thsnd pnds; tht’s th strk t swp th stks! Hrrh fr th
gld cp of sprm ol, my hrs! Thr chrs, mn—all hrts alv!
Esy, esy; dn’t b in a hrry—dn’t b in a hrry. Why dn’t y snp
yr ors, y rscls? Bt smthng, y dgs! S, s, s,
thn:—sftly, sftly! Tht’s it—tht’s it! lng and strng. Gv wy
thr, gv wy! Th dvl ftch y, y rgmffn rpscllns; y ar
all aslp. Stp snrng, y slprs, and pll. Pll, wll y? pll,
cn’t y? pll, wn’t y? Why in th nm of gdgns and gngr-cks
dn’t y pll?—pll and brk smthng! pll, and strt yr eys ot!
Hr!” whppng ot th shrp knf frm hs grdl; “evry mthr’s
sn of y drw hs knf, and pll wth th bld btwn hs tth.
Tht’s it—tht’s it. Nw y d smthng; tht lks lk it, my
stl-bts. Strt hr—strt hr, my slvr-spns! Strt hr,
mrlng-spks!”

Stbb’s exrdm t hs crw is gvn hr at lrg, bcs h hd
rthr a pclr wy of tlkng t thm in gnrl, and espclly in
inclctng th rlgn of rwng. Bt y mst nt spps frm ths
spcmn of hs srmnzngs tht h evr flw int dwnrght pssns
wth hs cngrgtn. Nt at all; and thrn cnsstd hs chf
pclrty. H wld sy th mst trrfc thngs t hs crw, in a
tn s strngly cmpndd of fn and fry, and th fry smd s
clcltd mrly as a spc t th fn, tht n orsmn cld hr
sch qr invctns wtht pllng fr dr lf, and yt pllng
fr th mr jk of th thng. Bsds h all th tm lkd s esy
and indlnt hmslf, s lngngly mngd hs strng-or, and s
brdly gpd—opn-mthd at tms—tht th mr sght of sch a
ywnng cmmndr, by shr frc of cntrst, actd lk a chrm upn
th crw. Thn agn, Stbb ws on of ths odd srt of hmrsts,
whs jllty is smtms s crsly ambgs, as t pt all
infrrs on thr grd in th mttr of obyng thm.

In obdnc t a sgn frm Ahb, Strbck ws nw pllng oblqly
acrss Stbb’s bw; and whn fr a mnt or s th tw bts wr
prtty nr t ech othr, Stbb hld th mt.

“Mr. Strbck! lrbrd bt thr, ahy! a wrd wth y, sr, if y
pls!”

“Hll!” rtrnd Strbck, trnng rnd nt a sngl inch as h
spk; stll ernstly bt whsprngly urgng hs crw; hs fc st
lk a flnt frm Stbb’s.

“Wht thnk y of ths yllw bys, sr!”

“Smggld on brd, smhw, bfr th shp sld. (Strng, strng,
bys!)” in a whspr t hs crw, thn spkng ot ld agn: “A sd
bsnss, Mr. Stbb! (sth hr, sth hr, my lds!) bt nvr mnd,
Mr. Stbb, all fr th bst. Lt all yr crw pll strng, cm wht
wll. (Sprng, my mn, sprng!) Thr’s hgshds of sprm ahd, Mr.
Stbb, and tht’s wht y cm fr. (Pll, my bys!) Sprm, sprm’s th
ply! Ths at lst is dty; dty and prft hnd in hnd.”

“Ay, ay, I thght as mch,” sllqzd Stbb, whn th bts
dvrgd, “as sn as I clpt ey on ’em, I thght s. Ay, and tht’s
wht h wnt int th aftr hld fr, s oftn, as Dgh-By lng
sspctd. Thy wr hddn dwn thr. Th Wht Whl’s at th bttm
of it. Wll, wll, s b it! Cn’t b hlpd! All rght! Gv wy, mn!
It an’t th Wht Whl t-dy! Gv wy!”

Nw th advnt of ths otlndsh strngrs at sch a crtcl instnt
as th lwrng of th bts frm th dck, ths hd nt unrsnbly
awknd a srt of sprstts amzmnt in sm of th shp’s
cmpny; bt Archy’s fncd dscvry hvng sm tm prvs gt
abrd amng thm, thgh indd nt crdtd thn, ths hd in sm
smll msr prprd thm fr th evnt. It tk off th extrm edg
of thr wndr; and s wht wth all ths and Stbb’s cnfdnt wy of
accntng fr thr apprnc, thy wr fr th tm frd frm
sprstts srmsngs; thgh th affr stll lft abndnt rm
fr all mnnr of wld cnjctrs as t drk Ahb’s prcs agncy in
th mttr frm th bgnnng. Fr m, I slntly rclld th
mystrs shdws I hd sn crpng on brd th Pqd drng th
dm Nntckt dwn, as wll as th engmtcl hntngs of th
unccntbl Eljh.

Mntm, Ahb, ot of hrng of hs offcrs, hvng sdd th
frthst t wndwrd, ws stll rngng ahd of th othr bts; a
crcmstnc bspkng hw ptnt a crw ws pllng hm. Ths tgr
yllw crtrs of hs smd all stl and whlbn; lk fv
trp-hmmrs thy rs and fll wth rglr strks of strngth, whch
prdclly strtd th bt alng th wtr lk a hrzntl brst
blr ot of a Msssspp stmr. As fr Fdllh, wh ws sn
pllng th hrpnr or, h hd thrwn asd hs blck jckt, and
dsplyd hs nkd chst wth th whl prt of hs bdy abv th
gnwl, clrly ct agnst th altrntng dprssns of th wtry
hrzn; whl at th othr end of th bt Ahb, wth on arm, lk a
fncr’s, thrwn hlf bckwrd int th ar, as if t cntrblnc
any tndncy t trp; Ahb ws sn stdly mngng hs strng or
as in a thsnd bt lwrngs er th Wht Whl hd trn hm. All
at onc th otstrtchd arm gv a pclr mtn and thn rmnd
fxd, whl th bt’s fv ors wr sn smltnsly pkd. Bt
and crw st mtnlss on th s. Instntly th thr sprd bts in
th rr psd on thr wy. Th whls hd irrglrly sttld bdly
dwn int th bl, ths gvng n dstntly dscrnbl tkn of th
mvmnt, thgh frm hs clsr vcnty Ahb hd obsrvd it.

“Evry mn lk ot alng hs ors!” crd Strbck. “Th, Qqg,
stnd up!”

Nmbly sprngng up on th trnglr rsd bx in th bw, th svg
std erct thr, and wth intnsly egr eys gzd off twrds th
spt whr th chs hd lst bn dscrd. Lkws upn th extrm
strn of th bt whr it ws als trnglrly pltfrmd lvl wth
th gnwl, Strbck hmslf ws sn clly and adrtly blncng
hmslf t th jrkng tssngs of hs chp of a crft, and slntly
eyng th vst bl ey of th s.

Nt vry fr dstnt Flsk’s bt ws als lyng brthlssly stll;
its cmmndr rcklssly stndng upn th tp of th lggrhd, a
stt srt of pst rtd in th kl, and rsng sm tw ft abv
th lvl of th strn pltfrm. It is usd fr ctchng trns wth th
whl ln. Its tp is nt mr spcs thn th plm of a mn’s hnd,
and stndng upn sch a bs as tht, Flsk smd prchd at th
mst-hd of sm shp whch hd snk t all bt hr trcks. Bt lttl
Kng-Pst ws smll and shrt, and at th sm tm lttl Kng-Pst
ws fll of a lrg and tll ambtn, s tht ths lggrhd
stnd-pnt of hs dd by n mns stsfy Kng-Pst.

“I cn’t s thr ss off; tp us up an or thr, and lt m on t
tht.”

Upn ths, Dgg, wth ethr hnd upn th gnwl t stdy hs wy,
swftly sld aft, and thn erctng hmslf vlntrd hs lfty
shldrs fr a pdstl.

“Gd a mst-hd as any, sr. Wll y mnt?”

“Tht I wll, and thnk y vry mch, my fn fllw; only I wsh y
ffty ft tllr.”

Whrpn plntng hs ft frmly agnst tw oppst plnks of th
bt, th ggntc ngr, stpng a lttl, prsntd hs flt plm t
Flsk’s ft, and thn pttng Flsk’s hnd on hs hrs-plmd hd
and bddng hm sprng as h hmslf shld tss, wth on dxtrs
flng lndd th lttl mn hgh and dry on hs shldrs. And hr ws
Flsk nw stndng, Dgg wth on lftd arm frnshng hm wth a
brstbnd t ln agnst and stdy hmslf by.

At any tm it is a strng sght t th tyr t s wth wht wndrs
hbtd of uncnscs skll th whlmn wll mntn an erct
pstr in hs bt, evn whn ptchd abt by th mst rtsly
prvrs and crss-rnnng ss. Stll mr strng t s hm gddly
prchd upn th lggrhd itslf, undr sch crcmstncs. Bt th
sght of lttl Flsk mntd upn ggntc Dgg ws yt mr
crs; fr sstnng hmslf wth a cl, indffrnt, esy,
unthght of, brbrc mjsty, th nbl ngr t evry rll of th
s hrmnsly rlld hs fn frm. On hs brd bck, flxn-hrd
Flsk smd a snw-flk. Th brr lkd nblr thn th rdr.
Thgh trly vvcs, tmlts, ostntts lttl Flsk wld nw
and thn stmp wth imptnc; bt nt on addd hv dd h thrby
gv t th ngr’s lrdly chst. S hv I sn Pssn and Vnty
stmpng th lvng mgnnms erth, bt th erth dd nt altr hr
tds and hr ssns fr tht.

Mnwhl Stbb, th thrd mt, btryd n sch fr-gzng
slctds. Th whls mght hv md on of thr rglr sndngs,
nt a tmprry dv frm mr frght; and if tht wr th cs,
Stbb, as hs wnt in sch css, it sms, ws rslvd t slc th
lngshng intrvl wth hs pp. H wthdrw it frm hs htbnd,
whr h alwys wr it aslnt lk a fthr. H ldd it, and rmmd
hm th ldng wth hs thmb-end; bt hrdly hd h igntd hs
mtch acrss th rgh sndppr of hs hnd, whn Tshtg, hs
hrpnr, whs eys hd bn sttng t wndwrd lk tw fxd
strs, sddnly drppd lk lght frm hs erct atttd t hs st,
cryng ot in a qck phrnsy of hrry, “Dwn, dwn all, and gv
wy!—thr thy ar!”

T a lndsmn, n whl, nr any sgn of a hrrng, wld hv bn
vsbl at tht mmnt; nthng bt a trbld bt of grnsh wht
wtr, and thn scttrd pffs of vpr hvrng ovr it, and
sffsngly blwng off t lwrd, lk th cnfsd scd frm wht
rllng bllws. Th ar arnd sddnly vbrtd and tngld, as it
wr, lk th ar ovr intnsly htd plts of irn. Bnth ths
atmsphrc wvng and crlng, and prtlly bnth a thn lyr of
wtr, als, th whls wr swmmng. Sn in advnc of all th othr
indctns, th pffs of vpr thy sptd, smd thr frrnnng
crrs and dtchd flyng otrdrs.

All fr bts wr nw in kn prst of tht on spt of trbld
wtr and ar. Bt it bd fr t otstrp thm; it flw on and on, as
a mss of intrblndng bbbls brn dwn a rpd strm frm th
hlls.

“Pll, pll, my gd bys,” sd Strbck, in th lwst pssbl bt
intnsst cncntrtd whspr t hs mn; whl th shrp fxd glnc
frm hs eys drtd strght ahd of th bw, almst smd as tw
vsbl ndls in tw unrrng bnncl cmpsss. H dd nt sy mch
t hs crw, thgh, nr dd hs crw sy anythng t hm. Only th
slnc of th bt ws at intrvls strtlngly prcd by on of hs
pclr whsprs, nw hrsh wth cmmnd, nw sft wth entrty.

Hw dffrnt th ld lttl Kng-Pst. “Sng ot and sy smthng,
my hrts. Rr and pll, my thndrblts! Bch m, bch m on
thr blck bcks, bys; only d tht fr m, and I’ll sgn ovr t y
my Mrth’s Vnyrd plnttn, bys; incldng wf and chldrn,
bys. Ly m on—ly m on! O Lrd, Lrd! bt I shll g strk, strng
md! S! s tht wht wtr!” And s shtng, h plld hs ht
frm hs hd, and stmpd up and dwn on it; thn pckng it up,
flrtd it fr off upn th s; and fnlly fll t rrng and
plngng in th bt’s strn lk a crzd clt frm th prr.

“Lk at tht chp nw,” phlsphclly drwld Stbb, wh, wth hs
unlghtd shrt pp, mchnclly rtnd btwn hs tth, at a
shrt dstnc, fllwd aftr—“H’s gt fts, tht Flsk hs. Fts?
ys, gv hm fts—tht’s th vry wrd—ptch fts int ’em. Mrrly,
mrrly, hrts-alv. Pddng fr sppr, y knw;—mrry’s th wrd.
Pll, bbs—pll, scklngs—pll, all. Bt wht th dvl ar y
hrryng abt? Sftly, sftly, and stdly, my mn. Only pll, and
kp pllng; nthng mr. Crck all yr bckbns, and bt yr
knvs in tw—tht’s all. Tk it esy—why dn’t y tk it esy, I
sy, and brst all yr lvrs and lngs!”

Bt wht it ws tht inscrtbl Ahb sd t tht tgr-yllw crw of
hs—ths wr wrds bst omttd hr; fr y lv undr th blssd
lght of th evnglcl lnd. Only th infdl shrks in th adcs
ss my gv er t sch wrds, whn, wth trnd brw, and eys of
rd mrdr, and fm-gld lps, Ahb lpd aftr hs pry.

Mnwhl, all th bts tr on. Th rptd spcfc allsns of
Flsk t “tht whl,” as h clld th fctts mnstr whch h
dclrd t b incssntly tntlzng hs bt’s bw wth its
tl—ths allsns of hs wr at tms s vvd and lf-lk, tht
thy wld cs sm on or tw of hs mn t sntch a frfl lk
ovr th shldr. Bt ths ws agnst all rl; fr th orsmn mst
pt ot thr eys, and rm a skwr thrgh thr ncks; usg
prnncng tht thy mst hv n orgns bt ers, and n lmbs bt
arms, in ths crtcl mmnts.

It ws a sght fll of qck wndr and aw! Th vst swlls of th
omnptnt s; th srgng, hllw rr thy md, as thy rlld
alng th eght gnwls, lk ggntc bwls in a bndlss
bwlng-grn; th brf sspndd agny of th bt, as it wld tp
fr an instnt on th knf-lk edg of th shrpr wvs, tht almst
smd thrtnng t ct it in tw; th sddn prfnd dp int th
wtry glns and hllws; th kn sprrngs and gdngs t gn th
tp of th oppst hll; th hdlng, sld-lk sld dwn its othr
sd;—all ths, wth th crs of th hdsmn and hrpnrs, and
th shddrng gsps of th orsmn, wth th wndrs sght of th
ivry Pqd brng dwn upn hr bts wth otstrtchd sls, lk
a wld hn aftr hr scrmng brd;—all ths ws thrllng.

Nt th rw rcrt, mrchng frm th bsm of hs wf int th fvr
ht of hs frst bttl; nt th dd mn’s ghst encntrng th
frst unknwn phntm in th othr wrld;—nthr of ths cn fl
strngr and strngr emtns thn tht mn ds, wh fr th frst
tm fnds hmslf pllng int th chrmd, chrnd crcl of th
hntd sprm whl.

Th dncng wht wtr md by th chs ws nw bcmng mr and
mr vsbl, owng t th incrsng drknss of th dn cld-shdws
flng upn th s. Th jts of vpr n lngr blndd, bt tltd
evrywhr t rght and lft; th whls smd sprtng thr wks.
Th bts wr plld mr aprt; Strbck gvng chs t thr whls
rnnng dd t lwrd. Or sl ws nw st, and, wth th stll
rsng wnd, w rshd alng; th bt gng wth sch mdnss thrgh
th wtr, tht th l ors cld scrcly b wrkd rpdly engh t
escp bng trn frm th rw-lcks.

Sn w wr rnnng thrgh a sffsng wd vl of mst; nthr
shp nr bt t b sn.

“Gv wy, mn,” whsprd Strbck, drwng stll frthr aft th
sht of hs sl; “thr is tm t kll a fsh yt bfr th sqll
cms. Thr’s wht wtr agn!—cls t! Sprng!”

Sn aftr, tw crs in qck sccssn on ech sd of us dntd
tht th othr bts hd gt fst; bt hrdly wr thy ovrhrd, whn
wth a lghtnng-lk hrtlng whspr Strbck sd: “Stnd up!” and
Qqg, hrpn in hnd, sprng t hs ft.

Thgh nt on of th orsmn ws thn fcng th lf and dth prl
s cls t thm ahd, yt wth thr eys on th intns cntnnc
of th mt in th strn of th bt, thy knw tht th immnnt
instnt hd cm; thy hrd, t, an enrms wllwng snd as of
ffty elphnts strrng in thr lttr. Mnwhl th bt ws stll
bmng thrgh th mst, th wvs crlng and hssng arnd us lk
th erctd crsts of enrgd srpnts.

“Tht’s hs hmp. _Thr_, _thr_, gv it t hm!” whsprd
Strbck.

A shrt rshng snd lpd ot of th bt; it ws th drtd irn of
Qqg. Thn all in on wldd cmmtn cm an invsbl psh frm
astrn, whl frwrd th bt smd strkng on a ldg; th sl
cllpsd and expldd; a gsh of scldng vpr sht up nr by;
smthng rlld and tmbld lk an erthqk bnth us. Th whl
crw wr hlf sffctd as thy wr tssd hltr-skltr int th
wht crdlng crm of th sqll. Sqll, whl, and hrpn hd all
blndd tgthr; and th whl, mrly grzd by th irn, escpd.

Thgh cmpltly swmpd, th bt ws nrly unhrmd. Swmmng rnd
it w pckd up th fltng ors, and lshng thm acrss th gnwl,
tmbld bck t or plcs. Thr w st up t or kns in th s,
th wtr cvrng evry rb and plnk, s tht t or dwnwrd gzng
eys th sspndd crft smd a crl bt grwn up t us frm th
bttm of th ocn.

Th wnd incrsd t a hwl; th wvs dshd thr bcklrs tgthr;
th whl sqll rrd, frkd, and crckld arnd us lk a wht
fr upn th prr, in whch, uncnsmd, w wr brnng; immrtl
in ths jws of dth! In vn w hld th othr bts; as wll rr
t th lv cls dwn th chmny of a flmng frnc as hl ths
bts in tht strm. Mnwhl th drvng scd, rck, and mst, grw
drkr wth th shdws of nght; n sgn of th shp cld b sn.
Th rsng s frbd all attmpts t bl ot th bt. Th ors wr
uslss as prpllrs, prfrmng nw th offc of lf-prsrvrs.
S, cttng th lshng of th wtrprf mtch kg, aftr mny
flrs Strbck cntrvd t ignt th lmp in th lntrn; thn
strtchng it on a wf pl, hndd it t Qqg as th
stndrd-brr of ths frlrn hp. Thr, thn, h st, hldng up
tht imbcl cndl in th hrt of tht almghty frlrnnss. Thr,
thn, h st, th sgn and symbl of a mn wtht fth, hplssly
hldng up hp in th mdst of dspr.

Wt, drnchd thrgh, and shvrng cld, dsprng of shp or bt,
w lftd up or eys as th dwn cm on. Th mst stll sprd ovr
th s, th empty lntrn ly crshd in th bttm of th bt.
Sddnly Qqg strtd t hs ft, hllwng hs hnd t hs er.
W all hrd a fnt crkng, as of rps and yrds hthrt mffld
by th strm. Th snd cm nrr and nrr; th thck msts wr
dmly prtd by a hg, vg frm. Affrghtd, w all sprng int th
s as th shp at lst lmd int vw, brng rght dwn upn us
wthn a dstnc of nt mch mr thn its lngth.

Fltng on th wvs w sw th abndnd bt, as fr on instnt it
tssd and gpd bnth th shp’s bws lk a chp at th bs of a
ctrct; and thn th vst hll rlld ovr it, and it ws sn n
mr tll it cm up wltrng astrn. Agn w swm fr it, wr
dshd agnst it by th ss, and wr at lst tkn up and sfly
lndd on brd. Er th sqll cm cls t, th othr bts hd ct
ls frm thr fsh and rtrnd t th shp in gd tm. Th shp
hd gvn us up, bt ws stll crsng, if hply it mght lght upn
sm tkn of or prshng,—an or or a lnc pl.


CHPTR 49. Th Hyn.

Thr ar crtn qr tms and occsns in ths strng mxd
affr w cll lf whn a mn tks ths whl unvrs fr a vst
prctcl jk, thgh th wt thrf h bt dmly dscrns, and mr
thn sspcts tht th jk is at nbdy’s expns bt hs own.
Hwvr, nthng dsprts, and nthng sms wrth whl dsptng. H
blts dwn all evnts, all crds, and blfs, and prssns, all
hrd thngs vsbl and invsbl, nvr mnd hw knbby; as an ostrch
of ptnt dgstn gbbls dwn bllts and gn flnts. And as fr
smll dffclts and wrryngs, prspcts of sddn dsstr, prl
of lf and lmb; all ths, and dth itslf, sm t hm only sly,
gd-ntrd hts, and jlly pnchs in th sd bstwd by th unsn
and unccntbl old jkr. Tht odd srt of wywrd md I am
spkng of, cms ovr a mn only in sm tm of extrm trbltn;
it cms in th vry mdst of hs ernstnss, s tht wht jst bfr
mght hv smd t hm a thng mst mmnts, nw sms bt a prt
of th gnrl jk. Thr is nthng lk th prls of whlng t
brd ths fr and esy srt of gnl, dsprd phlsphy; and wth
it I nw rgrdd ths whl vyg of th Pqd, and th grt Wht
Whl its objct.

“Qqg,” sd I, whn thy hd drggd m, th lst mn, t th
dck, and I ws stll shkng myslf in my jckt t flng off th
wtr; “Qqg, my fn frnd, ds ths srt of thng oftn
hppn?” Wtht mch emtn, thgh skd thrgh jst lk m, h
gv m t undrstnd tht sch thngs dd oftn hppn.

“Mr. Stbb,” sd I, trnng t tht wrthy, wh, bttnd up in hs
ol-jckt, ws nw clmly smkng hs pp in th rn; “Mr. Stbb, I
thnk I hv hrd y sy tht of all whlmn y evr mt, or chf
mt, Mr. Strbck, is by fr th mst crfl and prdnt. I spps
thn, tht gng plmp on a flyng whl wth yr sl st in a fggy
sqll is th hght of a whlmn’s dscrtn?”

“Crtn. I’v lwrd fr whls frm a lkng shp in a gl off
Cp Hrn.”

“Mr. Flsk,” sd I, trnng t lttl Kng-Pst, wh ws stndng
cls by; “y ar exprncd in ths thngs, and I am nt. Wll y
tll m whthr it is an unltrbl lw in ths fshry, Mr. Flsk,
fr an orsmn t brk hs own bck pllng hmslf bck-frmst int
dth’s jws?”

“Cn’t y twst tht smllr?” sd Flsk. “Ys, tht’s th lw. I
shld lk t s a bt’s crw bckng wtr up t a whl fc
frmst. H, h! th whl wld gv thm sqnt fr sqnt, mnd
tht!”

Hr thn, frm thr imprtl wtnsss, I hd a dlbrt sttmnt
of th entr cs. Cnsdrng, thrfr, tht sqlls and cpszngs
in th wtr and cnsqnt bvcks on th dp, wr mttrs of
cmmn occrrnc in ths knd of lf; cnsdrng tht at th
sprltvly crtcl instnt of gng on t th whl I mst rsgn
my lf int th hnds of hm wh strd th bt—oftntms a fllw
wh at tht vry mmnt is in hs imptsnss upn th pnt of
scttlng th crft wth hs own frntc stmpngs; cnsdrng tht
th prtclr dsstr t or own prtclr bt ws chfly t b
imptd t Strbck’s drvng on t hs whl almst in th tth of a
sqll, and cnsdrng tht Strbck, ntwthstndng, ws fms fr
hs grt hdflnss in th fshry; cnsdrng tht I blngd t
ths uncmmnly prdnt Strbck’s bt; and fnlly cnsdrng in
wht a dvl’s chs I ws implctd, tchng th Wht Whl: tkng
all thngs tgthr, I sy, I thght I mght as wll g blw and mk
a rgh drft of my wll. “Qqg,” sd I, “cm alng, y shll b
my lwyr, exctr, and lgt.”

It my sm strng tht of all mn slrs shld b tnkrng at
thr lst wlls and tstmnts, bt thr ar n ppl in th wrld
mr fnd of tht dvrsn. Ths ws th frth tm in my ntcl
lf tht I hd dn th sm thng. Aftr th crmny ws cncldd
upn th prsnt occsn, I flt all th esr; a stn ws rlld
awy frm my hrt. Bsds, all th dys I shld nw lv wld b as
gd as th dys tht Lzrs lvd aftr hs rsrrctn; a
spplmntry cln gn of s mny mnths or wks as th cs mght
b. I srvvd myslf; my dth and brl wr lckd up in my chst.
I lkd rnd m trnqlly and cntntdly, lk a qt ghst wth a
cln cnscnc sttng insd th brs of a sng fmly vlt.

Nw thn, thght I, uncnscsly rllng up th slvs of my frck,
hr gs fr a cl, cllctd dv at dth and dstrctn, and th
dvl ftch th hndmst.


CHPTR 50. Ahb’s Bt and Crw. Fdllh.

“Wh wld hv thght it, Flsk!” crd Stbb; “if I hd bt on lg
y wld nt ctch m in a bt, unlss myb t stp th plg-hl
wth my tmbr t. Oh! h’s a wndrfl old mn!”

“I dn’t thnk it s strng, aftr all, on tht accnt,” sd Flsk.
“If hs lg wr off at th hp, nw, it wld b a dffrnt thng.
Tht wld dsbl hm; bt h hs on kn, and gd prt of th othr
lft, y knw.”

“I dn’t knw tht, my lttl mn; I nvr yt sw hm knl.”

Amng whl-ws ppl it hs oftn bn argd whthr, cnsdrng
th prmnt imprtnc of hs lf t th sccss of th vyg, it
is rght fr a whlng cptn t jprdz tht lf in th actv
prls of th chs. S Tmrln’s sldrs oftn argd wth trs in
thr eys, whthr tht invlbl lf of hs oght t b crrd
int th thckst of th fght.

Bt wth Ahb th qstn assmd a mdfd aspct. Cnsdrng tht
wth tw lgs mn is bt a hbblng wght in all tms of dngr;
cnsdrng tht th prst of whls is alwys undr grt and
extrrdnry dffclts; tht evry indvdl mmnt, indd, thn
cmprss a prl; undr ths crcmstncs is it ws fr any mmd
mn t entr a whl-bt in th hnt? As a gnrl thng, th
jnt-ownrs of th Pqd mst hv plnly thght nt.

Ahb wll knw tht althgh hs frnds at hm wld thnk lttl of
hs entrng a bt in crtn cmprtvly hrmlss vcsstds of
th chs, fr th sk of bng nr th scn of actn and gvng
hs ordrs in prsn, yt fr Cptn Ahb t hv a bt actlly
apprtnd t hm as a rglr hdsmn in th hnt—abv all fr
Cptn Ahb t b sppld wth fv extr mn, as tht sm bt’s
crw, h wll knw tht sch gnrs cncts nvr entrd th hds
of th ownrs of th Pqd. Thrfr h hd nt slctd a bt’s
crw frm thm, nr hd h in any wy hntd hs dsrs on tht hd.
Nvrthlss h hd tkn prvt msrs of hs own tchng all tht
mttr. Untl Cbc’s pblshd dscvry, th slrs hd lttl
frsn it, thgh t b sr whn, aftr bng a lttl whl ot of
prt, all hnds hd cncldd th cstmry bsnss of fttng th
whlbts fr srvc; whn sm tm aftr ths Ahb ws nw and thn
fnd bstrrng hmslf in th mttr of mkng thl-pns wth hs
own hnds fr wht ws thght t b on of th spr bts, and evn
slctsly cttng th smll wdn skwrs, whch whn th ln is
rnnng ot ar pnnd ovr th grv in th bw: whn all ths ws
obsrvd in hm, and prtclrly hs slctd in hvng an extr
ct of shthng in th bttm of th bt, as if t mk it bttr
wthstnd th pntd prssr of hs ivry lmb; and als th anxty
h evncd in exctly shpng th thgh brd, or clmsy clt, as it
is smtms clld, th hrzntl pc in th bt’s bw fr brcng
th kn agnst in drtng or stbbng at th whl; whn it ws
obsrvd hw oftn h std up in tht bt wth hs sltry kn
fxd in th sm-crclr dprssn in th clt, and wth th
crpntr’s chsl ggd ot a lttl hr and strghtnd it a
lttl thr; all ths thngs, I sy, hd awknd mch intrst and
crsty at th tm. Bt almst evrybdy sppsd tht ths
prtclr prprtv hdflnss in Ahb mst only b wth a vw t
th ultmt chs of Mby Dck; fr h hd alrdy rvld hs
intntn t hnt tht mrtl mnstr in prsn. Bt sch a sppstn
dd by n mns invlv th rmtst sspcn as t any bt’s crw
bng assgnd t tht bt.

Nw, wth th sbrdnt phntms, wht wndr rmnd sn wnd
awy; fr in a whlr wndrs sn wn. Bsds, nw and thn sch
unccntbl odds and ends of strng ntns cm up frm th unknwn
nks and ash-hls of th erth t mn ths fltng otlws of
whlrs; and th shps thmslvs oftn pck up sch qr cstwy
crtrs fnd tssng abt th opn s on plnks, bts of wrck,
ors, whlbts, cns, blwn-off Jpns jnks, and wht nt; tht
Blzbb hmslf mght clmb up th sd and stp dwn int th cbn
t cht wth th cptn, and it wld nt crt any unsbdbl
exctmnt in th frcstl.

Bt b all ths as it my, crtn it is tht whl th sbrdnt
phntms sn fnd thr plc amng th crw, thgh stll as it wr
smhw dstnct frm thm, yt tht hr-trbnd Fdllh rmnd a
mffld mystry t th lst. Whnc h cm in a mnnrly wrld lk
ths, by wht srt of unccntbl t h sn evncd hmslf t b
lnkd wth Ahb’s pclr frtns; ny, s fr as t hv sm srt
of a hlf-hntd inflnc; Hvn knws, bt it mght hv bn evn
athrty ovr hm; all ths nn knw. Bt on cnnt sstn an
indffrnt ar cncrnng Fdllh. H ws sch a crtr as
cvlzd, dmstc ppl in th tmprt zn only s in thr
drms, and tht bt dmly; bt th lk of whm nw and thn gld
amng th unchngng Astc cmmnts, espclly th Orntl isls
t th est of th cntnnt—ths insltd, immmrl, unltrbl
cntrs, whch evn in ths mdrn dys stll prsrv mch of th
ghstly abrgnlnss of erth’s prml gnrtns, whn th mmry
of th frst mn ws a dstnct rcllctn, and all mn hs
dscndnts, unknwng whnc h cm, eyd ech othr as rl
phntms, and askd of th sn and th mn why thy wr crtd and
t wht end; whn thgh, accrdng t Gnss, th angls indd
cnsrtd wth th dghtrs of mn, th dvls als, add th
uncnncl Rbbns, indlgd in mndn amrs.


CHPTR 51. Th Sprt-Spt.

Dys, wks pssd, and undr esy sl, th ivry Pqd hd slwly
swpt acrss fr svrl crsng-grnds; tht off th Azrs; off
th Cp d Vrds; on th Plt (s clld), bng off th mth of
th R d l Plt; and th Crrl Grnd, an unstkd, wtry
lclty, sthrly frm St. Hln.

It ws whl gldng thrgh ths lttr wtrs tht on srn and
mnlght nght, whn all th wvs rlld by lk scrlls of slvr;
and, by thr sft, sffsng sthngs, md wht smd a slvry
slnc, nt a sltd; on sch a slnt nght a slvry jt ws sn
fr in advnc of th wht bbbls at th bw. Lt up by th mn, it
lkd clstl; smd sm plmd and glttrng gd uprsng frm
th s. Fdllh frst dscrd ths jt. Fr of ths mnlght
nghts, it ws hs wnt t mnt t th mn-mst hd, and stnd a
lk-ot thr, wth th sm prcsn as if it hd bn dy. And yt,
thgh hrds of whls wr sn by nght, nt on whlmn in a
hndrd wld vntr a lwrng fr thm. Y my thnk wth wht
emtns, thn, th smn bhld ths old Orntl prchd alft at
sch unsl hrs; hs trbn and th mn, cmpnns in on sky. Bt
whn, aftr spndng hs unfrm intrvl thr fr svrl sccssv
nghts wtht uttrng a sngl snd; whn, aftr all ths slnc,
hs unrthly vc ws hrd annncng tht slvry, mn-lt jt,
evry rclnng mrnr strtd t hs ft as if sm wngd sprt
hd lghtd in th rggng, and hld th mrtl crw. “Thr sh
blws!” Hd th trmp of jdgmnt blwn, thy cld nt hv qvrd
mr; yt stll thy flt n trrr; rthr plsr. Fr thgh it ws
a mst unwntd hr, yt s imprssv ws th cry, and s dlrsly
exctng, tht almst evry sl on brd instnctvly dsrd a
lwrng.

Wlkng th dck wth qck, sd-lngng strds, Ahb cmmndd th
t’gllnt sls and ryls t b st, and evry stnsl sprd. Th
bst mn in th shp mst tk th hlm. Thn, wth evry mst-hd
mnnd, th pld-up crft rlld dwn bfr th wnd. Th strng,
uphvng, lftng tndncy of th tffrl brz fllng th hllws
of s mny sls, md th bynt, hvrng dck t fl lk ar
bnth th ft; whl stll sh rshd alng, as if tw antgnstc
inflncs wr strgglng in hr—on t mnt drct t hvn, th
othr t drv ywngly t sm hrzntl gl. And hd y wtchd
Ahb’s fc tht nght, y wld hv thght tht in hm als tw
dffrnt thngs wr wrrng. Whl hs on lv lg md lvly
echs alng th dck, evry strk of hs dd lmb sndd lk a
cffn-tp. On lf and dth ths old mn wlkd. Bt thgh th shp
s swftly spd, and thgh frm evry ey, lk arrws, th egr
glncs sht, yt th slvry jt ws n mr sn tht nght. Evry
slr swr h sw it onc, bt nt a scnd tm.

Ths mdnght-spt hd almst grwn a frgttn thng, whn, sm dys
aftr, l! at th sm slnt hr, it ws agn annncd: agn it
ws dscrd by all; bt upn mkng sl t ovrtk it, onc mr it
dspprd as if it hd nvr bn. And s it srvd us nght aftr
nght, tll n on hdd it bt t wndr at it. Mystrsly jttd
int th clr mnlght, or strlght, as th cs mght b;
dspprng agn fr on whl dy, or tw dys, or thr; and
smhw smng at evry dstnct rpttn t b advncng stll
frthr and frthr in or vn, ths sltry jt smd fr evr
allrng us on.

Nr wth th immmrl sprsttn of thr rc, and in accrdnc
wth th prtrntrlnss, as it smd, whch in mny thngs invstd
th Pqd, wr thr wntng sm of th smn wh swr tht
whnvr and whrvr dscrd; at hwvr rmt tms, or in hwvr
fr aprt lttds and lngtds, tht unnrbl spt ws cst by
on slf-sm whl; and tht whl, Mby Dck. Fr a tm, thr
rgnd, t, a sns of pclr drd at ths flttng apprtn, as
if it wr trchrsly bcknng us on and on, in ordr tht th
mnstr mght trn rnd upn us, and rnd us at lst in th rmtst
and mst svg ss.

Ths tmprry apprhnsns, s vg bt s awfl, drvd a
wndrs ptncy frm th cntrstng srnty of th wthr, in
whch, bnth all its bl blndnss, sm thght thr lrkd a
dvlsh chrm, as fr dys and dys w vygd alng, thrgh ss s
wrly, lnsmly mld, tht all spc, in rpgnnc t or vngfl
errnd, smd vctng itslf of lf bfr or urn-lk prw.

Bt, at lst, whn trnng t th estwrd, th Cp wnds bgn
hwlng arnd us, and w rs and fll upn th lng, trbld ss
tht ar thr; whn th ivry-tskd Pqd shrply bwd t th
blst, and grd th drk wvs in hr mdnss, tll, lk shwrs of
slvr chps, th fm-flks flw ovr hr blwrks; thn all ths
dslt vcty of lf wnt awy, bt gv plc t sghts mr
dsml thn bfr.

Cls t or bws, strng frms in th wtr drtd hthr and ththr
bfr us; whl thck in or rr flw th inscrtbl s-rvns. And
evry mrnng, prchd on or stys, rws of ths brds wr sn; and
spt of or htngs, fr a lng tm obstntly clng t th hmp,
as thgh thy dmd or shp sm drftng, unnhbtd crft; a
thng appntd t dsltn, and thrfr ft rstng-plc fr
thr hmlss slvs. And hvd and hvd, stll unrstngly hvd
th blck s, as if its vst tds wr a cnscnc; and th grt
mndn sl wr in angsh and rmrs fr th lng sn and sffrng
it hd brd.

Cp of Gd Hp, d thy cll y? Rthr Cp Trmnts, as clld
of yr; fr lng allrd by th prfds slncs tht bfr hd
attndd us, w fnd orslvs lnchd int ths trmntd s, whr
glty bngs trnsfrmd int ths fwls and ths fsh, smd
cndmnd t swm on evrlstngly wtht any hvn in str, or bt
tht blck ar wtht any hrzn. Bt clm, snw-wht, and
unvryng; stll drctng its fntn of fthrs t th sky; stll
bcknng us on frm bfr, th sltry jt wld at tms b
dscrd.

Drng all ths blcknss of th elmnts, Ahb, thgh assmng fr
th tm th almst cntnl cmmnd of th drnchd and dngrs
dck, mnfstd th glmst rsrv; and mr sldm thn evr
addrssd hs mts. In tmpsts tms lk ths, aftr evrythng
abv and alft hs bn scrd, nthng mr cn b dn bt
pssvly t awt th iss of th gl. Thn Cptn and crw bcm
prctcl ftlsts. S, wth hs ivry lg insrtd int its
accstmd hl, and wth on hnd frmly grspng a shrd, Ahb fr
hrs and hrs wld stnd gzng dd t wndwrd, whl an
occsnl sqll of slt or snw wld all bt cngl hs vry
eylshs tgthr. Mntm, th crw drvn frm th frwrd prt of
th shp by th prls ss tht brstngly brk ovr its bws,
std in a ln alng th blwrks in th wst; and th bttr t
grd agnst th lpng wvs, ech mn hd slppd hmslf int a
srt of bwln scrd t th rl, in whch h swng as in a lsnd
blt. Fw or n wrds wr spkn; and th slnt shp, as if mnnd by
pntd slrs in wx, dy aftr dy tr on thrgh all th swft
mdnss and gldnss of th dmnc wvs. By nght th sm mtnss
of hmnty bfr th shrks of th ocn prvld; stll in slnc
th mn swng in th bwlns; stll wrdlss Ahb std up t th
blst. Evn whn wrd ntr smd dmndng rps h wld nt
sk tht rps in hs hmmck. Nvr cld Strbck frgt th old
mn’s aspct, whn on nght gng dwn int th cbn t mrk hw th
brmtr std, h sw hm wth clsd eys sttng strght in hs
flr-scrwd chr; th rn and hlf-mltd slt of th strm frm
whch h hd sm tm bfr emrgd, stll slwly drppng frm th
unrmvd ht and ct. On th tbl bsd hm ly unrlld on of
ths chrts of tds and crrnts whch hv prvsly bn spkn
of. Hs lntrn swng frm hs tghtly clnchd hnd. Thgh th bdy
ws erct, th hd ws thrwn bck s tht th clsd eys wr
pntd twrds th ndl of th tll-tl tht swng frm a bm in
th clng.*

*Th cbn-cmpss is clld th tll-tl, bcs wtht gng t
th cmpss at th hlm, th Cptn, whl blw, cn infrm hmslf
of th crs of th shp.

Trrbl old mn! thght Strbck wth a shddr, slpng in ths
gl, stll th stdfstly eyst thy prps.


CHPTR 52. Th Albtrss.

Sth-estwrd frm th Cp, off th dstnt Crztts, a gd crsng
grnd fr Rght Whlmn, a sl lmd ahd, th Gny (Albtrss)
by nm. As sh slwly drw ngh, frm my lfty prch at th
fr-mst-hd, I hd a gd vw of tht sght s rmrkbl t a tyr
in th fr ocn fshrs—a whlr at s, and lng absnt frm hm.

As if th wvs hd bn fllrs, ths crft ws blchd lk th
skltn of a strndd wlrs. All dwn hr sds, ths spctrl
apprnc ws trcd wth lng chnnls of rddnd rst, whl all
hr sprs and hr rggng wr lk th thck brnchs of trs frrd
ovr wth hr-frst. Only hr lwr sls wr st. A wld sght it
ws t s hr lng-brdd lk-ots at ths thr mst-hds. Thy
smd cld in th skns of bsts, s trn and bptchd th rmnt
tht hd srvvd nrly fr yrs of crsng. Stndng in irn hps
nld t th mst, thy swyd and swng ovr a fthmlss s; and
thgh, whn th shp slwly gldd cls undr or strn, w sx mn
in th ar cm s ngh t ech othr tht w mght almst hv lpd
frm th mst-hds of on shp t ths of th othr; yt, ths
frlrn-lkng fshrmn, mldly eyng us as thy pssd, sd nt
on wrd t or own lk-ots, whl th qrtr-dck hl ws bng
hrd frm blw.

“Shp ahy! Hv y sn th Wht Whl?”

Bt as th strng cptn, lnng ovr th plld blwrks, ws in
th act of pttng hs trmpt t hs mth, it smhw fll frm hs
hnd int th s; and th wnd nw rsng amn, h in vn strv t
mk hmslf hrd wtht it. Mntm hs shp ws stll incrsng
th dstnc btwn. Whl in vrs slnt wys th smn of th
Pqd wr evncng thr obsrvnc of ths omns incdnt at th
frst mr mntn of th Wht Whl’s nm t anthr shp, Ahb fr
a mmnt psd; it almst smd as thgh h wld hv lwrd a
bt t brd th strngr, hd nt th thrtnng wnd frbd. Bt
tkng advntg of hs wndwrd pstn, h agn szd hs trmpt,
and knwng by hr aspct tht th strngr vssl ws a Nntcktr
and shrtly bnd hm, h ldly hld—“Ahy thr! Ths is th
Pqd, bnd rnd th wrld! Tll thm t addrss all ftr lttrs
t th Pcfc ocn! and ths tm thr yrs, if I am nt at hm,
tll thm t addrss thm t ——”

At tht mmnt th tw wks wr frly crssd, and instntly, thn,
in accrdnc wth thr snglr wys, shls of smll hrmlss fsh,
tht fr sm dys bfr hd bn plcdly swmmng by or sd,
drtd awy wth wht smd shddrng fns, and rngd thmslvs
fr and aft wth th strngr’s flnks. Thgh in th crs of hs
cntnl vygngs Ahb mst oftn bfr hv ntcd a smlr
sght, yt, t any mnmnc mn, th vrst trfls cprcsly
crry mnngs.

“Swm awy frm m, d y?” mrmrd Ahb, gzng ovr int th wtr.
Thr smd bt lttl in th wrds, bt th tn cnvyd mr of
dp hlplss sdnss thn th insn old mn hd evr bfr evncd.
Bt trnng t th strsmn, wh ths fr hd bn hldng th shp in
th wnd t dmnsh hr hdwy, h crd ot in hs old ln
vc,—“Up hlm! Kp hr off rnd th wrld!”

Rnd th wrld! Thr is mch in tht snd t inspr prd flngs;
bt whrt ds all tht crcmnvgtn cndct? Only thrgh
nmbrlss prls t th vry pnt whnc w strtd, whr ths tht
w lft bhnd scr, wr all th tm bfr us.

Wr ths wrld an endlss pln, and by slng estwrd w cld fr
evr rch nw dstncs, and dscvr sghts mr swt and strng
thn any Cyclds or Islnds of Kng Slmn, thn thr wr prms
in th vyg. Bt in prst of ths fr mystrs w drm of, or in
trmntd chs of tht dmn phntm tht, sm tm or othr, swms
bfr all hmn hrts; whl chsng sch ovr ths rnd glb, thy
ethr ld us on in brrn mzs or mdwy lv us whlmd.


CHPTR 53. Th Gm.

Th ostnsbl rsn why Ahb dd nt g on brd of th whlr w hd
spkn ws ths: th wnd and s btknd strms. Bt evn hd ths
nt bn th cs, h wld nt aftr all, prhps, hv brdd
hr—jdgng by hs sbsqnt cndct on smlr occsns—if s it hd
bn tht, by th prcss of hlng, h hd obtnd a ngtv answr
t th qstn h pt. Fr, as it evntlly trnd ot, h crd nt
t cnsrt, evn fr fv mnts, wth any strngr cptn, excpt h
cld cntrbt sm of tht infrmtn h s absrbngly sght. Bt
all ths mght rmn indqtly estmtd, wr nt smthng sd
hr of th pclr usgs of whlng-vssls whn mtng ech othr
in frgn ss, and espclly on a cmmn crsng-grnd.

If tw strngrs crssng th Pn Brrns in Nw Yrk Stt, or th
eqlly dslt Slsbry Pln in Englnd; if cslly encntrng
ech othr in sch inhsptbl wlds, ths twn, fr th lf of
thm, cnnt wll avd a mtl slttn; and stppng fr a mmnt
t intrchng th nws; and, prhps, sttng dwn fr a whl and
rstng in cncrt: thn, hw mch mr ntrl tht upn th
illmtbl Pn Brrns and Slsbry Plns of th s, tw whlng
vssls dscryng ech othr at th ends of th erth—off ln
Fnnng’s Islnd, or th fr awy Kng’s Mlls; hw mch mr ntrl,
I sy, tht undr sch crcmstncs ths shps shld nt only
intrchng hls, bt cm int stll clsr, mr frndly and
scbl cntct. And espclly wld ths sm t b a mttr of
crs, in th cs of vssls ownd in on sprt, and whs
cptns, offcrs, and nt a fw of th mn ar prsnlly knwn t
ech othr; and cnsqntly, hv all srts of dr dmstc thngs t
tlk abt.

Fr th lng absnt shp, th otwrd-bndr, prhps, hs lttrs on
brd; at any rt, sh wll b sr t lt hr hv sm pprs of a
dt a yr or tw ltr thn th lst on on hr blrrd and
thmb-wrn fls. And in rtrn fr tht crtsy, th otwrd-bnd
shp wld rcv th ltst whlng intllgnc frm th
crsng-grnd t whch sh my b dstnd, a thng of th utmst
imprtnc t hr. And in dgr, all ths wll hld tr cncrnng
whlng vssls crssng ech othr’s trck on th crsng-grnd
itslf, evn thgh thy ar eqlly lng absnt frm hm. Fr on of
thm my hv rcvd a trnsfr of lttrs frm sm thrd, and nw
fr rmt vssl; and sm of ths lttrs my b fr th ppl of
th shp sh nw mts. Bsds, thy wld exchng th whlng nws,
and hv an agrbl cht. Fr nt only wld thy mt wth all th
sympths of slrs, bt lkws wth all th pclr
cngnlts arsng frm a cmmn prst and mtlly shrd
prvtns and prls.

Nr wld dffrnc of cntry mk any vry essntl dffrnc;
tht is, s lng as bth prts spk on lngg, as is th cs
wth Amrcns and Englsh. Thgh, t b sr, frm th smll nmbr
of Englsh whlrs, sch mtngs d nt vry oftn occr, and whn
thy d occr thr is t apt t b a srt of shynss btwn thm;
fr yr Englshmn is rthr rsrvd, and yr Ynk, h ds nt
fncy tht srt of thng in anybdy bt hmslf. Bsds, th Englsh
whlrs smtms affct a knd of mtrpltn sprrty ovr th
Amrcn whlrs; rgrdng th lng, ln Nntcktr, wth hs
nndscrpt prvnclsms, as a srt of s-psnt. Bt whr ths
sprrty in th Englsh whlmn ds rlly cnsst, it wld b
hrd t sy, sng tht th Ynks in on dy, cllctvly, kll
mr whls thn all th Englsh, cllctvly, in tn yrs. Bt ths
is a hrmlss lttl fbl in th Englsh whl-hntrs, whch th
Nntcktr ds nt tk mch t hrt; prbbly, bcs h knws
tht h hs a fw fbls hmslf.

S, thn, w s tht of all shps sprtly slng th s, th
whlrs hv mst rsn t b scbl—and thy ar s. Whrs, sm
mrchnt shps crssng ech othr’s wk in th md-Atlntc, wll
oftntms pss on wtht s mch as a sngl wrd of rcgntn,
mtlly cttng ech othr on th hgh ss, lk a brc of dnds
in Brdwy; and all th tm indlgng, prhps, in fncl crtcsm
upn ech othr’s rg. As fr Mn-of-Wr, whn thy chnc t mt at
s, thy frst g thrgh sch a strng of slly bwngs and
scrpngs, sch a dckng of ensgns, tht thr ds nt sm t b
mch rght-dwn hrty gd-wll and brthrly lv abt it at all. As
tchng Slv-shps mtng, why, thy ar in sch a prdgs hrry,
thy rn awy frm ech othr as sn as pssbl. And as fr Prts,
whn thy chnc t crss ech othr’s crss-bns, th frst hl
is—“Hw mny sklls?”—th sm wy tht whlrs hl—“Hw mny
brrls?” And tht qstn onc answrd, prts strghtwy str
aprt, fr thy ar infrnl vllns on bth sds, and dn’t lk t
s ovrmch of ech othr’s vllns lknsss.

Bt lk at th gdly, hnst, unstntts, hsptbl, scbl,
fr-and-esy whlr! Wht ds th whlr d whn sh mts anthr
whlr in any srt of dcnt wthr? Sh hs a “_Gm_,” a thng s
uttrly unknwn t all othr shps tht thy nvr hrd of th nm
evn; and if by chnc thy shld hr of it, thy only grn at it,
and rpt gmsm stff abt “sptrs” and “blbbr-blrs,” and
sch lk prtty exclmtns. Why it is tht all Mrchnt-smn, and
als all Prts and Mn-of-Wr’s mn, and Slv-shp slrs, chrsh
sch a scrnfl flng twrds Whl-shps; ths is a qstn it
wld b hrd t answr. Bcs, in th cs of prts, sy, I shld
lk t knw whthr tht prfssn of thrs hs any pclr glry
abt it. It smtms ends in uncmmn elvtn, indd; bt only at
th gllws. And bsds, whn a mn is elvtd in tht odd fshn,
h hs n prpr fndtn fr hs sprr alttd. Hnc, I
cncld, tht in bstng hmslf t b hgh lftd abv a whlmn,
in tht assrtn th prt hs n sld bss t stnd on.

Bt wht is a _Gm?_ Y mght wr ot yr indx-fngr rnnng up
and dwn th clmns of dctnrs, and nvr fnd th wrd. Dr.
Jhnsn nvr attnd t tht erdtn; Nh Wbstr’s ark ds nt
hld it. Nvrthlss, ths sm exprssv wrd hs nw fr mny yrs
bn in cnstnt us amng sm fftn thsnd tr brn Ynks.
Crtnly, it nds a dfntn, and shld b incrprtd int th
Lxcn. Wth tht vw, lt m lrndly dfn it.

GM. NN—_A scl mtng of tw_ (_or mr_) _Whlshps, gnrlly
on a crsng-grnd; whn, aftr exchngng hls, thy exchng
vsts by bts’ crws: th tw cptns rmnng, fr th tm, on
brd of on shp, and th tw chf mts on th othr._

Thr is anthr lttl itm abt Gmmng whch mst nt b frgttn
hr. All prfssns hv thr own lttl pclrts of dtl; s
hs th whl fshry. In a prt, mn-of-wr, or slv shp, whn th
cptn is rwd anywhr in hs bt, h alwys sts in th strn
shts on a cmfrtbl, smtms cshnd st thr, and oftn
strs hmslf wth a prtty lttl mllnr’s tllr dcrtd wth
gy crds and rbbns. Bt th whl-bt hs n st astrn, n sf
of tht srt whtvr, and n tllr at all. Hgh tms indd, if
whlng cptns wr whld abt th wtr on cstrs lk gty old
aldrmn in ptnt chrs. And as fr a tllr, th whl-bt nvr
admts of any sch effmncy; and thrfr as in gmmng a cmplt
bt’s crw mst lv th shp, and hnc as th bt strr or
hrpnr is of th nmbr, tht sbrdnt is th strsmn upn th
occsn, and th cptn, hvng n plc t st in, is plld off t
hs vst all stndng lk a pn tr. And oftn y wll ntc tht
bng cnscs of th eys of th whl vsbl wrld rstng on hm
frm th sds of th tw shps, ths stndng cptn is all alv t
th imprtnc of sstnng hs dgnty by mntnng hs lgs. Nr
is ths any vry esy mttr; fr in hs rr is th immns prjctng
strng or httng hm nw and thn in th smll of hs bck, th
aftr-or rcprctng by rppng hs kns in frnt. H is ths
cmpltly wdgd bfr and bhnd, and cn only expnd hmslf
sdwys by sttlng dwn on hs strtchd lgs; bt a sddn, vlnt
ptch of th bt wll oftn g fr t tppl hm, bcs lngth of
fndtn is nthng wtht crrspndng brdth. Mrly mk a
sprd angl of tw pls, and y cnnt stnd thm up. Thn, agn,
it wld nvr d in pln sght of th wrld’s rvtd eys, it wld
nvr d, I sy, fr ths strddlng cptn t b sn stdyng
hmslf th slghtst prtcl by ctchng hld of anythng wth hs
hnds; indd, as tkn of hs entr, bynt slf-cmmnd, h
gnrlly crrs hs hnds in hs trwsrs’ pckts; bt prhps bng
gnrlly vry lrg, hvy hnds, h crrs thm thr fr bllst.
Nvrthlss thr hv occrrd instncs, wll athntctd ons
t, whr th cptn hs bn knwn fr an uncmmnly crtcl mmnt
or tw, in a sddn sqll sy—t sz hld of th nrst orsmn’s
hr, and hld on thr lk grm dth.


CHPTR 54. Th Twn-H’s Stry.

(_As tld at th Gldn Inn._)

Th Cp of Gd Hp, and all th wtry rgn rnd abt thr, is
mch lk sm ntd fr crnrs of a grt hghwy, whr y mt
mr trvllrs thn in any othr prt.

It ws nt vry lng aftr spkng th Gny tht anthr
hmwrd-bnd whlmn, th Twn-H,* ws encntrd. Sh ws mnnd
almst whlly by Plynsns. In th shrt gm tht ensd sh gv us
strng nws of Mby Dck. T sm th gnrl intrst in th Wht
Whl ws nw wldly hghtnd by a crcmstnc of th Twn-H’s
stry, whch smd obscrly t invlv wth th whl a crtn
wndrs, invrtd vsttn of on of ths s clld jdgmnts of
Gd whch at tms ar sd t ovrtk sm mn. Ths lttr
crcmstnc, wth its own prtclr accmpnmnts, frmng wht my
b clld th scrt prt of th trgdy abt t b nrrtd, nvr
rchd th ers of Cptn Ahb or hs mts. Fr tht scrt prt of
th stry ws unknwn t th cptn of th Twn-H hmslf. It ws th
prvt prprty of thr cnfdrt wht smn of tht shp, on of
whm, it sms, cmmnctd it t Tshtg wth Rmsh injnctns of
scrcy, bt th fllwng nght Tshtg rmbld in hs slp, and
rvld s mch of it in tht wy, tht whn h ws wknd h cld
nt wll wthhld th rst. Nvrthlss, s ptnt an inflnc dd
ths thng hv on ths smn in th Pqd wh cm t th fll
knwldg of it, and by sch a strng dlccy, t cll it s, wr
thy gvrnd in ths mttr, tht thy kpt th scrt amng
thmslvs s tht it nvr trnsprd abft th Pqd’s mn-mst.
Intrwvng in its prpr plc ths drkr thrd wth th stry as
pblcly nrrtd on th shp, th whl of ths strng affr I nw
prcd t pt on lstng rcrd.

*Th ancnt whl-cry upn frst sghtng a whl frm th mst-hd,
stll usd by whlmn in hntng th fms Gllpgs trrpn.

Fr my hmr’s sk, I shll prsrv th styl in whch I onc
nrrtd it at Lm, t a lngng crcl of my Spnsh frnds, on
snt’s ev, smkng upn th thck-glt tld pzz of th Gldn
Inn. Of ths fn cvlrs, th yng Dns, Pdr and Sbstn, wr
on th clsr trms wth m; and hnc th intrldng qstns thy
occsnlly pt, and whch ar dly answrd at th tm.

“Sm tw yrs prr t my frst lrnng th evnts whch I am abt
rhrsng t y, gntlmn, th Twn-H, Sprm Whlr of Nntckt,
ws crsng in yr Pcfc hr, nt vry mny dys’ sl estwrd
frm th evs of ths gd Gldn Inn. Sh ws smwhr t th
nrthwrd of th Ln. On mrnng upn hndlng th pmps, accrdng
t dly usg, it ws obsrvd tht sh md mr wtr in hr hld
thn cmmn. Thy sppsd a swrd-fsh hd stbbd hr, gntlmn. Bt
th cptn, hvng sm unsl rsn fr blvng tht rr gd
lck awtd hm in ths lttds; and thrfr bng vry avrs t
qt thm, and th lk nt bng thn cnsdrd at all dngrs,
thgh, indd, thy cld nt fnd it aftr srchng th hld as lw
dwn as ws pssbl in rthr hvy wthr, th shp stll cntnd
hr crsngs, th mrnrs wrkng at th pmps at wd and esy
intrvls; bt n gd lck cm; mr dys wnt by, and nt only ws
th lk yt undscvrd, bt it snsbly incrsd. S mch s, tht
nw tkng sm alrm, th cptn, mkng all sl, std awy fr th
nrst hrbr amng th islnds, thr t hv hs hll hv ot and
rprd.

“Thgh n smll pssg ws bfr hr, yt, if th cmmnst chnc
fvrd, h dd nt at all fr tht hs shp wld fndr by th
wy, bcs hs pmps wr of th bst, and bng prdclly
rlvd at thm, ths sx-and-thrty mn of hs cld esly kp th
shp fr; nvr mnd if th lk shld dbl on hr. In trth, wll
ngh th whl of ths pssg bng attndd by vry prsprs
brzs, th Twn-H hd all bt crtnly arrvd in prfct sfty at
hr prt wtht th occrrnc of th lst ftlty, hd it nt bn
fr th brtl ovrbrng of Rdny, th mt, a Vnyrdr, and th
bttrly prvkd vngnc of Stlklt, a Lkmn and dsprd frm
Bffl.

“‘Lkmn!—Bffl! Pry, wht is a Lkmn, and whr is Bffl?’
sd Dn Sbstn, rsng in hs swngng mt of grss.

“On th estrn shr of or Lk Er, Dn; bt—I crv yr
crtsy—my b, y shll sn hr frthr of all tht. Nw,
gntlmn, in sqr-sl brgs and thr-mstd shps, wll-ngh as
lrg and stt as any tht evr sld ot of yr old Cll t fr
Mnll; ths Lkmn, in th lnd-lckd hrt of or Amrc, hd yt
bn nrtrd by all ths agrrn frbtng imprssns pplrly
cnnctd wth th opn ocn. Fr in thr intrflwng aggrgt,
ths grnd frsh-wtr ss of ors,—Er, and Ontr, and Hrn, and
Sprr, and Mchgn,—pssss an ocn-lk expnsvnss, wth mny
of th ocn’s nblst trts; wth mny of its rmmd vrts of
rcs and of clms. Thy cntn rnd archplgs of rmntc
isls, evn as th Plynsn wtrs d; in lrg prt, ar shrd by
tw grt cntrstng ntns, as th Atlntc is; thy frnsh lng
mrtm apprchs t or nmrs trrtrl clns frm th Est,
dttd all rnd thr bnks; hr and thr ar frwnd upn by
bttrs, and by th gt-lk crggy gns of lfty Mcknw; thy
hv hrd th flt thndrngs of nvl vctrs; at intrvls, thy
yld thr bchs t wld brbrns, whs rd pntd fcs flsh
frm ot thr pltry wgwms; fr lgs and lgs ar flnkd by
ancnt and unntrd frsts, whr th gnt pns stnd lk srrd
lns of kngs in Gthc gnlgs; ths sm wds hrbrng wld
Afrc bsts of pry, and slkn crtrs whs exprtd frs gv
rbs t Trtr Emprrs; thy mrrr th pvd cptls of Bffl and
Clvlnd, as wll as Wnnbg vllgs; thy flt alk th
fll-rggd mrchnt shp, th armd crsr of th Stt, th stmr,
and th bch cn; thy ar swpt by Brn and dsmstng blsts as
drfl as any tht lsh th sltd wv; thy knw wht shpwrcks
ar, fr ot of sght of lnd, hwvr inlnd, thy hv drwnd fll
mny a mdnght shp wth all its shrkng crw. Ths, gntlmn,
thgh an inlndr, Stlklt ws wld-ocn brn, and wld-ocn
nrtrd; as mch of an adcs mrnr as any. And fr Rdny,
thgh in hs infncy h my hv ld hm dwn on th ln Nntckt
bch, t nrs at hs mtrnl s; thgh in aftr lf h hd lng
fllwd or astr Atlntc and yr cntmpltv Pcfc; yt ws
h qt as vngfl and fll of scl qrrl as th bckwds
smn, frsh frm th lttds of bck-hrn hndld Bw-knvs. Yt
ws ths Nntcktr a mn wth sm gd-hrtd trts; and ths
Lkmn, a mrnr, wh thgh a srt of dvl indd, mght yt by
inflxbl frmnss, only tmprd by tht cmmn dcncy of hmn
rcgntn whch is th mnst slv’s rght; ths trtd, ths
Stlklt hd lng bn rtnd hrmlss and dcl. At all evnts, h
hd prvd s ths fr; bt Rdny ws dmd and md md, and
Stlklt—bt, gntlmn, y shll hr.

“It ws nt mr thn a dy or tw at th frthst aftr pntng hr
prw fr hr islnd hvn, tht th Twn-H’s lk smd agn
incrsng, bt only s as t rqr an hr or mr at th pmps
evry dy. Y mst knw tht in a sttld and cvlzd ocn lk or
Atlntc, fr exmpl, sm skpprs thnk lttl of pmpng thr
whl wy acrss it; thgh of a stll, slpy nght, shld th
offcr of th dck hppn t frgt hs dty in tht rspct, th
prbblty wld b tht h and hs shpmts wld nvr agn
rmmbr it, on accnt of all hnds gntly sbsdng t th bttm.
Nr in th sltry and svg ss fr frm y t th wstwrd,
gntlmn, is it altgthr unsl fr shps t kp clngng at thr
pmp-hndls in fll chrs evn fr a vyg of cnsdrbl lngth;
tht is, if it l alng a tlrbly accssbl cst, or if any othr
rsnbl rtrt is affrdd thm. It is only whn a lky vssl is
in sm vry ot of th wy prt of ths wtrs, sm rlly lndlss
lttd, tht hr cptn bgns t fl a lttl anxs.

“Mch ths wy hd it bn wth th Twn-H; s whn hr lk ws fnd
gnng onc mr, thr ws in trth sm smll cncrn mnfstd by
svrl of hr cmpny; espclly by Rdny th mt. H cmmndd th
uppr sls t b wll hstd, shtd hm anw, and evry wy
expndd t th brz. Nw ths Rdny, I spps, ws as lttl of a
cwrd, and as lttl inclnd t any srt of nrvs apprhnsvnss
tchng hs own prsn as any frlss, unthnkng crtr on lnd or
on s tht y cn cnvnntly imgn, gntlmn. Thrfr whn h
btryd ths slctd abt th sfty of th shp, sm of th
smn dclrd tht it ws only on accnt of hs bng a prt ownr
in hr. S whn thy wr wrkng tht evnng at th pmps, thr ws
on ths hd n smll gmsmnss slly gng on amng thm, as thy
std wth thr ft cntnlly ovrflwd by th rpplng clr
wtr; clr as any mntn sprng, gntlmn—tht bbblng frm th
pmps rn acrss th dck, and prd itslf ot in stdy spts at
th l scppr-hls.

“Nw, as y wll knw, it is nt sldm th cs in ths cnvntnl
wrld of ors—wtry or othrws; tht whn a prsn plcd in cmmnd
ovr hs fllw-mn fnds on of thm t b vry sgnfcntly hs
sprr in gnrl prd of mnhd, strghtwy agnst tht mn h
cncvs an uncnqrbl dslk and bttrnss; and if h hv a
chnc h wll pll dwn and plvrz tht sbltrn’s twr, and mk
a lttl hp of dst of it. B ths cnct of mn as it my,
gntlmn, at all evnts Stlklt ws a tll and nbl anml wth a
hd lk a Rmn, and a flwng gldn brd lk th tssld
hsngs of yr lst vcry’s snrtng chrgr; and a brn, and a
hrt, and a sl in hm, gntlmn, whch hd md Stlklt
Chrlmgn, hd h bn brn sn t Chrlmgn’s fthr. Bt Rdny,
th mt, ws ugly as a ml; yt as hrdy, as stbbrn, as mlcs.
H dd nt lv Stlklt, and Stlklt knw it.

“Espyng th mt drwng nr as h ws tlng at th pmp wth th
rst, th Lkmn affctd nt t ntc hm, bt unwd, wnt on wth
hs gy bntrngs.

“‘Ay, ay, my mrry lds, it’s a lvly lk ths; hld a cnnkn,
on of y, and lt’s hv a tst. By th Lrd, it’s wrth bttlng! I
tll y wht, mn, old Rd’s invstmnt mst g fr it! h hd bst ct
awy hs prt of th hll and tw it hm. Th fct is, bys, tht
swrd-fsh only bgn th jb; h’s cm bck agn wth a gng of
shp-crpntrs, sw-fsh, and fl-fsh, and wht nt; and th whl
pss of ’em ar nw hrd at wrk cttng and slshng at th bttm;
mkng imprvmnts, I spps. If old Rd wr hr nw, I’d tll hm
t jmp ovrbrd and scttr ’em. Thy’r plyng th dvl wth hs
estt, I cn tll hm. Bt h’s a smpl old sl,—Rd, and a bty
t. Bys, thy sy th rst of hs prprty is invstd in
lkng-glsss. I wndr if h’d gv a pr dvl lk m th mdl
of hs ns.’

“‘Dmn yr eys! wht’s tht pmp stppng fr?’ rrd Rdny,
prtndng nt t hv hrd th slrs’ tlk. ‘Thndr awy at it!’

“‘Ay, ay, sr,’ sd Stlklt, mrry as a crckt. ‘Lvly, bys,
lvly, nw!’ And wth tht th pmp clngd lk ffty fr-engns;
th mn tssd thr hts off t it, and er lng tht pclr gspng
of th lngs ws hrd whch dnts th fllst tnsn of lf’s
utmst enrgs.

“Qttng th pmp at lst, wth th rst of hs bnd, th Lkmn wnt
frwrd all pntng, and st hmslf dwn on th wndlss; hs fc
fry rd, hs eys bldsht, and wpng th prfs swt frm hs
brw. Nw wht cznng fnd it ws, gntlmn, tht pssssd Rdny
t mddl wth sch a mn in tht crprlly exsprtd stt, I knw
nt; bt s it hppnd. Intlrbly strdng alng th dck, th mt
cmmndd hm t gt a brm and swp dwn th plnks, and als a
shvl, and rmv sm offnsv mttrs cnsqnt upn allwng a
pg t rn at lrg.

“Nw, gntlmn, swpng a shp’s dck at s is a pc of hshld
wrk whch in all tms bt rgng gls is rglrly attndd t evry
evnng; it hs bn knwn t b dn in th cs of shps actlly
fndrng at th tm. Sch, gntlmn, is th inflxblty of
s-usgs and th instnctv lv of ntnss in smn; sm of whm
wld nt wllngly drwn wtht frst wshng thr fcs. Bt in all
vssls ths brm bsnss is th prscrptv prvnc of th bys,
if bys thr b abrd. Bsds, it ws th strngr mn in th
Twn-H tht hd bn dvdd int gngs, tkng trns at th pmps;
and bng th mst athltc smn of thm all, Stlklt hd bn
rglrly assgnd cptn of on of th gngs; cnsqntly h shld
hv bn frd frm any trvl bsnss nt cnnctd wth trly
ntcl dts, sch bng th cs wth hs cmrds. I mntn all
ths prtclrs s tht y my undrstnd exctly hw ths affr
std btwn th tw mn.

“Bt thr ws mr thn ths: th ordr abt th shvl ws almst as
plnly mnt t stng and inslt Stlklt, as thgh Rdny hd spt
in hs fc. Any mn wh hs gn slr in a whl-shp wll
undrstnd ths; and all ths and dbtlss mch mr, th Lkmn
flly cmprhndd whn th mt uttrd hs cmmnd. Bt as h st
stll fr a mmnt, and as h stdfstly lkd int th mt’s
mlgnnt ey and prcvd th stcks of pwdr-csks hpd up in hm
and th slw-mtch slntly brnng alng twrds thm; as h
instnctvly sw all ths, tht strng frbrnc and unwllngnss
t str up th dpr pssntnss in any alrdy irfl bng—a
rpgnnc mst flt, whn flt at all, by rlly vlnt mn evn whn
aggrvd—ths nmlss phntm flng, gntlmn, stl ovr
Stlklt.

“Thrfr, in hs ordnry tn, only a lttl brkn by th bdly
exhstn h ws tmprrly in, h answrd hm syng tht swpng
th dck ws nt hs bsnss, and h wld nt d it. And thn,
wtht at all alldng t th shvl, h pntd t thr lds as th
cstmry swprs; wh, nt bng blltd at th pmps, hd dn
lttl or nthng all dy. T ths, Rdny rpld wth an oth, in a
mst dmnrng and otrgs mnnr uncndtnlly rtrtng hs
cmmnd; mnwhl advncng upn th stll std Lkmn, wth an
uplftd cpr’s clb hmmr whch h hd sntchd frm a csk nr
by.

“Htd and irrttd as h ws by hs spsmdc tl at th pmps, fr
all hs frst nmlss flng of frbrnc th swtng Stlklt
cld bt ill brk ths brng in th mt; bt smhw stll
smthrng th cnflgrtn wthn hm, wtht spkng h rmnd
dggdly rtd t hs st, tll at lst th incnsd Rdny shk th
hmmr wthn a fw inchs of hs fc, frsly cmmndng hm t d
hs bddng.

“Stlklt rs, and slwly rtrtng rnd th wndlss, stdly
fllwd by th mt wth hs mncng hmmr, dlbrtly rptd
hs intntn nt t oby. Sng, hwvr, tht hs frbrnc hd
nt th slghtst effct, by an awfl and unspkbl intmtn wth
hs twstd hnd h wrnd off th flsh and infttd mn; bt it
ws t n prps. And in ths wy th tw wnt onc slwly rnd th
wndlss; whn, rslvd at lst n lngr t rtrt, bthnkng hm
tht h hd nw frbrn as mch as cmprtd wth hs hmr, th
Lkmn psd on th htchs and ths spk t th offcr:

“‘Mr. Rdny, I wll nt oby y. Tk tht hmmr awy, or lk t
yrslf.’ Bt th prdstntd mt cmng stll clsr t hm, whr
th Lkmn std fxd, nw shk th hvy hmmr wthn an inch of
hs tth; mnwhl rptng a strng of insffrbl mldctns.
Rtrtng nt th thsndth prt of an inch; stbbng hm in th ey
wth th unflnchng pnrd of hs glnc, Stlklt, clnchng hs
rght hnd bhnd hm and crpngly drwng it bck, tld hs
prsctr tht if th hmmr bt grzd hs chk h (Stlklt) wld
mrdr hm. Bt, gntlmn, th fl hd bn brndd fr th slghtr
by th gds. Immdtly th hmmr tchd th chk; th nxt instnt
th lwr jw of th mt ws stv in hs hd; h fll on th htch
sptng bld lk a whl.

“Er th cry cld g aft Stlklt ws shkng on of th bckstys
ldng fr alft t whr tw of hs cmrds wr stndng thr
msthds. Thy wr bth Cnllrs.

“‘Cnllrs!’ crd Dn Pdr. ‘W hv sn mny whl-shps in or
hrbrs, bt nvr hrd of yr Cnllrs. Prdn: wh and wht ar
thy?’

“‘Cnllrs, Dn, ar th btmn blngng t or grnd Er Cnl.
Y mst hv hrd of it.’

“‘Ny, Snr; hrbts in ths dll, wrm, mst lzy, and hrdtry
lnd, w knw bt lttl of yr vgrs Nrth.’

“‘Ay? Wll thn, Dn, rfll my cp. Yr chch’s vry fn; and er
prcdng frthr I wll tll y wht or Cnllrs ar; fr sch
infrmtn my thrw sd-lght upn my stry.’

“Fr thr hndrd and sxty mls, gntlmn, thrgh th entr
brdth of th stt of Nw Yrk; thrgh nmrs ppls cts and
mst thrvng vllgs; thrgh lng, dsml, unnhbtd swmps, and
afflnt, cltvtd flds, unrvlld fr frtlty; by bllrd-rm
and br-rm; thrgh th hly-of-hls of grt frsts; on Rmn
archs ovr Indn rvrs; thrgh sn and shd; by hppy hrts or
brkn; thrgh all th wd cntrstng scnry of ths nbl Mhwk
cnts; and espclly, by rws of snw-wht chpls, whs sprs
stnd almst lk mlstns, flws on cntnl strm of Vntnly
crrpt and oftn lwlss lf. Thr’s yr tr Ashnt, gntlmn;
thr hwl yr pgns; whr y evr fnd thm, nxt dr t y;
undr th lng-flng shdw, and th sng ptrnsng l of chrchs.
Fr by sm crs ftlty, as it is oftn ntd of yr mtrpltn
frbtrs tht thy evr encmp arnd th hlls of jstc, s
snnrs, gntlmn, mst abnd in hlst vcnts.

“‘Is tht a frr pssng?’ sd Dn Pdr, lkng dwnwrds int th
crwdd plzz, wth hmrs cncrn.

“‘Wll fr or nrthrn frnd, Dm Isbll’s Inqstn wns in
Lm,’ lghd Dn Sbstn. ‘Prcd, Snr.’

“‘A mmnt! Prdn!’ crd anthr of th cmpny. ‘In th nm of all
us Lms, I bt dsr t exprss t y, sr slr, tht w hv by
n mns ovrlkd yr dlccy in nt sbstttng prsnt Lm fr
dstnt Vnc in yr crrpt cmprsn. Oh! d nt bw and lk
srprsd; y knw th prvrb all alng ths cst—“Crrpt as Lm.”
It bt brs ot yr syng, t; chrchs mr plntfl thn
bllrd-tbls, and fr evr opn—and “Crrpt as Lm.” S, t,
Vnc; I hv bn thr; th hly cty of th blssd evnglst, St.
Mrk!—St. Dmnc, prg it! Yr cp! Thnks: hr I rfll; nw, y
pr ot agn.’

“Frly dpctd in hs own vctn, gntlmn, th Cnllr wld
mk a fn drmtc hr, s abndntly and pctrsqly wckd is
h. Lk Mrk Antny, fr dys and dys alng hs grn-trfd, flwry
Nl, h indlntly flts, opnly tyng wth hs rd-chkd
Clptr, rpnng hs aprct thgh upn th snny dck. Bt ashr,
all ths effmncy is dshd. Th brgndsh gs whch th Cnllr
s prdly sprts; hs slchd and gly-rbbnd ht btkn hs
grnd ftrs. A trrr t th smlng inncnc of th vllgs
thrgh whch h flts; hs swrt vsg and bld swggr ar nt
unshnnd in cts. Onc a vgbnd on hs own cnl, I hv rcvd
gd trns frm on of ths Cnllrs; I thnk hm hrtly; wld
fn b nt ungrtfl; bt it is oftn on of th prm rdmng
qlts of yr mn of vlnc, tht at tms h hs as stff an arm
t bck a pr strngr in a strt, as t plndr a wlthy on. In
sm, gntlmn, wht th wldnss of ths cnl lf is, is
emphtclly evncd by ths; tht or wld whl-fshry cntns s
mny of its mst fnshd grdts, and tht scrc any rc of
mnknd, excpt Sydny mn, ar s mch dstrstd by or whlng
cptns. Nr ds it at all dmnsh th crsnss of ths mttr,
tht t mny thsnds of or rrl bys and yng mn brn alng its
ln, th prbtnry lf of th Grnd Cnl frnshs th sl
trnstn btwn qtly rpng in a Chrstn crn-fld, and
rcklssly plghng th wtrs of th mst brbrc ss.

“‘I s! I s!’ imptsly exclmd Dn Pdr, spllng hs chch
upn hs slvry rffls. ‘N nd t trvl! Th wrld’s on Lm. I
hd thght, nw, tht at yr tmprt Nrth th gnrtns wr
cld and hly as th hlls.—Bt th stry.’

“I lft off, gntlmn, whr th Lkmn shk th bcksty. Hrdly
hd h dn s, whn h ws srrndd by th thr jnr mts and
th fr hrpnrs, wh all crwdd hm t th dck. Bt sldng dwn
th rps lk blfl cmts, th tw Cnllrs rshd int th
uprr, and sght t drg thr mn ot of it twrds th frcstl.
Othrs of th slrs jnd wth thm in ths attmpt, and a twstd
trml ensd; whl stndng ot of hrm’s wy, th vlnt cptn
dncd up and dwn wth a whl-pk, cllng upn hs offcrs t
mnhndl tht atrcs scndrl, and smk hm alng t th
qrtr-dck. At intrvls, h rn cls up t th rvlvng brdr of
th cnfsn, and pryng int th hrt of it wth hs pk, sght t
prck ot th objct of hs rsntmnt. Bt Stlklt and hs
dsprds wr t mch fr thm all; thy sccdd in gnng th
frcstl dck, whr, hstly slwng abt thr or fr lrg csks
in a ln wth th wndlss, ths s-Prsns entrnchd thmslvs
bhnd th brrcd.

“‘Cm ot of tht, y prts!’ rrd th cptn, nw mncng thm
wth a pstl in ech hnd, jst brght t hm by th stwrd. ‘Cm
ot of tht, y ct-thrts!’

“Stlklt lpd on th brrcd, and strdng up and dwn thr,
dfd th wrst th pstls cld d; bt gv th cptn t
undrstnd dstnctly, tht hs (Stlklt’s) dth wld b th sgnl
fr a mrdrs mtny on th prt of all hnds. Frng in hs hrt
lst ths mght prv bt t tr, th cptn a lttl dsstd, bt
stll cmmndd th insrgnts instntly t rtrn t thr dty.

“‘Wll y prms nt t tch us, if w d?’ dmndd thr
rngldr.

“‘Trn t! trn t!—I mk n prms;—t yr dty! D y wnt t
snk th shp, by knckng off at a tm lk ths? Trn t!’ and h
onc mr rsd a pstl.

“‘Snk th shp?’ crd Stlklt. ‘Ay, lt hr snk. Nt a mn of us
trns t, unlss y swr nt t rs a rp-yrn agnst us. Wht
sy y, mn?’ trnng t hs cmrds. A frc chr ws thr
rspns.

“Th Lkmn nw ptrlld th brrcd, all th whl kpng hs ey
on th Cptn, and jrkng ot sch sntncs as ths:—‘It’s nt or
flt; w ddn’t wnt it; I tld hm t tk hs hmmr awy; it ws
by’s bsnss; h mght hv knwn m bfr ths; I tld hm nt t
prck th bffl; I blv I hv brkn a fngr hr agnst hs
crsd jw; an’t ths mncng knvs dwn in th frcstl thr,
mn? lk t ths hndspks, my hrts. Cptn, by Gd, lk t
yrslf; sy th wrd; dn’t b a fl; frgt it all; w ar rdy t
trn t; trt us dcntly, and w’r yr mn; bt w wn’t b
flggd.’

“‘Trn t! I mk n prmss, trn t, I sy!’

“‘Lk y, nw,’ crd th Lkmn, flngng ot hs arm twrds hm,
‘thr ar a fw of us hr (and I am on of thm) wh hv shppd fr
th crs, d’y s; nw as y wll knw, sr, w cn clm or
dschrg as sn as th anchr is dwn; s w dn’t wnt a rw; it’s
nt or intrst; w wnt t b pcbl; w ar rdy t wrk, bt w
wn’t b flggd.’

“‘Trn t!’ rrd th Cptn.

“Stlklt glncd rnd hm a mmnt, and thn sd:—‘I tll y wht
it is nw, Cptn, rthr thn kll y, and b hng fr sch a shbby
rscl, w wn’t lft a hnd agnst y unlss y attck us; bt tll
y sy th wrd abt nt flggng us, w dn’t d a hnd’s trn.’

“‘Dwn int th frcstl thn, dwn wth y, I’ll kp y thr tll
y’r sck of it. Dwn y g.’

“‘Shll w?’ crd th rngldr t hs mn. Mst of thm wr agnst
it; bt at lngth, in obdnc t Stlklt, thy prcdd hm dwn
int thr drk dn, grwlngly dspprng, lk brs int a cv.

“As th Lkmn’s br hd ws jst lvl wth th plnks, th Cptn
and hs pss lpd th brrcd, and rpdly drwng ovr th sld
of th scttl, plntd thr grp of hnds upn it, and ldly clld
fr th stwrd t brng th hvy brss pdlck blngng t th
cmpnnwy. Thn opnng th sld a lttl, th Cptn whsprd
smthng dwn th crck, clsd it, and trnd th ky upn thm—tn
in nmbr—lvng on dck sm twnty or mr, wh ths fr hd
rmnd ntrl.

“All nght a wd-awk wtch ws kpt by all th offcrs, frwrd and
aft, espclly abt th frcstl scttl and fr htchwy; at
whch lst plc it ws frd th insrgnts mght emrg, aftr
brkng thrgh th blkhd blw. Bt th hrs of drknss pssd
in pc; th mn wh stll rmnd at thr dty tlng hrd at th
pmps, whs clnkng and clnkng at intrvls thrgh th drry
nght dsmlly rsndd thrgh th shp.

“At snrs th Cptn wnt frwrd, and knckng on th dck,
smmnd th prsnrs t wrk; bt wth a yll thy rfsd. Wtr ws
thn lwrd dwn t thm, and a cpl of hndfls of bsct wr
tssd aftr it; whn agn trnng th ky upn thm and pcktng it,
th Cptn rtrnd t th qrtr-dck. Twc evry dy fr thr
dys ths ws rptd; bt on th frth mrnng a cnfsd wrnglng,
and thn a scfflng ws hrd, as th cstmry smmns ws dlvrd;
and sddnly fr mn brst up frm th frcstl, syng thy wr
rdy t trn t. Th ftd clsnss of th ar, and a fmshng dt,
untd prhps t sm frs of ultmt rtrbtn, hd cnstrnd
thm t srrndr at dscrtn. Embldnd by ths, th Cptn
rtrtd hs dmnd t th rst, bt Stlklt shtd up t hm a
trrfc hnt t stp hs bbblng and btk hmslf whr h
blngd. On th ffth mrnng thr othrs of th mtnrs bltd up
int th ar frm th dsprt arms blw tht sght t rstrn
thm. Only thr wr lft.

“‘Bttr trn t, nw?’ sd th Cptn wth a hrtlss jr.

“‘Sht us up agn, wll y!’ crd Stlklt.

“‘Oh crtnly,’ sd th Cptn, and th ky clckd.

“It ws at ths pnt, gntlmn, tht enrgd by th dfctn of
svn of hs frmr asscts, and stng by th mckng vc tht hd
lst hld hm, and mddnd by hs lng entmbmnt in a plc as
blck as th bwls of dspr; it ws thn tht Stlklt prpsd t
th tw Cnllrs, ths fr apprntly of on mnd wth hm, t brst
ot of thr hl at th nxt smmnng of th grrsn; and armd wth
thr kn mncng knvs (lng, crscntc, hvy implmnts wth a
hndl at ech end) rn amck frm th bwsprt t th tffrl; and if
by any dvlshnss of dsprtn pssbl, sz th shp. Fr
hmslf, h wld d ths, h sd, whthr thy jnd hm or nt.
Tht ws th lst nght h shld spnd in tht dn. Bt th schm mt
wth n oppstn on th prt of th othr tw; thy swr thy wr
rdy fr tht, or fr any othr md thng, fr anythng in shrt bt a
srrndr. And wht ws mr, thy ech insstd upn bng th frst
mn on dck, whn th tm t mk th rsh shld cm. Bt t ths
thr ldr as frcly objctd, rsrvng tht prrty fr hmslf;
prtclrly as hs tw cmrds wld nt yld, th on t th othr,
in th mttr; and bth of thm cld nt b frst, fr th lddr
wld bt admt on mn at a tm. And hr, gntlmn, th fl ply
of ths mscrnts mst cm ot.

“Upn hrng th frntc prjct of thr ldr, ech in hs own
sprt sl hd sddnly lghtd, it wld sm, upn th sm pc
of trchry, nmly: t b frmst in brkng ot, in ordr t b
th frst of th thr, thgh th lst of th tn, t srrndr; and
thrby scr whtvr smll chnc of prdn sch cndct mght
mrt. Bt whn Stlklt md knwn hs dtrmntn stll t ld
thm t th lst, thy in sm wy, by sm sbtl chmstry of
vllny, mxd thr bfr scrt trchrs tgthr; and whn thr
ldr fll int a dz, vrblly opnd thr sls t ech othr in
thr sntncs; and bnd th slpr wth crds, and gggd hm wth
crds; and shrkd ot fr th Cptn at mdnght.

“Thnkng mrdr at hnd, and smllng in th drk fr th bld, h
and all hs armd mts and hrpnrs rshd fr th frcstl. In a
fw mnts th scttl ws opnd, and, bnd hnd and ft, th stll
strgglng rngldr ws shvd up int th ar by hs prfds
alls, wh at onc clmd th hnr of scrng a mn wh hd bn
flly rp fr mrdr. Bt all ths wr cllrd, and drggd alng
th dck lk dd cttl; and, sd by sd, wr szd up int th
mzzn rggng, lk thr qrtrs of mt, and thr thy hng tll
mrnng. ‘Dmn y,’ crd th Cptn, pcng t and fr bfr thm,
‘th vltrs wld nt tch y, y vllns!’

“At snrs h smmnd all hnds; and sprtng ths wh hd
rblld frm ths wh hd tkn n prt in th mtny, h tld th
frmr tht h hd a gd mnd t flg thm all rnd—thght, upn th
whl, h wld d s—h oght t—jstc dmndd it; bt fr th
prsnt, cnsdrng thr tmly srrndr, h wld lt thm g wth
a rprmnd, whch h accrdngly admnstrd in th vrnclr.

“‘Bt as fr y, y crrn rgs,’ trnng t th thr mn in th
rggng—‘fr y, I mn t mnc y up fr th try-pts;’ and, szng
a rp, h appld it wth all hs mght t th bcks of th tw
trtrs, tll thy ylld n mr, bt lflssly hng thr hds
sdwys, as th tw crcfd thvs ar drwn.

“‘My wrst is sprnd wth y!’ h crd, at lst; ‘bt thr is stll
rp engh lft fr y, my fn bntm, tht wldn’t gv up. Tk
tht gg frm hs mth, and lt us hr wht h cn sy fr hmslf.’

“Fr a mmnt th exhstd mtnr md a trmls mtn of hs
crmpd jws, and thn pnflly twstng rnd hs hd, sd in a
srt of hss, ‘Wht I sy is ths—and mnd it wll—if y flg m, I
mrdr y!’

“‘Sy y s? thn s hw y frghtn m’—and th Cptn drw off wth
th rp t strk.

“‘Bst nt,’ hssd th Lkmn.

“‘Bt I mst,’—and th rp ws onc mr drwn bck fr th strk.

“Stlklt hr hssd ot smthng, indbl t all bt th Cptn;
wh, t th amzmnt of all hnds, strtd bck, pcd th dck
rpdly tw or thr tms, and thn sddnly thrwng dwn hs rp,
sd, ‘I wn’t d it—lt hm g—ct hm dwn: d’y hr?’

“Bt as th jnr mts wr hrryng t exct th ordr, a pl
mn, wth a bndgd hd, arrstd thm—Rdny th chf mt. Evr
snc th blw, h hd ln in hs brth; bt tht mrnng, hrng th
tmlt on th dck, h hd crpt ot, and ths fr hd wtchd th
whl scn. Sch ws th stt of hs mth, tht h cld hrdly
spk; bt mmblng smthng abt _hs_ bng wllng and abl t d
wht th cptn drd nt attmpt, h sntchd th rp and advncd
t hs pnnd f.

“‘Y ar a cwrd!’ hssd th Lkmn.

“‘S I am, bt tk tht.’ Th mt ws in th vry act of strkng,
whn anthr hss styd hs uplftd arm. H psd: and thn psng
n mr, md gd hs wrd, spt of Stlklt’s thrt, whtvr tht
mght hv bn. Th thr mn wr thn ct dwn, all hnds wr
trnd t, and, sllnly wrkd by th mdy smn, th irn pmps
clngd as bfr.

“Jst aftr drk tht dy, whn on wtch hd rtrd blw, a clmr
ws hrd in th frcstl; and th tw trmblng trtrs rnnng up,
bsgd th cbn dr, syng thy drst nt cnsrt wth th crw.
Entrts, cffs, and kcks cld nt drv thm bck, s at thr own
instnc thy wr pt dwn in th shp’s rn fr slvtn. Stll, n
sgn of mtny rpprd amng th rst. On th cntrry, it smd,
tht mnly at Stlklt’s instgtn, thy hd rslvd t mntn
th strctst pcflnss, oby all ordrs t th lst, and, whn th
shp rchd prt, dsrt hr in a bdy. Bt in ordr t insr th
spdst end t th vyg, thy all agrd t anthr thng—nmly,
nt t sng ot fr whls, in cs any shld b dscvrd. Fr,
spt of hr lk, and spt of all hr othr prls, th Twn-H stll
mntnd hr mst-hds, and hr cptn ws jst as wllng t lwr
fr a fsh tht mmnt, as on th dy hs crft frst strck th
crsng grnd; and Rdny th mt ws qt as rdy t chng hs
brth fr a bt, and wth hs bndgd mth sk t gg in dth th
vtl jw of th whl.

“Bt thgh th Lkmn hd indcd th smn t adpt ths srt of
pssvnss in thr cndct, h kpt hs own cnsl (at lst tll
all ws ovr) cncrnng hs own prpr and prvt rvng upn th
mn wh hd stng hm in th vntrcls of hs hrt. H ws in Rdny
th chf mt’s wtch; and as if th infttd mn sght t rn mr
thn hlf wy t mt hs dm, aftr th scn at th rggng, h
insstd, agnst th exprss cnsl of th cptn, upn rsmng th
hd of hs wtch at nght. Upn ths, and on or tw othr
crcmstncs, Stlklt systmtclly blt th pln of hs rvng.

“Drng th nght, Rdny hd an unsmnlk wy of sttng on th
blwrks of th qrtr-dck, and lnng hs arm upn th gnwl of
th bt whch ws hstd up thr, a lttl abv th shp’s sd. In
ths atttd, it ws wll knwn, h smtms dzd. Thr ws a
cnsdrbl vcncy btwn th bt and th shp, and dwn btwn
ths ws th s. Stlklt clcltd hs tm, and fnd tht hs
nxt trck at th hlm wld cm rnd at tw o’clck, in th mrnng
of th thrd dy frm tht in whch h hd bn btryd. At hs
lsr, h emplyd th intrvl in brdng smthng vry crflly
in hs wtchs blw.

“‘Wht ar y mkng thr?’ sd a shpmt.

“‘Wht d y thnk? wht ds it lk lk?’

“‘Lk a lnyrd fr yr bg; bt it’s an odd on, sms t m.’

“‘Ys, rthr oddsh,’ sd th Lkmn, hldng it at arm’s lngth
bfr hm; ‘bt I thnk it wll answr. Shpmt, I hvn’t engh
twn,—hv y any?’

“Bt thr ws nn in th frcstl.

“‘Thn I mst gt sm frm old Rd;’ and h rs t g aft.

“‘Y dn’t mn t g a bggng t _hm!_’ sd a slr.

“‘Why nt? D y thnk h wn’t d m a trn, whn it’s t hlp
hmslf in th end, shpmt?’ and gng t th mt, h lkd at hm
qtly, and askd hm fr sm twn t mnd hs hmmck. It ws gvn
hm—nthr twn nr lnyrd wr sn agn; bt th nxt nght an
irn bll, clsly nttd, prtly rlld frm th pckt of th
Lkmn’s mnky jckt, as h ws tckng th ct int hs hmmck
fr a pllw. Twnty-fr hrs aftr, hs trck at th slnt
hlm—ngh t th mn wh ws apt t dz ovr th grv alwys rdy
dg t th smn’s hnd—tht ftl hr ws thn t cm; and in th
fr-ordnng sl of Stlklt, th mt ws alrdy strk and
strtchd as a crps, wth hs frhd crshd in.

“Bt, gntlmn, a fl svd th wld-b mrdrr frm th bldy
dd h hd plnnd. Yt cmplt rvng h hd, and wtht bng th
avngr. Fr by a mystrs ftlty, Hvn itslf smd t stp in
t tk ot of hs hnds int its own th dmnng thng h wld hv
dn.

“It ws jst btwn dybrk and snrs of th mrnng of th scnd
dy, whn thy wr wshng dwn th dcks, tht a stpd Tnrff
mn, drwng wtr in th mn-chns, all at onc shtd ot, ‘Thr
sh rlls! thr sh rlls!’ Js, wht a whl! It ws Mby Dck.

“‘Mby Dck!’ crd Dn Sbstn; ‘St. Dmnc! Sr slr, bt d
whls hv chrstnngs? Whm cll y Mby Dck?’

“‘A vry wht, and fms, and mst ddly immrtl mnstr, Dn;—bt
tht wld b t lng a stry.’

“‘Hw? hw?’ crd all th yng Spnrds, crwdng.

“‘Ny, Dns, Dns—ny, ny! I cnnt rhrs tht nw. Lt m gt mr
int th ar, Srs.’

“‘Th chch! th chch!’ crd Dn Pdr; ‘or vgrs frnd lks
fnt;—fll up hs empty glss!’

“N nd, gntlmn; on mmnt, and I prcd.—Nw, gntlmn, s
sddnly prcvng th snwy whl wthn ffty yrds of th
shp—frgtfl of th cmpct amng th crw—in th exctmnt of th
mmnt, th Tnrff mn hd instnctvly and invlntrly lftd
hs vc fr th mnstr, thgh fr sm lttl tm pst it hd bn
plnly bhld frm th thr slln mst-hds. All ws nw a phrnsy.
‘Th Wht Whl—th Wht Whl!’ ws th cry frm cptn, mts, and
hrpnrs, wh, undtrrd by frfl rmrs, wr all anxs t
cptr s fms and prcs a fsh; whl th dggd crw eyd
asknc, and wth crss, th appllng bty of th vst mlky mss,
tht lt up by a hrzntl spnglng sn, shftd and glstnd lk a
lvng opl in th bl mrnng s. Gntlmn, a strng ftlty
prvds th whl crr of ths evnts, as if vrly mppd ot
bfr th wrld itslf ws chrtd. Th mtnr ws th bwsmn of
th mt, and whn fst t a fsh, it ws hs dty t st nxt hm,
whl Rdny std up wth hs lnc in th prw, and hl in or
slckn th ln, at th wrd of cmmnd. Mrvr, whn th fr bts
wr lwrd, th mt’s gt th strt; and nn hwld mr frcly
wth dlght thn dd Stlklt, as h strnd at hs or. Aftr a
stff pll, thr hrpnr gt fst, and, spr in hnd, Rdny
sprng t th bw. H ws alwys a frs mn, it sms, in a bt.
And nw hs bndgd cry ws, t bch hm on th whl’s tpmst bck.
Nthng lth, hs bwsmn hld hm up and up, thrgh a blndng
fm tht blnt tw whtnsss tgthr; tll of a sddn th bt
strck as agnst a snkn ldg, and klng ovr, splld ot th
stndng mt. Tht instnt, as h fll on th whl’s slppry bck,
th bt rghtd, and ws dshd asd by th swll, whl Rdny ws
tssd ovr int th s, on th othr flnk of th whl. H strck
ot thrgh th spry, and, fr an instnt, ws dmly sn thrgh tht
vl, wldly skng t rmv hmslf frm th ey of Mby Dck. Bt
th whl rshd rnd in a sddn mlstrm; szd th swmmr
btwn hs jws; and rrng hgh up wth hm, plngd hdlng agn,
and wnt dwn.

“Mntm, at th frst tp of th bt’s bttm, th Lkmn hd
slcknd th ln, s as t drp astrn frm th whrlpl; clmly
lkng on, h thght hs own thghts. Bt a sddn, trrfc,
dwnwrd jrkng of th bt, qckly brght hs knf t th ln. H
ct it; and th whl ws fr. Bt, at sm dstnc, Mby Dck rs
agn, wth sm tttrs of Rdny’s rd wlln shrt, cght in th
tth tht hd dstryd hm. All fr bts gv chs agn; bt th
whl eldd thm, and fnlly whlly dspprd.

“In gd tm, th Twn-H rchd hr prt—a svg, sltry
plc—whr n cvlzd crtr rsdd. Thr, hdd by th
Lkmn, all bt fv or sx of th frmstmn dlbrtly dsrtd
amng th plms; evntlly, as it trnd ot, szng a lrg dbl
wr-cn of th svgs, and sttng sl fr sm othr hrbr.

“Th shp’s cmpny bng rdcd t bt a hndfl, th cptn clld
upn th Islndrs t assst hm in th lbrs bsnss of hvng
dwn th shp t stp th lk. Bt t sch unrstng vglnc ovr
thr dngrs alls ws ths smll bnd of whts ncssttd, bth
by nght and by dy, and s extrm ws th hrd wrk thy undrwnt,
tht upn th vssl bng rdy agn fr s, thy wr in sch a
wknd cndtn tht th cptn drst nt pt off wth thm in s
hvy a vssl. Aftr tkng cnsl wth hs offcrs, h anchrd th
shp as fr off shr as pssbl; ldd and rn ot hs tw cnnn
frm th bws; stckd hs mskts on th pp; and wrnng th
Islndrs nt t apprch th shp at thr prl, tk on mn wth
hm, and sttng th sl of hs bst whl-bt, strd strght
bfr th wnd fr Tht, fv hndrd mls dstnt, t prcr a
rnfrcmnt t hs crw.

“On th frth dy of th sl, a lrg cn ws dscrd, whch
smd t hv tchd at a lw isl of crls. H strd awy frm
it; bt th svg crft br dwn on hm; and sn th vc of
Stlklt hld hm t hv t, or h wld rn hm undr wtr. Th
cptn prsntd a pstl. Wth on ft on ech prw of th ykd
wr-cns, th Lkmn lghd hm t scrn; assrng hm tht if th
pstl s mch as clckd in th lck, h wld bry hm in bbbls and
fm.

“‘Wht d y wnt of m?’ crd th cptn.

“‘Whr ar y bnd? and fr wht ar y bnd?’ dmndd Stlklt;
‘n ls.’

“‘I am bnd t Tht fr mr mn.’

“‘Vry gd. Lt m brd y a mmnt—I cm in pc.’ Wth tht h
lpd frm th cn, swm t th bt; and clmbng th gnwl,
std fc t fc wth th cptn.

“‘Crss yr arms, sr; thrw bck yr hd. Nw, rpt aftr m. As
sn as Stlklt lvs m, I swr t bch ths bt on yndr
islnd, and rmn thr sx dys. If I d nt, my lghtnngs strk
m!’

“‘A prtty schlr,’ lghd th Lkmn. ‘Ads, Snr!’ and lpng
int th s, h swm bck t hs cmrds.

“Wtchng th bt tll it ws frly bchd, and drwn up t th
rts of th cc-nt trs, Stlklt md sl agn, and in d
tm arrvd at Tht, hs own plc of dstntn. Thr, lck
bfrndd hm; tw shps wr abt t sl fr Frnc, and wr
prvdntlly in wnt of prcsly tht nmbr of mn whch th slr
hdd. Thy embrkd; and s fr evr gt th strt of thr frmr
cptn, hd h bn at all mndd t wrk thm lgl rtrbtn.

“Sm tn dys aftr th Frnch shps sld, th whl-bt arrvd,
and th cptn ws frcd t enlst sm of th mr cvlzd
Thtns, wh hd bn smwht usd t th s. Chrtrng a smll
ntv schnr, h rtrnd wth thm t hs vssl; and fndng all
rght thr, agn rsmd hs crsngs.

“Whr Stlklt nw is, gntlmn, nn knw; bt upn th islnd of
Nntckt, th wdw of Rdny stll trns t th s whch rfss t
gv up its dd; stll in drms ss th awfl wht whl tht
dstryd hm.  * * * *

“‘Ar y thrgh?’ sd Dn Sbstn, qtly.

“‘I am, Dn.’

“‘Thn I entrt y, tll m if t th bst of yr own cnvctns,
ths yr stry is in sbstnc rlly tr? It is s pssng
wndrfl! Dd y gt it frm an unqstnbl src? Br wth m
if I sm t prss.’

“‘Als br wth all of us, sr slr; fr w all jn in Dn
Sbstn’s st,’ crd th cmpny, wth excdng intrst.

“‘Is thr a cpy of th Hly Evnglsts in th Gldn Inn,
gntlmn?’

“‘Ny,’ sd Dn Sbstn; ‘bt I knw a wrthy prst nr by, wh
wll qckly prcr on fr m. I g fr it; bt ar y wll advsd?
ths my grw t srs.’

“‘Wll y b s gd as t brng th prst als, Dn?’

“‘Thgh thr ar n At-d-Fés in Lm nw,’ sd on of th cmpny
t anthr; ‘I fr or slr frnd rns rsk of th archpscpcy.
Lt us wthdrw mr ot of th mnlght. I s n nd of ths.’

“‘Excs m fr rnnng aftr y, Dn Sbstn; bt my I als bg
tht y wll b prtclr in prcrng th lrgst szd Evnglsts
y cn.’

* * * * * *

“‘Ths is th prst, h brngs y th Evnglsts,’ sd Dn
Sbstn, grvly, rtrnng wth a tll and slmn fgr.

“‘Lt m rmv my ht. Nw, vnrbl prst, frthr int th lght,
and hld th Hly Bk bfr m tht I my tch it.

“‘S hlp m Hvn, and on my hnr th stry I hv tld y,
gntlmn, is in sbstnc and its grt itms, tr. I knw it t b
tr; it hppnd on ths bll; I trd th shp; I knw th crw; I
hv sn and tlkd wth Stlklt snc th dth of Rdny.’”


CHPTR 55. Of th Mnstrs Pctrs of Whls.

I shll er lng pnt t y as wll as on cn wtht cnvs,
smthng lk th tr frm of th whl as h actlly apprs t th
ey of th whlmn whn in hs own abslt bdy th whl is mrd
alngsd th whl-shp s tht h cn b frly stppd upn thr.
It my b wrth whl, thrfr, prvsly t advrt t ths crs
imgnry prtrts of hm whch evn dwn t th prsnt dy
cnfdntly chllng th fth of th lndsmn. It is tm t st th
wrld rght in ths mttr, by prvng sch pctrs of th whl all
wrng.

It my b tht th prml src of all ths pctrl dlsns wll
b fnd amng th oldst Hnd, Egyptn, and Grcn sclptrs. Fr
evr snc ths invntv bt unscrpls tms whn on th mrbl
pnllngs of tmpls, th pdstls of stts, and on shlds,
mdllns, cps, and cns, th dlphn ws drwn in scls of
chn-armr lk Sldn’s, and a hlmtd hd lk St. Grg’s; evr
snc thn hs smthng of th sm srt of lcns prvld, nt
only in mst pplr pctrs of th whl, bt in mny scntfc
prsnttns of hm.

Nw, by all odds, th mst ancnt extnt prtrt anywys prprtng
t b th whl’s, is t b fnd in th fms cvrn-pgd of
Elphnt, in Ind. Th Brhmns mntn tht in th almst endlss
sclptrs of tht immmrl pgd, all th trds and prsts,
evry cncvbl avctn of mn, wr prfgrd ags bfr any of
thm actlly cm int bng. N wndr thn, tht in sm srt or
nbl prfssn of whlng shld hv bn thr shdwd frth. Th
Hnd whl rfrrd t, occrs in a sprt dprtmnt of th wll,
dpctng th incrntn of Vshn in th frm of lvthn, lrndly
knwn as th Mts Avtr. Bt thgh ths sclptr is hlf mn and
hlf whl, s as only t gv th tl of th lttr, yt tht smll
sctn of hm is all wrng. It lks mr lk th tprng tl of an
ancnd, thn th brd plms of th tr whl’s mjstc flks.

Bt g t th old Gllrs, and lk nw at a grt Chrstn
pntr’s prtrt of ths fsh; fr h sccds n bttr thn th
antdlvn Hnd. It is Gd’s pctr of Prss rscng
Andrmd frm th s-mnstr or whl. Whr dd Gd gt th mdl
of sch a strng crtr as tht? Nr ds Hgrth, in pntng th
sm scn in hs own “Prss Dscndng,” mk ot on wht bttr.
Th hg crplnc of tht Hgrthn mnstr undlts on th
srfc, scrcly drwng on inch of wtr. It hs a srt of hwdh on
its bck, and its dstndd tskd mth int whch th bllws ar
rllng, mght b tkn fr th Trtrs’ Gt ldng frm th Thms
by wtr int th Twr. Thn, thr ar th Prdrms whls of old
Sctch Sbbld, and Jnh’s whl, as dpctd in th prnts of old
Bbls and th cts of old prmrs. Wht shll b sd of ths? As fr
th bk-bndr’s whl wndng lk a vn-stlk rnd th stck of a
dscndng anchr—as stmpd and gldd on th bcks and ttl-pgs of
mny bks bth old and nw—tht is a vry pctrsq bt prly
fbls crtr, imttd, I tk it, frm th lk fgrs on
antq vss. Thgh unvrslly dnmntd a dlphn, I nvrthlss
cll ths bk-bndr’s fsh an attmpt at a whl; bcs it ws s
intndd whn th dvc ws frst intrdcd. It ws intrdcd by an
old Itln pblshr smwhr abt th 15th cntry, drng th
Rvvl of Lrnng; and in ths dys, and evn dwn t a
cmprtvly lt prd, dlphns wr pplrly sppsd t b a
spcs of th Lvthn.

In th vgntts and othr embllshmnts of sm ancnt bks y
wll at tms mt wth vry crs tchs at th whl, whr all
mnnr of spts, jts d’e, ht sprngs and cld, Srtg and
Bdn-Bdn, cm bbblng up frm hs unxhstd brn. In th
ttl-pg of th orgnl edtn of th “Advncmnt of Lrnng” y
wll fnd sm crs whls.

Bt qttng all ths unprfssnl attmpts, lt us glnc at ths
pctrs of lvthn prprtng t b sbr, scntfc dlntns,
by ths wh knw. In old Hrrs’s cllctn of vygs thr ar sm
plts of whls extrctd frm a Dtch bk of vygs, A.D. 1671,
enttld “A Whlng Vyg t Sptzbrgn in th shp Jns in th
Whl, Ptr Ptrsn of Frslnd, mstr.” In on of ths plts th
whls, lk grt rfts of lgs, ar rprsntd lyng amng
ic-isls, wth wht brs rnnng ovr thr lvng bcks. In anthr
plt, th prdgs blndr is md of rprsntng th whl wth
prpndclr flks.

Thn agn, thr is an impsng qrt, wrttn by on Cptn
Clntt, a Pst Cptn in th Englsh nvy, enttld “A Vyg rnd
Cp Hrn int th Sth Ss, fr th prps of extndng th
Sprmct Whl Fshrs.” In ths bk is an otln prprtng t
b a “Pctr of a Phystr or Sprmct whl, drwn by scl frm
on klld on th cst of Mxc, Agst, 1793, and hstd on dck.”
I dbt nt th cptn hd ths vrcs pctr tkn fr th
bnft of hs mrns. T mntn bt on thng abt it, lt m sy
tht it hs an ey whch appld, accrdng t th accmpnyng scl,
t a fll grwn sprm whl, wld mk th ey of tht whl a
bw-wndw sm fv ft lng. Ah, my gllnt cptn, why dd y nt
gv us Jnh lkng ot of tht ey!

Nr ar th mst cnscnts cmpltns of Ntrl Hstry fr th
bnft of th yng and tndr, fr frm th sm hnsnss of
mstk. Lk at tht pplr wrk “Gldsmth’s Anmtd Ntr.” In
th abrdgd Lndn edtn of 1807, thr ar plts of an allgd
“whl” and a “nrwhl.” I d nt wsh t sm inlgnt, bt ths
unsghtly whl lks mch lk an ampttd sw; and, as fr th
nrwhl, on glmps at it is engh t amz on, tht in ths
nntnth cntry sch a hppgrff cld b plmd fr gnn upn
any intllgnt pblc of schlbys.

Thn, agn, in 1825, Brnrd Grmn, Cnt d Lcépèd, a grt
ntrlst, pblshd a scntfc systmzd whl bk, whrn ar
svrl pctrs of th dffrnt spcs of th Lvthn. All ths
ar nt only incrrct, bt th pctr of th Mystcts or Grnlnd
whl (tht is t sy, th Rght whl), evn Scrsby, a lng
exprncd mn as tchng tht spcs, dclrs nt t hv its
cntrprt in ntr.

Bt th plcng of th cp-shf t all ths blndrng bsnss ws
rsrvd fr th scntfc Frdrck Cvr, brthr t th fms
Brn. In 1836, h pblshd a Ntrl Hstry of Whls, in whch h
gvs wht h clls a pctr of th Sprm Whl. Bfr shwng tht
pctr t any Nntcktr, y hd bst prvd fr yr smmry
rtrt frm Nntckt. In a wrd, Frdrck Cvr’s Sprm Whl is
nt a Sprm Whl, bt a sqsh. Of crs, h nvr hd th bnft of
a whlng vyg (sch mn sldm hv), bt whnc h drvd tht
pctr, wh cn tll? Prhps h gt it as hs scntfc prdcssr
in th sm fld, Dsmrst, gt on of hs athntc abrtns; tht
is, frm a Chns drwng. And wht srt of lvly lds wth th
pncl ths Chns ar, mny qr cps and scrs infrm us.

As fr th sgn-pntrs’ whls sn in th strts hngng ovr th
shps of ol-dlrs, wht shll b sd of thm? Thy ar gnrlly
Rchrd I. whls, wth drmdry hmps, and vry svg;
brkfstng on thr or fr slr trts, tht is whlbts fll of
mrnrs: thr dfrmts flndrng in ss of bld and bl
pnt.

Bt ths mnfld mstks in dpctng th whl ar nt s vry
srprsng aftr all. Cnsdr! Mst of th scntfc drwngs hv
bn tkn frm th strndd fsh; and ths ar abt as crrct as a
drwng of a wrckd shp, wth brkn bck, wld crrctly rprsnt
th nbl anml itslf in all its undshd prd of hll and sprs.
Thgh elphnts hv std fr thr fll-lngths, th lvng
Lvthn hs nvr yt frly fltd hmslf fr hs prtrt. Th
lvng whl, in hs fll mjsty and sgnfcnc, is only t b sn
at s in unfthmbl wtrs; and aflt th vst blk of hm is ot
of sght, lk a lnchd ln-of-bttl shp; and ot of tht elmnt
it is a thng etrnlly impssbl fr mrtl mn t hst hm bdly
int th ar, s as t prsrv all hs mghty swlls and undltns.
And, nt t spk of th hghly prsmbl dffrnc of cntr
btwn a yng sckng whl and a fll-grwn Pltnn Lvthn;
yt, evn in th cs of on of ths yng sckng whls hstd t a
shp’s dck, sch is thn th otlndsh, el-lk, lmbrd, vryng
shp of hm, tht hs prcs exprssn th dvl hmslf cld nt
ctch.

Bt it my b fncd, tht frm th nkd skltn of th strndd
whl, accrt hnts my b drvd tchng hs tr frm. Nt at
all. Fr it is on of th mr crs thngs abt ths Lvthn,
tht hs skltn gvs vry lttl id of hs gnrl shp. Thgh
Jrmy Bnthm’s skltn, whch hngs fr cndlbr in th lbrry of
on of hs exctrs, crrctly cnvys th id of a brly-brwd
utltrn old gntlmn, wth all Jrmy’s othr ldng prsnl
chrctrstcs; yt nthng of ths knd cld b infrrd frm any
lvthn’s artcltd bns. In fct, as th grt Hntr sys, th
mr skltn of th whl brs th sm rltn t th flly
invstd and pddd anml as th insct ds t th chrysls tht s
rndngly envlps it. Ths pclrty is strkngly evncd in th
hd, as in sm prt of ths bk wll b incdntlly shwn. It is
als vry crsly dsplyd in th sd fn, th bns of whch
almst exctly answr t th bns of th hmn hnd, mns only th
thmb. Ths fn hs fr rglr bn-fngrs, th indx, mddl, rng,
and lttl fngr. Bt all ths ar prmnntly ldgd in thr flshy
cvrng, as th hmn fngrs in an artfcl cvrng. “Hwvr
rcklssly th whl my smtms srv us,” sd hmrs Stbb on
dy, “h cn nvr b trly sd t hndl us wtht mttns.”

Fr all ths rsns, thn, any wy y my lk at it, y mst nds
cncld tht th grt Lvthn is tht on crtr in th wrld
whch mst rmn unpntd t th lst. Tr, on prtrt my ht th
mrk mch nrr thn anthr, bt nn cn ht it wth any vry
cnsdrbl dgr of exctnss. S thr is n erthly wy of fndng
ot prcsly wht th whl rlly lks lk. And th only md in
whch y cn drv evn a tlrbl id of hs lvng cntr, is by
gng a whlng yrslf; bt by s dng, y rn n smll rsk of
bng etrnlly stv and snk by hm. Whrfr, it sms t m y
hd bst nt b t fstds in yr crsty tchng ths
Lvthn.


CHPTR 56. Of th Lss Errns Pctrs of Whls, and th Tr
Pctrs of Whlng Scns.

In cnnxn wth th mnstrs pctrs of whls, I am strngly
tmptd hr t entr upn ths stll mr mnstrs strs of thm
whch ar t b fnd in crtn bks, bth ancnt and mdrn,
espclly in Plny, Prchs, Hcklyt, Hrrs, Cvr, etc. Bt I pss
tht mttr by.

I knw of only fr pblshd otlns of th grt Sprm Whl;
Clntt’s, Hggns’s, Frdrck Cvr’s, and Bl’s. In th prvs
chptr Clntt and Cvr hv bn rfrrd t. Hggns’s is fr
bttr thn thrs; bt, by grt odds, Bl’s is th bst. All
Bl’s drwngs of ths whl ar gd, excptng th mddl fgr in
th pctr of thr whls in vrs atttds, cppng hs scnd
chptr. Hs frntspc, bts attckng Sprm Whls, thgh n
dbt clcltd t exct th cvl scptcsm of sm prlr mn, is
admrbly crrct and lf-lk in its gnrl effct. Sm of th
Sprm Whl drwngs in J. Rss Brwn ar prtty crrct in cntr;
bt thy ar wrtchdly engrvd. Tht is nt hs flt thgh.

Of th Rght Whl, th bst otln pctrs ar in Scrsby; bt thy
ar drwn on t smll a scl t cnvy a dsrbl imprssn. H hs
bt on pctr of whlng scns, and ths is a sd dfcncy,
bcs it is by sch pctrs only, whn at all wll dn, tht y
cn drv anythng lk a trthfl id of th lvng whl as sn by
hs lvng hntrs.

Bt, tkn fr all in all, by fr th fnst, thgh in sm dtls
nt th mst crrct, prsnttns of whls and whlng scns t b
anywhr fnd, ar tw lrg Frnch engrvngs, wll exctd, and
tkn frm pntngs by on Grnry. Rspctvly, thy rprsnt
attcks on th Sprm and Rght Whl. In th frst engrvng a nbl
Sprm Whl is dpctd in fll mjsty of mght, jst rsn bnth
th bt frm th prfndts of th ocn, and brng hgh in th
ar upn hs bck th trrfc wrck of th stvn plnks. Th prw of
th bt is prtlly unbrkn, and is drwn jst blncng upn th
mnstr’s spn; and stndng in tht prw, fr tht on sngl
incmptbl flsh of tm, y bhld an orsmn, hlf shrdd by th
incnsd blng spt of th whl, and in th act of lpng, as if
frm a prcpc. Th actn of th whl thng is wndrflly gd and
tr. Th hlf-emptd ln-tb flts on th whtnd s; th wdn
pls of th splld hrpns oblqly bb in it; th hds of th
swmmng crw ar scttrd abt th whl in cntrstng exprssns
of affrght; whl in th blck strmy dstnc th shp is brng
dwn upn th scn. Srs flt mght b fnd wth th antmcl
dtls of ths whl, bt lt tht pss; snc, fr th lf of m, I
cld nt drw s gd a on.

In th scnd engrvng, th bt is in th act of drwng alngsd
th brncld flnk of a lrg rnnng Rght Whl, tht rlls hs
blck wdy blk in th s lk sm mssy rck-sld frm th
Ptgnn clffs. Hs jts ar erct, fll, and blck lk st; s
tht frm s abndng a smk in th chmny, y wld thnk thr
mst b a brv sppr ckng in th grt bwls blw. S fwls ar
pckng at th smll crbs, shll-fsh, and othr s cnds and
mccrn, whch th Rght Whl smtms crrs on hs pstlnt
bck. And all th whl th thck-lppd lvthn is rshng thrgh
th dp, lvng tns of tmlts wht crds in hs wk, and
csng th slght bt t rck in th swlls lk a skff cght ngh
th pddl-whls of an ocn stmr. Ths, th frgrnd is all
rgng cmmtn; bt bhnd, in admrbl artstc cntrst, is th
glssy lvl of a s bclmd, th drpng unstrchd sls of th
pwrlss shp, and th inrt mss of a dd whl, a cnqrd
frtrss, wth th flg of cptr lzly hngng frm th whl-pl
insrtd int hs spt-hl.

Wh Grnry th pntr is, or ws, I knw nt. Bt my lf fr it h
ws ethr prctclly cnvrsnt wth hs sbjct, or els
mrvllsly ttrd by sm exprncd whlmn. Th Frnch ar th
lds fr pntng actn. G and gz upn all th pntngs of Erp,
and whr wll y fnd sch a gllry of lvng and brthng
cmmtn on cnvs, as in tht trmphl hll at Vrslls; whr th
bhldr fghts hs wy, pll-mll, thrgh th cnsctv grt
bttls of Frnc; whr evry swrd sms a flsh of th Nrthrn
Lghts, and th sccssv armd kngs and Emprrs dsh by, lk a
chrg of crwnd cntrs? Nt whlly unwrthy of a plc in tht
gllry, ar ths s bttl-pcs of Grnry.

Th ntrl apttd of th Frnch fr szng th pctrsqnss of
thngs sms t b pclrly evncd in wht pntngs and engrvngs
thy hv of thr whlng scns. Wth nt on tnth of Englnd’s
exprnc in th fshry, and nt th thsndth prt of tht of th
Amrcns, thy hv nvrthlss frnshd bth ntns wth th only
fnshd sktchs at all cpbl of cnvyng th rl sprt of th
whl hnt. Fr th mst prt, th Englsh and Amrcn whl
drghtsmn sm entrly cntnt wth prsntng th mchncl
otln of thngs, sch as th vcnt prfl of th whl; whch, s
fr as pctrsqnss of effct is cncrnd, is abt tntmnt t
sktchng th prfl of a pyrmd. Evn Scrsby, th jstly rnwnd
Rght whlmn, aftr gvng us a stff fll lngth of th Grnlnd
whl, and thr or fr dlct mntrs of nrwhls and
prpss, trts us t a srs of clsscl engrvngs of bt hks,
chppng knvs, and grpnls; and wth th mcrscpc dlgnc of a
Lwnhck sbmts t th inspctn of a shvrng wrld nnty-sx
fc-smls of mgnfd Arctc snw crystls. I mn n dsprgmnt
t th excllnt vygr (I hnr hm fr a vtrn), bt in s
imprtnt a mttr it ws crtnly an ovrsght nt t hv prcrd
fr evry crystl a swrn affdvt tkn bfr a Grnlnd Jstc of
th Pc.

In addtn t ths fn engrvngs frm Grnry, thr ar tw othr
Frnch engrvngs wrthy of nt, by sm on wh sbscrbs hmslf
“H. Drnd.” On of thm, thgh nt prcsly adptd t or prsnt
prps, nvrthlss dsrvs mntn on othr accnts. It is a qt
nn-scn amng th isls of th Pcfc; a Frnch whlr anchrd,
inshr, in a clm, and lzly tkng wtr on brd; th lsnd
sls of th shp, and th lng lvs of th plms in th bckgrnd,
bth drpng tgthr in th brzlss ar. Th effct is vry fn,
whn cnsdrd wth rfrnc t its prsntng th hrdy fshrmn
undr on of thr fw aspcts of orntl rps. Th othr engrvng
is qt a dffrnt affr: th shp hv-t upn th opn s, and in
th vry hrt of th Lvthnc lf, wth a Rght Whl alngsd;
th vssl (in th act of cttng-in) hv ovr t th mnstr as if t
a qy; and a bt, hrrdly pshng off frm ths scn of actvty,
is abt gvng chs t whls in th dstnc. Th hrpns and
lncs l lvlld fr us; thr orsmn ar jst sttng th mst in
its hl; whl frm a sddn rll of th s, th lttl crft stnds
hlf-erct ot of th wtr, lk a rrng hrs. Frm th shp, th
smk of th trmnts of th blng whl is gng up lk th smk
ovr a vllg of smths; and t wndwrd, a blck cld, rsng up
wth ernst of sqlls and rns, sms t qckn th actvty of th
exctd smn.


CHPTR 57. Of Whls in Pnt; in Tth; in Wd; in Sht-Irn; in
Stn; in Mntns; in Strs.

On Twr-hll, as y g dwn t th Lndn dcks, y my hv sn a
crppld bggr (or _kdgr_, as th slrs sy) hldng a pntd
brd bfr hm, rprsntng th trgc scn in whch h lst hs
lg. Thr ar thr whls and thr bts; and on of th bts
(prsmd t cntn th mssng lg in all its orgnl intgrty) is
bng crnchd by th jws of th frmst whl. Any tm ths tn
yrs, thy tll m, hs tht mn hld up tht pctr, and exhbtd
tht stmp t an incrdls wrld. Bt th tm of hs jstfctn
hs nw cm. Hs thr whls ar as gd whls as wr evr
pblshd in Wppng, at any rt; and hs stmp as unqstnbl a
stmp as any y wll fnd in th wstrn clrngs. Bt, thgh fr
evr mntd on tht stmp, nvr a stmp-spch ds th pr whlmn
mk; bt, wth dwncst eys, stnds rflly cntmpltng hs own
ampttn.

Thrght th Pcfc, and als in Nntckt, and Nw Bdfrd, and Sg
Hrbr, y wll cm acrss lvly sktchs of whls and
whlng-scns, grvn by th fshrmn thmslvs on Sprm
Whl-tth, or lds’ bsks wrght ot of th Rght Whl-bn, and
othr lk skrmshndr artcls, as th whlmn cll th nmrs
lttl ingns cntrvncs thy elbrtly crv ot of th rgh
mtrl, in thr hrs of ocn lsr. Sm of thm hv lttl
bxs of dntstcl-lkng implmnts, spclly intndd fr th
skrmshndrng bsnss. Bt, in gnrl, thy tl wth thr
jck-knvs aln; and, wth tht almst omnptnt tl of th slr,
thy wll trn y ot anythng y pls, in th wy of a mrnr’s
fncy.

Lng exl frm Chrstndm and cvlztn invtbly rstrs a mn
t tht cndtn in whch Gd plcd hm, _i.e._ wht is clld
svgry. Yr tr whl-hntr is as mch a svg as an Irqs. I
myslf am a svg, ownng n allgnc bt t th Kng of th
Cnnbls; and rdy at any mmnt t rbl agnst hm.

Nw, on of th pclr chrctrstcs of th svg in hs dmstc
hrs, is hs wndrfl ptnc of indstry. An ancnt Hwn
wr-clb or spr-pddl, in its fll mltplcty and elbrtn of
crvng, is as grt a trphy of hmn prsvrnc as a Ltn lxcn.
Fr, wth bt a bt of brkn s-shll or a shrk’s tth, tht
mrcls intrccy of wdn nt-wrk hs bn achvd; and it hs
cst stdy yrs of stdy applctn.

As wth th Hwn svg, s wth th wht slr-svg. Wth th
sm mrvlls ptnc, and wth th sm sngl shrk’s tth, of
hs on pr jck-knf, h wll crv y a bt of bn sclptr, nt
qt as wrkmnlk, bt as cls pckd in its mznss of dsgn, as
th Grk svg, Achlls’s shld; and fll of brbrc sprt and
sggstvnss, as th prnts of tht fn old Dtch svg, Albrt
Drr.

Wdn whls, or whls ct in prfl ot of th smll drk slbs of
th nbl Sth S wr-wd, ar frqntly mt wth in th
frcstls of Amrcn whlrs. Sm of thm ar dn wth mch
accrcy.

At sm old gbl-rfd cntry hss y wll s brss whls hng
by th tl fr knckrs t th rd-sd dr. Whn th prtr is
slpy, th anvl-hdd whl wld b bst. Bt ths knckng whls
ar sldm rmrkbl as fthfl essys. On th sprs of sm
old-fshnd chrchs y wll s sht-irn whls plcd thr fr
wthr-ccks; bt thy ar s elvtd, and bsds tht ar t all
intnts and prpss s lblld wth “_Hnds off!_” y cnnt exmn
thm clsly engh t dcd upn thr mrt.

In bny, rbby rgns of th erth, whr at th bs of hgh brkn
clffs msss of rck l strwn in fntstc grpngs upn th pln,
y wll oftn dscvr imgs as of th ptrfd frms of th
Lvthn prtly mrgd in grss, whch of a wndy dy brks agnst
thm in a srf of grn srgs.

Thn, agn, in mntns cntrs whr th trvllr is
cntnlly grdld by amphthtrcl hghts; hr and thr frm
sm lcky pnt of vw y wll ctch pssng glmpss of th
prfls of whls dfnd alng th undltng rdgs. Bt y mst b
a thrgh whlmn, t s ths sghts; and nt only tht, bt if y
wsh t rtrn t sch a sght agn, y mst b sr and tk th
exct intrsctng lttd and lngtd of yr frst stnd-pnt,
els s chnc-lk ar sch obsrvtns of th hlls, tht yr
prcs, prvs stnd-pnt wld rqr a lbrs r-dscvry;
lk th Slm Islnds, whch stll rmn incgnt, thgh onc
hgh-rffd Mndnn trd thm and old Fgr chrncld thm.

Nr whn expndngly lftd by yr sbjct, cn y fl t trc ot
grt whls in th strry hvns, and bts in prst of thm; as
whn lng flld wth thghts of wr th Estrn ntns sw arms
lckd in bttl amng th clds. Ths at th Nrth hv I chsd
Lvthn rnd and rnd th Pl wth th rvltns of th brght
pnts tht frst dfnd hm t m. And bnth th efflgnt
Antrctc sks I hv brdd th Arg-Nvs, and jnd th chs
agnst th strry Cts fr bynd th utmst strtch of Hydrs and
th Flyng Fsh.

Wth a frgt’s anchrs fr my brdl-btts and fscs of hrpns fr
sprs, wld I cld mnt tht whl and lp th tpmst sks, t
s whthr th fbld hvns wth all thr cntlss tnts rlly
l encmpd bynd my mrtl sght!


CHPTR 58. Brt.

Strng nrth-estwrd frm th Crztts, w fll in wth vst mdws
of brt, th mnt, yllw sbstnc, upn whch th Rght Whl
lrgly fds. Fr lgs and lgs it undltd rnd us, s tht
w smd t b slng thrgh bndlss flds of rp and gldn
wht.

On th scnd dy, nmbrs of Rght Whls wr sn, wh, scr frm
th attck of a Sprm Whlr lk th Pqd, wth opn jws slggshly
swm thrgh th brt, whch, adhrng t th frngng fbrs of tht
wndrs Vntn blnd in thr mths, ws in tht mnnr sprtd
frm th wtr tht escpd at th lp.

As mrnng mwrs, wh sd by sd slwly and sthngly advnc thr
scyths thrgh th lng wt grss of mrshy mds; evn s ths
mnstrs swm, mkng a strng, grssy, cttng snd; and lvng
bhnd thm endlss swths of bl upn th yllw s.*

*Tht prt of th s knwn amng whlmn as th “Brzl Bnks” ds
nt br tht nm as th Bnks of Nwfndlnd d, bcs of thr
bng shllws and sndngs thr, bt bcs of ths rmrkbl
mdw-lk apprnc, csd by th vst drfts of brt cntnlly
fltng in ths lttds, whr th Rght Whl is oftn chsd.

Bt it ws only th snd thy md as thy prtd th brt whch at
all rmndd on of mwrs. Sn frm th mst-hds, espclly whn
thy psd and wr sttnry fr a whl, thr vst blck frms
lkd mr lk lflss msss of rck thn anythng els. And as in
th grt hntng cntrs of Ind, th strngr at a dstnc wll
smtms pss on th plns rcmbnt elphnts wtht knwng thm
t b sch, tkng thm fr br, blcknd elvtns of th sl;
evn s, oftn, wth hm, wh fr th frst tm bhlds ths spcs
of th lvthns of th s. And evn whn rcgnsd at lst, thr
immns mgntd rndrs it vry hrd rlly t blv tht sch
blky msss of ovrgrwth cn pssbly b instnct, in all prts, wth
th sm srt of lf tht lvs in a dg or a hrs.

Indd, in othr rspcts, y cn hrdly rgrd any crtrs of th
dp wth th sm flngs tht y d ths of th shr. Fr thgh
sm old ntrlsts hv mntnd tht all crtrs of th lnd ar
of thr knd in th s; and thgh tkng a brd gnrl vw of th
thng, ths my vry wll b; yt cmng t spclts, whr, fr
exmpl, ds th ocn frnsh any fsh tht in dspstn answrs t
th sgcs kndnss of th dg? Th accrsd shrk aln cn in any
gnrc rspct b sd t br cmprtv anlgy t hm.

Bt thgh, t lndsmn in gnrl, th ntv inhbtnts of th ss
hv evr bn rgrdd wth emtns unspkbly unscl and
rpllng; thgh w knw th s t b an evrlstng trr incgnt,
s tht Clmbs sld ovr nmbrlss unknwn wrlds t dscvr hs
on sprfcl wstrn on; thgh, by vst odds, th mst trrfc of
all mrtl dsstrs hv immmrlly and indscrmntly bflln
tns and hndrds of thsnds of ths wh hv gn upn th wtrs;
thgh bt a mmnt’s cnsdrtn wll tch, tht hwvr bby mn
my brg of hs scnc and skll, and hwvr mch, in a flttrng
ftr, tht scnc and skll my agmnt; yt fr evr and fr evr,
t th crck of dm, th s wll inslt and mrdr hm, and plvrz
th sttlst, stffst frgt h cn mk; nvrthlss, by th
cntnl rpttn of ths vry imprssns, mn hs lst tht sns
of th fll awflnss of th s whch abrgnlly blngs t it.

Th frst bt w rd of, fltd on an ocn, tht wth Prtgs
vngnc hd whlmd a whl wrld wtht lvng s mch as a wdw.
Tht sm ocn rlls nw; tht sm ocn dstryd th wrckd shps
of lst yr. Y, flsh mrtls, Nh’s fld is nt yt sbsdd;
tw thrds of th fr wrld it yt cvrs.

Whrn dffr th s and th lnd, tht a mrcl upn on is nt a
mrcl upn th othr? Prtrntrl trrrs rstd upn th Hbrws,
whn undr th ft of Krh and hs cmpny th lv grnd opnd and
swllwd thm up fr evr; yt nt a mdrn sn evr sts, bt in
prcsly th sm mnnr th lv s swllws up shps and crws.

Bt nt only is th s sch a f t mn wh is an aln t it, bt it
is als a fnd t its own off-sprng; wrs thn th Prsn hst wh
mrdrd hs own gsts; sprng nt th crtrs whch itslf hth
spwnd. Lk a svg tgrss tht tssng in th jngl ovrlys hr
own cbs, s th s dshs evn th mghtst whls agnst th
rcks, and lvs thm thr sd by sd wth th splt wrcks of
shps. N mrcy, n pwr bt its own cntrls it. Pntng and snrtng
lk a md bttl std tht hs lst its rdr, th mstrlss ocn
ovrrns th glb.

Cnsdr th sbtlnss of th s; hw its mst drdd crtrs
gld undr wtr, unpprnt fr th mst prt, and trchrsly
hddn bnth th lvlst tnts of azr. Cnsdr als th dvlsh
brllnc and bty of mny of its mst rmrslss trbs, as th
dnty embllshd shp of mny spcs of shrks. Cnsdr, onc
mr, th unvrsl cnnblsm of th s; all whs crtrs pry
upn ech othr, crryng on etrnl wr snc th wrld bgn.

Cnsdr all ths; and thn trn t ths grn, gntl, and mst dcl
erth; cnsdr thm bth, th s and th lnd; and d y nt fnd a
strng anlgy t smthng in yrslf? Fr as ths appllng ocn
srrnds th vrdnt lnd, s in th sl of mn thr ls on
inslr Tht, fll of pc and jy, bt encmpssd by all th
hrrrs of th hlf knwn lf. Gd kp th! Psh nt off frm tht
isl, th cnst nvr rtrn!


CHPTR 59. Sqd.

Slwly wdng thrgh th mdws of brt, th Pqd stll hld on hr
wy nrth-estwrd twrds th islnd of Jv; a gntl ar impllng
hr kl, s tht in th srrndng srnty hr thr tll tprng
msts mldly wvd t tht lngd brz, as thr mld plms on a
pln. And stll, at wd intrvls in th slvry nght, th lnly,
allrng jt wld b sn.

Bt on trnsprnt bl mrnng, whn a stllnss almst prtrntrl
sprd ovr th s, hwvr unttndd wth any stgnnt clm; whn
th lng brnshd sn-gld on th wtrs smd a gldn fngr ld
acrss thm, enjnng sm scrcy; whn th slpprd wvs whsprd
tgthr as thy sftly rn on; in ths prfnd hsh of th vsbl
sphr a strng spctr ws sn by Dgg frm th mn-mst-hd.

In th dstnc, a grt wht mss lzly rs, and rsng hghr and
hghr, and dsntnglng itslf frm th azr, at lst glmd bfr
or prw lk a snw-sld, nw sld frm th hlls. Ths glstnng
fr a mmnt, as slwly it sbsdd, and snk. Thn onc mr ars,
and slntly glmd. It smd nt a whl; and yt is ths Mby Dck?
thght Dgg. Agn th phntm wnt dwn, bt on r-apprng onc
mr, wth a stltt-lk cry tht strtld evry mn frm hs nd,
th ngr ylld ot—“Thr! thr agn! thr sh brchs! rght
ahd! Th Wht Whl, th Wht Whl!”

Upn ths, th smn rshd t th yrd-arms, as in swrmng-tm th
bs rsh t th bghs. Br-hdd in th sltry sn, Ahb std on
th bwsprt, and wth on hnd pshd fr bhnd in rdnss t wv
hs ordrs t th hlmsmn, cst hs egr glnc in th drctn
indctd alft by th otstrtchd mtnlss arm of Dgg.

Whthr th flttng attndnc of th on stll and sltry jt hd
grdlly wrkd upn Ahb, s tht h ws nw prprd t cnnct th
ids of mldnss and rps wth th frst sght of th prtclr
whl h prsd; hwvr ths ws, or whthr hs egrnss btryd
hm; whchvr wy it mght hv bn, n snr dd h dstnctly
prcv th wht mss, thn wth a qck intnsty h instntly gv
ordrs fr lwrng.

Th fr bts wr sn on th wtr; Ahb’s in advnc, and all
swftly pllng twrds thr pry. Sn it wnt dwn, and whl, wth
ors sspndd, w wr awtng its rpprnc, l! in th sm spt
whr it snk, onc mr it slwly rs. Almst frgttng fr th
mmnt all thghts of Mby Dck, w nw gzd at th mst wndrs
phnmnn whch th scrt ss hv hthrt rvld t mnknd. A
vst plpy mss, frlngs in lngth and brdth, of a glncng
crm-clr, ly fltng on th wtr, innmrbl lng arms
rdtng frm its cntr, and crlng and twstng lk a nst of
ancnds, as if blndly t cltch at any hplss objct wthn rch.
N prcptbl fc or frnt dd it hv; n cncvbl tkn of
ethr snstn or instnct; bt undltd thr on th bllws, an
unrthly, frmlss, chnc-lk apprtn of lf.

As wth a lw sckng snd it slwly dspprd agn, Strbck stll
gzng at th agttd wtrs whr it hd snk, wth a wld vc
exclmd—“Almst rthr hd I sn Mby Dck and fght hm, thn t
hv sn th, th wht ghst!”

“Wht ws it, Sr?” sd Flsk.

“Th grt lv sqd, whch, thy sy, fw whl-shps evr bhld,
and rtrnd t thr prts t tll of it.”

Bt Ahb sd nthng; trnng hs bt, h sld bck t th vssl;
th rst as slntly fllwng.

Whtvr sprsttns th sprm whlmn in gnrl hv cnnctd
wth th sght of ths objct, crtn it is, tht a glmps of it
bng s vry unsl, tht crcmstnc hs gn fr t invst it wth
prtntsnss. S rrly is it bhld, tht thgh on and all of thm
dclr it t b th lrgst anmtd thng in th ocn, yt vry fw
of thm hv any bt th mst vg ids cncrnng its tr ntr
and frm; ntwthstndng, thy blv it t frnsh t th sprm
whl hs only fd. Fr thgh othr spcs of whls fnd thr fd
abv wtr, and my b sn by mn in th act of fdng, th
sprmct whl obtns hs whl fd in unknwn zns blw th
srfc; and only by infrnc is it tht any on cn tll of wht,
prcsly, tht fd cnssts. At tms, whn clsly prsd, h wll
dsgrg wht ar sppsd t b th dtchd arms of th sqd; sm
of thm ths exhbtd excdng twnty and thrty ft in lngth. Thy
fncy tht th mnstr t whch ths arms blngd ordnrly clngs
by thm t th bd of th ocn; and tht th sprm whl, unlk othr
spcs, is sppld wth tth in ordr t attck and tr it.

Thr sms sm grnd t imgn tht th grt Krkn of Bshp
Pntppdn my ultmtly rslv itslf int Sqd. Th mnnr in
whch th Bshp dscrbs it, as altrntly rsng and snkng, wth
sm othr prtclrs h nrrts, in all ths th tw crrspnd. Bt
mch abtmnt is ncssry wth rspct t th incrdbl blk h
assgns it.

By sm ntrlsts wh hv vgly hrd rmrs of th mystrs
crtr, hr spkn of, it is incldd amng th clss of
cttl-fsh, t whch, indd, in crtn extrnl rspcts it wld
sm t blng, bt only as th Ank of th trb.


CHPTR 60. Th Ln.

Wth rfrnc t th whlng scn shrtly t b dscrbd, as wll as
fr th bttr undrstndng of all smlr scns elswhr prsntd,
I hv hr t spk of th mgcl, smtms hrrbl whl-ln.

Th ln orgnlly usd in th fshry ws of th bst hmp, slghtly
vprd wth tr, nt imprgntd wth it, as in th cs of ordnry
rps; fr whl tr, as ordnrly usd, mks th hmp mr plbl
t th rp-mkr, and als rndrs th rp itslf mr cnvnnt t
th slr fr cmmn shp us; yt, nt only wld th ordnry
qntty t mch stffn th whl-ln fr th cls clng t whch
it mst b sbjctd; bt as mst smn ar bgnnng t lrn, tr in
gnrl by n mns adds t th rp’s drblty or strngth, hwvr
mch it my gv it cmpctnss and glss.

Of lt yrs th Mnll rp hs in th Amrcn fshry almst
entrly sprsdd hmp as a mtrl fr whl-lns; fr, thgh nt
s drbl as hmp, it is strngr, and fr mr sft and elstc; and
I wll add (snc thr is an æsthtcs in all thngs), is mch mr
hndsm and bcmng t th bt, thn hmp. Hmp is a dsky, drk
fllw, a srt of Indn; bt Mnll is as a gldn-hrd Crcssn
t bhld.

Th whl-ln is only tw-thrds of an inch in thcknss. At frst
sght, y wld nt thnk it s strng as it rlly is. By exprmnt
its on and ffty yrns wll ech sspnd a wght of on hndrd and
twnty pnds; s tht th whl rp wll br a strn nrly eql
t thr tns. In lngth, th cmmn sprm whl-ln msrs
smthng ovr tw hndrd fthms. Twrds th strn of th bt it is
sprlly cld awy in th tb, nt lk th wrm-pp of a stll
thgh, bt s as t frm on rnd, chs-shpd mss of dnsly
bddd “shvs,” or lyrs of cncntrc sprlztns, wtht any
hllw bt th “hrt,” or mnt vrtcl tb frmd at th axs of
th chs. As th lst tngl or knk in th clng wld, in
rnnng ot, infllbly tk smbdy’s arm, lg, or entr bdy off,
th utmst prctn is usd in stwng th ln in its tb. Sm
hrpnrs wll cnsm almst an entr mrnng in ths bsnss,
crryng th ln hgh alft and thn rvng it dwnwrds thrgh a
blck twrds th tb, s as in th act of clng t fr it frm all
pssbl wrnkls and twsts.

In th Englsh bts tw tbs ar usd instd of on; th sm ln
bng cntnsly cld in bth tbs. Thr is sm advntg in
ths; bcs ths twn-tbs bng s smll thy ft mr rdly int
th bt, and d nt strn it s mch; whrs, th Amrcn tb,
nrly thr ft in dmtr and of prprtnt dpth, mks a
rthr blky frght fr a crft whs plnks ar bt on hlf-inch in
thcknss; fr th bttm of th whl-bt is lk crtcl ic, whch
wll br up a cnsdrbl dstrbtd wght, bt nt vry mch of a
cncntrtd on. Whn th pntd cnvs cvr is clppd on th
Amrcn ln-tb, th bt lks as if it wr pllng off wth a
prdgs grt wddng-ck t prsnt t th whls.

Bth ends of th ln ar expsd; th lwr end trmntng in an
ey-splc or lp cmng up frm th bttm agnst th sd of th
tb, and hngng ovr its edg cmpltly dsnggd frm evrythng.
Ths arrngmnt of th lwr end is ncssry on tw accnts. Frst:
In ordr t fcltt th fstnng t it of an addtnl ln frm a
nghbrng bt, in cs th strckn whl shld snd s dp as t
thrtn t crry off th entr ln orgnlly attchd t th
hrpn. In ths instncs, th whl of crs is shftd lk a mg
of al, as it wr, frm th on bt t th othr; thgh th frst
bt alwys hvrs at hnd t assst its cnsrt. Scnd: Ths
arrngmnt is indspnsbl fr cmmn sfty’s sk; fr wr th
lwr end of th ln in any wy attchd t th bt, and wr th
whl thn t rn th ln ot t th end almst in a sngl, smkng
mnt as h smtms ds, h wld nt stp thr, fr th dmd
bt wld infllbly b drggd dwn aftr hm int th prfndty of
th s; and in tht cs n twn-crr wld evr fnd hr agn.

Bfr lwrng th bt fr th chs, th uppr end of th ln is
tkn aft frm th tb, and pssng rnd th lggrhd thr, is
agn crrd frwrd th entr lngth of th bt, rstng crssws
upn th lm or hndl of evry mn’s or, s tht it jgs agnst hs
wrst in rwng; and als pssng btwn th mn, as thy altrntly
st at th oppst gnwls, t th ldd chcks or grvs in th
extrm pntd prw of th bt, whr a wdn pn or skwr th sz
of a cmmn qll, prvnts it frm slppng ot. Frm th chcks it
hngs in a slght fstn ovr th bws, and is thn pssd insd th
bt agn; and sm tn or twnty fthms (clld bx-ln) bng
cld upn th bx in th bws, it cntns its wy t th gnwl
stll a lttl frthr aft, and is thn attchd t th shrt-wrp—th
rp whch is immdtly cnnctd wth th hrpn; bt prvs t
tht cnnxn, th shrt-wrp gs thrgh sndry mystfctns t
tds t dtl.

Ths th whl-ln flds th whl bt in its cmplctd cls,
twstng and wrthng arnd it in almst evry drctn. All th
orsmn ar invlvd in its prls cntrtns; s tht t th tmd
ey of th lndsmn, thy sm as Indn jgglrs, wth th ddlst
snks sprtvly fstnng thr lmbs. Nr cn any sn of mrtl
wmn, fr th frst tm, st hmslf amd ths hmpn intrccs,
and whl strnng hs utmst at th or, bthnk hm tht at any
unknwn instnt th hrpn my b drtd, and all ths hrrbl
cntrtns b pt in ply lk rngd lghtnngs; h cnnt b ths
crcmstncd wtht a shddr tht mks th vry mrrw in hs bns
t qvr in hm lk a shkn jlly. Yt hbt—strng thng! wht
cnnt hbt accmplsh?—Gyr slls, mr mrry mrth, bttr jks,
and brghtr rprts, y nvr hrd ovr yr mhgny, thn y
wll hr ovr th hlf-inch wht cdr of th whl-bt, whn ths
hng in hngmn’s nss; and, lk th sx brghrs of Cls bfr
Kng Edwrd, th sx mn cmpsng th crw pll int th jws of
dth, wth a hltr arnd evry nck, as y my sy.

Prhps a vry lttl thght wll nw enbl y t accnt fr ths
rptd whlng dsstrs—sm fw of whch ar cslly chrncld—of
ths mn or tht mn bng tkn ot of th bt by th ln, and lst.
Fr, whn th ln is drtng ot, t b std thn in th bt, is
lk bng std in th mdst of th mnfld whzzngs of a
stm-engn in fll ply, whn evry flyng bm, and shft, and
whl, is grzng y. It is wrs; fr y cnnt st mtnlss in
th hrt of ths prls, bcs th bt is rckng lk a crdl,
and y ar ptchd on wy and th othr, wtht th slghtst
wrnng; and only by a crtn slf-adjstng byncy and
smltnsnss of vltn and actn, cn y escp bng md a
Mzpp of, and rn awy wth whr th all-sng sn hmslf cld
nvr prc y ot.

Agn: as th prfnd clm whch only apprntly prcds and
prphss of th strm, is prhps mr awfl thn th strm itslf;
fr, indd, th clm is bt th wrppr and envlp of th strm; and
cntns it in itslf, as th smngly hrmlss rfl hlds th ftl
pwdr, and th bll, and th explsn; s th grcfl rps of th
ln, as it slntly srpntns abt th orsmn bfr bng brght
int actl ply—ths is a thng whch crrs mr of tr trrr thn
any othr aspct of ths dngrs affr. Bt why sy mr? All mn
lv envlpd in whl-lns. All ar brn wth hltrs rnd thr
ncks; bt it is only whn cght in th swft, sddn trn of dth,
tht mrtls rlz th slnt, sbtl, evr-prsnt prls of lf.
And if y b a phlsphr, thgh std in th whl-bt, y wld
nt at hrt fl on wht mr of trrr, thn thgh std bfr
yr evnng fr wth a pkr, and nt a hrpn, by yr sd.


CHPTR 61. Stbb Klls a Whl.

If t Strbck th apprtn of th Sqd ws a thng of prtnts, t
Qqg it ws qt a dffrnt objct.

“Whn y s hm ’qd,” sd th svg, hnng hs hrpn in th
bw of hs hstd bt, “thn y qck s hm ’prm whl.”

Th nxt dy ws excdngly stll and sltry, and wth nthng spcl
t engg thm, th Pqd’s crw cld hrdly rsst th spll of
slp indcd by sch a vcnt s. Fr ths prt of th Indn Ocn
thrgh whch w thn wr vygng is nt wht whlmn cll a lvly
grnd; tht is, it affrds fwr glmpss of prpss, dlphns,
flyng-fsh, and othr vvcs dnzns of mr strrng wtrs, thn
ths off th R d l Plt, or th in-shr grnd off Pr.

It ws my trn t stnd at th frmst-hd; and wth my shldrs
lnng agnst th slcknd ryl shrds, t and fr I idly swyd
in wht smd an enchntd ar. N rsltn cld wthstnd it; in
tht drmy md lsng all cnscsnss, at lst my sl wnt ot of
my bdy; thgh my bdy stll cntnd t swy as a pndlm wll,
lng aftr th pwr whch frst mvd it is wthdrwn.

Er frgtflnss altgthr cm ovr m, I hd ntcd tht th
smn at th mn and mzzn-mst-hds wr alrdy drwsy. S tht
at lst all thr of us lflssly swng frm th sprs, and fr evry
swng tht w md thr ws a nd frm blw frm th slmbrng
hlmsmn. Th wvs, t, nddd thr indlnt crsts; and acrss th
wd trnc of th s, est nddd t wst, and th sn ovr all.

Sddnly bbbls smd brstng bnth my clsd eys; lk vcs my
hnds grspd th shrds; sm invsbl, grcs agncy prsrvd
m; wth a shck I cm bck t lf. And l! cls undr or l, nt
frty fthms off, a ggntc Sprm Whl ly rllng in th wtr lk
th cpszd hll of a frgt, hs brd, glssy bck, of an Ethpn
h, glstnng in th sn’s rys lk a mrrr. Bt lzly undltng
in th trgh of th s, and evr and ann trnqlly sptng hs
vpry jt, th whl lkd lk a prtly brghr smkng hs pp of
a wrm aftrnn. Bt tht pp, pr whl, ws thy lst. As if strck
by sm enchntr’s wnd, th slpy shp and evry slpr in it all
at onc strtd int wkflnss; and mr thn a scr of vcs frm
all prts of th vssl, smltnsly wth th thr nts frm
alft, shtd frth th accstmd cry, as th grt fsh slwly and
rglrly sptd th sprklng brn int th ar.

“Clr awy th bts! Lff!” crd Ahb. And obyng hs own ordr, h
dshd th hlm dwn bfr th hlmsmn cld hndl th spks.

Th sddn exclmtns of th crw mst hv alrmd th whl; and
er th bts wr dwn, mjstclly trnng, h swm awy t th
lwrd, bt wth sch a stdy trnqllty, and mkng s fw rppls
as h swm, tht thnkng aftr all h mght nt as yt b alrmd,
Ahb gv ordrs tht nt an or shld b usd, and n mn mst spk
bt in whsprs. S std lk Ontr Indns on th gnwls of th
bts, w swftly bt slntly pddld alng; th clm nt admttng of
th nslss sls bng st. Prsntly, as w ths gldd in chs,
th mnstr prpndclrly flttd hs tl frty ft int th ar,
and thn snk ot of sght lk a twr swllwd up.

“Thr g flks!” ws th cry, an annncmnt immdtly fllwd by
Stbb’s prdcng hs mtch and igntng hs pp, fr nw a rspt
ws grntd. Aftr th fll intrvl of hs sndng hd elpsd, th
whl rs agn, and bng nw in advnc of th smkr’s bt, and
mch nrr t it thn t any of th othrs, Stbb cntd upn th
hnr of th cptr. It ws obvs, nw, tht th whl hd at lngth
bcm awr of hs prsrs. All slnc of ctsnss ws thrfr
n lngr of us. Pddls wr drppd, and ors cm ldly int ply.
And stll pffng at hs pp, Stbb chrd on hs crw t th
asslt.

Ys, a mghty chng hd cm ovr th fsh. All alv t hs jprdy,
h ws gng “hd ot”; tht prt oblqly prjctng frm th md
yst whch h brwd.*

*It wll b sn in sm othr plc of wht a vry lght sbstnc th
entr intrr of th sprm whl’s enrms hd cnssts. Thgh
apprntly th mst mssv, it is by fr th mst bynt prt abt
hm. S tht wth es h elvts it in th ar, and invrbly ds
s whn gng at hs utmst spd. Bsds, sch is th brdth of th
uppr prt of th frnt of hs hd, and sch th tprng ct-wtr
frmtn of th lwr prt, tht by oblqly elvtng hs hd, h
thrby my b sd t trnsfrm hmslf frm a blff-bwd slggsh
gllt int a shrppntd Nw Yrk plt-bt.

“Strt hr, strt hr, my mn! Dn’t hrry yrslvs; tk plnty of
tm—bt strt hr; strt hr lk thndr-clps, tht’s all,” crd
Stbb, splttrng ot th smk as h spk. “Strt hr, nw; gv ’em
th lng and strng strk, Tshtg. Strt hr, Tsh, my by—strt
hr, all; bt kp cl, kp cl—ccmbrs is th wrd—esy,
esy—only strt hr lk grm dth and grnnng dvls, and rs th
brd dd prpndclr ot of thr grvs, bys—tht’s all. Strt
hr!”

“W-h! W-h!” scrmd th Gy-Hdr in rply, rsng sm old
wr-whp t th sks; as evry orsmn in th strnd bt
invlntrly bncd frwrd wth th on trmnds ldng strk
whch th egr Indn gv.

Bt hs wld scrms wr answrd by othrs qt as wld. “K-h!
K-h!” ylld Dgg, strnng frwrds and bckwrds on hs st,
lk a pcng tgr in hs cg.

“K-l! K-l!” hwld Qqg, as if smckng hs lps ovr a
mthfl of Grndr’s stk. And ths wth ors and ylls th kls
ct th s. Mnwhl, Stbb rtnng hs plc in th vn, stll
encrgd hs mn t th onst, all th whl pffng th smk frm
hs mth. Lk dsprds thy tggd and thy strnd, tll th
wlcm cry ws hrd—“Stnd up, Tshtg!—gv it t hm!” Th hrpn
ws hrld. “Strn all!” Th orsmn bckd wtr; th sm mmnt
smthng wnt ht and hssng alng evry on of thr wrsts. It ws
th mgcl ln. An instnt bfr, Stbb hd swftly cght tw
addtnl trns wth it rnd th lggrhd, whnc, by rsn of its
incrsd rpd crclngs, a hmpn bl smk nw jttd up and
mngld wth th stdy fms frm hs pp. As th ln pssd rnd
and rnd th lggrhd; s als, jst bfr rchng tht pnt, it
blstrngly pssd thrgh and thrgh bth of Stbb’s hnds, frm
whch th hnd-clths, or sqrs of qltd cnvs smtms wrn at
ths tms, hd accdntlly drppd. It ws lk hldng an enmy’s
shrp tw-edgd swrd by th bld, and tht enmy all th tm
strvng t wrst it ot of yr cltch.

“Wt th ln! wt th ln!” crd Stbb t th tb orsmn (hm
std by th tb) wh, sntchng off hs ht, dshd s-wtr int
it.* Mr trns wr tkn, s tht th ln bgn hldng its plc.
Th bt nw flw thrgh th blng wtr lk a shrk all fns.
Stbb and Tshtg hr chngd plcs—stm fr strn—a stggrng
bsnss trly in tht rckng cmmtn.

*Prtly t shw th indspnsblnss of ths act, it my hr b
sttd, tht, in th old Dtch fshry, a mp ws usd t dsh th
rnnng ln wth wtr; in mny othr shps, a wdn pggn, or
blr, is st aprt fr tht prps. Yr ht, hwvr, is th mst
cnvnnt.

Frm th vbrtng ln extndng th entr lngth of th uppr prt
of th bt, and frm its nw bng mr tght thn a hrpstrng, y
wld hv thght th crft hd tw kls—on clvng th wtr, th
othr th ar—as th bt chrnd on thrgh bth oppsng elmnts at
onc. A cntnl cscd plyd at th bws; a cslss whrlng eddy
in hr wk; and, at th slghtst mtn frm wthn, evn bt of a
lttl fngr, th vbrtng, crckng crft cntd ovr hr spsmdc
gnwl int th s. Ths thy rshd; ech mn wth mght and mn
clngng t hs st, t prvnt bng tssd t th fm; and th tll
frm of Tshtg at th strng or crchng almst dbl, in ordr
t brng dwn hs cntr of grvty. Whl Atlntcs and Pcfcs
smd pssd as thy sht on thr wy, tll at lngth th whl
smwht slcknd hs flght.

“Hl in—hl in!” crd Stbb t th bwsmn! and, fcng rnd
twrds th whl, all hnds bgn pllng th bt up t hm, whl
yt th bt ws bng twd on. Sn rngng up by hs flnk, Stbb,
frmly plntng hs kn in th clmsy clt, drtd drt aftr drt
int th flyng fsh; at th wrd of cmmnd, th bt altrntly
strnng ot of th wy of th whl’s hrrbl wllw, and thn
rngng up fr anthr flng.

Th rd td nw prd frm all sds of th mnstr lk brks dwn
a hll. Hs trmntd bdy rlld nt in brn bt in bld, whch
bbbld and sthd fr frlngs bhnd in thr wk. Th slntng sn
plyng upn ths crmsn pnd in th s, snt bck its rflctn
int evry fc, s tht thy all glwd t ech othr lk rd mn.
And all th whl, jt aftr jt of wht smk ws agnzngly sht
frm th sprcl of th whl, and vhmnt pff aftr pff frm th
mth of th exctd hdsmn; as at evry drt, hlng in upn hs
crkd lnc (by th ln attchd t it), Stbb strghtnd it agn
and agn, by a fw rpd blws agnst th gnwl, thn agn and
agn snt it int th whl.

“Pll up—pll up!” h nw crd t th bwsmn, as th wnng whl
rlxd in hs wrth. “Pll up!—cls t!” and th bt rngd alng
th fsh’s flnk. Whn rchng fr ovr th bw, Stbb slwly chrnd
hs lng shrp lnc int th fsh, and kpt it thr, crflly
chrnng and chrnng, as if ctsly skng t fl aftr sm gld
wtch tht th whl mght hv swllwd, and whch h ws frfl of
brkng er h cld hk it ot. Bt tht gld wtch h sght ws
th innrmst lf of th fsh. And nw it is strck; fr, strtng
frm hs trnc int tht unspkbl thng clld hs “flrry,” th
mnstr hrrbly wllwd in hs bld, ovrwrppd hmslf in
impntrbl, md, blng spry, s tht th imprlld crft,
instntly drppng astrn, hd mch ad blndly t strggl ot frm
tht phrnsd twlght int th clr ar of th dy.

And nw abtng in hs flrry, th whl onc mr rlld ot int
vw; srgng frm sd t sd; spsmdclly dltng and cntrctng
hs spt-hl, wth shrp, crckng, agnzd rsprtns. At lst,
gsh aftr gsh of clttd rd gr, as if it hd bn th prpl ls
of rd wn, sht int th frghtd ar; and fllng bck agn, rn
drppng dwn hs mtnlss flnks int th s. Hs hrt hd brst!

“H’s dd, Mr. Stbb,” sd Dgg.

“Ys; bth pps smkd ot!” and wthdrwng hs own frm hs mth,
Stbb scttrd th dd ashs ovr th wtr; and, fr a mmnt, std
thghtflly eyng th vst crps h hd md.


CHPTR 62. Th Drt.

A wrd cncrnng an incdnt in th lst chptr.

Accrdng t th invrbl usg of th fshry, th whl-bt pshs
off frm th shp, wth th hdsmn or whl-kllr as tmprry
strsmn, and th hrpnr or whl-fstnr pllng th frmst
or, th on knwn as th hrpnr-or. Nw it nds a strng,
nrvs arm t strk th frst irn int th fsh; fr oftn, in wht
is clld a lng drt, th hvy implmnt hs t b flng t th
dstnc of twnty or thrty ft. Bt hwvr prlngd and exhstng
th chs, th hrpnr is expctd t pll hs or mnwhl t th
uttrmst; indd, h is expctd t st an exmpl of sprhmn
actvty t th rst, nt only by incrdbl rwng, bt by rptd
ld and intrpd exclmtns; and wht it is t kp shtng at th
tp of on’s cmpss, whl all th othr mscls ar strnd and hlf
strtd—wht tht is nn knw bt ths wh hv trd it. Fr on, I
cnnt bwl vry hrtly and wrk vry rcklssly at on and th sm
tm. In ths strnng, bwlng stt, thn, wth hs bck t th
fsh, all at onc th exhstd hrpnr hrs th exctng
cry—“Stnd up, and gv it t hm!” H nw hs t drp and scr hs
or, trn rnd on hs cntr hlf wy, sz hs hrpn frm th
crtch, and wth wht lttl strngth my rmn, h essys t ptch it
smhw int th whl. N wndr, tkng th whl flt of whlmn
in a bdy, tht ot of ffty fr chncs fr a drt, nt fv ar
sccssfl; n wndr tht s mny hplss hrpnrs ar mdly crsd
and dsrtd; n wndr tht sm of thm actlly brst thr
bld-vssls in th bt; n wndr tht sm sprm whlmn ar
absnt fr yrs wth fr brrls; n wndr tht t mny shp
ownrs, whlng is bt a lsng cncrn; fr it is th hrpnr tht
mks th vyg, and if y tk th brth ot of hs bdy hw cn
y expct t fnd it thr whn mst wntd!

Agn, if th drt b sccssfl, thn at th scnd crtcl instnt,
tht is, whn th whl strts t rn, th bthdr and hrpnr
lkws strt t rnnng fr and aft, t th immnnt jprdy of
thmslvs and evry on els. It is thn thy chng plcs; and th
hdsmn, th chf offcr of th lttl crft, tks hs prpr
sttn in th bws of th bt.

Nw, I cr nt wh mntns th cntrry, bt all ths is bth
flsh and unncssry. Th hdsmn shld sty in th bws frm
frst t lst; h shld bth drt th hrpn and th lnc, and n
rwng whtvr shld b expctd of hm, excpt undr crcmstncs
obvs t any fshrmn. I knw tht ths wld smtms invlv a
slght lss of spd in th chs; bt lng exprnc in vrs
whlmn of mr thn on ntn hs cnvncd m tht in th vst
mjrty of flrs in th fshry, it hs nt by any mns bn s
mch th spd of th whl as th bfr dscrbd exhstn of th
hrpnr tht hs csd thm.

T insr th grtst effcncy in th drt, th hrpnrs of ths
wrld mst strt t thr ft frm ot of idlnss, and nt frm ot
of tl.


CHPTR 63. Th Crtch.

Ot of th trnk, th brnchs grw; ot of thm, th twgs. S, in
prdctv sbjcts, grw th chptrs.

Th crtch alldd t on a prvs pg dsrvs indpndnt mntn.
It is a ntchd stck of a pclr frm, sm tw ft in lngth,
whch is prpndclrly insrtd int th strbrd gnwl nr th
bw, fr th prps of frnshng a rst fr th wdn extrmty of
th hrpn, whs othr nkd, brbd end slpngly prjcts frm th
prw. Thrby th wpn is instntly at hnd t its hrlr, wh
sntchs it up as rdly frm its rst as a bckwdsmn swngs hs
rfl frm th wll. It is cstmry t hv tw hrpns rpsng in
th crtch, rspctvly clld th frst and scnd irns.

Bt ths tw hrpns, ech by its own crd, ar bth cnnctd wth
th ln; th objct bng ths: t drt thm bth, if pssbl, on
instntly aftr th othr int th sm whl; s tht if, in th
cmng drg, on shld drw ot, th othr my stll rtn a hld. It
is a dblng of th chncs. Bt it vry oftn hppns tht owng t
th instntns, vlnt, cnvlsv rnnng of th whl upn
rcvng th frst irn, it bcms impssbl fr th hrpnr,
hwvr lghtnng-lk in hs mvmnts, t ptch th scnd irn int
hm. Nvrthlss, as th scnd irn is alrdy cnnctd wth th
ln, and th ln is rnnng, hnc tht wpn mst, at all evnts,
b antcptngly tssd ot of th bt, smhw and smwhr; els
th mst trrbl jprdy wld invlv all hnds. Tmbld int th
wtr, it accrdngly is in sch css; th spr cls of bx ln
(mntnd in a prcdng chptr) mkng ths ft, in mst instncs,
prdntly prctcbl. Bt ths crtcl act is nt alwys unttndd
wth th sddst and mst ftl cslts.

Frthrmr: y mst knw tht whn th scnd irn is thrwn
ovrbrd, it thncfrth bcms a dnglng, shrp-edgd trrr,
skttshly crvttng abt bth bt and whl, entnglng th lns,
or cttng thm, and mkng a prdgs snstn in all drctns.
Nr, in gnrl, is it pssbl t scr it agn untl th whl is
frly cptrd and a crps.

Cnsdr, nw, hw it mst b in th cs of fr bts all enggng
on unslly strng, actv, and knwng whl; whn owng t ths
qlts in hm, as wll as t th thsnd cncrrng accdnts of
sch an adcs entrprs, eght or tn ls scnd irns my b
smltnsly dnglng abt hm. Fr, of crs, ech bt is
sppld wth svrl hrpns t bnd on t th ln shld th frst
on b inffctlly drtd wtht rcvry. All ths prtclrs ar
fthflly nrrtd hr, as thy wll nt fl t elcdt svrl
mst imprtnt, hwvr intrct pssgs, in scns hrftr t b
pntd.


CHPTR 64. Stbb’s Sppr.

Stbb’s whl hd bn klld sm dstnc frm th shp. It ws a
clm; s, frmng a tndm of thr bts, w cmmncd th slw
bsnss of twng th trphy t th Pqd. And nw, as w eghtn
mn wth or thrty-sx arms, and on hndrd and eghty thmbs and
fngrs, slwly tld hr aftr hr upn tht inrt, slggsh crps
in th s; and it smd hrdly t bdg at all, excpt at lng
intrvls; gd evdnc ws hrby frnshd of th enrmsnss of
th mss w mvd. Fr, upn th grt cnl of Hng-H, or whtvr
thy cll it, in Chn, fr or fv lbrrs on th ft-pth wll
drw a blky frghtd jnk at th rt of a ml an hr; bt ths
grnd argsy w twd hvly frgd alng, as if ldn wth pg-ld
in blk.

Drknss cm on; bt thr lghts up and dwn in th Pqd’s
mn-rggng dmly gdd or wy; tll drwng nrr w sw Ahb
drppng on of svrl mr lntrns ovr th blwrks. Vcntly
eyng th hvng whl fr a mmnt, h issd th usl ordrs fr
scrng it fr th nght, and thn hndng hs lntrn t a smn,
wnt hs wy int th cbn, and dd nt cm frwrd agn untl
mrnng.

Thgh, in ovrsng th prst of ths whl, Cptn Ahb hd
evncd hs cstmry actvty, t cll it s; yt nw tht th
crtr ws dd, sm vg dsstsfctn, or imptnc, or
dspr, smd wrkng in hm; as if th sght of tht dd bdy
rmndd hm tht Mby Dck ws yt t b sln; and thgh a thsnd
othr whls wr brght t hs shp, all tht wld nt on jt
advnc hs grnd, mnmnc objct. Vry sn y wld hv thght
frm th snd on th Pqd’s dcks, tht all hnds wr prprng t
cst anchr in th dp; fr hvy chns ar bng drggd alng th
dck, and thrst rttlng ot of th prt-hls. Bt by ths clnkng
lnks, th vst crps itslf, nt th shp, is t b mrd. Td by
th hd t th strn, and by th tl t th bws, th whl nw ls
wth its blck hll cls t th vssl’s and sn thrgh th drknss
of th nght, whch obscrd th sprs and rggng alft, th tw—shp
and whl, smd ykd tgthr lk clssl bllcks, whrf on
rclns whl th othr rmns stndng.*

*A lttl itm my as wll b rltd hr. Th strngst and mst
rlbl hld whch th shp hs upn th whl whn mrd alngsd,
is by th flks or tl; and as frm its grtr dnsty tht prt is
rltvly hvr thn any othr (excptng th sd-fns), its
flxblty evn in dth, css it t snk lw bnth th srfc;
s tht wth th hnd y cnnt gt at it frm th bt, in ordr t
pt th chn rnd it. Bt ths dffclty is ingnsly ovrcm: a
smll, strng ln is prprd wth a wdn flt at its otr end,
and a wght in its mddl, whl th othr end is scrd t th shp.
By adrt mngmnt th wdn flt is md t rs on th othr sd
of th mss, s tht nw hvng grdld th whl, th chn is rdly
md t fllw st; and bng slppd alng th bdy, is at lst
lckd fst rnd th smllst prt of th tl, at th pnt of
jnctn wth its brd flks or lbs.

If mdy Ahb ws nw all qscnc, at lst s fr as cld b knwn
on dck, Stbb, hs scnd mt, flshd wth cnqst, btryd an
unsl bt stll gd-ntrd exctmnt. Sch an unwntd bstl ws
h in tht th std Strbck, hs offcl sprr, qtly rsgnd
t hm fr th tm th sl mngmnt of affrs. On smll, hlpng
cs of all ths lvlnss in Stbb, ws sn md strngly
mnfst. Stbb ws a hgh lvr; h ws smwht intmprtly fnd of
th whl as a flvrsh thng t hs plt.

“A stk, a stk, er I slp! Y, Dgg! ovrbrd y g, and ct
m on frm hs smll!”

Hr b it knwn, tht thgh ths wld fshrmn d nt, as a gnrl
thng, and accrdng t th grt mltry mxm, mk th enmy dfry
th crrnt expnss of th wr (at lst bfr rlzng th prcds
of th vyg), yt nw and thn y fnd sm of ths Nntcktrs
wh hv a gnn rlsh fr tht prtclr prt of th Sprm Whl
dsgntd by Stbb; cmprsng th tprng extrmty of th bdy.

Abt mdnght tht stk ws ct and ckd; and lghtd by tw
lntrns of sprm ol, Stbb sttly std up t hs sprmct sppr
at th cpstn-hd, as if tht cpstn wr a sdbrd. Nr ws Stbb
th only bnqtr on whl’s flsh tht nght. Mnglng thr
mmblngs wth hs own mstctns, thsnds on thsnds of shrks,
swrmng rnd th dd lvthn, smckngly fstd on its ftnss.
Th fw slprs blw in thr bnks wr oftn strtld by th shrp
slppng of thr tls agnst th hll, wthn a fw inchs of th
slprs’ hrts. Prng ovr th sd y cld jst s thm (as
bfr y hrd thm) wllwng in th slln, blck wtrs, and
trnng ovr on thr bcks as thy scpd ot hg glblr pcs of
th whl of th bgnss of a hmn hd. Ths prtclr ft of th
shrk sms all bt mrcls. Hw at sch an apprntly unsslbl
srfc, thy cntrv t gg ot sch symmtrcl mthfls, rmns
a prt of th unvrsl prblm of all thngs. Th mrk thy ths lv
on th whl, my bst b lknd t th hllw md by a crpntr in
cntrsnkng fr a scrw.

Thgh amd all th smkng hrrr and dblsm of a s-fght, shrks
wll b sn lngngly gzng up t th shp’s dcks, lk hngry dgs
rnd a tbl whr rd mt is bng crvd, rdy t blt dwn evry
klld mn tht is tssd t thm; and thgh, whl th vlnt
btchrs ovr th dck-tbl ar ths cnnblly crvng ech othr’s
lv mt wth crvng-knvs all gldd and tsslld, th shrks,
als, wth thr jwl-hltd mths, ar qrrlsmly crvng awy
undr th tbl at th dd mt; and thgh, wr y t trn th
whl affr upsd dwn, it wld stll b prtty mch th sm thng,
tht is t sy, a shckng shrksh bsnss engh fr all prts;
and thgh shrks als ar th invrbl otrdrs of all slv shps
crssng th Atlntc, systmtclly trttng alngsd, t b hndy
in cs a prcl is t b crrd anywhr, or a dd slv t b
dcntly brd; and thgh on or tw othr lk instncs mght b
st dwn, tchng th st trms, plcs, and occsns, whn shrks d
mst sclly cngrgt, and mst hlrsly fst; yt is thr n
cncvbl tm or occsn whn y wll fnd thm in sch cntlss
nmbrs, and in gyr or mr jvl sprts, thn arnd a dd sprm
whl, mrd by nght t a whlshp at s. If y hv nvr sn
tht sght, thn sspnd yr dcsn abt th prprty of
dvl-wrshp, and th expdncy of cncltng th dvl.

Bt, as yt, Stbb hdd nt th mmblngs of th bnqt tht ws
gng on s ngh hm, n mr thn th shrks hdd th smckng of
hs own epcrn lps.

“Ck, ck!—whr’s tht old Flc?” h crd at lngth, wdnng hs
lgs stll frthr, as if t frm a mr scr bs fr hs sppr;
and, at th sm tm drtng hs frk int th dsh, as if stbbng
wth hs lnc; “ck, y ck!—sl ths wy, ck!”

Th old blck, nt in any vry hgh gl at hvng bn prvsly
rsd frm hs wrm hmmck at a mst unssnbl hr, cm
shmblng alng frm hs glly, fr, lk mny old blcks, thr ws
smthng th mttr wth hs kn-pns, whch h dd nt kp wll
scrd lk hs othr pns; ths old Flc, as thy clld hm, cm
shfflng and lmpng alng, assstng hs stp wth hs tngs, whch,
aftr a clmsy fshn, wr md of strghtnd irn hps; ths old
Ebny flndrd alng, and in obdnc t th wrd of cmmnd, cm
t a dd stp on th oppst sd of Stbb’s sdbrd; whn, wth
bth hnds fldd bfr hm, and rstng on hs tw-lggd cn, h
bwd hs archd bck stll frthr ovr, at th sm tm sdwys
inclnng hs hd, s as t brng hs bst er int ply.

“Ck,” sd Stbb, rpdly lftng a rthr rddsh mrsl t hs
mth, “dn’t y thnk ths stk is rthr ovrdn? Y’v bn
btng ths stk t mch, ck; it’s t tndr. Dn’t I alwys sy
tht t b gd, a whl-stk mst b tgh? Thr ar ths shrks
nw ovr th sd, dn’t y s thy prfr it tgh and rr? Wht a
shndy thy ar kckng up! Ck, g and tlk t ’em; tll ’em thy ar
wlcm t hlp thmslvs cvlly, and in mdrtn, bt thy mst
kp qt. Blst m, if I cn hr my own vc. Awy, ck, and
dlvr my mssg. Hr, tk ths lntrn,” sntchng on frm hs
sdbrd; “nw thn, g and prch t ’em!”

Sllnly tkng th offrd lntrn, old Flc lmpd acrss th dck
t th blwrks; and thn, wth on hnd drppng hs lght lw ovr
th s, s as t gt a gd vw of hs cngrgtn, wth th othr
hnd h slmnly flrshd hs tngs, and lnng fr ovr th sd in
a mmblng vc bgn addrssng th shrks, whl Stbb, sftly
crwlng bhnd, ovrhrd all tht ws sd.

“Fllw-crttrs: I’s ordrd hr t sy dt y mst stp dt dm
ns dr. Y hr? Stp dt dm smckn’ ob d lp! Mss Stbb sy
dt y cn fll yr dm blls up t d htchngs, bt by Gr! y
mst stp dt dm rckt!”

“Ck,” hr intrpsd Stbb, accmpnyng th wrd wth a sddn slp
on th shldr,—“Ck! why, dmn yr eys, y mstn’t swr tht wy
whn y’r prchng. Tht’s n wy t cnvrt snnrs, ck!”

“Wh dt? Dn prch t hm yrslf,” sllnly trnng t g.

“N, ck; g on, g on.”

“Wll, dn, Blbd fllw-crttrs:”—

“Rght!” exclmd Stbb, apprvngly, “cx ’em t it; try tht,” and
Flc cntnd.

“D y is all shrks, and by ntr wry wrcs, yt I zy t y,
fllw-crttrs, dt dt wrcsnss—’tp dt dm slppn’ ob d
tl! Hw y tnk t hr, sps y kp up sch a dm slppn’ and
btn’ dr?”

“Ck,” crd Stbb, cllrng hm, “I wn’t hv tht swrng. Tlk
t ’em gntlmnly.”

Onc mr th srmn prcdd.

“Yr wrcsnss, fllw-crttrs, I dn’t blm y s mch fr; dt
is ntr, and cn’t b hlpd; bt t gbrn dt wckd ntr, dt is
d pnt. Y is shrks, srtn; bt if y gbrn d shrk in y, why
dn y b angl; fr all angl is nt’ing mr dn d shrk wll
gbrnd. Nw, lk hr, brd’rn, jst try wnst t b cbl, a
hlpng yrslbs frm dt whl. Dn’t b trn’ d blbbr ot yr
nghbr’s mt, I sy. Is nt on shrk dd rght as tdr t dt
whl? And, by Gr, nn on y hs d rght t dt whl; dt whl
blng t sm on els. I knw sm o’ y hs brry brg mt,
brggr dn odrs; bt dn d brg mts smtms hs d smll
blls; s dt d brgnss of d mt is nt t swllr wd, bt t
bt off d blbbr fr d smll fry ob shrks, dt cn’t gt int d
scrg t hlp dmslvs.”

“Wll dn, old Flc!” crd Stbb, “tht’s Chrstnty; g on.”

“N us gn’ on; d dm wllns wll kp a scgn’ and slppn’
ech odr, Mss Stbb; dy dn’t hr on wrd; n us a-prchn’ t
sch dm g’uttns as y cll ’em, tll dr blls is fll, and dr
blls is bttmlss; and whn dy d gt ’em fll, dy wnt hr y
dn; fr dn dy snk in d s, g fst t slp on d crl, and
cn’t hr nt’ing at all, n mr, fr ebr and ebr.”

“Upn my sl, I am abt of th sm opnn; s gv th bndctn,
Flc, and I’ll awy t my sppr.”

Upn ths, Flc, hldng bth hnds ovr th fshy mb, rsd hs
shrll vc, and crd—

“Cssd fllw-crttrs! Kck up d dmndst rw as evr y cn; fll
yr dm’ blls ’tll dy bst—and dn d.”

“Nw, ck,” sd Stbb, rsmng hs sppr at th cpstn; “stnd
jst whr y std bfr, thr, ovr agnst m, and py prtclr
attntn.”

“All dntn,” sd Flc, agn stpng ovr upn hs tngs in th
dsrd pstn.

“Wll,” sd Stbb, hlpng hmslf frly mnwhl; “I shll nw g
bck t th sbjct of ths stk. In th frst plc, hw old ar y,
ck?”

“Wht dt d wd d ’tk,” sd th old blck, tstly.

“Slnc! Hw old ar y, ck?”

“’Bt nnty, dy sy,” h glmly mttrd.

“And y hv lvd in ths wrld hrd upn on hndrd yrs, ck,
and dn’t knw yt hw t ck a whl-stk?” rpdly bltng anthr
mthfl at th lst wrd, s tht mrsl smd a cntntn of th
qstn. “Whr wr y brn, ck?”

“’Hnd d htchwy, in frry-bt, gn’ obr d Rnk.”

“Brn in a frry-bt! Tht’s qr, t. Bt I wnt t knw wht
cntry y wr brn in, ck!”

“Ddn’t I sy d Rnk cntry?” h crd shrply.

“N, y ddn’t, ck; bt I’ll tll y wht I’m cmng t, ck. Y
mst g hm and b brn ovr agn; y dn’t knw hw t ck a
whl-stk yt.”

“Brss my sl, if I ck ndr on,” h grwld, angrly, trnng
rnd t dprt.

“Cm bck, ck;—hr, hnd m ths tngs;—nw tk tht bt of stk
thr, and tll m if y thnk tht stk ckd as it shld b? Tk
it, I sy”—hldng th tngs twrds hm—“tk it, and tst it.”

Fntly smckng hs wthrd lps ovr it fr a mmnt, th old ngr
mttrd, “Bst ckd ’tk I ebr tst; jsy, brry jsy.”

“Ck,” sd Stbb, sqrng hmslf onc mr; “d y blng t th
chrch?”

“Pssd on onc in Cp-Dwn,” sd th old mn sllnly.

“And y hv onc in yr lf pssd a hly chrch in Cp-Twn,
whr y dbtlss ovrhrd a hly prsn addrssng hs hrrs as
hs blvd fllw-crtrs, hv y, ck! And yt y cm hr,
and tll m sch a drdfl l as y dd jst nw, eh?” sd Stbb.
“Whr d y expct t g t, ck?”

“G t bd brry sn,” h mmbld, hlf-trnng as h spk.

“Avst! hv t! I mn whn y d, ck. It’s an awfl qstn.
Nw wht’s yr answr?”

“Whn ds old brck mn ds,” sd th ngr slwly, chngng hs
whl ar and dmnr, “h hsslf wn’t g nwhr; bt sm brssd
angl wll cm and ftch hm.”

“Ftch hm? Hw? In a cch and fr, as thy ftchd Eljh? And ftch
hm whr?”

“Up dr,” sd Flc, hldng hs tngs strght ovr hs hd, and
kpng it thr vry slmnly.

“S, thn, y expct t g up int or mn-tp, d y, ck, whn
y ar dd? Bt dn’t y knw th hghr y clmb, th cldr it
gts? Mn-tp, eh?”

“Ddn’t sy dt t’all,” sd Flc, agn in th slks.

“Y sd up thr, ddn’t y? and nw lk yrslf, and s whr
yr tngs ar pntng. Bt, prhps y expct t gt int hvn by
crwlng thrgh th lbbr’s hl, ck; bt, n, n, ck, y dn’t
gt thr, excpt y g th rglr wy, rnd by th rggng. It’s a
tcklsh bsnss, bt mst b dn, or els it’s n g. Bt nn of us
ar in hvn yt. Drp yr tngs, ck, and hr my ordrs. D y
hr? Hld yr ht in on hnd, and clp t’othr a’tp of yr hrt,
whn I’m gvng my ordrs, ck. Wht! tht yr hrt, thr?—tht’s
yr gzzrd! Alft! alft!—tht’s it—nw y hv it. Hld it thr
nw, and py attntn.”

“All ’dntn,” sd th old blck, wth bth hnds plcd as dsrd,
vnly wrgglng hs grzzld hd, as if t gt bth ers in frnt at
on and th sm tm.

“Wll thn, ck, y s ths whl-stk of yrs ws s vry bd,
tht I hv pt it ot of sght as sn as pssbl; y s tht,
dn’t y? Wll, fr th ftr, whn y ck anthr whl-stk fr
my prvt tbl hr, th cpstn, I’ll tll y wht t d s as nt
t spl it by ovrdng. Hld th stk in on hnd, and shw a lv
cl t it wth th othr; tht dn, dsh it; d’y hr? And nw
t-mrrw, ck, whn w ar cttng in th fsh, b sr y stnd by
t gt th tps of hs fns; hv thm pt in pckl. As fr th ends
of th flks, hv thm ssd, ck. Thr, nw y my g.”

Bt Flc hd hrdly gt thr pcs off, whn h ws rclld.

“Ck, gv m ctlts fr sppr t-mrrw nght in th md-wtch.
D’y hr? awy y sl, thn.—Hll! stp! mk a bw bfr y
g.—Avst hvng agn! Whl-blls fr brkfst—dn’t frgt.”

“Wsh, by gr! whl et hm, ’std of hm et whl. I’m brssd if
h an’t mr of shrk dn Mss Shrk hsslf,” mttrd th old mn,
lmpng awy; wth whch sg ejcltn h wnt t hs hmmck.


CHPTR 65. Th Whl as a Dsh.

Tht mrtl mn shld fd upn th crtr tht fds hs lmp, and,
lk Stbb, et hm by hs own lght, as y my sy; ths sms s
otlndsh a thng tht on mst nds g a lttl int th hstry and
phlsphy of it.

It is upn rcrd, tht thr cntrs ag th tng of th Rght
Whl ws estmd a grt dlccy in Frnc, and cmmndd lrg
prcs thr. Als, tht in Hnry Vth’s tm, a crtn ck of th
crt obtnd a hndsm rwrd fr invntng an admrbl sc t b
etn wth brbcd prpss, whch, y rmmbr, ar a spcs of
whl. Prpss, indd, ar t ths dy cnsdrd fn etng. Th
mt is md int blls abt th sz of bllrd blls, and bng
wll ssnd and spcd mght b tkn fr trtl-blls or vl blls.
Th old mnks of Dnfrmln wr vry fnd of thm. Thy hd a grt
prps grnt frm th crwn.

Th fct is, tht amng hs hntrs at lst, th whl wld by all
hnds b cnsdrd a nbl dsh, wr thr nt s mch of hm; bt
whn y cm t st dwn bfr a mt-p nrly on hndrd ft
lng, it tks awy yr apptt. Only th mst unprjdcd of mn
lk Stbb, nwdys prtk of ckd whls; bt th Esqmx ar
nt s fstds. W all knw hw thy lv upn whls, and hv rr
old vntgs of prm old trn ol. Zgrnd, on of thr mst fms
dctrs, rcmmnds strps of blbbr fr infnts, as bng excdngly
jcy and nrshng. And ths rmnds m tht crtn Englshmn, wh
lng ag wr accdntlly lft in Grnlnd by a whlng vssl—tht
ths mn actlly lvd fr svrl mnths on th mldy scrps of
whls whch hd bn lft ashr aftr tryng ot th blbbr. Amng
th Dtch whlmn ths scrps ar clld “frttrs”; whch, indd,
thy grtly rsmbl, bng brwn and crsp, and smllng smthng
lk old Amstrdm hswvs’ dgh-nts or oly-cks, whn frsh.
Thy hv sch an etbl lk tht th mst slf-dnyng strngr cn
hrdly kp hs hnds off.

Bt wht frthr dprcts th whl as a cvlzd dsh, is hs
excdng rchnss. H is th grt prz ox of th s, t ft t b
dlctly gd. Lk at hs hmp, whch wld b as fn etng as th
bffl’s (whch is estmd a rr dsh), wr it nt sch a sld
pyrmd of ft. Bt th sprmct itslf, hw blnd and crmy tht
is; lk th trnsprnt, hlf-jlld, wht mt of a ccnt in th
thrd mnth of its grwth, yt fr t rch t spply a sbsttt fr
bttr. Nvrthlss, mny whlmn hv a mthd of absrbng it int
sm othr sbstnc, and thn prtkng of it. In th lng try wtchs
of th nght it is a cmmn thng fr th smn t dp thr
shp-bsct int th hg ol-pts and lt thm fry thr awhl. Mny
a gd sppr hv I ths md.

In th cs of a smll Sprm Whl th brns ar accntd a fn
dsh. Th cskt of th skll is brkn int wth an ax, and th tw
plmp, whtsh lbs bng wthdrwn (prcsly rsmblng tw lrg
pddngs), thy ar thn mxd wth flr, and ckd int a mst
dlctbl mss, in flvr smwht rsmblng clvs’ hd, whch is
qt a dsh amng sm epcrs; and evry on knws tht sm yng
bcks amng th epcrs, by cntnlly dnng upn clvs’ brns, by
and by gt t hv a lttl brns of thr own, s as t b abl t
tll a clf’s hd frm thr own hds; whch, indd, rqrs
uncmmn dscrmntn. And tht is th rsn why a yng bck wth
an intllgnt lkng clf’s hd bfr hm, is smhw on of th
sddst sghts y cn s. Th hd lks a srt of rprchflly at
hm, wth an “Et t Brt!” exprssn.

It is nt, prhps, entrly bcs th whl is s excssvly
uncts tht lndsmn sm t rgrd th etng of hm wth
abhrrnc; tht apprs t rslt, in sm wy, frm th cnsdrtn
bfr mntnd: _i.e._ tht a mn shld et a nwly mrdrd thng
of th s, and et it t by its own lght. Bt n dbt th frst mn
tht evr mrdrd an ox ws rgrdd as a mrdrr; prhps h ws
hng; and if h hd bn pt on hs trl by oxn, h crtnly wld
hv bn; and h crtnly dsrvd it if any mrdrr ds. G t th
mt-mrkt of a Strdy nght and s th crwds of lv bpds
strng up at th lng rws of dd qdrpds. Ds nt tht sght
tk a tth ot of th cnnbl’s jw? Cnnbls? wh is nt a
cnnbl? I tll y it wll b mr tlrbl fr th Fj tht
sltd dwn a ln mssnry in hs cllr agnst a cmng fmn; it
wll b mr tlrbl fr tht prvdnt Fj, I sy, in th dy of
jdgmnt, thn fr th, cvlzd and enlghtnd grmnd, wh
nlst gs t th grnd and fstst on thr bltd lvrs in thy
pté-d-f-grs.

Bt Stbb, h ets th whl by its own lght, ds h? and tht is
addng inslt t injry, is it? Lk at yr knf-hndl, thr, my
cvlzd and enlghtnd grmnd dnng off tht rst bf, wht is
tht hndl md of?—wht bt th bns of th brthr of th vry ox
y ar etng? And wht d y pck yr tth wth, aftr dvrng
tht ft gs? Wth a fthr of th sm fwl. And wth wht qll
dd th Scrtry of th Scty fr th Spprssn of Crlty t
Gndrs frmlly indt hs crclrs? It is only wthn th lst mnth
or tw tht tht scty pssd a rsltn t ptrnz nthng bt
stl pns.


CHPTR 66. Th Shrk Msscr.

Whn in th Sthrn Fshry, a cptrd Sprm Whl, aftr lng and
wry tl, is brght alngsd lt at nght, it is nt, as a gnrl
thng at lst, cstmry t prcd at onc t th bsnss of cttng
hm in. Fr tht bsnss is an excdngly lbrs on; is nt vry
sn cmpltd; and rqrs all hnds t st abt it. Thrfr, th
cmmn usg is t tk in all sl; lsh th hlm a’l; and thn snd
evry on blw t hs hmmck tll dylght, wth th rsrvtn
tht, untl tht tm, anchr-wtchs shll b kpt; tht is, tw and
tw fr an hr, ech cpl, th crw in rttn shll mnt th dck
t s tht all gs wll.

Bt smtms, espclly upn th Ln in th Pcfc, ths pln wll
nt answr at all; bcs sch inclclbl hsts of shrks gthr
rnd th mrd crcs, tht wr h lft s fr sx hrs, sy, on a
strtch, lttl mr thn th skltn wld b vsbl by mrnng. In
mst othr prts of th ocn, hwvr, whr ths fsh d nt s
lrgly abnd, thr wndrs vrcty cn b at tms cnsdrbly
dmnshd, by vgrsly strrng thm up wth shrp whlng-spds, a
prcdr ntwthstndng, whch, in sm instncs, only sms t
tckl thm int stll grtr actvty. Bt it ws nt ths in th
prsnt cs wth th Pqd’s shrks; thgh, t b sr, any mn
unccstmd t sch sghts, t hv lkd ovr hr sd tht nght,
wld hv almst thght th whl rnd s ws on hg chs, and
ths shrks th mggts in it.

Nvrthlss, upn Stbb sttng th anchr-wtch aftr hs sppr ws
cncldd; and whn, accrdngly, Qqg and a frcstl smn cm
on dck, n smll exctmnt ws crtd amng th shrks; fr
immdtly sspndng th cttng stgs ovr th sd, and lwrng
thr lntrns, s tht thy cst lng glms of lght ovr th trbd
s, ths tw mrnrs, drtng thr lng whlng-spds, kpt up an
incssnt mrdrng of th shrks,* by strkng th kn stl dp
int thr sklls, smngly thr only vtl prt. Bt in th fmy
cnfsn of thr mxd and strgglng hsts, th mrksmn cld nt
alwys ht thr mrk; and ths brght abt nw rvltns of th
incrdbl frcty of th f. Thy vcsly snppd, nt only at
ech othr’s dsmbwlmnts, bt lk flxbl bws, bnt rnd, and
bt thr own; tll ths entrls smd swllwd ovr and ovr agn
by th sm mth, t b oppstly vdd by th gpng wnd. Nr ws
ths all. It ws unsf t mddl wth th crpss and ghsts of ths
crtrs. A srt of gnrc or Pnthstc vtlty smd t lrk in
thr vry jnts and bns, aftr wht mght b clld th indvdl
lf hd dprtd. Klld and hstd on dck fr th sk of hs skn,
on of ths shrks almst tk pr Qqg’s hnd off, whn h trd
t sht dwn th dd ld of hs mrdrs jw.

*Th whlng-spd usd fr cttng-in is md of th vry bst stl;
is abt th bgnss of a mn’s sprd hnd; and in gnrl shp,
crrspnds t th grdn implmnt aftr whch it is nmd; only its
sds ar prfctly flt, and its uppr end cnsdrbly nrrwr thn
th lwr. Ths wpn is alwys kpt as shrp as pssbl; and whn
bng usd is occsnlly hnd, jst lk a rzr. In its sckt, a
stff pl, frm twnty t thrty ft lng, is insrtd fr a hndl.

“Qqg n cr wht gd md hm shrk,” sd th svg,
agnzngly lftng hs hnd up and dwn; “wddr Fj gd or
Nntckt gd; bt d gd wt md shrk mst b on dm Ingn.”


CHPTR 67. Cttng In.

It ws a Strdy nght, and sch a Sbbth as fllwd! Ex offc
prfssrs of Sbbth brkng ar all whlmn. Th ivry Pqd ws
trnd int wht smd a shmbl; evry slr a btchr. Y wld
hv thght w wr offrng up tn thsnd rd oxn t th s gds.

In th frst plc, th enrms cttng tckls, amng othr pndrs
thngs cmprsng a clstr of blcks gnrlly pntd grn, and
whch n sngl mn cn pssbly lft—ths vst bnch of grps ws
swyd up t th mn-tp and frmly lshd t th lwr mst-hd, th
strngst pnt anywhr abv a shp’s dck. Th end of th
hwsr-lk rp wndng thrgh ths intrccs, ws thn cndctd
t th wndlss, and th hg lwr blck of th tckls ws swng ovr
th whl; t ths blck th grt blbbr hk, wghng sm on
hndrd pnds, ws attchd. And nw sspndd in stgs ovr th
sd, Strbck and Stbb, th mts, armd wth thr lng spds,
bgn cttng a hl in th bdy fr th insrtn of th hk jst
abv th nrst of th tw sd-fns. Ths dn, a brd,
smcrclr ln is ct rnd th hl, th hk is insrtd, and th
mn bdy of th crw strkng up a wld chrs, nw cmmnc hvng
in on dns crwd at th wndlss. Whn instntly, th entr shp
crns ovr on hr sd; evry blt in hr strts lk th nl-hds
of an old hs in frsty wthr; sh trmbls, qvrs, and nds hr
frghtd mst-hds t th sky. Mr and mr sh lns ovr t th
whl, whl evry gspng hv of th wndlss is answrd by a
hlpng hv frm th bllws; tll at lst, a swft, strtlng snp
is hrd; wth a grt swsh th shp rlls upwrds and bckwrds frm
th whl, and th trmphnt tckl rss int sght drggng aftr it
th dsnggd smcrclr end of th frst strp of blbbr. Nw as
th blbbr envlps th whl prcsly as th rnd ds an orng,
s is it strppd off frm th bdy prcsly as an orng is smtms
strppd by sprlzng it. Fr th strn cnstntly kpt up by th
wndlss cntnlly kps th whl rllng ovr and ovr in th
wtr, and as th blbbr in on strp unfrmly pls off alng th
ln clld th “scrf,” smltnsly ct by th spds of Strbck
and Stbb, th mts; and jst as fst as it is ths pld off, and
indd by tht vry act itslf, it is all th tm bng hstd hghr
and hghr alft tll its uppr end grzs th mn-tp; th mn at th
wndlss thn cs hvng, and fr a mmnt or tw th prdgs
bld-drppng mss swys t and fr as if lt dwn frm th sky, and
evry on prsnt mst tk gd hd t ddg it whn it swngs, els
it my bx hs ers and ptch hm hdlng ovrbrd.

On of th attndng hrpnrs nw advncs wth a lng, kn wpn
clld a brdng-swrd, and wtchng hs chnc h dxtrsly slcs
ot a cnsdrbl hl in th lwr prt of th swyng mss. Int
ths hl, th end of th scnd altrntng grt tckl is thn
hkd s as t rtn a hld upn th blbbr, in ordr t prpr fr
wht fllws. Whrpn, ths accmplshd swrdsmn, wrnng all hnds
t stnd off, onc mr mks a scntfc dsh at th mss, and wth a
fw sdlng, dsprt, lngng slcngs, svrs it cmpltly in
twn; s tht whl th shrt lwr prt is stll fst, th lng uppr
strp, clld a blnkt-pc, swngs clr, and is all rdy fr
lwrng. Th hvrs frwrd nw rsm thr sng, and whl th on
tckl is plng and hstng a scnd strp frm th whl, th othr
is slwly slcknd awy, and dwn gs th frst strp thrgh th
mn htchwy rght bnth, int an unfrnshd prlr clld th
blbbr-rm. Int ths twlght aprtmnt sndry nmbl hnds kp
clng awy th lng blnkt-pc as if it wr a grt lv mss of
pltd srpnts. And ths th wrk prcds; th tw tckls hstng
and lwrng smltnsly; bth whl and wndlss hvng, th
hvrs sngng, th blbbr-rm gntlmn clng, th mts
scrfng, th shp strnng, and all hnds swrng occsnlly, by
wy of assgng th gnrl frctn.


CHPTR 68. Th Blnkt.

I hv gvn n smll attntn t tht nt unvxd sbjct, th skn
of th whl. I hv hd cntrvrss abt it wth exprncd
whlmn aflt, and lrnd ntrlsts ashr. My orgnl opnn
rmns unchngd; bt it is only an opnn.

Th qstn is, wht and whr is th skn of th whl? Alrdy y
knw wht hs blbbr is. Tht blbbr is smthng of th cnsstnc
of frm, cls-grnd bf, bt tghr, mr elstc and cmpct, and
rngs frm eght or tn t twlv and fftn inchs in thcknss.

Nw, hwvr prpstrs it my at frst sm t tlk of any
crtr’s skn as bng of tht srt of cnsstnc and thcknss, yt
in pnt of fct ths ar n argmnts agnst sch a prsmptn;
bcs y cnnt rs any othr dns envlpng lyr frm th
whl’s bdy bt tht sm blbbr; and th otrmst envlpng lyr
of any anml, if rsnbly dns, wht cn tht b bt th skn?
Tr, frm th unmrrd dd bdy of th whl, y my scrp off wth
yr hnd an infntly thn, trnsprnt sbstnc, smwht
rsmblng th thnnst shrds of isnglss, only it is almst as
flxbl and sft as stn; tht is, prvs t bng drd, whn it
nt only cntrcts and thckns, bt bcms rthr hrd and brttl. I
hv svrl sch drd bts, whch I us fr mrks in my whl-bks.
It is trnsprnt, as I sd bfr; and bng ld upn th prntd
pg, I hv smtms plsd myslf wth fncyng it exrtd a
mgnfyng inflnc. At any rt, it is plsnt t rd abt whls
thrgh thr own spctcls, as y my sy. Bt wht I am drvng at
hr is ths. Tht sm infntly thn, isnglss sbstnc, whch, I
admt, invsts th entr bdy of th whl, is nt s mch t b
rgrdd as th skn of th crtr, as th skn of th skn, s t
spk; fr it wr smply rdcls t sy, tht th prpr skn of
th trmnds whl is thnnr and mr tndr thn th skn of a
nw-brn chld. Bt n mr of ths.

Assmng th blbbr t b th skn of th whl; thn, whn ths skn,
as in th cs of a vry lrg Sprm Whl, wll yld th blk of on
hndrd brrls of ol; and, whn it is cnsdrd tht, in qntty,
or rthr wght, tht ol, in its exprssd stt, is only thr
frths, and nt th entr sbstnc of th ct; sm id my hnc
b hd of th enrmsnss of tht anmtd mss, a mr prt of whs
mr intgmnt ylds sch a lk of lqd as tht. Rcknng tn
brrls t th tn, y hv tn tns fr th nt wght of only thr
qrtrs of th stff of th whl’s skn.

In lf, th vsbl srfc of th Sprm Whl is nt th lst amng
th mny mrvls h prsnts. Almst invrbly it is all ovr
oblqly crssd and r-crssd wth nmbrlss strght mrks in
thck arry, smthng lk ths in th fnst Itln ln
engrvngs. Bt ths mrks d nt sm t b imprssd upn th
isnglss sbstnc abv mntnd, bt sm t b sn thrgh it, as
if thy wr engrvd upn th bdy itslf. Nr is ths all. In sm
instncs, t th qck, obsrvnt ey, ths lnr mrks, as in a
vrtbl engrvng, bt affrd th grnd fr fr othr dlntns.
Ths ar hrglyphcl; tht is, if y cll ths mystrs cyphrs
on th wlls of pyrmds hrglyphcs, thn tht is th prpr wrd t
us in th prsnt cnnxn. By my rtntv mmry of th
hrglyphcs upn on Sprm Whl in prtclr, I ws mch strck
wth a plt rprsntng th old Indn chrctrs chslld on th
fms hrglyphc plsds on th bnks of th Uppr Msssspp.
Lk ths mystc rcks, t, th mystc-mrkd whl rmns
undcphrbl. Ths allsn t th Indn rcks rmnds m of anthr
thng. Bsds all th othr phnmn whch th extrr of th Sprm
Whl prsnts, h nt sldm dsplys th bck, and mr espclly
hs flnks, effcd in grt prt of th rglr lnr apprnc, by
rsn of nmrs rd scrtchs, altgthr of an irrglr, rndm
aspct. I shld sy tht ths Nw Englnd rcks on th s-cst,
whch Agssz imgns t br th mrks of vlnt scrpng cntct
wth vst fltng icbrgs—I shld sy, tht ths rcks mst nt a
lttl rsmbl th Sprm Whl in ths prtclr. It als sms t m
tht sch scrtchs in th whl ar prbbly md by hstl cntct
wth othr whls; fr I hv mst rmrkd thm in th lrg,
fll-grwn blls of th spcs.

A wrd or tw mr cncrnng ths mttr of th skn or blbbr of th
whl. It hs alrdy bn sd, tht it is strpt frm hm in lng
pcs, clld blnkt-pcs. Lk mst s-trms, ths on is vry
hppy and sgnfcnt. Fr th whl is indd wrpt up in hs blbbr
as in a rl blnkt or cntrpn; or, stll bttr, an Indn pnch
slpt ovr hs hd, and skrtng hs extrmty. It is by rsn of
ths csy blnktng of hs bdy, tht th whl is enbld t kp
hmslf cmfrtbl in all wthrs, in all ss, tms, and tds.
Wht wld bcm of a Grnlnd whl, sy, in ths shddrng, icy
ss of th Nrth, if unsppld wth hs csy srtt? Tr, othr
fsh ar fnd excdngly brsk in ths Hyprbrn wtrs; bt
ths, b it obsrvd, ar yr cld-bldd, lnglss fsh, whs vry
blls ar rfrgrtrs; crtrs, tht wrm thmslvs undr th
l of an icbrg, as a trvllr in wntr wld bsk bfr an inn
fr; whrs, lk mn, th whl hs lngs and wrm bld. Frz hs
bld, and h ds. Hw wndrfl is it thn—excpt aftr
explntn—tht ths grt mnstr, t whm crprl wrmth is as
indspnsbl as it is t mn; hw wndrfl tht h shld b fnd at
hm, immrsd t hs lps fr lf in ths Arctc wtrs! whr, whn
smn fll ovrbrd, thy ar smtms fnd, mnths aftrwrds,
prpndclrly frzn int th hrts of flds of ic, as a fly is
fnd gld in ambr. Bt mr srprsng is it t knw, as hs bn
prvd by exprmnt, tht th bld of a Plr whl is wrmr thn
tht of a Brn ngr in smmr.

It ds sm t m, tht hrn w s th rr vrt of a strng
indvdl vtlty, and th rr vrt of thck wlls, and th rr
vrt of intrr spcsnss. Oh, mn! admr and mdl thyslf
aftr th whl! D th, t, rmn wrm amng ic. D th, t,
lv in ths wrld wtht bng of it. B cl at th eqtr; kp
thy bld fld at th Pl. Lk th grt dm of St. Ptr’s, and
lk th grt whl, rtn, O mn! in all ssns a tmprtr of
thn own.

Bt hw esy and hw hplss t tch ths fn thngs! Of erctns,
hw fw ar dmd lk St. Ptr’s! of crtrs, hw fw vst as th
whl!


CHPTR 69. Th Fnrl.

“Hl in th chns! Lt th crcs g astrn!”

Th vst tckls hv nw dn thr dty. Th pld wht bdy of th
bhdd whl flshs lk a mrbl splchr; thgh chngd in h,
it hs nt prcptbly lst anythng in blk. It is stll clssl.
Slwly it flts mr and mr awy, th wtr rnd it trn and
splshd by th instt shrks, and th ar abv vxd wth
rpcs flghts of scrmng fwls, whs bks ar lk s mny
insltng pnrds in th whl. Th vst wht hdlss phntm flts
frthr and frthr frm th shp, and evry rd tht it s flts,
wht sm sqr rds of shrks and cbc rds of fwls, agmnt th
mrdrs dn. Fr hrs and hrs frm th almst sttnry shp tht
hds sght is sn. Bnth th uncldd and mld azr sky, upn
th fr fc of th plsnt s, wftd by th jys brzs, tht
grt mss of dth flts on and on, tll lst in infnt
prspctvs.

Thr’s a mst dlfl and mst mckng fnrl! Th s-vltrs all
in ps mrnng, th ar-shrks all pnctlsly in blck or
spckld. In lf bt fw of thm wld hv hlpd th whl, I wn,
if prdvntr h hd ndd it; bt upn th bnqt of hs fnrl
thy mst psly d pnc. Oh, hrrbl vltrsm of erth! frm
whch nt th mghtst whl is fr.

Nr is ths th end. Dscrtd as th bdy is, a vngfl ghst
srvvs and hvrs ovr it t scr. Espd by sm tmd mn-of-wr
or blndrng dscvry-vssl frm afr, whn th dstnc obscrng
th swrmng fwls, nvrthlss stll shws th wht mss fltng in
th sn, and th wht spry hvng hgh agnst it; strghtwy th
whl’s unhrmng crps, wth trmblng fngrs is st dwn in th
lg—_shls, rcks, and brkrs hrbts: bwr!_ And fr yrs
aftrwrds, prhps, shps shn th plc; lpng ovr it as slly
shp lp ovr a vcm, bcs thr ldr orgnlly lpd thr
whn a stck ws hld. Thr’s yr lw of prcdnts; thr’s yr
utlty of trdtns; thr’s th stry of yr obstnt srvvl of
old blfs nvr bttmd on th erth, and nw nt evn hvrng in
th ar! Thr’s orthdxy!

Ths, whl in lf th grt whl’s bdy my hv bn a rl trrr
t hs fs, in hs dth hs ghst bcms a pwrlss pnc t a
wrld.

Ar y a blvr in ghsts, my frnd? Thr ar othr ghsts thn
th Cck-Ln on, and fr dpr mn thn Dctr Jhnsn wh blv
in thm.


CHPTR 70. Th Sphynx.

It shld nt hv bn omttd tht prvs t cmpltly strppng
th bdy of th lvthn, h ws bhdd. Nw, th bhdng of th
Sprm Whl is a scntfc antmcl ft, upn whch exprncd
whl srgns vry mch prd thmslvs: and nt wtht rsn.

Cnsdr tht th whl hs nthng tht cn prprly b clld a nck;
on th cntrry, whr hs hd and bdy sm t jn, thr, in tht
vry plc, is th thckst prt of hm. Rmmbr, als, tht th
srgn mst oprt frm abv, sm eght or tn ft intrvnng
btwn hm and hs sbjct, and tht sbjct almst hddn in a
dsclrd, rllng, and oftntms tmlts and brstng s. Br
in mnd, t, tht undr ths untwrd crcmstncs h hs t ct
mny ft dp in th flsh; and in tht sbtrrns mnnr, wtht
s mch as gttng on sngl pp int th evr-cntrctng gsh ths
md, h mst sklflly str clr of all adjcnt, intrdctd prts,
and exctly dvd th spn at a crtcl pnt hrd by its insrtn
int th skll. D y nt mrvl, thn, at Stbb’s bst, tht h
dmndd bt tn mnts t bhd a sprm whl?

Whn frst svrd, th hd is drppd astrn and hld thr by a
cbl tll th bdy is strppd. Tht dn, if it blng t a smll
whl it is hstd on dck t b dlbrtly dspsd of. Bt, wth a
fll grwn lvthn ths is impssbl; fr th sprm whl’s hd
embrcs nrly on thrd of hs entr blk, and cmpltly t sspnd
sch a brdn as tht, evn by th immns tckls of a whlr, ths
wr as vn a thng as t attmpt wghng a Dtch brn in jwllrs’
scls.

Th Pqd’s whl bng dcpttd and th bdy strppd, th hd
ws hstd agnst th shp’s sd—abt hlf wy ot of th s, s
tht it mght yt in grt prt b byd up by its ntv elmnt. And
thr wth th strnd crft stply lnng ovr t it, by rsn of
th enrms dwnwrd drg frm th lwr mst-hd, and evry yrd-arm
on tht sd prjctng lk a crn ovr th wvs; thr, tht
bld-drppng hd hng t th Pqd’s wst lk th gnt
Hlfrns’s frm th grdl of Jdth.

Whn ths lst tsk ws accmplshd it ws nn, and th smn wnt
blw t thr dnnr. Slnc rgnd ovr th bfr tmlts bt
nw dsrtd dck. An intns cppr clm, lk a unvrsl yllw
lts, ws mr and mr unfldng its nslss msrlss lvs
upn th s.

A shrt spc elpsd, and up int ths nslssnss cm Ahb aln
frm hs cbn. Tkng a fw trns on th qrtr-dck, h psd t
gz ovr th sd, thn slwly gttng int th mn-chns h tk
Stbb’s lng spd—stll rmnng thr aftr th whl’s
dcpttn—and strkng it int th lwr prt of th hlf-sspndd
mss, plcd its othr end crtch-ws undr on arm, and s std
lnng ovr wth eys attntvly fxd on ths hd.

It ws a blck and hdd hd; and hngng thr in th mdst of s
intns a clm, it smd th Sphynx’s in th dsrt. “Spk, th vst
and vnrbl hd,” mttrd Ahb, “whch, thgh ungrnshd wth a
brd, yt hr and thr lkst hry wth msss; spk, mghty
hd, and tll us th scrt thng tht is in th. Of all dvrs, th
hst dvd th dpst. Tht hd upn whch th uppr sn nw glms,
hs mvd amd ths wrld’s fndtns. Whr unrcrdd nms and
nvs rst, and untld hps and anchrs rt; whr in hr mrdrs
hld ths frgt erth is bllstd wth bns of mllns of th
drwnd; thr, in tht awfl wtr-lnd, thr ws thy mst fmlr
hm. Th hst bn whr bll or dvr nvr wnt; hst slpt by mny
a slr’s sd, whr slplss mthrs wld gv thr lvs t ly
thm dwn. Th sw’st th lckd lvrs whn lpng frm thr
flmng shp; hrt t hrt thy snk bnth th exltng wv; tr
t ech othr, whn hvn smd fls t thm. Th sw’st th
mrdrd mt whn tssd by prts frm th mdnght dck; fr hrs
h fll int th dpr mdnght of th instt mw; and hs
mrdrrs stll sld on unhrmd—whl swft lghtnngs shvrd th
nghbrng shp tht wld hv brn a rghts hsbnd t
otstrtchd, lngng arms. O hd! th hst sn engh t splt th
plnts and mk an infdl of Abrhm, and nt on syllbl is thn!”

“Sl h!” crd a trmphnt vc frm th mn-mst-hd.

“Ay? Wll, nw, tht’s chrng,” crd Ahb, sddnly erctng
hmslf, whl whl thndr-clds swpt asd frm hs brw. “Tht
lvly cry upn ths ddly clm mght almst cnvrt a bttr
mn.—Whr awy?”

“Thr pnts on th strbrd bw, sr, and brngng dwn hr brz
t us!

“Bttr and bttr, mn. Wld nw St. Pl wld cm alng tht wy,
and t my brzlssnss brng hs brz! O Ntr, and O sl of mn!
hw fr bynd all uttrnc ar yr lnkd anlgs! nt th
smllst atm strs or lvs on mttr, bt hs its cnnng dplct
in mnd.”


CHPTR 71. Th Jrbm’s Stry.

Hnd in hnd, shp and brz blw on; bt th brz cm fstr thn
th shp, and sn th Pqd bgn t rck.

By and by, thrgh th glss th strngr’s bts and mnnd mst-hds
prvd hr a whl-shp. Bt as sh ws s fr t wndwrd, and
shtng by, apprntly mkng a pssg t sm othr grnd, th
Pqd cld nt hp t rch hr. S th sgnl ws st t s wht
rspns wld b md.

Hr b it sd, tht lk th vssls of mltry mrns, th shps
of th Amrcn Whl Flt hv ech a prvt sgnl; all whch
sgnls bng cllctd in a bk wth th nms of th rspctv
vssls attchd, evry cptn is prvdd wth it. Thrby, th whl
cmmndrs ar enbld t rcgns ech othr upn th ocn, evn at
cnsdrbl dstncs and wth n smll fclty.

Th Pqd’s sgnl ws at lst rspndd t by th strngr’s sttng
hr own; whch prvd th shp t b th Jrbm of Nntckt.
Sqrng hr yrds, sh br dwn, rngd abm undr th Pqd’s l,
and lwrd a bt; it sn drw ngh; bt, as th sd-lddr ws
bng rggd by Strbck’s ordr t accmmdt th vstng cptn,
th strngr in qstn wvd hs hnd frm hs bt’s strn in tkn
of tht prcdng bng entrly unncssry. It trnd ot tht th
Jrbm hd a mlgnnt epdmc on brd, and tht Myhw, hr
cptn, ws frfl of infctng th Pqd’s cmpny. Fr, thgh
hmslf and bt’s crw rmnd untntd, and thgh hs shp ws
hlf a rfl-sht off, and an incrrptbl s and ar rllng and
flwng btwn; yt cnscntsly adhrng t th tmd qrntn
of th lnd, h prmptrly rfsd t cm int drct cntct wth
th Pqd.

Bt ths dd by n mns prvnt all cmmnctns. Prsrvng an
intrvl of sm fw yrds btwn itslf and th shp, th Jrbm’s
bt by th occsnl us of its ors cntrvd t kp prlll t
th Pqd, as sh hvly frgd thrgh th s (fr by ths tm it
blw vry frsh), wth hr mn-tpsl abck; thgh, indd, at tms
by th sddn onst of a lrg rllng wv, th bt wld b pshd
sm wy ahd; bt wld b sn sklflly brght t hr prpr
brngs agn. Sbjct t ths, and othr th lk intrrptns nw
and thn, a cnvrstn ws sstnd btwn th tw prts; bt at
intrvls nt wtht stll anthr intrrptn of a vry dffrnt
srt.

Pllng an or in th Jrbm’s bt, ws a mn of a snglr
apprnc, evn in tht wld whlng lf whr indvdl
ntblts mk up all ttlts. H ws a smll, shrt, yngsh
mn, sprnkld all ovr hs fc wth frckls, and wrng rdndnt
yllw hr. A lng-skrtd, cblstclly-ct ct of a fdd wlnt
tng envlpd hm; th ovrlppng slvs of whch wr rlld up on
hs wrsts. A dp, sttld, fntc dlrm ws in hs eys.

S sn as ths fgr hd bn frst dscrd, Stbb hd
exclmd—“Tht’s h! tht’s h!—th lng-tggd scrmch th
Twn-H’s cmpny tld us of!” Stbb hr alldd t a strng stry
tld of th Jrbm, and a crtn mn amng hr crw, sm tm
prvs whn th Pqd spk th Twn-H. Accrdng t ths accnt
and wht ws sbsqntly lrnd, it smd tht th scrmch in
qstn hd gnd a wndrfl ascndncy ovr almst evrybdy in th
Jrbm. Hs stry ws ths:

H hd bn orgnlly nrtrd amng th crzy scty of Nskyn
Shkrs, whr h hd bn a grt prpht; in thr crckd, scrt
mtngs hvng svrl tms dscndd frm hvn by th wy of a
trp-dr, annncng th spdy opnng of th svnth vl, whch h
crrd in hs vst-pckt; bt, whch, instd of cntnng
gnpwdr, ws sppsd t b chrgd wth ldnm. A strng,
apstlc whm hvng szd hm, h hd lft Nskyn fr Nntckt,
whr, wth tht cnnng pclr t crznss, h assmd a stdy,
cmmn-sns extrr, and offrd hmslf as a grn-hnd cnddt
fr th Jrbm’s whlng vyg. Thy enggd hm; bt strghtwy
upn th shp’s gttng ot of sght of lnd, hs insnty brk ot in
a frsht. H annncd hmslf as th archngl Gbrl, and cmmndd
th cptn t jmp ovrbrd. H pblshd hs mnfst, whrby h
st hmslf frth as th dlvrr of th isls of th s and
vcr-gnrl of all Ocnc. Th unflnchng ernstnss wth whch
h dclrd ths thngs;—th drk, drng ply of hs slplss,
exctd imgntn, and all th prtrntrl trrrs of rl
dlrm, untd t invst ths Gbrl in th mnds of th mjrty of
th ignrnt crw, wth an atmsphr of scrdnss. Mrvr, thy
wr afrd of hm. As sch a mn, hwvr, ws nt of mch prctcl
us in th shp, espclly as h rfsd t wrk excpt whn h
plsd, th incrdls cptn wld fn hv bn rd of hm; bt
apprsd tht tht indvdl’s intntn ws t lnd hm in th frst
cnvnnt prt, th archngl frthwth opnd all hs sls and
vls—dvtng th shp and all hnds t uncndtnl prdtn, in
cs ths intntn ws crrd ot. S strngly dd h wrk upn hs
dscpls amng th crw, tht at lst in a bdy thy wnt t th
cptn and tld hm if Gbrl ws snt frm th shp, nt a mn of
thm wld rmn. H ws thrfr frcd t rlnqsh hs pln. Nr
wld thy prmt Gbrl t b any wy mltrtd, sy or d wht h
wld; s tht it cm t pss tht Gbrl hd th cmplt frdm of
th shp. Th cnsqnc of all ths ws, tht th archngl crd
lttl or nthng fr th cptn and mts; and snc th epdmc hd
brkn ot, h crrd a hghr hnd thn evr; dclrng tht th
plg, as h clld it, ws at hs sl cmmnd; nr shld it b
styd bt accrdng t hs gd plsr. Th slrs, mstly pr
dvls, crngd, and sm of thm fwnd bfr hm; in obdnc t
hs instrctns, smtms rndrng hm prsnl hmg, as t a gd.
Sch thngs my sm incrdbl; bt, hwvr wndrs, thy ar tr.
Nr is th hstry of fntcs hlf s strkng in rspct t th
msrlss slf-dcptn of th fntc hmslf, as hs msrlss
pwr of dcvng and bdvllng s mny othrs. Bt it is tm t
rtrn t th Pqd.

“I fr nt thy epdmc, mn,” sd Ahb frm th blwrks, t Cptn
Myhw, wh std in th bt’s strn; “cm on brd.”

Bt nw Gbrl strtd t hs ft.

“Thnk, thnk of th fvrs, yllw and bls! Bwr of th hrrbl
plg!”

“Gbrl! Gbrl!” crd Cptn Myhw; “th mst ethr—” Bt tht
instnt a hdlng wv sht th bt fr ahd, and its sthngs
drwnd all spch.

“Hst th sn th Wht Whl?” dmndd Ahb, whn th bt drftd
bck.

“Thnk, thnk of thy whl-bt, stvn and snk! Bwr of th
hrrbl tl!”

“I tll th agn, Gbrl, tht—” Bt agn th bt tr ahd as if
drggd by fnds. Nthng ws sd fr sm mmnts, whl a
sccssn of rts wvs rlld by, whch by on of ths occsnl
cprcs of th ss wr tmblng, nt hvng it. Mntm, th
hstd sprm whl’s hd jggd abt vry vlntly, and Gbrl ws
sn eyng it wth rthr mr apprhnsvnss thn hs archngl
ntr smd t wrrnt.

Whn ths intrld ws ovr, Cptn Myhw bgn a drk stry
cncrnng Mby Dck; nt, hwvr, wtht frqnt intrrptns frm
Gbrl, whnvr hs nm ws mntnd, and th crzy s tht smd
lgd wth hm.

It smd tht th Jrbm hd nt lng lft hm, whn upn spkng
a whl-shp, hr ppl wr rlbly apprsd of th exstnc of
Mby Dck, and th hvc h hd md. Grdly sckng in ths
intllgnc, Gbrl slmnly wrnd th cptn agnst attckng th
Wht Whl, in cs th mnstr shld b sn; in hs gbbrng
insnty, prnncng th Wht Whl t b n lss a bng thn th
Shkr Gd incrntd; th Shkrs rcvng th Bbl. Bt whn, sm
yr or tw aftrwrds, Mby Dck ws frly sghtd frm th
mst-hds, Mcy, th chf mt, brnd wth ardr t encntr hm;
and th cptn hmslf bng nt unwllng t lt hm hv th
opprtnty, dspt all th archngl’s dnnctns and
frwrnngs, Mcy sccdd in prsdng fv mn t mn hs bt.
Wth thm h pshd off; and, aftr mch wry pllng, and mny
prls, unsccssfl onsts, h at lst sccdd in gttng on irn
fst. Mntm, Gbrl, ascndng t th mn-ryl mst-hd, ws
tssng on arm in frntc gstrs, and hrlng frth prphcs of
spdy dm t th scrlgs asslnts of hs dvnty. Nw, whl
Mcy, th mt, ws stndng up in hs bt’s bw, and wth all th
rcklss enrgy of hs trb ws vntng hs wld exclmtns upn th
whl, and essyng t gt a fr chnc fr hs psd lnc, l! a
brd wht shdw rs frm th s; by its qck, fnnng mtn,
tmprrly tkng th brth ot of th bds of th orsmn. Nxt
instnt, th lcklss mt, s fll of frs lf, ws smttn bdly
int th ar, and mkng a lng arc in hs dscnt, fll int th s
at th dstnc of abt ffty yrds. Nt a chp of th bt ws
hrmd, nr a hr of any orsmn’s hd; bt th mt fr evr snk.

It is wll t prnthsz hr, tht of th ftl accdnts in th
Sprm-Whl Fshry, ths knd is prhps almst as frqnt as any.
Smtms, nthng is injrd bt th mn wh is ths annhltd;
oftnr th bt’s bw is knckd off, or th thgh-brd, in whch th
hdsmn stnds, is trn frm its plc and accmpns th bdy. Bt
strngst of all is th crcmstnc, tht in mr instncs thn on,
whn th bdy hs bn rcvrd, nt a sngl mrk of vlnc is
dscrnbl; th mn bng strk dd.

Th whl clmty, wth th fllng frm of Mcy, ws plnly
dscrd frm th shp. Rsng a prcng shrk—“Th vl! th vl!”
Gbrl clld off th trrr-strckn crw frm th frthr hntng of
th whl. Ths trrbl evnt clthd th archngl wth addd
inflnc; bcs hs crdls dscpls blvd tht h hd
spcfclly fr-annncd it, instd of only mkng a gnrl
prphcy, whch any on mght hv dn, and s hv chncd t ht on
of mny mrks in th wd mrgn allwd. H bcm a nmlss trrr
t th shp.

Myhw hvng cncldd hs nrrtn, Ahb pt sch qstns t hm,
tht th strngr cptn cld nt frbr inqrng whthr h
intndd t hnt th Wht Whl, if opprtnty shld offr. T whch
Ahb answrd—“Ay.” Strghtwy, thn, Gbrl onc mr strtd t
hs ft, glrng upn th old mn, and vhmntly exclmd, wth
dwnwrd pntd fngr—“Thnk, thnk of th blsphmr—dd, and dwn
thr!—bwr of th blsphmr’s end!”

Ahb stldly trnd asd; thn sd t Myhw, “Cptn, I hv jst
bthght m of my lttr-bg; thr is a lttr fr on of thy
offcrs, if I mstk nt. Strbck, lk ovr th bg.”

Evry whl-shp tks ot a gdly nmbr of lttrs fr vrs
shps, whs dlvry t th prsns t whm thy my b addrssd,
dpnds upn th mr chnc of encntrng thm in th fr ocns.
Ths, mst lttrs nvr rch thr mrk; and mny ar only rcvd
aftr attnng an ag of tw or thr yrs or mr.

Sn Strbck rtrnd wth a lttr in hs hnd. It ws srly
tmbld, dmp, and cvrd wth a dll, spttd, grn mld, in
cnsqnc of bng kpt in a drk lckr of th cbn. Of sch a
lttr, Dth hmslf mght wll hv bn th pst-by.

“Cn’st nt rd it?” crd Ahb. “Gv it m, mn. Ay, ay, it’s bt
a dm scrwl;—wht’s ths?” As h ws stdyng it ot, Strbck tk a
lng cttng-spd pl, and wth hs knf slghtly splt th end, t
insrt th lttr thr, and in tht wy, hnd it t th bt, wtht
its cmng any clsr t th shp.

Mntm, Ahb hldng th lttr, mttrd, “Mr. Hr—ys, Mr. Hrry—(a
wmn’s pnny hnd,—th mn’s wf, I’ll wgr)—Ay—Mr. Hrry Mcy,
Shp Jrbm;—why it’s Mcy, and h’s dd!”

“Pr fllw! pr fllw! and frm hs wf,” sghd Myhw; “bt lt
m hv it.”

“Ny, kp it thyslf,” crd Gbrl t Ahb; “th art sn gng
tht wy.”

“Crss thrttl th!” ylld Ahb. “Cptn Myhw, stnd by nw t
rcv it”; and tkng th ftl mssv frm Strbck’s hnds, h
cght it in th slt of th pl, and rchd it ovr twrds th
bt. Bt as h dd s, th orsmn expctntly dsstd frm rwng;
th bt drftd a lttl twrds th shp’s strn; s tht, as if by
mgc, th lttr sddnly rngd alng wth Gbrl’s egr hnd. H
cltchd it in an instnt, szd th bt-knf, and implng th
lttr on it, snt it ths ldd bck int th shp. It fll at Ahb’s
ft. Thn Gbrl shrkd ot t hs cmrds t gv wy wth thr
ors, and in tht mnnr th mtns bt rpdly sht awy frm th
Pqd.

As, aftr ths intrld, th smn rsmd thr wrk upn th jckt
of th whl, mny strng thngs wr hntd in rfrnc t ths wld
affr.


CHPTR 72. Th Mnky-Rp.

In th tmlts bsnss of cttng-in and attndng t a whl,
thr is mch rnnng bckwrds and frwrds amng th crw. Nw hnds
ar wntd hr, and thn agn hnds ar wntd thr. Thr is n
styng in any on plc; fr at on and th sm tm evrythng hs
t b dn evrywhr. It is mch th sm wth hm wh endvrs th
dscrptn of th scn. W mst nw rtrc or wy a lttl. It ws
mntnd tht upn frst brkng grnd in th whl’s bck, th
blbbr-hk ws insrtd int th orgnl hl thr ct by th
spds of th mts. Bt hw dd s clmsy and wghty a mss as tht
sm hk gt fxd in tht hl? It ws insrtd thr by my
prtclr frnd Qqg, whs dty it ws, as hrpnr, t
dscnd upn th mnstr’s bck fr th spcl prps rfrrd t.
Bt in vry mny css, crcmstncs rqr tht th hrpnr shll
rmn on th whl tll th whl flnsng or strppng oprtn is
cncldd. Th whl, b it obsrvd, ls almst entrly sbmrgd,
excptng th immdt prts oprtd upn. S dwn thr, sm tn
ft blw th lvl of th dck, th pr hrpnr flndrs abt,
hlf on th whl and hlf in th wtr, as th vst mss rvlvs lk
a trd-mll bnth hm. On th occsn in qstn, Qqg fgrd
in th Hghlnd cstm—a shrt and scks—in whch t my eys, at
lst, h apprd t uncmmn advntg; and n on hd a bttr
chnc t obsrv hm, as wll prsntly b sn.

Bng th svg’s bwsmn, tht is, th prsn wh plld th bw-or
in hs bt (th scnd on frm frwrd), it ws my chrfl dty t
attnd upn hm whl tkng tht hrd-scrbbl scrmbl upn th dd
whl’s bck. Y hv sn Itln orgn-bys hldng a dncng-ap by
a lng crd. Jst s, frm th shp’s stp sd, dd I hld Qqg
dwn thr in th s, by wht is tchnclly clld in th fshry a
mnky-rp, attchd t a strng strp of cnvs bltd rnd hs
wst.

It ws a hmrsly prls bsnss fr bth of us. Fr, bfr w
prcd frthr, it mst b sd tht th mnky-rp ws fst at bth
ends; fst t Qqg’s brd cnvs blt, and fst t my nrrw
lthr on. S tht fr bttr or fr wrs, w tw, fr th tm,
wr wddd; and shld pr Qqg snk t rs n mr, thn bth
usg and hnr dmndd, tht instd of cttng th crd, it shld
drg m dwn in hs wk. S, thn, an elngtd Sms lgtr
untd us. Qqg ws my own insprbl twn brthr; nr cld I
any wy gt rd of th dngrs lblts whch th hmpn bnd
entld.

S strngly and mtphysclly dd I cncv of my sttn thn,
tht whl ernstly wtchng hs mtns, I smd dstnctly t
prcv tht my own indvdlty ws nw mrgd in a jnt stck
cmpny of tw; tht my fr wll hd rcvd a mrtl wnd; and tht
anthr’s mstk or msfrtn mght plng inncnt m int unmrtd
dsstr and dth. Thrfr, I sw tht hr ws a srt of
intrrgnm in Prvdnc; fr its evn-hndd eqty nvr cld hv
s grss an injstc. And yt stll frthr pndrng—whl I jrkd
hm nw and thn frm btwn th whl and shp, whch wld thrtn
t jm hm—stll frthr pndrng, I sy, I sw tht ths sttn of
mn ws th prcs sttn of evry mrtl tht brths; only, in
mst css, h, on wy or othr, hs ths Sms cnnxn wth a
plrlty of othr mrtls. If yr bnkr brks, y snp; if yr
apthcry by mstk snds y psn in yr plls, y d. Tr,
y my sy tht, by excdng ctn, y my pssbly escp ths
and th mlttdns othr evl chncs of lf. Bt hndl Qqg’s
mnky-rp hdflly as I wld, smtms h jrkd it s, tht I
cm vry nr sldng ovrbrd. Nr cld I pssbly frgt tht, d
wht I wld, I only hd th mngmnt of on end of it.*

*Th mnky-rp is fnd in all whlrs; bt it ws only in th Pqd
tht th mnky and hs hldr wr evr td tgthr. Ths
imprvmnt upn th orgnl usg ws intrdcd by n lss a mn
thn Stbb, in ordr t affrd th imprlld hrpnr th strngst
pssbl grnt fr th fthflnss and vglnc of hs
mnky-rp hldr.

I hv hntd tht I wld oftn jrk pr Qqg frm btwn th
whl and th shp—whr h wld occsnlly fll, frm th incssnt
rllng and swyng of bth. Bt ths ws nt th only jmmng jprdy
h ws expsd t. Unpplld by th msscr md upn thm drng th
nght, th shrks nw frshly and mr knly allrd by th bfr
pnt bld whch bgn t flw frm th crcss—th rbd crtrs
swrmd rnd it lk bs in a bhv.

And rght in amng ths shrks ws Qqg; wh oftn pshd thm
asd wth hs flndrng ft. A thng altgthr incrdbl wr it
nt tht attrctd by sch pry as a dd whl, th othrws
mscllnsly crnvrs shrk wll sldm tch a mn.

Nvrthlss, it my wll b blvd tht snc thy hv sch a
rvns fngr in th p, it is dmd bt ws t lk shrp t
thm. Accrdngly, bsds th mnky-rp, wth whch I nw and thn
jrkd th pr fllw frm t cls a vcnty t th mw of wht
smd a pclrly frcs shrk—h ws prvdd wth stll anthr
prtctn. Sspndd ovr th sd in on of th stgs, Tshtg and
Dgg cntnlly flrshd ovr hs hd a cpl of kn
whl-spds, whrwth thy slghtrd as mny shrks as thy cld
rch. Ths prcdr of thrs, t b sr, ws vry dsntrstd and
bnvlnt of thm. Thy mnt Qqg’s bst hppnss, I admt; bt
in thr hsty zl t bfrnd hm, and frm th crcmstnc tht
bth h and th shrks wr at tms hlf hddn by th bld-mddld
wtr, ths indscrt spds of thrs wld cm nrr ampttng a
lg thn a tl. Bt pr Qqg, I spps, strnng and gspng
thr wth tht grt irn hk—pr Qqg, I spps, only pryd
t hs Yj, and gv up hs lf int th hnds of hs gds.

Wll, wll, my dr cmrd and twn-brthr, thght I, as I drw in
and thn slckd off th rp t evry swll of th s—wht mttrs
it, aftr all? Ar y nt th prcs img of ech and all of us mn
in ths whlng wrld? Tht unsndd ocn y gsp in, is Lf; ths
shrks, yr fs; ths spds, yr frnds; and wht btwn shrks
and spds y ar in a sd pckl and prl, pr ld.

Bt crg! thr is gd chr in str fr y, Qqg. Fr nw,
as wth bl lps and bld-sht eys th exhstd svg at lst
clmbs up th chns and stnds all drppng and invlntrly
trmblng ovr th sd; th stwrd advncs, and wth a bnvlnt,
cnsltry glnc hnds hm—wht? Sm ht Cgnc? N! hnds hm, y
gds! hnds hm a cp of tpd gngr and wtr!

“Gngr? D I smll gngr?” sspcsly askd Stbb, cmng nr.
“Ys, ths mst b gngr,” prng int th as yt untstd cp. Thn
stndng as if incrdls fr a whl, h clmly wlkd twrds th
astnshd stwrd slwly syng, “Gngr? gngr? and wll y hv
th gdnss t tll m, Mr. Dgh-By, whr ls th vrt of
gngr? Gngr! is gngr th srt of fl y us, Dgh-by, t
kndl a fr in ths shvrng cnnbl? Gngr!—wht th dvl is
gngr? S-cl? frwd?—lcfr mtchs?—tndr?—gnpwdr?—wht
th dvl is gngr, I sy, tht y offr ths cp t or pr
Qqg hr.”

“Thr is sm snkng Tmprnc Scty mvmnt abt ths
bsnss,” h sddnly addd, nw apprchng Strbck, wh hd jst
cm frm frwrd. “Wll y lk at tht knnkn, sr: smll of it,
if y pls.” Thn wtchng th mt’s cntnnc, h addd, “Th
stwrd, Mr. Strbck, hd th fc t offr tht clml and jlp t
Qqg, thr, ths instnt off th whl. Is th stwrd an
apthcry, sr? and my I ask whthr ths is th srt of bttrs by
whch h blws bck th lf int a hlf-drwnd mn?”

“I trst nt,” sd Strbck, “it is pr stff engh.”

“Ay, ay, stwrd,” crd Stbb, “w’ll tch y t drg a
hrpnr; nn of yr apthcry’s mdcn hr; y wnt t psn
us, d y? Y hv gt ot insrncs on or lvs and wnt t mrdr
us all, and pckt th prcds, d y?”

“It ws nt m,” crd Dgh-By, “it ws Ant Chrty tht brght th
gngr on brd; and bd m nvr gv th hrpnrs any sprts,
bt only ths gngr-jb—s sh clld it.”

“Gngr-jb! y gngrly rscl! tk tht! and rn alng wth y t
th lckrs, and gt smthng bttr. I hp I d n wrng, Mr.
Strbck. It is th cptn’s ordrs—grg fr th hrpnr on a
whl.”

“Engh,” rpld Strbck, “only dn’t ht hm agn, bt—”

“Oh, I nvr hrt whn I ht, excpt whn I ht a whl or smthng of
tht srt; and ths fllw’s a wzl. Wht wr y abt syng,
sr?”

“Only ths: g dwn wth hm, and gt wht th wntst thyslf.”

Whn Stbb rpprd, h cm wth a drk flsk in on hnd, and a
srt of t-cddy in th othr. Th frst cntnd strng sprts, and
ws hndd t Qqg; th scnd ws Ant Chrty’s gft, and tht
ws frly gvn t th wvs.


CHPTR 73. Stbb and Flsk kll a Rght Whl; and Thn Hv a Tlk
ovr Hm.

It mst b brn in mnd tht all ths tm w hv a Sprm Whl’s
prdgs hd hngng t th Pqd’s sd. Bt w mst lt it
cntn hngng thr a whl tll w cn gt a chnc t attnd t
it. Fr th prsnt othr mttrs prss, and th bst w cn d nw fr
th hd, is t pry hvn th tckls my hld.

Nw, drng th pst nght and frnn, th Pqd hd grdlly
drftd int a s, whch, by its occsnl ptchs of yllw brt,
gv unsl tkns of th vcnty of Rght Whls, a spcs of th
Lvthn tht bt fw sppsd t b at ths prtclr tm lrkng
anywhr nr. And thgh all hnds cmmnly dsdnd th cptr of
ths infrr crtrs; and thgh th Pqd ws nt cmmssnd t
crs fr thm at all, and thgh sh hd pssd nmbrs of thm nr
th Crztts wtht lwrng a bt; yt nw tht a Sprm Whl hd
bn brght alngsd and bhdd, t th srprs of all, th
annncmnt ws md tht a Rght Whl shld b cptrd tht dy,
if opprtnty offrd.

Nr ws ths lng wntng. Tll spts wr sn t lwrd; and tw
bts, Stbb’s and Flsk’s, wr dtchd in prst. Pllng frthr
and frthr awy, thy at lst bcm almst invsbl t th mn at
th mst-hd. Bt sddnly in th dstnc, thy sw a grt hp of
tmlts wht wtr, and sn aftr nws cm frm alft tht on or
bth th bts mst b fst. An intrvl pssd and th bts wr in
pln sght, in th act of bng drggd rght twrds th shp by th
twng whl. S cls dd th mnstr cm t th hll, tht at frst
it smd as if h mnt it mlc; bt sddnly gng dwn in a
mlstrm, wthn thr rds of th plnks, h whlly dspprd frm
vw, as if dvng undr th kl. “Ct, ct!” ws th cry frm th
shp t th bts, whch, fr on instnt, smd on th pnt of bng
brght wth a ddly dsh agnst th vssl’s sd. Bt hvng plnty
of ln yt in th tbs, and th whl nt sndng vry rpdly, thy
pd ot abndnc of rp, and at th sm tm plld wth all thr
mght s as t gt ahd of th shp. Fr a fw mnts th strggl
ws intnsly crtcl; fr whl thy stll slckd ot th tghtnd
ln in on drctn, and stll pld thr ors in anthr, th
cntndng strn thrtnd t tk thm undr. Bt it ws only a fw
ft advnc thy sght t gn. And thy stck t it tll thy dd
gn it; whn instntly, a swft trmr ws flt rnnng lk lghtnng
alng th kl, as th strnd ln, scrpng bnth th shp,
sddnly rs t vw undr hr bws, snppng and qvrng; and s
flngng off its drppngs, tht th drps fll lk bts of brkn
glss on th wtr, whl th whl bynd als rs t sght, and onc
mr th bts wr fr t fly. Bt th fggd whl abtd hs spd,
and blndly altrng hs crs, wnt rnd th strn of th shp
twng th tw bts aftr hm, s tht thy prfrmd a cmplt
crct.

Mntm, thy hld mr and mr upn thr lns, tll cls
flnkng hm on bth sds, Stbb answrd Flsk wth lnc fr lnc;
and ths rnd and rnd th Pqd th bttl wnt, whl th
mlttds of shrks tht hd bfr swm rnd th Sprm Whl’s bdy,
rshd t th frsh bld tht ws splld, thrstly drnkng at evry
nw gsh, as th egr Isrlts dd at th nw brstng fntns
tht prd frm th smttn rck.

At lst hs spt grw thck, and wth a frghtfl rll and vmt, h
trnd upn hs bck a crps.

Whl th tw hdsmn wr enggd in mkng fst crds t hs flks,
and in othr wys gttng th mss in rdnss fr twng, sm
cnvrstn ensd btwn thm.

“I wndr wht th old mn wnts wth ths lmp of fl lrd,” sd
Stbb, nt wtht sm dsgst at th thght of hvng t d wth s
ignbl a lvthn.

“Wnts wth it?” sd Flsk, clng sm spr ln in th bt’s bw,
“dd y nvr hr tht th shp whch bt onc hs a Sprm Whl’s
hd hstd on hr strbrd sd, and at th sm tm a Rght
Whl’s on th lrbrd; dd y nvr hr, Stbb, tht tht shp cn
nvr aftrwrds cpsz?”

“Why nt?

“I dn’t knw, bt I hrd tht gmbg ghst of a Fdllh syng s,
and h sms t knw all abt shps’ chrms. Bt I smtms thnk
h’ll chrm th shp t n gd at lst. I dn’t hlf lk tht chp,
Stbb. Dd y evr ntc hw tht tsk of hs is a srt of crvd
int a snk’s hd, Stbb?”

“Snk hm! I nvr lk at hm at all; bt if evr I gt a chnc of a
drk nght, and h stndng hrd by th blwrks, and n on by; lk
dwn thr, Flsk”—pntng int th s wth a pclr mtn of bth
hnds—“Ay, wll I! Flsk, I tk tht Fdllh t b th dvl in
dsgs. D y blv tht cck and bll stry abt hs hvng bn
stwd awy on brd shp? H’s th dvl, I sy. Th rsn why y
dn’t s hs tl, is bcs h tcks it up ot of sght; h crrs
it cld awy in hs pckt, I gss. Blst hm! nw tht I thnk of
it, h’s alwys wntng okm t stff int th ts of hs bts.”

“H slps in hs bts, dn’t h? H hsn’t gt any hmmck; bt I’v
sn hm ly of nghts in a cl of rggng.”

“N dbt, and it’s bcs of hs crsd tl; h cls it dwn, d y
s, in th ey of th rggng.”

“Wht’s th old mn hv s mch t d wth hm fr?”

“Strkng up a swp or a brgn, I spps.”

“Brgn?—abt wht?”

“Why, d y s, th old mn is hrd bnt aftr tht Wht Whl, and
th dvl thr is tryng t cm rnd hm, and gt hm t swp awy
hs slvr wtch, or hs sl, or smthng of tht srt, and thn
h’ll srrndr Mby Dck.”

“Ph! Stbb, y ar skylrkng; hw cn Fdllh d tht?”

“I dn’t knw, Flsk, bt th dvl is a crs chp, and a wckd
on, I tll y. Why, thy sy as hw h wnt a sntrng int th old
flg-shp onc, swtchng hs tl abt dvlsh esy and
gntlmnlk, and inqrng if th old gvrnr ws at hm. Wll, h
ws at hm, and askd th dvl wht h wntd. Th dvl, swtchng
hs hfs, up and sys, ‘I wnt Jhn.’ ‘Wht fr?’ sys th old
gvrnr. ‘Wht bsnss is tht of yrs,’ sys th dvl, gttng
md,—‘I wnt t us hm.’ ‘Tk hm,’ sys th gvrnr—and by th
Lrd, Flsk, if th dvl ddn’t gv Jhn th Astc chlr bfr
h gt thrgh wth hm, I’ll et ths whl in on mthfl. Bt lk
shrp—an’t y all rdy thr? Wll, thn, pll ahd, and lt’s gt
th whl alngsd.”

“I thnk I rmmbr sm sch stry as y wr tllng,” sd Flsk,
whn at lst th tw bts wr slwly advncng wth thr brdn
twrds th shp, “bt I cn’t rmmbr whr.”

“Thr Spnrds? Advntrs of ths thr bldy-mndd sldds?
Dd y rd it thr, Flsk? I gss y dd?”

“N: nvr sw sch a bk; hrd of it, thgh. Bt nw, tll m,
Stbb, d y spps tht tht dvl y ws spkng of jst nw, ws
th sm y sy is nw on brd th Pqd?”

“Am I th sm mn tht hlpd kll ths whl? Dsn’t th dvl lv
fr evr; wh evr hrd tht th dvl ws dd? Dd y evr s any
prsn a wrng mrnng fr th dvl? And if th dvl hs a
ltch-ky t gt int th admrl’s cbn, dn’t y spps h cn
crwl int a prthl? Tll m tht, Mr. Flsk?”

“Hw old d y spps Fdllh is, Stbb?”

“D y s tht mnmst thr?” pntng t th shp; “wll, tht’s
th fgr on; nw tk all th hps in th Pqd’s hld, and strng
alng in a rw wth tht mst, fr oghts, d y s; wll, tht
wldn’t bgn t b Fdllh’s ag. Nr all th cprs in crtn
cldn’t shw hps engh t mk oghts engh.”

“Bt s hr, Stbb, I thght y a lttl bstd jst nw, tht y
mnt t gv Fdllh a s-tss, if y gt a gd chnc. Nw, if
h’s s old as all ths hps of yrs cm t, and if h is gng t
lv fr evr, wht gd wll it d t ptch hm ovrbrd—tll m
tht?

“Gv hm a gd dckng, anyhw.”

“Bt h’d crwl bck.”

“Dck hm agn; and kp dckng hm.”

“Spps h shld tk it int hs hd t dck y, thgh—ys, and
drwn y—wht thn?”

“I shld lk t s hm try it; I’d gv hm sch a pr of blck
eys tht h wldn’t dr t shw hs fc in th admrl’s cbn
agn fr a lng whl, lt aln dwn in th orlp thr, whr h
lvs, and hrbts on th uppr dcks whr h snks s mch. Dmn
th dvl, Flsk; s y spps I’m afrd of th dvl? Wh’s afrd
of hm, excpt th old gvrnr wh drsn’t ctch hm and pt hm in
dbl-drbs, as h dsrvs, bt lts hm g abt kdnppng
ppl; ay, and sgnd a bnd wth hm, tht all th ppl th dvl
kdnppd, h’d rst fr hm? Thr’s a gvrnr!”

“D y spps Fdllh wnts t kdnp Cptn Ahb?”

“D I spps it? Y’ll knw it bfr lng, Flsk. Bt I am gng nw
t kp a shrp lk-ot on hm; and if I s anythng vry sspcs
gng on, I’ll jst tk hm by th np of hs nck, and sy—Lk
hr, Blzbb, y dn’t d it; and if h mks any fss, by th Lrd
I’ll mk a grb int hs pckt fr hs tl, tk it t th cpstn,
and gv hm sch a wrnchng and hvng, tht hs tl wll cm
shrt off at th stmp—d y s; and thn, I rthr gss whn h
fnds hmslf dckd in tht qr fshn, h’ll snk off wtht th
pr stsfctn of flng hs tl btwn hs lgs.”

“And wht wll y d wth th tl, Stbb?”

“D wth it? Sll it fr an ox whp whn w gt hm;—wht els?”

“Nw, d y mn wht y sy, and hv bn syng all alng, Stbb?”

“Mn or nt mn, hr w ar at th shp.”

Th bts wr hr hld, t tw th whl on th lrbrd sd,
whr flk chns and othr ncssrs wr alrdy prprd fr
scrng hm.

“Ddn’t I tll y s?” sd Flsk; “ys, y’ll sn s ths rght
whl’s hd hstd up oppst tht prmctt’s.”

In gd tm, Flsk’s syng prvd tr. As bfr, th Pqd stply
lnd ovr twrds th sprm whl’s hd, nw, by th cntrps of
bth hds, sh rgnd hr evn kl; thgh srly strnd, y my
wll blv. S, whn on on sd y hst in Lck’s hd, y g
ovr tht wy; bt nw, on th othr sd, hst in Knt’s and y cm
bck agn; bt in vry pr plght. Ths, sm mnds fr evr kp
trmmng bt. Oh, y flsh! thrw all ths thndr-hds ovrbrd,
and thn y wll flt lght and rght.

In dspsng of th bdy of a rght whl, whn brght alngsd th
shp, th sm prlmnry prcdngs cmmnly tk plc as in th
cs of a sprm whl; only, in th lttr instnc, th hd is ct
off whl, bt in th frmr th lps and tng ar sprtly rmvd
and hstd on dck, wth all th wll knwn blck bn attchd t
wht is clld th crwn-pc. Bt nthng lk ths, in th prsnt
cs, hd bn dn. Th crcss of bth whls hd drppd astrn;
and th hd-ldn shp nt a lttl rsmbld a ml crryng a pr
of ovrbrdnng pnnrs.

Mntm, Fdllh ws clmly eyng th rght whl’s hd, and evr
and ann glncng frm th dp wrnkls thr t th lns in hs own
hnd. And Ahb chncd s t stnd, tht th Prs occpd hs
shdw; whl, if th Prs’s shdw ws thr at all it smd only
t blnd wth, and lngthn Ahb’s. As th crw tld on, Lplndsh
spcltns wr bndd amng thm, cncrnng all ths pssng
thngs.


CHPTR 74. Th Sprm Whl’s Hd—Cntrstd Vw.

Hr, nw, ar tw grt whls, lyng thr hds tgthr; lt us
jn thm, and ly tgthr or own.

Of th grnd ordr of fl lvthns, th Sprm Whl and th Rght
Whl ar by fr th mst ntwrthy. Thy ar th only whls
rglrly hntd by mn. T th Nntcktr, thy prsnt th tw
extrms of all th knwn vrts of th whl. As th extrnl
dffrnc btwn thm is mnly obsrvbl in thr hds; and as a
hd of ech is ths mmnt hngng frm th Pqd’s sd; and as w
my frly g frm on t th othr, by mrly stppng acrss th
dck:—whr, I shld lk t knw, wll y obtn a bttr chnc t
stdy prctcl ctlgy thn hr?

In th frst plc, y ar strck by th gnrl cntrst btwn
ths hds. Bth ar mssv engh in all cnscnc; bt thr is a
crtn mthmtcl symmtry in th Sprm Whl’s whch th Rght
Whl’s sdly lcks. Thr is mr chrctr in th Sprm Whl’s hd.
As y bhld it, y invlntrly yld th immns sprrty t
hm, in pnt of prvdng dgnty. In th prsnt instnc, t, ths
dgnty is hghtnd by th pppr and slt clr of hs hd at th
smmt, gvng tkn of advncd ag and lrg exprnc. In shrt, h
is wht th fshrmn tchnclly cll a “gry-hdd whl.”

Lt us nw nt wht is lst dssmlr in ths hds—nmly, th tw
mst imprtnt orgns, th ey and th er. Fr bck on th sd of th
hd, and lw dwn, nr th angl of ethr whl’s jw, if y
nrrwly srch, y wll at lst s a lshlss ey, whch y wld
fncy t b a yng clt’s ey; s ot of all prprtn is it t th
mgntd of th hd.

Nw, frm ths pclr sdwy pstn of th whl’s eys, it is
pln tht h cn nvr s an objct whch is exctly ahd, n mr
thn h cn on exctly astrn. In a wrd, th pstn of th whl’s
eys crrspnds t tht of a mn’s ers; and y my fncy, fr
yrslf, hw it wld fr wth y, dd y sdwys srvy objcts
thrgh yr ers. Y wld fnd tht y cld only cmmnd sm
thrty dgrs of vsn in advnc of th strght sd-ln of sght;
and abt thrty mr bhnd it. If yr bttrst f wr wlkng
strght twrds y, wth dggr uplftd in brd dy, y wld nt
b abl t s hm, any mr thn if h wr stlng upn y frm
bhnd. In a wrd, y wld hv tw bcks, s t spk; bt, at th
sm tm, als, tw frnts (sd frnts): fr wht is it tht mks
th frnt of a mn—wht, indd, bt hs eys?

Mrvr, whl in mst othr anmls tht I cn nw thnk of, th eys
ar s plntd as imprcptbly t blnd thr vsl pwr, s as t
prdc on pctr and nt tw t th brn; th pclr pstn of
th whl’s eys, effctlly dvdd as thy ar by mny cbc ft of
sld hd, whch twrs btwn thm lk a grt mntn sprtng
tw lks in vllys; ths, of crs, mst whlly sprt th
imprssns whch ech indpndnt orgn imprts. Th whl, thrfr,
mst s on dstnct pctr on ths sd, and anthr dstnct
pctr on tht sd; whl all btwn mst b prfnd drknss and
nthngnss t hm. Mn my, in effct, b sd t lk ot on th
wrld frm a sntry-bx wth tw jnd sshs fr hs wndw. Bt wth
th whl, ths tw sshs ar sprtly insrtd, mkng tw
dstnct wndws, bt sdly imprng th vw. Ths pclrty of th
whl’s eys is a thng alwys t b brn in mnd in th fshry; and
t b rmmbrd by th rdr in sm sbsqnt scns.

A crs and mst pzzlng qstn mght b strtd cncrnng ths
vsl mttr as tchng th Lvthn. Bt I mst b cntnt wth a
hnt. S lng as a mn’s eys ar opn in th lght, th act of sng
is invlntry; tht is, h cnnt thn hlp mchnclly sng
whtvr objcts ar bfr hm. Nvrthlss, any on’s exprnc
wll tch hm, tht thgh h cn tk in an undscrmntng swp of
thngs at on glnc, it is qt impssbl fr hm, attntvly, and
cmpltly, t exmn any tw thngs—hwvr lrg or hwvr smll—at
on and th sm instnt of tm; nvr mnd if thy l sd by sd
and tch ech othr. Bt if y nw cm t sprt ths tw
objcts, and srrnd ech by a crcl of prfnd drknss; thn, in
ordr t s on of thm, in sch a mnnr as t brng yr mnd t
br on it, th othr wll b uttrly excldd frm yr cntmprry
cnscsnss. Hw is it, thn, wth th whl? Tr, bth hs eys, in
thmslvs, mst smltnsly act; bt is hs brn s mch mr
cmprhnsv, cmbnng, and sbtl thn mn’s, tht h cn at th
sm mmnt of tm attntvly exmn tw dstnct prspcts, on on
on sd of hm, and th othr in an exctly oppst drctn? If h
cn, thn is it as mrvlls a thng in hm, as if a mn wr abl
smltnsly t g thrgh th dmnstrtns of tw dstnct
prblms in Ecld. Nr, strctly invstgtd, is thr any
incngrty in ths cmprsn.

It my b bt an idl whm, bt it hs alwys smd t m, tht th
extrrdnry vclltns of mvmnt dsplyd by sm whls whn
bst by thr or fr bts; th tmdty and lblty t qr
frghts, s cmmn t sch whls; I thnk tht all ths indrctly
prcds frm th hlplss prplxty of vltn, in whch thr
dvdd and dmtrclly oppst pwrs of vsn mst invlv thm.

Bt th er of th whl is fll as crs as th ey. If y ar an
entr strngr t thr rc, y mght hnt ovr ths tw hds fr
hrs, and nvr dscvr tht orgn. Th er hs n extrnl lf
whtvr; and int th hl itslf y cn hrdly insrt a qll, s
wndrsly mnt is it. It is ldgd a lttl bhnd th ey. Wth
rspct t thr ers, ths imprtnt dffrnc is t b obsrvd
btwn th sprm whl and th rght. Whl th er of th frmr hs
an extrnl opnng, tht of th lttr is entrly and evnly cvrd
ovr wth a mmbrn, s as t b qt imprcptbl frm wtht.

Is it nt crs, tht s vst a bng as th whl shld s th
wrld thrgh s smll an ey, and hr th thndr thrgh an er
whch is smllr thn a hr’s? Bt if hs eys wr brd as th lns
of Hrschl’s grt tlscp; and hs ers cpcs as th prchs of
cthdrls; wld tht mk hm any lngr of sght, or shrpr of
hrng? Nt at all.—Why thn d y try t “enlrg” yr mnd?
Sbtlz it.

Lt us nw wth whtvr lvrs and stm-engns w hv at hnd, cnt
ovr th sprm whl’s hd, tht it my l bttm up; thn, ascndng
by a lddr t th smmt, hv a pp dwn th mth; and wr it nt
tht th bdy is nw cmpltly sprtd frm it, wth a lntrn w
mght dscnd int th grt Kntcky Mmmth Cv of hs stmch. Bt
lt us hld on hr by ths tth, and lk abt us whr w ar. Wht
a rlly btfl and chst-lkng mth! frm flr t clng,
lnd, or rthr pprd wth a glstnng wht mmbrn, glssy as
brdl stns.

Bt cm ot nw, and lk at ths prtnts lwr jw, whch sms
lk th lng nrrw ld of an immns snff-bx, wth th hng at on
end, instd of on sd. If y pry it up, s as t gt it ovrhd,
and exps its rws of tth, it sms a trrfc prtclls; and sch,
als! it prvs t mny a pr wght in th fshry, upn whm ths
spks fll wth implng frc. Bt fr mr trrbl is it t bhld,
whn fthms dwn in th s, y s sm slky whl, fltng thr
sspndd, wth hs prdgs jw, sm fftn ft lng, hngng
strght dwn at rght-angls wth hs bdy, fr all th wrld lk a
shp’s jb-bm. Ths whl is nt dd; h is only dsprtd; ot of
srts, prhps; hypchndrc; and s spn, tht th hngs of hs
jw hv rlxd, lvng hm thr in tht ungnly srt of plght, a
rprch t all hs trb, wh mst, n dbt, imprct lck-jws upn
hm.

In mst css ths lwr jw—bng esly unhngd by a prctsd
artst—is dsnggd and hstd on dck fr th prps of extrctng
th ivry tth, and frnshng a spply of tht hrd wht whlbn
wth whch th fshrmn fshn all srts of crs artcls,
incldng cns, umbrll-stcks, and hndls t rdng-whps.

Wth a lng, wry hst th jw is drggd on brd, as if it wr an
anchr; and whn th prpr tm cms—sm fw dys aftr th othr
wrk—Qqg, Dgg, and Tshtg, bng all accmplshd dntsts,
ar st t drwng tth. Wth a kn cttng-spd, Qqg lncs
th gms; thn th jw is lshd dwn t rngblts, and a tckl bng
rggd frm alft, thy drg ot ths tth, as Mchgn oxn drg
stmps of old oks ot of wld wd lnds. Thr ar gnrlly
frty-tw tth in all; in old whls, mch wrn dwn, bt undcyd;
nr flld aftr or artfcl fshn. Th jw is aftrwrds swn
int slbs, and pld awy lk jsts fr bldng hss.


CHPTR 75. Th Rght Whl’s Hd—Cntrstd Vw.

Crssng th dck, lt us nw hv a gd lng lk at th Rght
Whl’s hd.

As in gnrl shp th nbl Sprm Whl’s hd my b cmprd t a
Rmn wr-chrt (espclly in frnt, whr it is s brdly
rndd); s, at a brd vw, th Rght Whl’s hd brs a rthr
inlgnt rsmblnc t a ggntc gllt-td sh. Tw hndrd
yrs ag an old Dtch vygr lknd its shp t tht of a
shmkr’s lst. And in ths sm lst or sh, tht old wmn of th
nrsry tl, wth th swrmng brd, mght vry cmfrtbly b
ldgd, sh and all hr prgny.

Bt as y cm nrr t ths grt hd it bgns t assm dffrnt
aspcts, accrdng t yr pnt of vw. If y stnd on its smmt
and lk at ths tw F-shpd spthls, y wld tk th whl
hd fr an enrms bss-vl, and ths sprcls, th aprtrs in
its sndng-brd. Thn, agn, if y fx yr ey upn ths strng,
crstd, cmb-lk incrsttn on th tp of th mss—ths grn,
brncld thng, whch th Grnlndrs cll th “crwn,” and th
Sthrn fshrs th “bnnt” of th Rght Whl; fxng yr eys
slly on ths, y wld tk th hd fr th trnk of sm hg ok,
wth a brd’s nst in its crtch. At any rt, whn y wtch ths
lv crbs tht nstl hr on ths bnnt, sch an id wll b almst
sr t occr t y; unlss, indd, yr fncy hs bn fxd by th
tchncl trm “crwn” als bstwd upn it; in whch cs y wll
tk grt intrst in thnkng hw ths mghty mnstr is actlly a
ddmd kng of th s, whs grn crwn hs bn pt tgthr fr
hm in ths mrvlls mnnr. Bt if ths whl b a kng, h is a
vry slky lkng fllw t grc a ddm. Lk at tht hngng lwr
lp! wht a hg slk and pt is thr! a slk and pt, by
crpntr’s msrmnt, abt twnty ft lng and fv ft dp; a
slk and pt tht wll yld y sm 500 gllns of ol and mr.

A grt pty, nw, tht ths unfrtnt whl shld b hr-lppd.
Th fssr is abt a ft acrss. Prbbly th mthr drng an
imprtnt intrvl ws slng dwn th Prvn cst, whn
erthqks csd th bch t gp. Ovr ths lp, as ovr a slppry
thrshld, w nw sld int th mth. Upn my wrd wr I at
Mcknw, I shld tk ths t b th insd of an Indn wgwm. Gd
Lrd! is ths th rd tht Jnh wnt? Th rf is abt twlv ft
hgh, and rns t a prtty shrp angl, as if thr wr a rglr
rdg-pl thr; whl ths rbbd, archd, hry sds, prsnt us
wth ths wndrs, hlf vrtcl, scmtr-shpd slts of whlbn,
sy thr hndrd on a sd, whch dpndng frm th uppr prt of th
hd or crwn bn, frm ths Vntn blnds whch hv elswhr
bn crsrly mntnd. Th edgs of ths bns ar frngd wth
hry fbrs, thrgh whch th Rght Whl strns th wtr, and in
whs intrccs h rtns th smll fsh, whn opnmthd h gs
thrgh th ss of brt in fdng tm. In th cntrl blnds of
bn, as thy stnd in thr ntrl ordr, thr ar crtn crs
mrks, crvs, hllws, and rdgs, whrby sm whlmn clclt th
crtr’s ag, as th ag of an ok by its crclr rngs. Thgh th
crtnty of ths crtrn is fr frm dmnstrbl, yt it hs th
svr of anlgcl prbblty. At any rt, if w yld t it, w
mst grnt a fr grtr ag t th Rght Whl thn at frst glnc
wll sm rsnbl.

In old tms, thr sm t hv prvld th mst crs fncs
cncrnng ths blnds. On vygr in Prchs clls thm th wndrs
“whskrs” insd of th whl’s mth;* anthr, “hgs’ brstls”; a
thrd old gntlmn in Hcklyt uss th fllwng elgnt lngg:
“Thr ar abt tw hndrd and ffty fns grwng on ech sd of hs
uppr _chp_, whch arch ovr hs tng on ech sd of hs mth.”

*Ths rmnds us tht th Rght Whl rlly hs a srt of whskr, or
rthr a mstch, cnsstng of a fw scttrd wht hrs on th
uppr prt of th otr end of th lwr jw. Smtms ths tfts
imprt a rthr brgndsh exprssn t hs othrws slmn
cntnnc.

As evry on knws, ths sm “hgs’ brstls,” “fns,” “whskrs,”
“blnds,” or whtvr y pls, frnsh t th lds thr bsks and
othr stffnng cntrvncs. Bt in ths prtclr, th dmnd hs
lng bn on th dcln. It ws in Qn Ann’s tm tht th bn ws
in its glry, th frthngl bng thn all th fshn. And as ths
ancnt dms mvd abt gly, thgh in th jws of th whl, as
y my sy; evn s, in a shwr, wth th lk thghtlssnss, d w
nwdys fly undr th sm jws fr prtctn; th umbrll bng a
tnt sprd ovr th sm bn.

Bt nw frgt all abt blnds and whskrs fr a mmnt, and,
stndng in th Rght Whl’s mth, lk arnd y afrsh. Sng all
ths clnnds of bn s mthdclly rngd abt, wld y nt
thnk y wr insd of th grt Hrlm orgn, and gzng upn its
thsnd pps? Fr a crpt t th orgn w hv a rg of th sftst
Trky—th tng, whch is gld, as it wr, t th flr of th
mth. It is vry ft and tndr, and apt t tr in pcs in hstng
it on dck. Ths prtclr tng nw bfr us; at a pssng glnc I
shld sy it ws a sx-brrlr; tht is, it wll yld y abt tht
amnt of ol.

Er ths, y mst hv plnly sn th trth of wht I strtd
wth—tht th Sprm Whl and th Rght Whl hv almst entrly
dffrnt hds. T sm up, thn: in th Rght Whl’s thr is n
grt wll of sprm; n ivry tth at all; n lng, slndr mndbl
of a lwr jw, lk th Sprm Whl’s. Nr in th Sprm Whl ar
thr any of ths blnds of bn; n hg lwr lp; and scrcly
anythng of a tng. Agn, th Rght Whl hs tw extrnl
spt-hls, th Sprm Whl only on.

Lk yr lst, nw, on ths vnrbl hdd hds, whl thy yt
l tgthr; fr on wll sn snk, unrcrdd, in th s; th othr
wll nt b vry lng in fllwng.

Cn y ctch th exprssn of th Sprm Whl’s thr? It is th sm
h dd wth, only sm of th lngr wrnkls in th frhd sm nw
fdd awy. I thnk hs brd brw t b fll of a prr-lk
plcdty, brn of a spcltv indffrnc as t dth. Bt mrk th
othr hd’s exprssn. S tht amzng lwr lp, prssd by
accdnt agnst th vssl’s sd, s as frmly t embrc th jw.
Ds nt ths whl hd sm t spk of an enrms prctcl
rsltn in fcng dth? Ths Rght Whl I tk t hv bn a
Stc; th Sprm Whl, a Pltnn, wh mght hv tkn up Spnz in
hs lttr yrs.


CHPTR 76. Th Bttrng-Rm.

Er qttng, fr th nnc, th Sprm Whl’s hd, I wld hv y,
as a snsbl physlgst, smply—prtclrly rmrk its frnt
aspct, in all its cmpctd cllctdnss. I wld hv y
invstgt it nw wth th sl vw of frmng t yrslf sm
unxggrtd, intllgnt estmt of whtvr bttrng-rm pwr my
b ldgd thr. Hr is a vtl pnt; fr y mst ethr
stsfctrly sttl ths mttr wth yrslf, or fr evr rmn an
infdl as t on of th mst appllng, bt nt th lss tr evnts,
prhps anywhr t b fnd in all rcrdd hstry.

Y obsrv tht in th ordnry swmmng pstn of th Sprm Whl,
th frnt of hs hd prsnts an almst whlly vrtcl pln t th
wtr; y obsrv tht th lwr prt of tht frnt slps
cnsdrbly bckwrds, s as t frnsh mr of a rtrt fr th lng
sckt whch rcvs th bm-lk lwr jw; y obsrv tht th
mth is entrly undr th hd, mch in th sm wy, indd, as
thgh yr own mth wr entrly undr yr chn. Mrvr y
obsrv tht th whl hs n extrnl ns; and tht wht ns h
hs—hs spt hl—is on th tp of hs hd; y obsrv tht hs eys
and ers ar at th sds of hs hd, nrly on thrd of hs entr
lngth frm th frnt. Whrfr, y mst nw hv prcvd tht th
frnt of th Sprm Whl’s hd is a dd, blnd wll, wtht a sngl
orgn or tndr prmnnc of any srt whtsvr. Frthrmr, y ar
nw t cnsdr tht only in th extrm, lwr, bckwrd slpng prt
of th frnt of th hd, is thr th slghtst vstg of bn; and
nt tll y gt nr twnty ft frm th frhd d y cm t th
fll crnl dvlpmnt. S tht ths whl enrms bnlss mss is
as on wd. Fnlly, thgh, as wll sn b rvld, its cntnts
prtly cmprs th mst dlct ol; yt, y ar nw t b apprsd
of th ntr of th sbstnc whch s imprgnbly invsts all tht
apprnt effmncy. In sm prvs plc I hv dscrbd t y hw
th blbbr wrps th bdy of th whl, as th rnd wrps an orng.
Jst s wth th hd; bt wth ths dffrnc: abt th hd ths
envlp, thgh nt s thck, is of a bnlss tghnss, instmbl
by any mn wh hs nt hndld it. Th svrst pntd hrpn, th
shrpst lnc drtd by th strngst hmn arm, imptntly rbnds
frm it. It is as thgh th frhd of th Sprm Whl wr pvd
wth hrss’ hfs. I d nt thnk tht any snstn lrks in it.

Bthnk yrslf als of anthr thng. Whn tw lrg, ldd Indmn
chnc t crwd and crsh twrds ech othr in th dcks, wht d th
slrs d? Thy d nt sspnd btwn thm, at th pnt of cmng
cntct, any mrly hrd sbstnc, lk irn or wd. N, thy hld
thr a lrg, rnd wd of tw and crk, envlpd in th thckst and
tghst of ox-hd. Tht brvly and unnjrd tks th jm whch
wld hv snppd all thr okn hndspks and irn crw-brs. By
itslf ths sffcntly illstrts th obvs fct I drv at. Bt
spplmntry t ths, it hs hypthtclly occrrd t m, tht as
ordnry fsh pssss wht is clld a swmmng blddr in thm,
cpbl, at wll, of dstnsn or cntrctn; and as th Sprm Whl,
as fr as I knw, hs n sch prvsn in hm; cnsdrng, t, th
othrws inxplcbl mnnr in whch h nw dprsss hs hd
altgthr bnth th srfc, and ann swms wth it hgh elvtd
ot of th wtr; cnsdrng th unbstrctd elstcty of its
envlp; cnsdrng th unq intrr of hs hd; it hs
hypthtclly occrrd t m, I sy, tht ths mystcl lng-clld
hnycmbs thr my pssbly hv sm hthrt unknwn and
unsspctd cnnxn wth th otr ar, s as t b sscptbl t
atmsphrc dstnsn and cntrctn. If ths b s, fncy th
irrsstblnss of tht mght, t whch th mst implpbl and
dstrctv of all elmnts cntrbts.

Nw, mrk. Unrrngly impllng ths dd, imprgnbl, unnjrbl
wll, and ths mst bynt thng wthn; thr swms bhnd it all a
mss of trmnds lf, only t b adqtly estmtd as pld wd
is—by th crd; and all obdnt t on vltn, as th smllst
insct. S tht whn I shll hrftr dtl t y all th
spclts and cncntrtns of ptncy evrywhr lrkng in ths
expnsv mnstr; whn I shll shw y sm of hs mr
incnsdrbl brnng fts; I trst y wll hv rnncd all
ignrnt incrdlty, and b rdy t abd by ths; tht thgh th
Sprm Whl stv a pssg thrgh th Isthms of Drn, and mxd
th Atlntc wth th Pcfc, y wld nt elvt on hr of yr
ey-brw. Fr unlss y own th whl, y ar bt a prvncl and
sntmntlst in Trth. Bt clr Trth is a thng fr slmndr
gnts only t encntr; hw smll th chncs fr th prvncls
thn? Wht bfll th wklng yth lftng th drd gddss’s vl
at Ls?


CHPTR 77. Th Grt Hdlbrgh Tn.

Nw cms th Blng of th Cs. Bt t cmprhnd it arght, y mst
knw smthng of th crs intrnl strctr of th thng oprtd
upn.

Rgrdng th Sprm Whl’s hd as a sld oblng, y my, on an
inclnd pln, sdwys dvd it int tw qns,* whrf th lwr
is th bny strctr, frmng th crnm and jws, and th uppr an
uncts mss whlly fr frm bns; its brd frwrd end frmng th
expndd vrtcl apprnt frhd of th whl. At th mddl of th
frhd hrzntlly sbdvd ths uppr qn, and thn y hv tw
almst eql prts, whch bfr wr ntrlly dvdd by an intrnl
wll of a thck tndns sbstnc.

*Qn is nt a Ecldn trm. It blngs t th pr ntcl
mthmtcs. I knw nt tht it hs bn dfnd bfr. A qn is a
sld whch dffrs frm a wdg in hvng its shrp end frmd by th
stp inclntn of on sd, instd of th mtl tprng of bth
sds.

Th lwr sbdvdd prt, clld th jnk, is on immns hnycmb of
ol, frmd by th crssng and rcrssng, int tn thsnd
infltrtd clls, of tgh elstc wht fbrs thrght its whl
extnt. Th uppr prt, knwn as th Cs, my b rgrdd as th grt
Hdlbrgh Tn of th Sprm Whl. And as tht fms grt trc is
mystclly crvd in frnt, s th whl’s vst pltd frhd frms
innmrbl strng dvcs fr th emblmtcl adrnmnt of hs
wndrs tn. Mrvr, as tht of Hdlbrgh ws alwys rplnshd
wth th mst excllnt of th wns of th Rhnsh vllys, s th tn
of th whl cntns by fr th mst prcs of all hs oly
vntgs; nmly, th hghly-przd sprmct, in its absltly pr,
lmpd, and odrfrs stt. Nr is ths prcs sbstnc fnd
unllyd in any othr prt of th crtr. Thgh in lf it rmns
prfctly fld, yt, upn expsr t th ar, aftr dth, it sn
bgns t cncrt; sndng frth btfl crystlln shts, as whn
th frst thn dlct ic is jst frmng in wtr. A lrg whl’s
cs gnrlly ylds abt fv hndrd gllns of sprm, thgh frm
unvdbl crcmstncs, cnsdrbl of it is splld, lks, and
drbbls awy, or is othrws irrvcbly lst in th tcklsh
bsnss of scrng wht y cn.

I knw nt wth wht fn and cstly mtrl th Hdlbrgh Tn ws
ctd wthn, bt in sprltv rchnss tht ctng cld nt
pssbly hv cmprd wth th slkn prl-clrd mmbrn, lk
th lnng of a fn plss, frmng th innr srfc of th Sprm
Whl’s cs.

It wll hv bn sn tht th Hdlbrgh Tn of th Sprm Whl
embrcs th entr lngth of th entr tp of th hd; and snc—as
hs bn elswhr st frth—th hd embrcs on thrd of th whl
lngth of th crtr, thn sttng tht lngth dwn at eghty ft
fr a gd szd whl, y hv mr thn twnty-sx ft fr th
dpth of th tn, whn it is lngthws hstd up and dwn agnst a
shp’s sd.

As in dcpttng th whl, th oprtr’s instrmnt is brght
cls t th spt whr an entrnc is sbsqntly frcd int th
sprmct mgzn; h hs, thrfr, t b uncmmnly hdfl, lst
a crlss, untmly strk shld invd th snctry and wstngly
lt ot its invlbl cntnts. It is ths dcpttd end of th
hd, als, whch is at lst elvtd ot of th wtr, and rtnd in
tht pstn by th enrms cttng tckls, whs hmpn
cmbntns, on on sd, mk qt a wldrnss of rps in tht
qrtr.

Ths mch bng sd, attnd nw, I pry y, t tht mrvlls and—in
ths prtclr instnc—almst ftl oprtn whrby th Sprm
Whl’s grt Hdlbrgh Tn is tppd.


CHPTR 78. Cstrn and Bckts.

Nmbl as a ct, Tshtg mnts alft; and wtht altrng hs erct
pstr, rns strght ot upn th ovrhngng mnyrd-arm, t th
prt whr it exctly prjcts ovr th hstd Tn. H hs crrd
wth hm a lght tckl clld a whp, cnsstng of only tw prts,
trvllng thrgh a sngl-shvd blck. Scrng ths blck, s tht
it hngs dwn frm th yrd-arm, h swngs on end of th rp, tll it
is cght and frmly hld by a hnd on dck. Thn, hnd-ovr-hnd, dwn
th othr prt, th Indn drps thrgh th ar, tll dxtrsly h
lnds on th smmt of th hd. Thr—stll hgh elvtd abv th
rst of th cmpny, t whm h vvcsly crs—h sms sm Trksh
Mzzn cllng th gd ppl t pryrs frm th tp of a twr. A
shrt-hndld shrp spd bng snt up t hm, h dlgntly srchs
fr th prpr plc t bgn brkng int th Tn. In ths bsnss
h prcds vry hdflly, lk a trsr-hntr in sm old hs,
sndng th wlls t fnd whr th gld is msnd in. By th tm
ths cts srch is ovr, a stt irn-bnd bckt, prcsly lk
a wll-bckt, hs bn attchd t on end of th whp; whl th
othr end, bng strtchd acrss th dck, is thr hld by tw or
thr alrt hnds. Ths lst nw hst th bckt wthn grsp of th
Indn, t whm anthr prsn hs rchd up a vry lng pl.
Insrtng ths pl int th bckt, Tshtg dwnwrd gds th
bckt int th Tn, tll it entrly dspprs; thn gvng th wrd
t th smn at th whp, up cms th bckt agn, all bbblng lk
a dry-md’s pl of nw mlk. Crflly lwrd frm its hght, th
fll-frghtd vssl is cght by an appntd hnd, and qckly
emptd int a lrg tb. Thn rmntng alft, it agn gs thrgh
th sm rnd untl th dp cstrn wll yld n mr. Twrds th
end, Tshtg hs t rm hs lng pl hrdr and hrdr, and dpr
and dpr int th Tn, untl sm twnty ft of th pl hv gn
dwn.

Nw, th ppl of th Pqd hd bn blng sm tm in ths wy;
svrl tbs hd bn flld wth th frgrnt sprm; whn all at onc
a qr accdnt hppnd. Whthr it ws tht Tshtg, tht wld
Indn, ws s hdlss and rcklss as t lt g fr a mmnt hs
on-hndd hld on th grt cbld tckls sspndng th hd; or
whthr th plc whr h std ws s trchrs and ozy; or
whthr th Evl On hmslf wld hv it t fll ot s, wtht
sttng hs prtclr rsns; hw it ws exctly, thr is n tllng
nw; bt, on a sddn, as th eghtth or nntth bckt cm
sckngly up—my Gd! pr Tshtg—lk th twn rcprctng bckt
in a vrtbl wll, drppd hd-frmst dwn int ths grt Tn of
Hdlbrgh, and wth a hrrbl oly grglng, wnt cln ot of
sght!

“Mn ovrbrd!” crd Dgg, wh amd th gnrl cnstrntn frst
cm t hs snss. “Swng th bckt ths wy!” and pttng on ft
int it, s as th bttr t scr hs slppry hnd-hld on th whp
itslf, th hstrs rn hm hgh up t th tp of th hd, almst
bfr Tshtg cld hv rchd its intrr bttm. Mntm, thr
ws a trrbl tmlt. Lkng ovr th sd, thy sw th bfr
lflss hd thrbbng and hvng jst blw th srfc of th s,
as if tht mmnt szd wth sm mmnts id; whrs it ws only
th pr Indn uncnscsly rvlng by ths strggls th prls
dpth t whch h hd snk.

At ths instnt, whl Dgg, on th smmt of th hd, ws clrng
th whp—whch hd smhw gt fl of th grt cttng tckls—a
shrp crckng ns ws hrd; and t th unspkbl hrrr of all,
on of th tw enrms hks sspndng th hd tr ot, and wth a
vst vbrtn th enrms mss sdwys swng, tll th drnk shp
rld and shk as if smttn by an icbrg. Th on rmnng hk,
upn whch th entr strn nw dpndd, smd evry instnt t b
on th pnt of gvng wy; an evnt stll mr lkly frm th vlnt
mtns of th hd.

“Cm dwn, cm dwn!” ylld th smn t Dgg, bt wth on hnd
hldng on t th hvy tckls, s tht if th hd shld drp, h
wld stll rmn sspndd; th ngr hvng clrd th fl ln,
rmmd dwn th bckt int th nw cllpsd wll, mnng tht th
brd hrpnr shld grsp it, and s b hstd ot.

“In hvn’s nm, mn,” crd Stbb, “ar y rmmng hm a crtrdg
thr?—Avst! Hw wll tht hlp hm; jmmng tht irn-bnd bckt on
tp of hs hd? Avst, wll y!”

“Stnd clr of th tckl!” crd a vc lk th brstng of a
rckt.

Almst in th sm instnt, wth a thndr-bm, th enrms mss
drppd int th s, lk Ngr’s Tbl-Rck int th whrlpl; th
sddnly rlvd hll rlld awy frm it, t fr dwn hr glttrng
cppr; and all cght thr brth, as hlf swngng—nw ovr th
slrs’ hds, and nw ovr th wtr—Dgg, thrgh a thck mst of
spry, ws dmly bhld clngng t th pndls tckls, whl pr,
brd-alv Tshtg ws snkng uttrly dwn t th bttm of th
s! Bt hrdly hd th blndng vpr clrd awy, whn a nkd
fgr wth a brdng-swrd in hs hnd, ws fr on swft mmnt sn
hvrng ovr th blwrks. Th nxt, a ld splsh annncd tht my
brv Qqg hd dvd t th rsc. On pckd rsh ws md t th
sd, and evry ey cntd evry rppl, as mmnt fllwd mmnt,
and n sgn of ethr th snkr or th dvr cld b sn. Sm hnds
nw jmpd int a bt alngsd, and pshd a lttl off frm th
shp.

“H! h!” crd Dgg, all at onc, frm hs nw qt, swngng prch
ovrhd; and lkng frthr off frm th sd, w sw an arm thrst
uprght frm th bl wvs; a sght strng t s, as an arm thrst
frth frm th grss ovr a grv.

“Bth! bth!—it is bth!”—crd Dgg agn wth a jyfl sht; and
sn aftr, Qqg ws sn bldly strkng ot wth on hnd, and
wth th othr cltchng th lng hr of th Indn. Drwn int th
wtng bt, thy wr qckly brght t th dck; bt Tshtg ws
lng in cmng t, and Qqg dd nt lk vry brsk.

Nw, hw hd ths nbl rsc bn accmplshd? Why, dvng aftr th
slwly dscndng hd, Qqg wth hs kn swrd hd md sd
lngs nr its bttm, s as t scttl a lrg hl thr; thn
drppng hs swrd, hd thrst hs lng arm fr inwrds and upwrds,
and s hld ot pr Tsh by th hd. H avrrd, tht upn frst
thrstng in fr hm, a lg ws prsntd; bt wll knwng tht tht
ws nt as it oght t b, and mght occsn grt trbl;—h hd
thrst bck th lg, and by a dxtrs hv and tss, hd wrght a
smrst upn th Indn; s tht wth th nxt trl, h cm frth in
th gd old wy—hd frmst. As fr th grt hd itslf, tht ws
dng as wll as cld b expctd.

And ths, thrgh th crg and grt skll in obsttrcs of
Qqg, th dlvrnc, or rthr, dlvry of Tshtg, ws
sccssflly accmplshd, in th tth, t, of th mst untwrd and
apprntly hplss impdmnts; whch is a lssn by n mns t b
frgttn. Mdwfry shld b tght in th sm crs wth fncng
and bxng, rdng and rwng.

I knw tht ths qr advntr of th Gy-Hdr’s wll b sr t
sm incrdbl t sm lndsmn, thgh thy thmslvs my hv
ethr sn or hrd of sm on’s fllng int a cstrn ashr; an
accdnt whch nt sldm hppns, and wth mch lss rsn t thn
th Indn’s, cnsdrng th excdng slpprnss of th crb of th
Sprm Whl’s wll.

Bt, prdvntr, it my b sgcsly urgd, hw is ths? W thght
th tssd, infltrtd hd of th Sprm Whl, ws th lghtst and
mst crky prt abt hm; and yt th mkst it snk in an elmnt of
a fr grtr spcfc grvty thn itslf. W hv th thr. Nt at
all, bt I hv y; fr at th tm pr Tsh fll in, th cs hd
bn nrly emptd of its lghtr cntnts, lvng lttl bt th
dns tndns wll of th wll—a dbl wldd, hmmrd sbstnc,
as I hv bfr sd, mch hvr thn th s wtr, and a lmp of
whch snks in it lk ld almst. Bt th tndncy t rpd snkng
in ths sbstnc ws in th prsnt instnc mtrlly cntrctd
by th othr prts of th hd rmnng undtchd frm it, s tht it
snk vry slwly and dlbrtly indd, affrdng Qqg a fr
chnc fr prfrmng hs agl obsttrcs on th rn, as y my sy.
Ys, it ws a rnnng dlvry, s it ws.

Nw, hd Tshtg prshd in tht hd, it hd bn a vry prcs
prshng; smthrd in th vry whtst and dntst of frgrnt
sprmct; cffnd, hrsd, and tmbd in th scrt innr chmbr
and snctm snctrm of th whl. Only on swtr end cn rdly b
rclld—th dlcs dth of an Oh hny-hntr, wh skng hny
in th crtch of a hllw tr, fnd sch excdng str of it, tht
lnng t fr ovr, it sckd hm in, s tht h dd emblmd. Hw
mny, thnk y, hv lkws flln int Plt’s hny hd, and
swtly prshd thr?


CHPTR 79. Th Prr.

T scn th lns of hs fc, or fl th bmps on th hd of ths
Lvthn; ths is a thng whch n Physgnmst or Phrnlgst hs
as yt undrtkn. Sch an entrprs wld sm almst as hpfl as
fr Lvtr t hv scrtnzd th wrnkls on th Rck of Gbrltr,
or fr Gll t hv mntd a lddr and mnpltd th Dm of th
Pnthn. Stll, in tht fms wrk of hs, Lvtr nt only trts of
th vrs fcs of mn, bt als attntvly stds th fcs of
hrss, brds, srpnts, and fsh; and dwlls in dtl upn th
mdfctns of exprssn dscrnbl thrn. Nr hv Gll and hs
dscpl Sprzhm fld t thrw ot sm hnts tchng th
phrnlgcl chrctrstcs of othr bngs thn mn. Thrfr,
thgh I am bt ill qlfd fr a pnr, in th applctn of
ths tw sm-scncs t th whl, I wll d my endvr. I try all
thngs; I achv wht I cn.

Physgnmclly rgrdd, th Sprm Whl is an anmls crtr. H
hs n prpr ns. And snc th ns is th cntrl and mst
cnspcs of th ftrs; and snc it prhps mst mdfs and
fnlly cntrls thr cmbnd exprssn; hnc it wld sm tht
its entr absnc, as an extrnl appndg, mst vry lrgly affct
th cntnnc of th whl. Fr as in lndscp grdnng, a spr,
cpl, mnmnt, or twr of sm srt, is dmd almst indspnsbl
t th cmpltn of th scn; s n fc cn b physgnmclly in
kpng wtht th elvtd opn-wrk blfry of th ns. Dsh th
ns frm Phds’s mrbl Jv, and wht a srry rmndr!
Nvrthlss, Lvthn is of s mghty a mgntd, all hs
prprtns ar s sttly, tht th sm dfcncy whch in th
sclptrd Jv wr hds, in hm is n blmsh at all. Ny, it is
an addd grndr. A ns t th whl wld hv bn imprtnnt. As
on yr physgnmcl vyg y sl rnd hs vst hd in yr
jlly-bt, yr nbl cncptns of hm ar nvr insltd by th
rflctn tht h hs a ns t b plld. A pstlnt cnct, whch
s oftn wll insst upn obtrdng evn whn bhldng th mghtst
ryl bdl on hs thrn.

In sm prtclrs, prhps th mst impsng physgnmcl vw t
b hd of th Sprm Whl, is tht of th fll frnt of hs hd. Ths
aspct is sblm.

In thght, a fn hmn brw is lk th Est whn trbld wth th
mrnng. In th rps of th pstr, th crld brw of th bll hs
a tch of th grnd in it. Pshng hvy cnnn up mntn dfls,
th elphnt’s brw is mjstc. Hmn or anml, th mystcl brw is
as tht grt gldn sl affxd by th Grmn emprrs t thr
dcrs. It sgnfs—“Gd: dn ths dy by my hnd.” Bt in mst
crtrs, ny in mn hmslf, vry oftn th brw is bt a mr strp
of alpn lnd lyng alng th snw ln. Fw ar th frhds whch
lk Shkspr’s or Mlncthn’s rs s hgh, and dscnd s lw,
tht th eys thmslvs sm clr, etrnl, tdlss mntn lks;
and all abv thm in th frhd’s wrnkls, y sm t trck th
antlrd thghts dscndng thr t drnk, as th Hghlnd hntrs
trck th snw prnts of th dr. Bt in th grt Sprm Whl, ths
hgh and mghty gd-lk dgnty inhrnt in th brw is s immnsly
amplfd, tht gzng on it, in tht fll frnt vw, y fl th
Dty and th drd pwrs mr frcbly thn in bhldng any othr
objct in lvng ntr. Fr y s n on pnt prcsly; nt on
dstnct ftr is rvld; n ns, eys, ers, or mth; n fc;
h hs nn, prpr; nthng bt tht on brd frmmnt of a
frhd, pltd wth rddls; dmbly lwrng wth th dm of bts,
and shps, and mn. Nr, in prfl, ds ths wndrs brw dmnsh;
thgh tht wy vwd its grndr ds nt dmnr upn y s. In
prfl, y plnly prcv tht hrzntl, sm-crscntc
dprssn in th frhd’s mddl, whch, in mn, is Lvtr’s mrk
of gns.

Bt hw? Gns in th Sprm Whl? Hs th Sprm Whl evr wrttn a
bk, spkn a spch? N, hs grt gns is dclrd in hs dng
nthng prtclr t prv it. It is mrvr dclrd in hs
pyrmdcl slnc. And ths rmnds m tht hd th grt Sprm Whl
bn knwn t th yng Ornt Wrld, h wld hv bn dfd by
thr chld-mgn thghts. Thy dfd th crcdl of th Nl,
bcs th crcdl is tnglss; and th Sprm Whl hs n tng,
or at lst it is s excdngly smll, as t b incpbl of
prtrsn. If hrftr any hghly cltrd, ptcl ntn shll
lr bck t thr brth-rght, th mrry My-dy gds of old; and
lvngly enthrn thm agn in th nw egtstcl sky; in th nw
unhntd hll; thn b sr, exltd t Jv’s hgh st, th grt
Sprm Whl shll lrd it.

Chmplln dcphrd th wrnkld grnt hrglyphcs. Bt thr is
n Chmplln t dcphr th Egypt of evry mn’s and evry bng’s
fc. Physgnmy, lk evry othr hmn scnc, is bt a pssng
fbl. If thn, Sr Wllm Jns, wh rd in thrty lnggs, cld
nt rd th smplst psnt’s fc in its prfndr and mr sbtl
mnngs, hw my unlttrd Ishml hp t rd th awfl Chld of
th Sprm Whl’s brw? I bt pt tht brw bfr y. Rd it if y
cn.


CHPTR 80. Th Nt.

If th Sprm Whl b physgnmclly a Sphnx, t th phrnlgst
hs brn sms tht gmtrcl crcl whch it is impssbl t
sqr.

In th fll-grwn crtr th skll wll msr at lst twnty ft
in lngth. Unhng th lwr jw, and th sd vw of ths skll is as
th sd of a mdrtly inclnd pln rstng thrght on a lvl
bs. Bt in lf—as w hv elswhr sn—ths inclnd pln is
anglrly flld up, and almst sqrd by th enrms sprncmbnt
mss of th jnk and sprm. At th hgh end th skll frms a crtr t
bd tht prt of th mss; whl undr th lng flr of ths crtr—in
anthr cvty sldm excdng tn inchs in lngth and as mny in
dpth—rpss th mr hndfl of ths mnstr’s brn. Th brn is at
lst twnty ft frm hs apprnt frhd in lf; it is hddn awy
bhnd its vst otwrks, lk th innrmst ctdl wthn th
amplfd frtfctns of Qbc. S lk a chc cskt is it
scrtd in hm, tht I hv knwn sm whlmn wh prmptrly dny
tht th Sprm Whl hs any othr brn thn tht plpbl smblnc
of on frmd by th cbc-yrds of hs sprm mgzn. Lyng in
strng flds, crss, and cnvltns, t thr apprhnsns, it
sms mr in kpng wth th id of hs gnrl mght t rgrd tht
mystc prt of hm as th st of hs intllgnc.

It is pln, thn, tht phrnlgclly th hd of ths Lvthn, in
th crtr’s lvng intct stt, is an entr dlsn. As fr hs
tr brn, y cn thn s n indctns of it, nr fl any. Th
whl, lk all thngs tht ar mghty, wrs a fls brw t th
cmmn wrld.

If y unld hs skll of its sprmy hps and thn tk a rr vw
of its rr end, whch is th hgh end, y wll b strck by its
rsmblnc t th hmn skll, bhld in th sm sttn, and frm
th sm pnt of vw. Indd, plc ths rvrsd skll (scld dwn
t th hmn mgntd) amng a plt of mn’s sklls, and y wld
invlntrly cnfnd it wth thm; and rmrkng th dprssns on
on prt of its smmt, in phrnlgcl phrs y wld sy—Ths mn
hd n slf-estm, and n vnrtn. And by ths ngtns,
cnsdrd alng wth th affrmtv fct of hs prdgs blk and
pwr, y cn bst frm t yrslf th trst, thgh nt th mst
exhlrtng cncptn of wht th mst exltd ptncy is.

Bt if frm th cmprtv dmnsns of th whl’s prpr brn, y
dm it incpbl of bng adqtly chrtd, thn I hv anthr id
fr y. If y attntvly rgrd almst any qdrpd’s spn, y
wll b strck wth th rsmblnc of its vrtbræ t a strng
ncklc of dwrfd sklls, all brng rdmntl rsmblnc t th
skll prpr. It is a Grmn cnct, tht th vrtbræ ar absltly
undvlpd sklls. Bt th crs extrnl rsmblnc, I tk it th
Grmns wr nt th frst mn t prcv. A frgn frnd onc
pntd it ot t m, in th skltn of a f h hd sln, and wth
th vrtbræ of whch h ws inlyng, in a srt of bss-rlv, th
bkd prw of hs cn. Nw, I cnsdr tht th phrnlgsts hv
omttd an imprtnt thng in nt pshng thr invstgtns frm th
crbllm thrgh th spnl cnl. Fr I blv tht mch of a mn’s
chrctr wll b fnd btknd in hs bckbn. I wld rthr fl
yr spn thn yr skll, whvr y ar. A thn jst of a spn
nvr yt uphld a fll and nbl sl. I rjc in my spn, as in
th frm adcs stff of tht flg whch I flng hlf ot t th
wrld.

Apply ths spnl brnch of phrnlgy t th Sprm Whl. Hs crnl
cvty is cntns wth th frst nck-vrtbr; and in tht vrtbr
th bttm of th spnl cnl wll msr tn inchs acrss, bng
eght in hght, and of a trnglr fgr wth th bs dwnwrds. As
it psss thrgh th rmnng vrtbræ th cnl tprs in sz, bt
fr a cnsdrbl dstnc rmns of lrg cpcty. Nw, of crs,
ths cnl is flld wth mch th sm strngly fbrs sbstnc—th
spnl crd—as th brn; and drctly cmmncts wth th brn. And
wht is stll mr, fr mny ft aftr emrgng frm th brn’s
cvty, th spnl crd rmns of an undcrsng grth, almst eql
t tht of th brn. Undr all ths crcmstncs, wld it b
unrsnbl t srvy and mp ot th whl’s spn phrnlgclly?
Fr, vwd in ths lght, th wndrfl cmprtv smllnss of hs
brn prpr is mr thn cmpnstd by th wndrfl cmprtv
mgntd of hs spnl crd.

Bt lvng ths hnt t oprt as it my wth th phrnlgsts, I
wld mrly assm th spnl thry fr a mmnt, in rfrnc t th
Sprm Whl’s hmp. Ths agst hmp, if I mstk nt, rss ovr on
of th lrgr vrtbræ, and is, thrfr, in sm srt, th otr
cnvx mld of it. Frm its rltv sttn thn, I shld cll
ths hgh hmp th orgn of frmnss or indmtblnss in th Sprm
Whl. And tht th grt mnstr is indmtbl, y wll yt hv
rsn t knw.


CHPTR 81. Th Pqd Mts Th Vrgn.

Th prdstntd dy arrvd, and w dly mt th shp Jngfr,
Drck D Dr, mstr, of Brmn.

At on tm th grtst whlng ppl in th wrld, th Dtch and
Grmns ar nw amng th lst; bt hr and thr at vry wd
intrvls of lttd and lngtd, y stll occsnlly mt wth
thr flg in th Pcfc.

Fr sm rsn, th Jngfr smd qt egr t py hr rspcts.
Whl yt sm dstnc frm th Pqd, sh rndd t, and drppng a
bt, hr cptn ws implld twrds us, imptntly stndng in th
bws instd of th strn.

“Wht hs h in hs hnd thr?” crd Strbck, pntng t smthng
wvngly hld by th Grmn. “Impssbl!—a lmp-fdr!”

“Nt tht,” sd Stbb, “n, n, it’s a cff-pt, Mr. Strbck; h’s
cmng off t mk us or cff, is th Yrmn; dn’t y s tht bg
tn cn thr alngsd of hm?—tht’s hs blng wtr. Oh! h’s all
rght, is th Yrmn.”

“G alng wth y,” crd Flsk, “it’s a lmp-fdr and an ol-cn.
H’s ot of ol, and hs cm a-bggng.”

Hwvr crs it my sm fr an ol-shp t b brrwng ol on th
whl-grnd, and hwvr mch it my invrtdly cntrdct th old
prvrb abt crryng cls t Nwcstl, yt smtms sch a thng
rlly hppns; and in th prsnt cs Cptn Drck D Dr dd
indbtbly cndct a lmp-fdr as Flsk dd dclr.

As h mntd th dck, Ahb abrptly accstd hm, wtht at all
hdng wht h hd in hs hnd; bt in hs brkn lng, th Grmn
sn evncd hs cmplt ignrnc of th Wht Whl; immdtly
trnng th cnvrstn t hs lmp-fdr and ol cn, wth sm
rmrks tchng hs hvng t trn int hs hmmck at nght in
prfnd drknss—hs lst drp of Brmn ol bng gn, and nt a
sngl flyng-fsh yt cptrd t spply th dfcncy; cncldng by
hntng tht hs shp ws indd wht in th Fshry is tchnclly
clld a _cln_ on (tht is, an empty on), wll dsrvng th nm
of Jngfr or th Vrgn.

Hs ncssts sppld, Drck dprtd; bt h hd nt gnd hs
shp’s sd, whn whls wr almst smltnsly rsd frm th
mst-hds of bth vssls; and s egr fr th chs ws Drck, tht
wtht psng t pt hs ol-cn and lmp-fdr abrd, h slwd
rnd hs bt and md aftr th lvthn lmp-fdrs.

Nw, th gm hvng rsn t lwrd, h and th othr thr Grmn
bts tht sn fllwd hm, hd cnsdrbly th strt of th
Pqd’s kls. Thr wr eght whls, an avrg pd. Awr of thr
dngr, thy wr gng all abrst wth grt spd strght bfr
th wnd, rbbng thr flnks as clsly as s mny spns of hrss in
hrnss. Thy lft a grt, wd wk, as thgh cntnlly unrllng
a grt wd prchmnt upn th s.

Fll in ths rpd wk, and mny fthms in th rr, swm a hg,
hmpd old bll, whch by hs cmprtvly slw prgrss, as wll as
by th unsl yllwsh incrsttns ovrgrwng hm, smd
afflctd wth th jndc, or sm othr infrmty. Whthr ths
whl blngd t th pd in advnc, smd qstnbl; fr it is
nt cstmry fr sch vnrbl lvthns t b at all scl.
Nvrthlss, h stck t thr wk, thgh indd thr bck wtr
mst hv rtrdd hm, bcs th wht-bn or swll at hs brd
mzzl ws a dshd on, lk th swll frmd whn tw hstl
crrnts mt. Hs spt ws shrt, slw, and lbrs; cmng frth
wth a chkng srt of gsh, and spndng itslf in trn shrds,
fllwd by strng sbtrrnn cmmtns in hm, whch smd t
hv egrss at hs othr brd extrmty, csng th wtrs bhnd
hm t upbbbl.

“Wh’s gt sm prgrc?” sd Stbb, “h hs th stmch-ach, I’m
afrd. Lrd, thnk of hvng hlf an acr of stmch-ach! Advrs
wnds ar hldng md Chrstms in hm, bys. It’s th frst fl wnd
I evr knw t blw frm astrn; bt lk, dd evr whl yw s
bfr? it mst b, h’s lst hs tllr.”

As an ovrldn Indmn brng dwn th Hndstn cst wth a dck
ld of frghtnd hrss, crns, brs, rlls, and wllws on hr
wy; s dd ths old whl hv hs agd blk, and nw and thn prtly
trnng ovr on hs cmbrs rb-ends, exps th cs of hs dvs
wk in th unntrl stmp of hs strbrd fn. Whthr h hd lst
tht fn in bttl, or hd bn brn wtht it, it wr hrd t sy.

“Only wt a bt, old chp, and I’ll gv y a slng fr tht wndd
arm,” crd crl Flsk, pntng t th whl-ln nr hm.

“Mnd h dn’t slng th wth it,” crd Strbck. “Gv wy, or th
Grmn wll hv hm.”

Wth on intnt all th cmbnd rvl bts wr pntd fr ths on
fsh, bcs nt only ws h th lrgst, and thrfr th mst
vlbl whl, bt h ws nrst t thm, and th othr whls wr
gng wth sch grt vlcty, mrvr, as almst t dfy prst fr
th tm. At ths jnctr th Pqd’s kls hd sht by th thr
Grmn bts lst lwrd; bt frm th grt strt h hd hd,
Drck’s bt stll ld th chs, thgh evry mmnt nrd by hs
frgn rvls. Th only thng thy frd, ws, tht frm bng
alrdy s ngh t hs mrk, h wld b enbld t drt hs irn
bfr thy cld cmpltly ovrtk and pss hm. As fr Drck, h
smd qt cnfdnt tht ths wld b th cs, and occsnlly
wth a drdng gstr shk hs lmp-fdr at th othr bts.

“Th ungrcs and ungrtfl dg!” crd Strbck; “h mcks and
drs m wth th vry pr-bx I flld fr hm nt fv mnts
ag!”—thn in hs old intns whspr—“Gv wy, gryhnds! Dg t
it!”

“I tll y wht it is, mn”—crd Stbb t hs crw—“it’s agnst my
rlgn t gt md; bt I’d lk t et tht vllns
Yrmn—Pll—wn’t y? Ar y gng t lt tht rscl bt y? D y
lv brndy? A hgshd of brndy, thn, t th bst mn. Cm, why
dn’t sm of y brst a bld-vssl? Wh’s tht bn drppng an
anchr ovrbrd—w dn’t bdg an inch—w’r bclmd. Hll, hr’s
grss grwng in th bt’s bttm—and by th Lrd, th mst thr’s
bddng. Ths wn’t d, bys. Lk at tht Yrmn! Th shrt and lng
of it is, mn, wll y spt fr or nt?”

“Oh! s th sds h mks!” crd Flsk, dncng up and dwn—“Wht a
hmp—Oh, _d_ pl on th bf—lys lk a lg! Oh! my lds, _d_
sprng—slp-jcks and qhgs fr sppr, y knw, my lds—bkd clms
and mffns—oh, _d_, _d_, sprng,—h’s a hndrd brrllr—dn’t ls
hm nw—dn’t oh, _dn’t!_—s tht Yrmn—Oh, wn’t y pll fr yr
dff, my lds—sch a sg! sch a sggr! Dn’t y lv sprm? Thr
gs thr thsnd dllrs, mn!—a bnk!—a whl bnk! Th bnk of
Englnd!—Oh, _d_, _d_, _d!_—Wht’s tht Yrmn abt nw?”

At ths mmnt Drck ws in th act of ptchng hs lmp-fdr at th
advncng bts, and als hs ol-cn; prhps wth th dbl vw of
rtrdng hs rvls’ wy, and at th sm tm ecnmclly
acclrtng hs own by th mmntry impts of th bckwrd tss.

“Th unmnnrly Dtch dggr!” crd Stbb. “Pll nw, mn, lk ffty
thsnd ln-of-bttl-shp lds of rd-hrd dvls. Wht d’y sy,
Tshtg; ar y th mn t snp yr spn in tw-and-twnty pcs
fr th hnr of old Gyhd? Wht d’y sy?”

“I sy, pll lk gd-dm,”—crd th Indn.

Frcly, bt evnly inctd by th tnts of th Grmn, th Pqd’s
thr bts nw bgn rngng almst abrst; and, s dspsd,
mmntrly nrd hm. In tht fn, ls, chvlrs atttd of th
hdsmn whn drwng nr t hs pry, th thr mts std up
prdly, occsnlly bckng th aftr orsmn wth an exhlrtng
cry of, “Thr sh slds, nw! Hrrh fr th wht-ash brz! Dwn
wth th Yrmn! Sl ovr hm!”

Bt s dcdd an orgnl strt hd Drck hd, tht spt of all
thr gllntry, h wld hv prvd th vctr in ths rc, hd nt
a rghts jdgmnt dscndd upn hm in a crb whch cght th
bld of hs mdshp orsmn. Whl ths clmsy lbbr ws strvng t
fr hs wht-ash, and whl, in cnsqnc, Drck’s bt ws ngh
t cpszng, and h thndrng awy at hs mn in a mghty rg;—tht
ws a gd tm fr Strbck, Stbb, and Flsk. Wth a sht, thy tk
a mrtl strt frwrds, and slntngly rngd up on th Grmn’s
qrtr. An instnt mr, and all fr bts wr dgnclly in th
whl’s immdt wk, whl strtchng frm thm, on bth sds, ws
th fmng swll tht h md.

It ws a trrfc, mst ptbl, and mddnng sght. Th whl ws
nw gng hd ot, and sndng hs spt bfr hm in a cntnl
trmntd jt; whl hs on pr fn bt hs sd in an agny of
frght. Nw t ths hnd, nw t tht, h ywd in hs fltrng
flght, and stll at evry bllw tht h brk, h spsmdclly snk
in th s, or sdwys rlld twrds th sky hs on btng fn. S
hv I sn a brd wth clppd wng mkng affrghtd brkn crcls
in th ar, vnly strvng t escp th prtcl hwks. Bt th brd
hs a vc, and wth plntv crs wll mk knwn hr fr; bt th
fr of ths vst dmb brt of th s, ws chnd up and enchntd
in hm; h hd n vc, sv tht chkng rsprtn thrgh hs
sprcl, and ths md th sght of hm unspkbly ptbl; whl
stll, in hs amzng blk, prtclls jw, and omnptnt tl, thr
ws engh t appl th sttst mn wh s ptd.

Sng nw tht bt a vry fw mmnts mr wld gv th Pqd’s
bts th advntg, and rthr thn b ths fld of hs gm, Drck
chs t hzrd wht t hm mst hv smd a mst unslly lng
drt, er th lst chnc wld fr evr escp.

Bt n snr dd hs hrpnr stnd up fr th strk, thn all
thr tgrs—Qqg, Tshtg, Dgg—instnctvly sprng t thr
ft, and stndng in a dgnl rw, smltnsly pntd thr
brbs; and drtd ovr th hd of th Grmn hrpnr, thr thr
Nntckt irns entrd th whl. Blndng vprs of fm and
wht-fr! Th thr bts, in th frst fry of th whl’s hdlng
rsh, bmpd th Grmn’s asd wth sch frc, tht bth Drck and
hs bffld hrpnr wr splld ot, and sld ovr by th thr
flyng kls.

“Dn’t b afrd, my bttr-bxs,” crd Stbb, cstng a pssng
glnc upn thm as h sht by; “y’ll b pckd up prsntly—all
rght—I sw sm shrks astrn—St. Brnrd’s dgs, y knw—rlv
dstrssd trvllrs. Hrrh! ths is th wy t sl nw. Evry kl
a snbm! Hrrh!—Hr w g lk thr tn kttls at th tl of a
md cgr! Ths pts m in mnd of fstnng t an elphnt in a
tlbry on a pln—mks th whl-spks fly, bys, whn y fstn t
hm tht wy; and thr’s dngr of bng ptchd ot t, whn y
strk a hll. Hrrh! ths is th wy a fllw fls whn h’s gng
t Dvy Jns—all a rsh dwn an endlss inclnd pln! Hrrh! ths
whl crrs th evrlstng ml!”

Bt th mnstr’s rn ws a brf on. Gvng a sddn gsp, h
tmltsly sndd. Wth a grtng rsh, th thr lns flw rnd
th lggrhds wth sch a frc as t gg dp grvs in thm;
whl s frfl wr th hrpnrs tht ths rpd sndng wld
sn exhst th lns, tht usng all thr dxtrs mght, thy
cght rptd smkng trns wth th rp t hld on; tll at
lst—owng t th prpndclr strn frm th ld-lnd chcks of
th bts, whnc th thr rps wnt strght dwn int th bl—th
gnwls of th bws wr almst evn wth th wtr, whl th thr
strns tltd hgh in th ar. And th whl sn csng t snd, fr
sm tm thy rmnd in tht atttd, frfl of expndng mr
ln, thgh th pstn ws a lttl tcklsh. Bt thgh bts hv
bn tkn dwn and lst in ths wy, yt it is ths “hldng on,” as
it is clld; ths hkng up by th shrp brbs of hs lv flsh frm
th bck; ths it is tht oftn trmnts th Lvthn int sn rsng
agn t mt th shrp lnc of hs fs. Yt nt t spk of th
prl of th thng, it is t b dbtd whthr ths crs is alwys
th bst; fr it is bt rsnbl t prsm, tht th lngr th
strckn whl stys undr wtr, th mr h is exhstd. Bcs,
owng t th enrms srfc of hm—in a fll grwn sprm whl
smthng lss thn 2000 sqr ft—th prssr of th wtr is
immns. W all knw wht an astnshng atmsphrc wght w
orslvs stnd up undr; evn hr, abv-grnd, in th ar; hw
vst, thn, th brdn of a whl, brng on hs bck a clmn of tw
hndrd fthms of ocn! It mst at lst eql th wght of ffty
atmsphrs. On whlmn hs estmtd it at th wght of twnty
ln-of-bttl shps, wth all thr gns, and strs, and mn on
brd.

As th thr bts ly thr on tht gntly rllng s, gzng dwn
int its etrnl bl nn; and as nt a sngl grn or cry of any
srt, ny, nt s mch as a rppl or a bbbl cm up frm its dpths;
wht lndsmn wld hv thght, tht bnth all tht slnc and
plcdty, th utmst mnstr of th ss ws wrthng and wrnchng in
agny! Nt eght inchs of prpndclr rp wr vsbl at th bws.
Sms it crdbl tht by thr sch thn thrds th grt Lvthn
ws sspndd lk th bg wght t an eght dy clck. Sspndd? and
t wht? T thr bts of brd. Is ths th crtr of whm it ws
onc s trmphntly sd—“Cnst th fll hs skn wth brbd irns?
or hs hd wth fsh-sprs? Th swrd of hm tht lyth at hm
cnnt hld, th spr, th drt, nr th hbrgn: h estmth irn
as strw; th arrw cnnt mk hm fl; drts ar cntd as stbbl;
h lghth at th shkng of a spr!” Ths th crtr? ths h? Oh!
tht unflflmnts shld fllw th prphts. Fr wth th strngth of
a thsnd thghs in hs tl, Lvthn hd rn hs hd undr th
mntns of th s, t hd hm frm th Pqd’s fsh-sprs!

In tht slpng aftrnn snlght, th shdws tht th thr bts
snt dwn bnth th srfc, mst hv bn lng engh and brd
engh t shd hlf Xrxs’ army. Wh cn tll hw appllng t th
wndd whl mst hv bn sch hg phntms flttng ovr hs hd!

“Stnd by, mn; h strs,” crd Strbck, as th thr lns sddnly
vbrtd in th wtr, dstnctly cndctng upwrds t thm, as by
mgntc wrs, th lf and dth thrbs of th whl, s tht evry
orsmn flt thm in hs st. Th nxt mmnt, rlvd in grt prt
frm th dwnwrd strn at th bws, th bts gv a sddn bnc
upwrds, as a smll icfld wll, whn a dns hrd of wht brs ar
scrd frm it int th s.

“Hl in! Hl in!” crd Strbck agn; “h’s rsng.”

Th lns, of whch, hrdly an instnt bfr, nt on hnd’s brdth
cld hv bn gnd, wr nw in lng qck cls flng bck all
drppng int th bts, and sn th whl brk wtr wthn tw
shp’s lngths of th hntrs.

Hs mtns plnly dntd hs extrm exhstn. In mst lnd
anmls thr ar crtn vlvs or fld-gts in mny of thr vns,
whrby whn wndd, th bld is in sm dgr at lst instntly
sht off in crtn drctns. Nt s wth th whl; on of whs
pclrts it is t hv an entr nn-vlvlr strctr of th
bld-vssls, s tht whn prcd evn by s smll a pnt as a
hrpn, a ddly drn is at onc bgn upn hs whl artrl
systm; and whn ths is hghtnd by th extrrdnry prssr of
wtr at a grt dstnc blw th srfc, hs lf my b sd t
pr frm hm in incssnt strms. Yt s vst is th qntty of
bld in hm, and s dstnt and nmrs its intrr fntns, tht
h wll kp ths bldng and bldng fr a cnsdrbl prd; evn
as in a drght a rvr wll flw, whs src is in th wll-sprngs
of fr-off and undscrnbl hlls. Evn nw, whn th bts plld
upn ths whl, and prlsly drw ovr hs swyng flks, and th
lncs wr drtd int hm, thy wr fllwd by stdy jts frm th
nw md wnd, whch kpt cntnlly plyng, whl th ntrl
spt-hl in hs hd ws only at intrvls, hwvr rpd, sndng
its affrghtd mstr int th ar. Frm ths lst vnt n bld yt
cm, bcs n vtl prt of hm hd ths fr bn strck. Hs lf,
as thy sgnfcntly cll it, ws untchd.

As th bts nw mr clsly srrndd hm, th whl uppr prt of
hs frm, wth mch of it tht is ordnrly sbmrgd, ws plnly
rvld. Hs eys, or rthr th plcs whr hs eys hd bn, wr
bhld. As strng msgrwn msss gthr in th knt-hls of th
nblst oks whn prstrt, s frm th pnts whch th whl’s eys
hd onc occpd, nw prtrdd blnd blbs, hrrbly ptbl t s.
Bt pty thr ws nn. Fr all hs old ag, and hs on arm, and hs
blnd eys, h mst d th dth and b mrdrd, in ordr t lght
th gy brdls and othr mrry-mkngs of mn, and als t illmnt
th slmn chrchs tht prch uncndtnl inffnsvnss by all t
all. Stll rllng in hs bld, at lst h prtlly dsclsd a
strngly dsclrd bnch or prtbrnc, th sz of a bshl, lw
dwn on th flnk.

“A nc spt,” crd Flsk; “jst lt m prck hm thr onc.”

“Avst!” crd Strbck, “thr’s n nd of tht!”

Bt hmn Strbck ws t lt. At th instnt of th drt an
ulcrs jt sht frm ths crl wnd, and gdd by it int mr
thn sffrbl angsh, th whl nw sptng thck bld, wth swft
fry blndly drtd at th crft, bspttrng thm and thr glryng
crws all ovr wth shwrs of gr, cpszng Flsk’s bt and mrrng
th bws. It ws hs dth strk. Fr, by ths tm, s spnt ws h
by lss of bld, tht h hlplssly rlld awy frm th wrck h hd
md; ly pntng on hs sd, imptntly flppd wth hs stmpd fn,
thn ovr and ovr slwly rvlvd lk a wnng wrld; trnd up th
wht scrts of hs blly; ly lk a lg, and dd. It ws mst
pts, tht lst exprng spt. As whn by unsn hnds th wtr is
grdlly drwn off frm sm mghty fntn, and wth hlf-stfld
mlnchly grglngs th spry-clmn lwrs and lwrs t th
grnd—s th lst lng dyng spt of th whl.

Sn, whl th crws wr awtng th arrvl of th shp, th bdy
shwd symptms of snkng wth all its trsrs unrfld.
Immdtly, by Strbck’s ordrs, lns wr scrd t it at
dffrnt pnts, s tht er lng evry bt ws a by; th snkn
whl bng sspndd a fw inchs bnth thm by th crds. By vry
hdfl mngmnt, whn th shp drw ngh, th whl ws trnsfrrd
t hr sd, and ws strngly scrd thr by th stffst
flk-chns, fr it ws pln tht unlss artfclly uphld, th
bdy wld at onc snk t th bttm.

It s chncd tht almst upn frst cttng int hm wth th spd,
th entr lngth of a crrdd hrpn ws fnd imbddd in hs
flsh, on th lwr prt of th bnch bfr dscrbd. Bt as th
stmps of hrpns ar frqntly fnd in th dd bds of cptrd
whls, wth th flsh prfctly hld arnd thm, and n prmnnc
of any knd t dnt thr plc; thrfr, thr mst nds hv
bn sm othr unknwn rsn in th prsnt cs flly t accnt fr
th ulcrtn alldd t. Bt stll mr crs ws th fct of a
lnc-hd of stn bng fnd in hm, nt fr frm th brd irn,
th flsh prfctly frm abt it. Wh hd drtd tht stn lnc? And
whn? It mght hv bn drtd by sm Nr’ Wst Indn lng bfr
Amrc ws dscvrd.

Wht othr mrvls mght hv bn rmmgd ot of ths mnstrs
cbnt thr is n tllng. Bt a sddn stp ws pt t frthr
dscvrs, by th shp’s bng unprcdntdly drggd ovr sdwys
t th s, owng t th bdy’s immnsly incrsng tndncy t snk.
Hwvr, Strbck, wh hd th ordrng of affrs, hng on t it t
th lst; hng on t it s rsltly, indd, tht whn at lngth th
shp wld hv bn cpszd, if stll prsstng in lckng arms wth
th bdy; thn, whn th cmmnd ws gvn t brk clr frm it, sch
ws th immvbl strn upn th tmbr-hds t whch th
flk-chns and cbls wr fstnd, tht it ws impssbl t cst
thm off. Mntm evrythng in th Pqd ws aslnt. T crss t th
othr sd of th dck ws lk wlkng up th stp gbld rf of a
hs. Th shp grnd and gspd. Mny of th ivry inlyngs of hr
blwrks and cbns wr strtd frm thr plcs, by th unntrl
dslctn. In vn hndspks and crws wr brght t br upn th
immvbl flk-chns, t pry thm adrft frm th tmbrhds; and s
lw hd th whl nw sttld tht th sbmrgd ends cld nt b at
all apprchd, whl evry mmnt whl tns of pndrsty smd
addd t th snkng blk, and th shp smd on th pnt of gng
ovr.

“Hld on, hld on, wn’t y?” crd Stbb t th bdy, “dn’t b in
sch a dvl of a hrry t snk! By thndr, mn, w mst d smthng
or g fr it. N us pryng thr; avst, I sy wth yr hndspks,
and rn on of y fr a pryr bk and a pn-knf, and ct th bg
chns.”

“Knf? Ay, ay,” crd Qqg, and szng th crpntr’s hvy
htcht, h lnd ot of a prthl, and stl t irn, bgn slshng
at th lrgst flk-chns. Bt a fw strks, fll of sprks, wr
gvn, whn th excdng strn effctd th rst. Wth a trrfc
snp, evry fstnng wnt adrft; th shp rghtd, th crcs snk.

Nw, ths occsnl invtbl snkng of th rcntly klld Sprm
Whl is a vry crs thng; nr hs any fshrmn yt adqtly
accntd fr it. Uslly th dd Sprm Whl flts wth grt
byncy, wth its sd or blly cnsdrbly elvtd abv th
srfc. If th only whls tht ths snk wr old, mgr, and
brkn-hrtd crtrs, thr pds of lrd dmnshd and all thr
bns hvy and rhmtc; thn y mght wth sm rsn assrt tht
ths snkng is csd by an uncmmn spcfc grvty in th fsh s
snkng, cnsqnt upn ths absnc of bynt mttr in hm. Bt it
is nt s. Fr yng whls, in th hghst hlth, and swllng wth
nbl asprtns, prmtrly ct off in th wrm flsh and My of
lf, wth all thr pntng lrd abt thm; evn ths brwny,
bynt hrs d smtms snk.

B it sd, hwvr, tht th Sprm Whl is fr lss lbl t ths
accdnt thn any othr spcs. Whr on of tht srt g dwn, twnty
Rght Whls d. Ths dffrnc in th spcs is n dbt imptbl
in n smll dgr t th grtr qntty of bn in th Rght Whl;
hs Vntn blnds aln smtms wghng mr thn a tn; frm ths
incmbrnc th Sprm Whl is whlly fr. Bt thr ar instncs
whr, aftr th lps of mny hrs or svrl dys, th snkn whl
agn rss, mr bynt thn in lf. Bt th rsn of ths is
obvs. Gss ar gnrtd in hm; h swlls t a prdgs
mgntd; bcms a srt of anml blln. A ln-of-bttl shp
cld hrdly kp hm undr thn. In th Shr Whlng, on sndngs,
amng th Bys of Nw Zlnd, whn a Rght Whl gvs tkn of
snkng, thy fstn bys t hm, wth plnty of rp; s tht whn
th bdy hs gn dwn, thy knw whr t lk fr it whn it shll
hv ascndd agn.

It ws nt lng aftr th snkng of th bdy tht a cry ws hrd frm
th Pqd’s mst-hds, annncng tht th Jngfr ws agn
lwrng hr bts; thgh th only spt in sght ws tht of a
Fn-Bck, blngng t th spcs of uncptrbl whls, bcs of
its incrdbl pwr of swmmng. Nvrthlss, th Fn-Bck’s spt is
s smlr t th Sprm Whl’s, tht by unsklfl fshrmn it is
oftn mstkn fr it. And cnsqntly Drck and all hs hst wr
nw in vlnt chs of ths unnrbl brt. Th Vrgn crwdng all
sl, md aftr hr fr yng kls, and ths thy all dspprd
fr t lwrd, stll in bld, hpfl chs.

Oh! mny ar th Fn-Bcks, and mny ar th Drcks, my frnd.


CHPTR 82. Th Hnr and Glry of Whlng.

Thr ar sm entrprss in whch a crfl dsrdrlnss is th
tr mthd.

Th mr I dv int ths mttr of whlng, and psh my rsrchs up
t th vry sprng-hd of it s mch th mr am I imprssd wth its
grt hnrblnss and antqty; and espclly whn I fnd s mny
grt dm-gds and hrs, prphts of all srts, wh on wy or othr
hv shd dstnctn upn it, I am trnsprtd wth th rflctn
tht I myslf blng, thgh bt sbrdntly, t s emblznd a
frtrnty.

Th gllnt Prss, a sn of Jptr, ws th frst whlmn; and t
th etrnl hnr of or cllng b it sd, tht th frst whl
attckd by or brthrhd ws nt klld wth any srdd intnt.
Ths wr th knghtly dys of or prfssn, whn w only br arms
t sccr th dstrssd, and nt t fll mn’s lmp-fdrs. Evry on
knws th fn stry of Prss and Andrmd; hw th lvly
Andrmd, th dghtr of a kng, ws td t a rck on th s-cst,
and as Lvthn ws in th vry act of crryng hr off, Prss, th
prnc of whlmn, intrpdly advncng, hrpnd th mnstr, and
dlvrd and mrrd th md. It ws an admrbl artstc explt,
rrly achvd by th bst hrpnrs of th prsnt dy; insmch as
ths Lvthn ws sln at th vry frst drt. And lt n mn dbt
ths Arkt stry; fr in th ancnt Jpp, nw Jff, on th Syrn
cst, in on of th Pgn tmpls, thr std fr mny ags th vst
skltn of a whl, whch th cty’s lgnds and all th inhbtnts
assrtd t b th idntcl bns of th mnstr tht Prss slw.
Whn th Rmns tk Jpp, th sm skltn ws crrd t Itly in
trmph. Wht sms mst snglr and sggstvly imprtnt in ths
stry, is ths: it ws frm Jpp tht Jnh st sl.

Akn t th advntr of Prss and Andrmd—indd, by sm sppsd
t b indrctly drvd frm it—is tht fms stry of St. Grg and
th Drgn; whch drgn I mntn t hv bn a whl; fr in mny
old chrncls whls and drgns ar strngly jmbld tgthr, and
oftn stnd fr ech othr. “Th art as a ln of th wtrs, and as a
drgn of th s,” sth Ezkl; hrby, plnly mnng a whl; in
trth, sm vrsns of th Bbl us tht wrd itslf. Bsds, it
wld mch sbtrct frm th glry of th explt hd St. Grg bt
encntrd a crwlng rptl of th lnd, instd of dng bttl
wth th grt mnstr of th dp. Any mn my kll a snk, bt only
a Prss, a St. Grg, a Cffn, hv th hrt in thm t mrch
bldly up t a whl.

Lt nt th mdrn pntngs of ths scn msld us; fr thgh th
crtr encntrd by tht vlnt whlmn of old is vgly
rprsntd of a grffn-lk shp, and thgh th bttl is dpctd
on lnd and th snt on hrsbck, yt cnsdrng th grt ignrnc
of ths tms, whn th tr frm of th whl ws unknwn t artsts;
and cnsdrng tht as in Prss’ cs, St. Grg’s whl mght hv
crwld up ot of th s on th bch; and cnsdrng tht th anml
rddn by St. Grg mght hv bn only a lrg sl, or s-hrs;
brng all ths in mnd, it wll nt appr altgthr incmptbl
wth th scrd lgnd and th ancntst drghts of th scn, t
hld ths s-clld drgn n othr thn th grt Lvthn hmslf.
In fct, plcd bfr th strct and prcng trth, ths whl stry
wll fr lk tht fsh, flsh, and fwl idl of th Phlstns,
Dgn by nm; wh bng plntd bfr th ark of Isrl, hs hrs’s
hd and bth th plms of hs hnds fll off frm hm, and only th
stmp or fshy prt of hm rmnd. Ths, thn, on of or own nbl
stmp, evn a whlmn, is th ttlry grdn of Englnd; and by
gd rghts, w hrpnrs of Nntckt shld b enrlld in th mst
nbl ordr of St. Grg. And thrfr, lt nt th knghts of tht
hnrbl cmpny (nn of whm, I vntr t sy, hv evr hd t d
wth a whl lk thr grt ptrn), lt thm nvr ey a Nntcktr
wth dsdn, snc evn in or wlln frcks and trrd trwsrs w
ar mch bttr enttld t St. Grg’s dcrtn thn thy.

Whthr t admt Hrcls amng us or nt, cncrnng ths I lng
rmnd dbs: fr thgh accrdng t th Grk mythlgs, tht
antq Crcktt and Kt Crsn—tht brwny dr of rjcng gd
dds, ws swllwd dwn and thrwn up by a whl; stll, whthr tht
strctly mks a whlmn of hm, tht mght b mtd. It nwhr
apprs tht h evr actlly hrpnd hs fsh, unlss, indd, frm
th insd. Nvrthlss, h my b dmd a srt of invlntry
whlmn; at any rt th whl cght hm, if h dd nt th whl. I
clm hm fr on of or cln.

Bt, by th bst cntrdctry athrts, ths Grcn stry of
Hrcls and th whl is cnsdrd t b drvd frm th stll mr
ancnt Hbrw stry of Jnh and th whl; and vc vrsâ; crtnly
thy ar vry smlr. If I clm th dm-gd thn, why nt th
prpht?

Nr d hrs, snts, dmgds, and prphts aln cmprs th whl
rll of or ordr. Or grnd mstr is stll t b nmd; fr lk
ryl kngs of old tms, w fnd th hd wtrs of or frtrnty in
nthng shrt of th grt gds thmslvs. Tht wndrs orntl
stry is nw t b rhrsd frm th Shstr, whch gvs us th drd
Vshn, on of th thr prsns in th gdhd of th Hnds; gvs
us ths dvn Vshn hmslf fr or Lrd;—Vshn, wh, by th frst
of hs tn erthly incrntns, hs fr evr st aprt and snctfd
th whl. Whn Brhm, or th Gd of Gds, sth th Shstr, rslvd
t rcrt th wrld aftr on of its prdcl dssltns, h gv
brth t Vshn, t prsd ovr th wrk; bt th Vds, or mystcl
bks, whs prsl wld sm t hv bn indspnsbl t Vshn
bfr bgnnng th crtn, and whch thrfr mst hv cntnd
smthng in th shp of prctcl hnts t yng archtcts, ths
Vds wr lyng at th bttm of th wtrs; s Vshn bcm
incrnt in a whl, and sndng dwn in hm t th uttrmst dpths,
rscd th scrd vlms. Ws nt ths Vshn a whlmn, thn? evn
as a mn wh rds a hrs is clld a hrsmn?

Prss, St. Grg, Hrcls, Jnh, and Vshn! thr’s a
mmbr-rll fr y! Wht clb bt th whlmn’s cn hd off lk
tht?


CHPTR 83. Jnh Hstrclly Rgrdd.

Rfrnc ws md t th hstrcl stry of Jnh and th whl in
th prcdng chptr. Nw sm Nntcktrs rthr dstrst ths
hstrcl stry of Jnh and th whl. Bt thn thr wr sm
scptcl Grks and Rmns, wh, stndng ot frm th orthdx pgns
of thr tms, eqlly dbtd th stry of Hrcls and th whl,
and Arn and th dlphn; and yt thr dbtng ths trdtns dd
nt mk ths trdtns on wht th lss fcts, fr all tht.

On old Sg-Hrbr whlmn’s chf rsn fr qstnng th Hbrw
stry ws ths:—H hd on of ths qnt old-fshnd Bbls,
embllshd wth crs, unscntfc plts; on of whch rprsntd
Jnh’s whl wth tw spts in hs hd—a pclrty only tr wth
rspct t a spcs of th Lvthn (th Rght Whl, and th
vrts of tht ordr), cncrnng whch th fshrmn hv ths
syng, “A pnny rll wld chk hm”; hs swllw is s vry smll.
Bt, t ths, Bshp Jbb’s antcptv answr is rdy. It is nt
ncssry, hnts th Bshp, tht w cnsdr Jnh as tmbd in th
whl’s blly, bt as tmprrly ldgd in sm prt of hs mth. And
ths sms rsnbl engh in th gd Bshp. Fr trly, th Rght
Whl’s mth wld accmmdt a cpl of whst-tbls, and
cmfrtbly st all th plyrs. Pssbly, t, Jnh mght hv
enscncd hmslf in a hllw tth; bt, on scnd thghts, th Rght
Whl is tthlss.

Anthr rsn whch Sg-Hrbr (h wnt by tht nm) urgd fr hs
wnt of fth in ths mttr of th prpht, ws smthng obscrly in
rfrnc t hs incrcrtd bdy and th whl’s gstrc jcs. Bt
ths objctn lkws flls t th grnd, bcs a Grmn exgtst
sppss tht Jnh mst hv tkn rfg in th fltng bdy of a
_dd_ whl—evn as th Frnch sldrs in th Rssn cmpgn trnd
thr dd hrss int tnts, and crwld int thm. Bsds, it hs
bn dvnd by othr cntnntl cmmnttrs, tht whn Jnh ws
thrwn ovrbrd frm th Jpp shp, h strghtwy effctd hs
escp t anthr vssl nr by, sm vssl wth a whl fr a
fgr-hd; and, I wld add, pssbly clld “Th Whl,” as sm
crft ar nwdys chrstnd th “Shrk,” th “Gll,” th “Egl.” Nr
hv thr bn wntng lrnd exgtsts wh hv opnd tht th
whl mntnd in th bk of Jnh mrly mnt a lf-prsrvr—an
infltd bg of wnd—whch th endngrd prpht swm t, and s ws
svd frm a wtry dm. Pr Sg-Hrbr, thrfr, sms wrstd all
rnd. Bt h hd stll anthr rsn fr hs wnt of fth. It ws
ths, if I rmmbr rght: Jnh ws swllwd by th whl in th
Mdtrrnn S, and aftr thr dys h ws vmtd up smwhr
wthn thr dys’ jrny of Nnvh, a cty on th Tgrs, vry mch
mr thn thr dys’ jrny acrss frm th nrst pnt of th
Mdtrrnn cst. Hw is tht?

Bt ws thr n othr wy fr th whl t lnd th prpht wthn
tht shrt dstnc of Nnvh? Ys. H mght hv crrd hm rnd by
th wy of th Cp of Gd Hp. Bt nt t spk of th pssg
thrgh th whl lngth of th Mdtrrnn, and anthr pssg up
th Prsn Glf and Rd S, sch a sppstn wld invlv th
cmplt crcmnvgtn of all Afrc in thr dys, nt t spk of
th Tgrs wtrs, nr th st of Nnvh, bng t shllw fr any
whl t swm in. Bsds, ths id of Jnh’s wthrng th Cp of
Gd Hp at s erly a dy wld wrst th hnr of th dscvry of
tht grt hdlnd frm Brthlmw Dz, its rptd dscvrr, and
s mk mdrn hstry a lr.

Bt all ths flsh argmnts of old Sg-Hrbr only evncd hs
flsh prd of rsn—a thng stll mr rprhnsbl in hm, sng
tht h hd bt lttl lrnng excpt wht h hd pckd up frm th
sn and th s. I sy it only shws hs flsh, imps prd, and
abmnbl, dvlsh rblln agnst th rvrnd clrgy. Fr by a
Prtgs Cthlc prst, ths vry id of Jnh’s gng t Nnvh
v th Cp of Gd Hp ws advncd as a sgnl mgnfctn of th
gnrl mrcl. And s it ws. Bsds, t ths dy, th hghly
enlghtnd Trks dvtly blv in th hstrcl stry of Jnh.
And sm thr cntrs ag, an Englsh trvllr in old Hrrs’s
Vygs, spks of a Trksh Msq blt in hnr of Jnh, in whch
Msq ws a mrcls lmp tht brnt wtht any ol.


CHPTR 84. Ptchplng.

T mk thm rn esly and swftly, th axls of crrgs ar
anntd; and fr mch th sm prps, sm whlrs prfrm an
anlgs oprtn upn thr bt; thy grs th bttm. Nr is it
t b dbtd tht as sch a prcdr cn d n hrm, it my pssbly
b of n cntmptbl advntg; cnsdrng tht ol and wtr ar
hstl; tht ol is a sldng thng, and tht th objct in vw is t
mk th bt sld brvly. Qqg blvd strngly in anntng
hs bt, and on mrnng nt lng aftr th Grmn shp Jngfr
dspprd, tk mr thn cstmry pns in tht occptn;
crwlng undr its bttm, whr it hng ovr th sd, and rbbng in
th unctsnss as thgh dlgntly skng t insr a crp of hr
frm th crft’s bld kl. H smd t b wrkng in obdnc t
sm prtclr prsntmnt. Nr dd it rmn unwrrntd by th
evnt.

Twrds nn whls wr rsd; bt s sn as th shp sld dwn t
thm, thy trnd and fld wth swft prcptncy; a dsrdrd
flght, as of Clptr’s brgs frm Actm.

Nvrthlss, th bts prsd, and Stbb’s ws frmst. By grt
exrtn, Tshtg at lst sccdd in plntng on irn; bt th
strckn whl, wtht at all sndng, stll cntnd hs hrzntl
flght, wth addd fltnss. Sch unntrmttd strnngs upn th
plntd irn mst snr or ltr invtbly extrct it. It bcm
imprtv t lnc th flyng whl, or b cntnt t ls hm. Bt t
hl th bt up t hs flnk ws impssbl, h swm s fst and
frs. Wht thn rmnd?

Of all th wndrs dvcs and dxtrts, th slghts of hnd and
cntlss sbtlts, t whch th vtrn whlmn is s oftn frcd,
nn excd tht fn mnœuvr wth th lnc clld ptchplng. Smll
swrd, or brd swrd, in all its exrcss bsts nthng lk it. It
is only indspnsbl wth an invtrt rnnng whl; its grnd fct
and ftr is th wndrfl dstnc t whch th lng lnc is
accrtly drtd frm a vlntly rckng, jrkng bt, undr extrm
hdwy. Stl and wd incldd, th entr spr is sm tn or
twlv ft in lngth; th stff is mch slghtr thn tht of th
hrpn, and als of a lghtr mtrl—pn. It is frnshd wth a
smll rp clld a wrp, of cnsdrbl lngth, by whch it cn b
hld bck t th hnd aftr drtng.

Bt bfr gng frthr, it is imprtnt t mntn hr, tht thgh
th hrpn my b ptchpld in th sm wy wth th lnc, yt it is
sldm dn; and whn dn, is stll lss frqntly sccssfl, on
accnt of th grtr wght and infrr lngth of th hrpn as
cmprd wth th lnc, whch in effct bcm srs drwbcks. As a
gnrl thng, thrfr, y mst frst gt fst t a whl, bfr
any ptchplng cms int ply.

Lk nw at Stbb; a mn wh frm hs hmrs, dlbrt clnss and
eqnmty in th drst emrgncs, ws spclly qlfd t excl
in ptchplng. Lk at hm; h stnds uprght in th tssd bw of th
flyng bt; wrpt in flcy fm, th twng whl is frty ft
ahd. Hndlng th lng lnc lghtly, glncng twc or thrc alng
its lngth t s if it b exctly strght, Stbb whstlngly gthrs
up th cl of th wrp in on hnd, s as t scr its fr end in
hs grsp, lvng th rst unbstrctd. Thn hldng th lnc fll
bfr hs wstbnd’s mddl, h lvls it at th whl; whn,
cvrng hm wth it, h stdly dprsss th btt-end in hs hnd,
thrby elvtng th pnt tll th wpn stnds frly blncd upn
hs plm, fftn ft in th ar. H mnds y smwht of a jgglr,
blncng a lng stff on hs chn. Nxt mmnt wth a rpd, nmlss
impls, in a sprb lfty arch th brght stl spns th fmng
dstnc, and qvrs in th lf spt of th whl. Instd of
sprklng wtr, h nw spts rd bld.

“Tht drv th spgt ot of hm!” crd Stbb. “’Ts Jly’s immrtl
Frth; all fntns mst rn wn tdy! Wld nw, it wr old
Orlns whsky, or old Oh, or unspkbl old Mnnghl! Thn,
Tshtg, ld, I’d hv y hld a cnkn t th jt, and w’d drnk
rnd it! Y, vrly, hrts alv, w’d brw chc pnch in th
sprd of hs spt-hl thr, and frm tht lv pnch-bwl qff th
lvng stff.”

Agn and agn t sch gmsm tlk, th dxtrs drt is rptd,
th spr rtrnng t its mstr lk a gryhnd hld in sklfl
lsh. Th agnzd whl gs int hs flrry; th tw-ln is
slcknd, and th ptchplr drppng astrn, flds hs hnds, and
mtly wtchs th mnstr d.


CHPTR 85. Th Fntn.

Tht fr sx thsnd yrs—and n on knws hw mny mllns of ags
bfr—th grt whls shld hv bn sptng all ovr th s, and
sprnklng and mstfyng th grdns of th dp, as wth s mny
sprnklng or mstfyng pts; and tht fr sm cntrs bck,
thsnds of hntrs shld hv bn cls by th fntn of th
whl, wtchng ths sprnklngs and sptngs—tht all ths shld
b, and yt, tht dwn t ths blssd mnt (fftn and a qrtr
mnts pst on o’clck P.M. of ths sxtnth dy of Dcmbr, A.D.
1851), it shld stll rmn a prblm, whthr ths sptngs ar,
aftr all, rlly wtr, or nthng bt vpr—ths is srly a
ntwrthy thng.

Lt us, thn, lk at ths mttr, alng wth sm intrstng itms
cntngnt. Evry on knws tht by th pclr cnnng of thr
glls, th fnny trbs in gnrl brth th ar whch at all tms
is cmbnd wth th elmnt in whch thy swm; hnc, a hrrng or a
cd mght lv a cntry, and nvr onc rs its hd abv th
srfc. Bt owng t hs mrkd intrnl strctr whch gvs hm
rglr lngs, lk a hmn bng’s, th whl cn only lv by
inhlng th dsnggd ar in th opn atmsphr. Whrfr th
ncssty fr hs prdcl vsts t th uppr wrld. Bt h cnnt
in any dgr brth thrgh hs mth, fr, in hs ordnry atttd,
th Sprm Whl’s mth is brd at lst eght ft bnth th
srfc; and wht is stll mr, hs wndpp hs n cnnxn wth hs
mth. N, h brths thrgh hs sprcl aln; and ths is on th
tp of hs hd.

If I sy, tht in any crtr brthng is only a fnctn
indspnsbl t vtlty, insmch as it wthdrws frm th ar a
crtn elmnt, whch bng sbsqntly brght int cntct wth th
bld imprts t th bld its vvfyng prncpl, I d nt thnk I
shll err; thgh I my pssbly us sm sprfls scntfc wrds.
Assm it, and it fllws tht if all th bld in a mn cld b
artd wth on brth, h mght thn sl up hs nstrls and nt
ftch anthr fr a cnsdrbl tm. Tht is t sy, h wld thn
lv wtht brthng. Anmls as it my sm, ths is prcsly th
cs wth th whl, wh systmtclly lvs, by intrvls, hs fll
hr and mr (whn at th bttm) wtht drwng a sngl brth, or
s mch as in any wy inhlng a prtcl of ar; fr, rmmbr, h hs
n glls. Hw is ths? Btwn hs rbs and on ech sd of hs spn
h is sppld wth a rmrkbl invlvd Crtn lbyrnth of
vrmcll-lk vssls, whch vssls, whn h qts th srfc, ar
cmpltly dstndd wth oxygntd bld. S tht fr an hr or
mr, a thsnd fthms in th s, h crrs a srpls stck of
vtlty in hm, jst as th cml crssng th wtrlss dsrt
crrs a srpls spply of drnk fr ftr us in its fr
spplmntry stmchs. Th antmcl fct of ths lbyrnth is
indsptbl; and tht th sppstn fndd upn it is rsnbl
and tr, sms th mr cgnt t m, whn I cnsdr th othrws
inxplcbl obstncy of tht lvthn in _hvng hs sptngs ot_,
as th fshrmn phrs it. Ths is wht I mn. If unmlstd, upn
rsng t th srfc, th Sprm Whl wll cntn thr fr a prd
of tm exctly unfrm wth all hs othr unmlstd rsngs. Sy h
stys elvn mnts, and jts svnty tms, tht is, rsprs svnty
brths; thn whnvr h rss agn, h wll b sr t hv hs
svnty brths ovr agn, t a mnt. Nw, if aftr h ftchs a fw
brths y alrm hm, s tht h snds, h wll b alwys ddgng up
agn t mk gd hs rglr allwnc of ar. And nt tll ths
svnty brths ar tld, wll h fnlly g dwn t sty ot hs fll
trm blw. Rmrk, hwvr, tht in dffrnt indvdls ths rts
ar dffrnt; bt in any on thy ar alk. Nw, why shld th whl
ths insst upn hvng hs sptngs ot, unlss it b t rplnsh
hs rsrvr of ar, er dscndng fr gd? Hw obvs is it, t,
tht ths ncssty fr th whl’s rsng expss hm t all th ftl
hzrds of th chs. Fr nt by hk or by nt cld ths vst
lvthn b cght, whn slng a thsnd fthms bnth th
snlght. Nt s mch thy skll, thn, O hntr, as th grt
ncssts tht strk th vctry t th!

In mn, brthng is incssntly gng on—on brth only srvng fr
tw or thr plstns; s tht whtvr othr bsnss h hs t
attnd t, wkng or slpng, brth h mst, or d h wll. Bt th
Sprm Whl only brths abt on svnth or Sndy of hs tm.

It hs bn sd tht th whl only brths thrgh hs spt-hl;
if it cld trthflly b addd tht hs spts ar mxd wth wtr,
thn I opn w shld b frnshd wth th rsn why hs sns of
smll sms obltrtd in hm; fr th only thng abt hm tht at
all answrs t hs ns is tht idntcl spt-hl; and bng s
clggd wth tw elmnts, it cld nt b expctd t hv th pwr
of smllng. Bt owng t th mystry of th spt—whthr it b wtr
or whthr it b vpr—n abslt crtnty cn as yt b arrvd at
on ths hd. Sr it is, nvrthlss, tht th Sprm Whl hs n
prpr olfctrs. Bt wht ds h wnt of thm? N rss, n
vlts, n Clgn-wtr in th s.

Frthrmr, as hs wndpp slly opns int th tb of hs sptng
cnl, and as tht lng cnl—lk th grnd Er Cnl—is frnshd
wth a srt of lcks (tht opn and sht) fr th dwnwrd rtntn of
ar or th upwrd exclsn of wtr, thrfr th whl hs n vc;
unlss y inslt hm by syng, tht whn h s strngly rmbls, h
tlks thrgh hs ns. Bt thn agn, wht hs th whl t sy?
Sldm hv I knwn any prfnd bng tht hd anythng t sy t ths
wrld, unlss frcd t stmmr ot smthng by wy of gttng a
lvng. Oh! hppy tht th wrld is sch an excllnt lstnr!

Nw, th sptng cnl of th Sprm Whl, chfly intndd as it is
fr th cnvync of ar, and fr svrl ft ld alng,
hrzntlly, jst bnth th uppr srfc of hs hd, and a lttl
t on sd; ths crs cnl is vry mch lk a gs-pp ld dwn
in a cty on on sd of a strt. Bt th qstn rtrns whthr
ths gs-pp is als a wtr-pp; in othr wrds, whthr th spt
of th Sprm Whl is th mr vpr of th exhld brth, or whthr
tht exhld brth is mxd wth wtr tkn in at th mth, and
dschrgd thrgh th sprcl. It is crtn tht th mth
indrctly cmmncts wth th sptng cnl; bt it cnnt b
prvd tht ths is fr th prps of dschrgng wtr thrgh th
sprcl. Bcs th grtst ncssty fr s dng wld sm t b,
whn in fdng h accdntlly tks in wtr. Bt th Sprm Whl’s
fd is fr bnth th srfc, and thr h cnnt spt evn if h
wld. Bsds, if y rgrd hm vry clsly, and tm hm wth yr
wtch, y wll fnd tht whn unmlstd, thr is an undvtng
rhym btwn th prds of hs jts and th ordnry prds of
rsprtn.

Bt why pstr on wth all ths rsnng on th sbjct? Spk ot!
Y hv sn hm spt; thn dclr wht th spt is; cn y nt
tll wtr frm ar? My dr sr, in ths wrld it is nt s esy t
sttl ths pln thngs. I hv evr fnd yr pln thngs th
knttst of all. And as fr ths whl spt, y mght almst stnd
in it, and yt b undcdd as t wht it is prcsly.

Th cntrl bdy of it is hddn in th snwy sprklng mst envlpng
it; and hw cn y crtnly tll whthr any wtr flls frm it,
whn, alwys, whn y ar cls engh t a whl t gt a cls vw
of hs spt, h is in a prdgs cmmtn, th wtr cscdng all
arnd hm. And if at sch tms y shld thnk tht y rlly
prcvd drps of mstr in th spt, hw d y knw tht thy ar
nt mrly cndnsd frm its vpr; or hw d y knw tht thy ar
nt ths idntcl drps sprfclly ldgd in th spt-hl
fssr, whch is cntrsnk int th smmt of th whl’s hd? Fr
evn whn trnqlly swmmng thrgh th md-dy s in a clm, wth
hs elvtd hmp sn-drd as a drmdry’s in th dsrt; evn thn,
th whl alwys crrs a smll bsn of wtr on hs hd, as undr a
blzng sn y wll smtms s a cvty in a rck flld up wth
rn.

Nr is it at all prdnt fr th hntr t b ovr crs tchng th
prcs ntr of th whl spt. It wll nt d fr hm t b prng
int it, and pttng hs fc in it. Y cnnt g wth yr ptchr t
ths fntn and fll it, and brng it awy. Fr evn whn cmng int
slght cntct wth th otr, vpry shrds of th jt, whch wll
oftn hppn, yr skn wll fvrshly smrt, frm th acrdnss of
th thng s tchng it. And I knw on, wh cmng int stll clsr
cntct wth th spt, whthr wth sm scntfc objct in vw, or
othrws, I cnnt sy, th skn pld off frm hs chk and arm.
Whrfr, amng whlmn, th spt is dmd psns; thy try t
evd it. Anthr thng; I hv hrd it sd, and I d nt mch dbt
it, tht if th jt is frly sptd int yr eys, it wll blnd
y. Th wsst thng th invstgtr cn d thn, it sms t m, is
t lt ths ddly spt aln.

Stll, w cn hypthsz, evn if w cnnt prv and estblsh. My
hypthss is ths: tht th spt is nthng bt mst. And bsds
othr rsns, t ths cnclsn I am implld, by cnsdrtns
tchng th grt inhrnt dgnty and sblmty of th Sprm Whl; I
accnt hm n cmmn, shllw bng, insmch as it is an undsptd
fct tht h is nvr fnd on sndngs, or nr shrs; all othr
whls smtms ar. H is bth pndrs and prfnd. And I am
cnvncd tht frm th hds of all pndrs prfnd bngs, sch as
Plt, Pyrrh, th Dvl, Jptr, Dnt, and s on, thr alwys gs
up a crtn sm-vsbl stm, whl in th act of thnkng dp
thghts. Whl cmpsng a lttl trts on Etrnty, I hd th
crsty t plc a mrrr bfr m; and er lng sw rflctd
thr, a crs invlvd wrmng and undltn in th atmsphr ovr
my hd. Th invrbl mstr of my hr, whl plngd in dp
thght, aftr sx cps of ht t in my thn shngld attc, of an
Agst nn; ths sms an addtnl argmnt fr th abv
sppstn.

And hw nbly it rss or cnct of th mghty, msty mnstr, t
bhld hm slmnly slng thrgh a clm trpcl s; hs vst, mld
hd ovrhng by a cnpy of vpr, engndrd by hs incmmncbl
cntmpltns, and tht vpr—as y wll smtms s it—glrfd
by a rnbw, as if Hvn itslf hd pt its sl upn hs thghts.
Fr, d’y s, rnbws d nt vst th clr ar; thy only irrdt
vpr. And s, thrgh all th thck msts of th dm dbts in my
mnd, dvn inttns nw and thn sht, enkndlng my fg wth a
hvnly ry. And fr ths I thnk Gd; fr all hv dbts; mny dny;
bt dbts or dnls, fw alng wth thm, hv inttns. Dbts of
all thngs erthly, and inttns of sm thngs hvnly; ths
cmbntn mks nthr blvr nr infdl, bt mks a mn wh
rgrds thm bth wth eql ey.


CHPTR 86. Th Tl.

Othr pts hv wrbld th prss of th sft ey of th antlp,
and th lvly plmg of th brd tht nvr alghts; lss clstl,
I clbrt a tl.

Rcknng th lrgst szd Sprm Whl’s tl t bgn at tht pnt
of th trnk whr it tprs t abt th grth of a mn, it cmprss
upn its uppr srfc aln, an ar of at lst ffty sqr ft.
Th cmpct rnd bdy of its rt expnds int tw brd, frm, flt
plms or flks, grdlly shlng awy t lss thn an inch in
thcknss. At th crtch or jnctn, ths flks slghtly ovrlp,
thn sdwys rcd frm ech othr lk wngs, lvng a wd vcncy
btwn. In n lvng thng ar th lns of bty mr exqstly
dfnd thn in th crscntc brdrs of ths flks. At its utmst
expnsn in th fll grwn whl, th tl wll cnsdrbly excd
twnty ft acrss.

Th entr mmbr sms a dns wbbd bd of wldd snws; bt ct
int it, and y fnd tht thr dstnct strt cmps it:—uppr,
mddl, and lwr. Th fbrs in th uppr and lwr lyrs, ar lng
and hrzntl; ths of th mddl on, vry shrt, and rnnng
crssws btwn th otsd lyrs. Ths trn strctr, as mch as
anythng els, imprts pwr t th tl. T th stdnt of old Rmn
wlls, th mddl lyr wll frnsh a crs prlll t th thn
crs of tls alwys altrntng wth th stn in ths wndrfl
rlcs of th antq, and whch undbtdly cntrbt s mch t th
grt strngth of th msnry.

Bt as if ths vst lcl pwr in th tndns tl wr nt engh,
th whl blk of th lvthn is knt ovr wth a wrp and wf of
msclr fbrs and flmnts, whch pssng on ethr sd th lns
and rnnng dwn int th flks, insnsbly blnd wth thm, and
lrgly cntrbt t thr mght; s tht in th tl th cnflnt
msrlss frc of th whl whl sms cncntrtd t a pnt.
Cld annhltn occr t mttr, ths wr th thng t d it.

Nr ds ths—its amzng strngth, at all tnd t crppl th grcfl
flxn of its mtns; whr infntlnss of es undlts thrgh a
Ttnsm of pwr. On th cntrry, ths mtns drv thr mst
appllng bty frm it. Rl strngth nvr imprs bty or
hrmny, bt it oftn bstws it; and in evrythng impsngly
btfl, strngth hs mch t d wth th mgc. Tk awy th td
tndns tht all ovr sm brstng frm th mrbl in th crvd
Hrcls, and its chrm wld b gn. As dvt Eckrmn lftd th
lnn sht frm th nkd crps of Gth, h ws ovrwhlmd wth
th mssv chst of th mn, tht smd as a Rmn trmphl arch.
Whn Angl pnts evn Gd th Fthr in hmn frm, mrk wht
rbstnss is thr. And whtvr thy my rvl of th dvn lv in
th Sn, th sft, crld, hrmphrdtcl Itln pctrs, in whch
hs id hs bn mst sccssflly embdd; ths pctrs, s
dsttt as thy ar of all brwnnss, hnt nthng of any pwr, bt
th mr ngtv, fmnn on of sbmssn and endrnc, whch on
all hnds it is cncdd, frm th pclr prctcl vrts of hs
tchngs.

Sch is th sbtl elstcty of th orgn I trt of, tht whthr
wldd in sprt, or in ernst, or in angr, whtvr b th md it
b in, its flxns ar invrbly mrkd by excdng grc. Thrn
n fry’s arm cn trnscnd it.

Fv grt mtns ar pclr t it. Frst, whn usd as a fn fr
prgrssn; Scnd, whn usd as a mc in bttl; Thrd, in swpng;
Frth, in lbtlng; Ffth, in pkng flks.

Frst: Bng hrzntl in its pstn, th Lvthn’s tl acts in a
dffrnt mnnr frm th tls of all othr s crtrs. It nvr
wrggls. In mn or fsh, wrgglng is a sgn of infrrty. T th
whl, hs tl is th sl mns of prplsn. Scrll-ws cld
frwrds bnth th bdy, and thn rpdly sprng bckwrds, it is
ths whch gvs tht snglr drtng, lpng mtn t th mnstr
whn frsly swmmng. Hs sd-fns only srv t str by.

Scnd: It is a lttl sgnfcnt, tht whl on sprm whl only
fghts anthr sprm whl wth hs hd and jw, nvrthlss, in hs
cnflcts wth mn, h chfly and cntmptsly uss hs tl. In
strkng at a bt, h swftly crvs awy hs flks frm it, and th
blw is only inflctd by th rcl. If it b md in th unbstrctd
ar, espclly if it dscnd t its mrk, th strk is thn smply
irrsstbl. N rbs of mn or bt cn wthstnd it. Yr only
slvtn ls in eldng it; bt if it cms sdwys thrgh th
oppsng wtr, thn prtly owng t th lght byncy of th
whl-bt, and th elstcty of its mtrls, a crckd rb or a
dshd plnk or tw, a srt of sttch in th sd, is gnrlly th
mst srs rslt. Ths sbmrgd sd blws ar s oftn rcvd
in th fshry, tht thy ar accntd mr chld’s ply. Sm on
strps off a frck, and th hl is stppd.

Thrd: I cnnt dmnstrt it, bt it sms t m, tht in th whl
th sns of tch is cncntrtd in th tl; fr in ths rspct
thr is a dlccy in it only eqlld by th dntnss of th
elphnt’s trnk. Ths dlccy is chfly evncd in th actn of
swpng, whn in mdnly gntlnss th whl wth a crtn sft
slwnss mvs hs immns flks frm sd t sd upn th srfc of
th s; and if h fl bt a slr’s whskr, w t tht slr,
whskrs and all. Wht tndrnss thr is in tht prlmnry tch!
Hd ths tl any prhnsl pwr, I shld strghtwy bthnk m of
Drmnds’ elphnt tht s frqntd th flwr-mrkt, and wth lw
slttns prsntd nsgys t dmsls, and thn crssd thr
zns. On mr accnts thn on, a pty it is tht th whl ds nt
pssss ths prhnsl vrt in hs tl; fr I hv hrd of yt
anthr elphnt, tht whn wndd in th fght, crvd rnd hs
trnk and extrctd th drt.

Frth: Stlng unwrs upn th whl in th fncd scrty of th
mddl of sltry ss, y fnd hm unbnt frm th vst crplnc
of hs dgnty, and kttn-lk, h plys on th ocn as if it wr a
hrth. Bt stll y s hs pwr in hs ply. Th brd plms of hs
tl ar flrtd hgh int th ar; thn smtng th srfc, th
thndrs cncssn rsnds fr mls. Y wld almst thnk a
grt gn hd bn dschrgd; and if y ntcd th lght wrth of
vpr frm th sprcl at hs othr extrmty, y wld thnk tht
tht ws th smk frm th tch-hl.

Ffth: As in th ordnry fltng pstr of th lvthn th flks
l cnsdrbly blw th lvl of hs bck, thy ar thn cmpltly
ot of sght bnth th srfc; bt whn h is abt t plng int
th dps, hs entr flks wth at lst thrty ft of hs bdy ar
tssd erct in th ar, and s rmn vbrtng a mmnt, tll thy
dwnwrds sht ot of vw. Excptng th sblm _brch_—smwhr
els t b dscrbd—ths pkng of th whl’s flks is prhps th
grndst sght t b sn in all anmtd ntr. Ot of th bttmlss
prfndts th ggntc tl sms spsmdclly sntchng at th
hghst hvn. S in drms, hv I sn mjstc Stn thrstng
frth hs trmntd clssl clw frm th flm Bltc of Hll. Bt in
gzng at sch scns, it is all in all wht md y ar in; if in th
Dntn, th dvls wll occr t y; if in tht of Ish, th
archngls. Stndng at th mst-hd of my shp drng a snrs tht
crmsnd sky and s, I onc sw a lrg hrd of whls in th est,
all hdng twrds th sn, and fr a mmnt vbrtng in cncrt wth
pkd flks. As it smd t m at th tm, sch a grnd embdmnt
of adrtn of th gds ws nvr bhld, evn in Prs, th hm of
th fr wrshpprs. As Ptlmy Phlptr tstfd of th Afrcn
elphnt, I thn tstfd of th whl, prnncng hm th mst
dvt of all bngs. Fr accrdng t Kng Jb, th mltry
elphnts of antqty oftn hld th mrnng wth thr trnks
uplftd in th prfndst slnc.

Th chnc cmprsn in ths chptr, btwn th whl and th
elphnt, s fr as sm aspcts of th tl of th on and th trnk
of th othr ar cncrnd, shld nt tnd t plc ths tw oppst
orgns on an eqlty, mch lss th crtrs t whch thy
rspctvly blng. Fr as th mghtst elphnt is bt a trrr t
Lvthn, s, cmprd wth Lvthn’s tl, hs trnk is bt th
stlk of a lly. Th mst drfl blw frm th elphnt’s trnk wr
as th plyfl tp of a fn, cmprd wth th msrlss crsh and
crsh of th sprm whl’s pndrs flks, whch in rptd
instncs hv on aftr th othr hrld entr bts wth all thr
ors and crws int th ar, vry mch as an Indn jgglr tsss hs
blls.*

*Thgh all cmprsn in th wy of gnrl blk btwn th whl and
th elphnt is prpstrs, insmch as in tht prtclr th
elphnt stnds in mch th sm rspct t th whl tht a dg ds
t th elphnt; nvrthlss, thr ar nt wntng sm pnts of
crs smltd; amng ths is th spt. It is wll knwn tht th
elphnt wll oftn drw up wtr or dst in hs trnk, and thn
elvtng it, jt it frth in a strm.

Th mr I cnsdr ths mghty tl, th mr d I dplr my
inblty t exprss it. At tms thr ar gstrs in it, whch,
thgh thy wld wll grc th hnd of mn, rmn whlly
inxplcbl. In an extnsv hrd, s rmrkbl, occsnlly, ar
ths mystc gstrs, tht I hv hrd hntrs wh hv dclrd thm
akn t Fr-Msn sgns and symbls; tht th whl, indd, by ths
mthds intllgntly cnvrsd wth th wrld. Nr ar thr wntng
othr mtns of th whl in hs gnrl bdy, fll of strngnss,
and unccntbl t hs mst exprncd asslnt. Dssct hm hw I
my, thn, I bt g skn dp; I knw hm nt, and nvr wll. Bt if I
knw nt evn th tl of ths whl, hw undrstnd hs hd? mch
mr, hw cmprhnd hs fc, whn fc h hs nn? Th shlt s my
bck prts, my tl, h sms t sy, bt my fc shll nt b sn.
Bt I cnnt cmpltly mk ot hs bck prts; and hnt wht h wll
abt hs fc, I sy agn h hs n fc.


CHPTR 87. Th Grnd Armd.

Th lng and nrrw pnnsl of Mlcc, extndng sth-estwrd frm
th trrtrs of Brmh, frms th mst sthrly pnt of all As.
In a cntns ln frm tht pnnsl strtch th lng islnds of
Smtr, Jv, Blly, and Tmr; whch, wth mny othrs, frm a vst
ml, or rmprt, lngthws cnnctng As wth Astrl, and
dvdng th lng unbrkn Indn ocn frm th thckly stddd
orntl archplgs. Ths rmprt is prcd by svrl slly-prts
fr th cnvnnc of shps and whls; cnspcs amng whch ar
th strts of Snd and Mlcc. By th strts of Snd, chfly,
vssls bnd t Chn frm th wst, emrg int th Chn ss.

Ths nrrw strts of Snd dvd Smtr frm Jv; and stndng
mdwy in tht vst rmprt of islnds, bttrssd by tht bld grn
prmntry, knwn t smn as Jv Hd; thy nt a lttl crrspnd
t th cntrl gtwy opnng int sm vst wlld empr: and
cnsdrng th inxhstbl wlth of spcs, and slks, and jwls,
and gld, and ivry, wth whch th thsnd islnds of tht orntl
s ar enrchd, it sms a sgnfcnt prvsn of ntr, tht sch
trsrs, by th vry frmtn of th lnd, shld at lst br th
apprnc, hwvr inffctl, of bng grdd frm th all-grspng
wstrn wrld. Th shrs of th Strts of Snd ar unsppld wth
ths dmnrng frtrsss whch grd th entrncs t th
Mdtrrnn, th Bltc, and th Prpnts. Unlk th Dns, ths
Orntls d nt dmnd th obsqs hmg of lwrd tp-sls frm
th endlss prcssn of shps bfr th wnd, whch fr cntrs
pst, by nght and by dy, hv pssd btwn th islnds of Smtr
and Jv, frghtd wth th cstlst crgs of th est. Bt whl
thy frly wv a crmnl lk ths, thy d by n mns rnnc
thr clm t mr sld trbt.

Tm ot of mnd th prtcl prs of th Mlys, lrkng amng th
lw shdd cvs and islts of Smtr, hv slld ot upn th
vssls slng thrgh th strts, frcly dmndng trbt at th
pnt of thr sprs. Thgh by th rptd bldy chstsmnts thy
hv rcvd at th hnds of Erpn crsrs, th adcty of ths
crsrs hs of lt bn smwht rprssd; yt, evn at th prsnt
dy, w occsnlly hr of Englsh and Amrcn vssls, whch, in
ths wtrs, hv bn rmrslssly brdd and pllgd.

Wth a fr, frsh wnd, th Pqd ws nw drwng ngh t ths
strts; Ahb prpsng t pss thrgh thm int th Jvn s, and
thnc, crsng nrthwrds, ovr wtrs knwn t b frqntd hr
and thr by th Sprm Whl, swp inshr by th Phlppn Islnds,
and gn th fr cst of Jpn, in tm fr th grt whlng ssn
thr. By ths mns, th crcmnvgtng Pqd wld swp almst
all th knwn Sprm Whl crsng grnds of th wrld, prvs t
dscndng upn th Ln in th Pcfc; whr Ahb, thgh evrywhr
els fld in hs prst, frmly cntd upn gvng bttl t Mby
Dck, in th s h ws mst knwn t frqnt; and at a ssn whn h
mght mst rsnbly b prsmd t b hntng it.

Bt hw nw? in ths znd qst, ds Ahb tch n lnd? ds hs
crw drnk ar? Srly, h wll stp fr wtr. Ny. Fr a lng tm,
nw, th crcs-rnnng sn hs rcd wthn hs fry rng, and nds
n sstnnc bt wht’s in hmslf. S Ahb. Mrk ths, t, in th
whlr. Whl othr hlls ar ldd dwn wth aln stff, t b
trnsfrrd t frgn whrvs; th wrld-wndrng whl-shp crrs
n crg bt hrslf and crw, thr wpns and thr wnts. Sh hs a
whl lk’s cntnts bttld in hr ampl hld. Sh is bllstd wth
utlts; nt altgthr wth unsbl pg-ld and kntldg. Sh
crrs yrs’ wtr in hr. Clr old prm Nntckt wtr; whch,
whn thr yrs aflt, th Nntcktr, in th Pcfc, prfrs t
drnk bfr th brcksh fld, bt ystrdy rftd off in csks,
frm th Prvn or Indn strms. Hnc it is, tht, whl othr
shps my hv gn t Chn frm Nw Yrk, and bck agn, tchng at
a scr of prts, th whl-shp, in all tht intrvl, my nt hv
sghtd on grn of sl; hr crw hvng sn n mn bt fltng
smn lk thmslvs. S tht dd y crry thm th nws tht
anthr fld hd cm; thy wld only answr—“Wll, bys, hr’s th
ark!”

Nw, as mny Sprm Whls hd bn cptrd off th wstrn cst of
Jv, in th nr vcnty of th Strts of Snd; indd, as mst of
th grnd, rndbt, ws gnrlly rcgnsd by th fshrmn as an
excllnt spt fr crsng; thrfr, as th Pqd gnd mr and
mr upn Jv Hd, th lk-ots wr rptdly hld, and
admnshd t kp wd awk. Bt thgh th grn plmy clffs of th
lnd sn lmd on th strbrd bw, and wth dlghtd nstrls th
frsh cnnmn ws snffd in th ar, yt nt a sngl jt ws
dscrd. Almst rnncng all thght of fllng in wth any gm
hrbts, th shp hd wll ngh entrd th strts, whn th
cstmry chrng cry ws hrd frm alft, and er lng a spctcl
of snglr mgnfcnc sltd us.

Bt hr b it prmsd, tht owng t th unwrd actvty wth
whch of lt thy hv bn hntd ovr all fr ocns, th Sprm
Whls, instd of almst invrbly slng in smll dtchd
cmpns, as in frmr tms, ar nw frqntly mt wth in extnsv
hrds, smtms embrcng s grt a mlttd, tht it wld almst
sm as if nmrs ntns of thm hd swrn slmn lg and
cvnnt fr mtl assstnc and prtctn. T ths aggrgtn of
th Sprm Whl int sch immns crvns, my b imptd th
crcmstnc tht evn in th bst crsng grnds, y my nw
smtms sl fr wks and mnths tgthr, wtht bng grtd by
a sngl spt; and thn b sddnly sltd by wht smtms sms
thsnds on thsnds.

Brd on bth bws, at th dstnc of sm tw or thr mls, and
frmng a grt smcrcl, embrcng on hlf of th lvl hrzn, a
cntns chn of whl-jts wr up-plyng and sprklng in th
nn-dy ar. Unlk th strght prpndclr twn-jts of th Rght
Whl, whch, dvdng at tp, fll ovr in tw brnchs, lk th
clft drpng bghs of a wllw, th sngl frwrd-slntng spt of
th Sprm Whl prsnts a thck crld bsh of wht mst, cntnlly
rsng and fllng awy t lwrd.

Sn frm th Pqd’s dck, thn, as sh wld rs on a hgh hll of
th s, ths hst of vpry spts, indvdlly crlng up int th
ar, and bhld thrgh a blndng atmsphr of blsh hz, shwd
lk th thsnd chrfl chmnys of sm dns mtrpls, dscrd
of a blmy atmnl mrnng, by sm hrsmn on a hght.

As mrchng arms apprchng an unfrndly dfl in th mntns,
acclrt thr mrch, all egrnss t plc tht prls pssg in
thr rr, and onc mr expnd in cmprtv scrty upn th
pln; evn s dd ths vst flt of whls nw sm hrryng frwrd
thrgh th strts; grdlly cntrctng th wngs of thr
smcrcl, and swmmng on, in on sld, bt stll crscntc cntr.

Crwdng all sl th Pqd prssd aftr thm; th hrpnrs
hndlng thr wpns, and ldly chrng frm th hds of thr yt
sspndd bts. If th wnd only hld, lttl dbt hd thy, tht
chsd thrgh ths Strts of Snd, th vst hst wld only dply
int th Orntl ss t wtnss th cptr of nt a fw of thr
nmbr. And wh cld tll whthr, in tht cngrgtd crvn, Mby
Dck hmslf mght nt tmprrly b swmmng, lk th wrshppd
wht-elphnt in th crntn prcssn of th Sms! S wth
stn-sl pld on stn-sl, w sld alng, drvng ths lvthns
bfr us; whn, of a sddn, th vc of Tshtg ws hrd, ldly
drctng attntn t smthng in or wk.

Crrspndng t th crscnt in or vn, w bhld anthr in or
rr. It smd frmd of dtchd wht vprs, rsng and fllng
smthng lk th spts of th whls; only thy dd nt s
cmpltly cm and g; fr thy cnstntly hvrd, wtht fnlly
dspprng. Lvllng hs glss at ths sght, Ahb qckly rvlvd
in hs pvt-hl, cryng, “Alft thr, and rg whps and bckts t
wt th sls;—Mlys, sr, and aftr us!”

As if t lng lrkng bhnd th hdlnds, tll th Pqd shld
frly hv entrd th strts, ths rsclly Astcs wr nw in
ht prst, t mk up fr thr ovr-cts dly. Bt whn th
swft Pqd, wth a frsh ldng wnd, ws hrslf in ht chs; hw
vry knd of ths twny phlnthrpsts t assst in spdng hr on
t hr own chsn prst,—mr rdng-whps and rwls t hr, tht
thy wr. As wth glss undr arm, Ahb t-and-fr pcd th dck; in
hs frwrd trn bhldng th mnstrs h chsd, and in th aftr on
th bldthrsty prts chsng _hm_; sm sch fncy as th abv
smd hs. And whn h glncd upn th grn wlls of th wtry
dfl in whch th shp ws thn slng, and bthght hm tht
thrgh tht gt ly th rt t hs vngnc, and bhld, hw tht
thrgh tht sm gt h ws nw bth chsng and bng chsd t hs
ddly end; and nt only tht, bt a hrd of rmrslss wld prts
and inhmn athstcl dvls wr infrnlly chrng hm on wth
thr crss;—whn all ths cncts hd pssd thrgh hs brn,
Ahb’s brw ws lft gnt and rbbd, lk th blck snd bch aftr
sm strmy td hs bn gnwng it, wtht bng abl t drg th
frm thng frm its plc.

Bt thghts lk ths trbld vry fw of th rcklss crw; and
whn, aftr stdly drppng and drppng th prts astrn, th
Pqd at lst sht by th vvd grn Cckt Pnt on th Smtr
sd, emrgng at lst upn th brd wtrs bynd; thn, th
hrpnrs smd mr t grv tht th swft whls hd bn
gnng upn th shp, thn t rjc tht th shp hd s
vctrsly gnd upn th Mlys. Bt stll drvng on in th wk
of th whls, at lngth thy smd abtng thr spd; grdlly th
shp nrd thm; and th wnd nw dyng awy, wrd ws pssd t
sprng t th bts. Bt n snr dd th hrd, by sm prsmd
wndrfl instnct of th Sprm Whl, bcm ntfd of th thr
kls tht wr aftr thm,—thgh as yt a ml in thr rr,—thn
thy rlld agn, and frmng in cls rnks and bttlns, s tht
thr spts all lkd lk flshng lns of stckd bynts, mvd
on wth rdbld vlcty.

Strppd t or shrts and drwrs, w sprng t th wht-ash, and
aftr svrl hrs’ pllng wr almst dspsd t rnnc th
chs, whn a gnrl psng cmmtn amng th whls gv anmtng
tkn tht thy wr nw at lst undr th inflnc of tht strng
prplxty of inrt irrsltn, whch, whn th fshrmn prcv it
in th whl, thy sy h is glld. Th cmpct mrtl clmns in
whch thy hd bn hthrt rpdly and stdly swmmng, wr nw
brkn up in on msrlss rt; and lk Kng Prs’ elphnts in
th Indn bttl wth Alxndr, thy smd gng md wth
cnstrntn. In all drctns expndng in vst irrglr crcls,
and amlssly swmmng hthr and ththr, by thr shrt thck
sptngs, thy plnly btryd thr dstrctn of pnc. Ths ws
stll mr strngly evncd by ths of thr nmbr, wh, cmpltly
prlysd as it wr, hlplssly fltd lk wtr-lggd dsmntld
shps on th s. Hd ths Lvthns bn bt a flck of smpl
shp, prsd ovr th pstr by thr frc wlvs, thy cld nt
pssbly hv evncd sch excssv dsmy. Bt ths occsnl
tmdty is chrctrstc of almst all hrdng crtrs. Thgh
bndng tgthr in tns of thsnds, th ln-mnd bffls of th
Wst hv fld bfr a sltry hrsmn. Wtnss, t, all hmn
bngs, hw whn hrdd tgthr in th shpfld of a thtr’s pt,
thy wll, at th slghtst alrm of fr, rsh hltr-skltr fr th
otlts, crwdng, trmplng, jmmng, and rmrslssly dshng ech
othr t dth. Bst, thrfr, wthhld any amzmnt at th
strngly glld whls bfr us, fr thr is n flly of th bsts
of th erth whch is nt infntly otdn by th mdnss of mn.

Thgh mny of th whls, as hs bn sd, wr in vlnt mtn,
yt it is t b obsrvd tht as a whl th hrd nthr advncd nr
rtrtd, bt cllctvly rmnd in on plc. As is cstmry in
ths css, th bts at onc sprtd, ech mkng fr sm on ln
whl on th otskrts of th shl. In abt thr mnts’ tm,
Qqg’s hrpn ws flng; th strckn fsh drtd blndng spry
in or fcs, and thn rnnng awy wth us lk lght, strd
strght fr th hrt of th hrd. Thgh sch a mvmnt on th prt
of th whl strck undr sch crcmstncs, is in n ws
unprcdntd; and indd is almst alwys mr or lss antcptd;
yt ds it prsnt on of th mr prls vcsstds of th
fshry. Fr as th swft mnstr drgs y dpr and dpr int th
frntc shl, y bd ad t crcmspct lf and only exst in a
dlrs thrb.

As, blnd and df, th whl plngd frwrd, as if by shr pwr of
spd t rd hmslf of th irn lch tht hd fstnd t hm; as w
ths tr a wht gsh in th s, on all sds mncd as w flw, by
th crzd crtrs t and fr rshng abt us; or bst bt ws
lk a shp mbbd by ic-isls in a tmpst, and strvng t str
thrgh thr cmplctd chnnls and strts, knwng nt at wht
mmnt it my b lckd in and crshd.

Bt nt a bt dntd, Qqg strd us mnflly; nw shrng off
frm ths mnstr drctly acrss or rt in advnc; nw edgng awy
frm tht, whs clssl flks wr sspndd ovrhd, whl all th
tm, Strbck std up in th bws, lnc in hnd, prckng ot of or
wy whtvr whls h cld rch by shrt drts, fr thr ws n
tm t mk lng ons. Nr wr th orsmn qt idl, thgh thr
wntd dty ws nw altgthr dspnsd wth. Thy chfly attndd t
th shtng prt of th bsnss. “Ot of th wy, Cmmdr!” crd
on, t a grt drmdry tht of a sddn rs bdly t th srfc,
and fr an instnt thrtnd t swmp us. “Hrd dwn wth yr tl,
thr!” crd a scnd t anthr, whch, cls t or gnwl, smd
clmly clng hmslf wth hs own fn-lk extrmty.

All whlbts crry crtn crs cntrvncs, orgnlly invntd
by th Nntckt Indns, clld drggs. Tw thck sqrs of wd of
eql sz ar sttly clnchd tgthr, s tht thy crss ech
othr’s grn at rght angls; a ln of cnsdrbl lngth is thn
attchd t th mddl of ths blck, and th othr end of th ln
bng lpd, it cn in a mmnt b fstnd t a hrpn. It is
chfly amng glld whls tht ths drgg is usd. Fr thn, mr
whls ar cls rnd y thn y cn pssbly chs at on tm. Bt
sprm whls ar nt evry dy encntrd; whl y my, thn, y
mst kll all y cn. And if y cnnt kll thm all at onc, y
mst wng thm, s tht thy cn b aftrwrds klld at yr lsr.
Hnc it is, tht at tms lk ths th drgg, cms int
rqstn. Or bt ws frnshd wth thr of thm. Th frst and
scnd wr sccssflly drtd, and w sw th whls stggrngly
rnnng off, fttrd by th enrms sdlng rsstnc of th twng
drgg. Thy wr crmpd lk mlfctrs wth th chn and bll. Bt
upn flngng th thrd, in th act of tssng ovrbrd th clmsy
wdn blck, it cght undr on of th sts of th bt, and in an
instnt tr it ot and crrd it awy, drppng th orsmn in th
bt’s bttm as th st sld frm undr hm. On bth sds th s
cm in at th wndd plnks, bt w stffd tw or thr drwrs and
shrts in, and s stppd th lks fr th tm.

It hd bn nxt t impssbl t drt ths drggd-hrpns, wr it
nt tht as w advncd int th hrd, or whl’s wy grtly
dmnshd; mrvr, tht as w wnt stll frthr and frthr frm
th crcmfrnc of cmmtn, th drfl dsrdrs smd wnng. S
tht whn at lst th jrkng hrpn drw ot, and th twng whl
sdwys vnshd; thn, wth th tprng frc of hs prtng
mmntm, w gldd btwn tw whls int th innrmst hrt of th
shl, as if frm sm mntn trrnt w hd sld int a srn
vlly lk. Hr th strms in th rrng glns btwn th otrmst
whls, wr hrd bt nt flt. In ths cntrl expns th s
prsntd tht smth stn-lk srfc, clld a slk, prdcd by
th sbtl mstr thrwn off by th whl in hs mr qt mds.
Ys, w wr nw in tht enchntd clm whch thy sy lrks at th
hrt of evry cmmtn. And stll in th dstrctd dstnc w
bhld th tmlts of th otr cncntrc crcls, and sw sccssv
pds of whls, eght or tn in ech, swftly gng rnd and rnd,
lk mltpld spns of hrss in a rng; and s clsly shldr t
shldr, tht a Ttnc crcs-rdr mght esly hv ovr-archd th
mddl ons, and s hv gn rnd on thr bcks. Owng t th
dnsty of th crwd of rpsng whls, mr immdtly srrndng
th embyd axs of th hrd, n pssbl chnc of escp ws at
prsnt affrdd us. W mst wtch fr a brch in th lvng wll tht
hmmd us in; th wll tht hd only admttd us in ordr t sht us
up. Kpng at th cntr of th lk, w wr occsnlly vstd by
smll tm cws and clvs; th wmn and chldrn of ths rtd hst.

Nw, inclsv of th occsnl wd intrvls btwn th rvlvng
otr crcls, and inclsv of th spcs btwn th vrs pds in
any on of ths crcls, th entr ar at ths jnctr, embrcd by
th whl mlttd, mst hv cntnd at lst tw or thr sqr
mls. At any rt—thgh indd sch a tst at sch a tm mght b
dcptv—sptngs mght b dscvrd frm or lw bt tht smd
plyng up almst frm th rm of th hrzn. I mntn ths
crcmstnc, bcs, as if th cws and clvs hd bn prpsly
lckd up in ths innrmst fld; and as if th wd extnt of th hrd
hd hthrt prvntd thm frm lrnng th prcs cs of its
stppng; or, pssbly, bng s yng, unsphstctd, and evry wy
inncnt and inxprncd; hwvr it my hv bn, ths smllr
whls—nw and thn vstng or bclmd bt frm th mrgn of th
lk—evncd a wndrs frlssnss and cnfdnc, or els a stll
bchrmd pnc whch it ws impssbl nt t mrvl at. Lk
hshld dgs thy cm snfflng rnd us, rght up t or gnwls,
and tchng thm; tll it almst smd tht sm spll hd sddnly
dmstctd thm. Qqg pttd thr frhds; Strbck scrtchd
thr bcks wth hs lnc; bt frfl of th cnsqncs, fr th
tm rfrnd frm drtng it.

Bt fr bnth ths wndrs wrld upn th srfc, anthr and stll
strngr wrld mt or eys as w gzd ovr th sd. Fr, sspndd
in ths wtry vlts, fltd th frms of th nrsng mthrs of th
whls, and ths tht by thr enrms grth smd shrtly t bcm
mthrs. Th lk, as I hv hntd, ws t a cnsdrbl dpth
excdngly trnsprnt; and as hmn infnts whl scklng wll
clmly and fxdly gz awy frm th brst, as if ldng tw
dffrnt lvs at th tm; and whl yt drwng mrtl nrshmnt,
b stll sprtlly fstng upn sm unrthly rmnscnc;—evn s
dd th yng of ths whls sm lkng up twrds us, bt nt at
us, as if w wr bt a bt of Glfwd in thr nw-brn sght.
Fltng on thr sds, th mthrs als smd qtly eyng us. On
of ths lttl infnts, tht frm crtn qr tkns smd hrdly a
dy old, mght hv msrd sm frtn ft in lngth, and sm sx
ft in grth. H ws a lttl frsky; thgh as yt hs bdy smd
scrc yt rcvrd frm tht irksm pstn it hd s ltly
occpd in th mtrnl rtcl; whr, tl t hd, and all rdy
fr th fnl sprng, th unbrn whl ls bnt lk a Trtr’s bw.
Th dlct sd-fns, and th plms of hs flks, stll frshly
rtnd th pltd crmpld apprnc of a bby’s ers nwly arrvd
frm frgn prts.

“Ln! ln!” crd Qqg, lkng ovr th gnwl; “hm fst! hm
fst!—Wh ln hm! Wh strck?—Tw whl; on bg, on lttl!”

“Wht als y, mn?” crd Strbck.

“Lk-e hr,” sd Qqg, pntng dwn.

As whn th strckn whl, tht frm th tb hs rld ot hndrds
of fthms of rp; as, aftr dp sndng, h flts up agn, and
shws th slcknd crlng ln byntly rsng and sprllng
twrds th ar; s nw, Strbck sw lng cls of th umblcl crd
of Mdm Lvthn, by whch th yng cb smd stll tthrd t
its dm. Nt sldm in th rpd vcsstds of th chs, ths
ntrl ln, wth th mtrnl end ls, bcms entngld wth th
hmpn on, s tht th cb is thrby trppd. Sm of th sbtlst
scrts of th ss smd dvlgd t us in ths enchntd pnd. W
sw yng Lvthn amrs in th dp.*

*Th sprm whl, as wth all othr spcs of th Lvthn, bt
unlk mst othr fsh, brds indffrntly at all ssns; aftr a
gsttn whch my prbbly b st dwn at nn mnths, prdcng bt
on at a tm; thgh in sm fw knwn instncs gvng brth t an
Es and Jcb:—a cntngncy prvdd fr in scklng by tw tts,
crsly sttd, on on ech sd of th ans; bt th brsts
thmslvs extnd upwrds frm tht. Whn by chnc ths prcs
prts in a nrsng whl ar ct by th hntr’s lnc, th mthr’s
prng mlk and bld rvllngly dsclr th s fr rds. Th mlk
is vry swt and rch; it hs bn tstd by mn; it mght d wll
wth strwbrrs. Whn ovrflwng wth mtl estm, th whls
slt _mr hmnm_.

And ths, thgh srrndd by crcl upn crcl of cnstrntns and
affrghts, dd ths inscrtbl crtrs at th cntr frly and
frlssly indlg in all pcfl cncrnmnts; y, srnly rvlld
in dllnc and dlght. Bt evn s, amd th trndd Atlntc of
my bng, d I myslf stll fr evr cntrlly dsprt in mt clm;
and whl pndrs plnts of unwnng w rvlv rnd m, dp dwn
and dp inlnd thr I stll bth m in etrnl mldnss of jy.

Mnwhl, as w ths ly entrncd, th occsnl sddn frntc
spctcls in th dstnc evncd th actvty of th othr bts,
stll enggd in drggng th whls on th frntr of th hst; or
pssbly crryng on th wr wthn th frst crcl, whr abndnc
of rm and sm cnvnnt rtrts wr affrdd thm. Bt th sght
of th enrgd drggd whls nw and thn blndly drtng t and fr
acrss th crcls, ws nthng t wht at lst mt or eys. It is
smtms th cstm whn fst t a whl mr thn cmmnly pwrfl
and alrt, t sk t hmstrng hm, as it wr, by sndrng or
mmng hs ggntc tl-tndn. It is dn by drtng a shrt-hndld
cttng-spd, t whch is attchd a rp fr hlng it bck agn. A
whl wndd (as w aftrwrds lrnd) in ths prt, bt nt
effctlly, as it smd, hd brkn awy frm th bt, crryng
alng wth hm hlf of th hrpn ln; and in th extrrdnry agny
of th wnd, h ws nw dshng amng th rvlvng crcls lk th
ln mntd dsprd Arnld, at th bttl of Srtg, crryng
dsmy whrvr h wnt.

Bt agnzng as ws th wnd of ths whl, and an appllng
spctcl engh, any wy; yt th pclr hrrr wth whch h smd
t inspr th rst of th hrd, ws owng t a cs whch at frst
th intrvnng dstnc obscrd frm us. Bt at lngth w prcvd
tht by on of th unmgnbl accdnts of th fshry, ths whl
hd bcm entngld in th hrpn-ln tht h twd; h hd als rn
awy wth th cttng-spd in hm; and whl th fr end of th rp
attchd t tht wpn, hd prmnntly cght in th cls of th
hrpn-ln rnd hs tl, th cttng-spd itslf hd wrkd ls
frm hs flsh. S tht trmntd t mdnss, h ws nw chrnng
thrgh th wtr, vlntly fllng wth hs flxbl tl, and
tssng th kn spd abt hm, wndng and mrdrng hs own
cmrds.

Ths trrfc objct smd t rcll th whl hrd frm thr
sttnry frght. Frst, th whls frmng th mrgn of or lk
bgn t crwd a lttl, and tmbl agnst ech othr, as if lftd by
hlf spnt bllws frm afr; thn th lk itslf bgn fntly t
hv and swll; th sbmrn brdl-chmbrs and nrsrs vnshd;
in mr and mr cntrctng orbts th whls in th mr cntrl
crcls bgn t swm in thcknng clstrs. Ys, th lng clm ws
dprtng. A lw advncng hm ws sn hrd; and thn lk t th
tmlts msss of blck-ic whn th grt rvr Hdsn brks up in
Sprng, th entr hst of whls cm tmblng upn thr innr
cntr, as if t pl thmslvs up in on cmmn mntn. Instntly
Strbck and Qqg chngd plcs; Strbck tkng th strn.

“Ors! Ors!” h intnsly whsprd, szng th hlm—“grp yr
ors, and cltch yr sls, nw! My Gd, mn, stnd by! Shv hm off,
y Qqg—th whl thr!—prck hm!—ht hm! Stnd up—stnd up,
and sty s! Sprng, mn—pll, mn; nvr mnd thr bcks—scrp
thm!—scrp awy!”

Th bt ws nw all bt jmmd btwn tw vst blck blks, lvng a
nrrw Drdnlls btwn thr lng lngths. Bt by dsprt
endvr w at lst sht int a tmprry opnng; thn gvng wy
rpdly, and at th sm tm ernstly wtchng fr anthr otlt.
Aftr mny smlr hr-brdth escps, w at lst swftly gldd int
wht hd jst bn on of th otr crcls, bt nw crssd by rndm
whls, all vlntly mkng fr on cntr. Ths lcky slvtn ws
chply prchsd by th lss of Qqg’s ht, wh, whl stndng in
th bws t prck th fgtv whls, hd hs ht tkn cln frm hs
hd by th ar-eddy md by th sddn tssng of a pr of brd
flks cls by.

Rts and dsrdrd as th unvrsl cmmtn nw ws, it sn
rslvd itslf int wht smd a systmtc mvmnt; fr hvng
clmpd tgthr at lst in on dns bdy, thy thn rnwd thr
onwrd flght wth agmntd fltnss. Frthr prst ws uslss;
bt th bts stll lngrd in thr wk t pck up wht drggd
whls mght b drppd astrn, and lkws t scr on whch Flsk
hd klld and wfd. Th wf is a pnnnd pl, tw or thr of
whch ar crrd by evry bt; and whch, whn addtnl gm is at
hnd, ar insrtd uprght int th fltng bdy of a dd whl, bth
t mrk its plc on th s, and als as tkn of prr pssssn,
shld th bts of any othr shp drw nr.

Th rslt of ths lwrng ws smwht illstrtv of tht sgcs
syng in th Fshry,—th mr whls th lss fsh. Of all th
drggd whls only on ws cptrd. Th rst cntrvd t escp fr
th tm, bt only t b tkn, as wll hrftr b sn, by sm
othr crft thn th Pqd.


CHPTR 88. Schls and Schlmstrs.

Th prvs chptr gv accnt of an immns bdy or hrd of Sprm
Whls, and thr ws als thn gvn th prbbl cs indcng ths
vst aggrgtns.

Nw, thgh sch grt bds ar at tms encntrd, yt, as mst
hv bn sn, evn at th prsnt dy, smll dtchd bnds ar
occsnlly obsrvd, embrcng frm twnty t ffty indvdls ech.
Sch bnds ar knwn as schls. Thy gnrlly ar of tw srts; ths
cmpsd almst entrly of fmls, and ths mstrng nn bt yng
vgrs mls, or blls, as thy ar fmlrly dsgntd.

In cvlr attndnc upn th schl of fmls, y invrbly s a
ml of fll grwn mgntd, bt nt old; wh, upn any alrm, evncs
hs gllntry by fllng in th rr and cvrng th flght of hs
lds. In trth, ths gntlmn is a lxrs Ottmn, swmmng abt
ovr th wtry wrld, srrndngly accmpnd by all th slcs and
endrmnts of th hrm. Th cntrst btwn ths Ottmn and hs
cncbns is strkng; bcs, whl h is alwys of th lrgst
lvthnc prprtns, th lds, evn at fll grwth, ar nt mr
thn on-thrd of th blk of an avrg-szd ml. Thy ar
cmprtvly dlct, indd; I dr sy, nt t excd hlf a dzn
yrds rnd th wst. Nvrthlss, it cnnt b dnd, tht upn th
whl thy ar hrdtrly enttld t _en bn pnt_.

It is vry crs t wtch ths hrm and its lrd in thr indlnt
rmblngs. Lk fshnbls, thy ar fr evr on th mv in
lsrly srch of vrty. Y mt thm on th Ln in tm fr th
fll flwr of th Eqtrl fdng ssn, hvng jst rtrnd,
prhps, frm spndng th smmr in th Nrthrn ss, and s chtng
smmr of all unplsnt wrnss and wrmth. By th tm thy hv
lngd up and dwn th prmnd of th Eqtr awhl, thy strt fr
th Orntl wtrs in antcptn of th cl ssn thr, and s
evd th othr excssv tmprtr of th yr.

Whn srnly advncng on on of ths jrnys, if any strng
sspcs sghts ar sn, my lrd whl kps a wry ey on hs
intrstng fmly. Shld any unwrrntbly prt yng Lvthn
cmng tht wy, prsm t drw cnfdntlly cls t on of th
lds, wth wht prdgs fry th Bshw assls hm, and chss
hm awy! Hgh tms, indd, if unprncpld yng rks lk hm ar
t b prmttd t invd th snctty of dmstc blss; thgh d
wht th Bshw wll, h cnnt kp th mst ntrs Lthr ot of
hs bd; fr, als! all fsh bd in cmmn. As ashr, th lds oftn
cs th mst trrbl dls amng thr rvl admrrs; jst s wth
th whls, wh smtms cm t ddly bttl, and all fr lv. Thy
fnc wth thr lng lwr jws, smtms lckng thm tgthr, and
s strvng fr th sprmcy lk elks tht wrrngly intrwv thr
antlrs. Nt a fw ar cptrd hvng th dp scrs of ths
encntrs,—frrwd hds, brkn tth, scllpd fns; and in sm
instncs, wrnchd and dslctd mths.

Bt sppsng th invdr of dmstc blss t btk hmslf awy at
th frst rsh of th hrm’s lrd, thn is it vry dvrtng t wtch
tht lrd. Gntly h insnts hs vst blk amng thm agn and
rvls thr awhl, stll in tntlzng vcnty t yng Lthr,
lk ps Slmn dvtly wrshppng amng hs thsnd cncbns.
Grntng othr whls t b in sght, th fshrmn wll sldm gv
chs t on of ths Grnd Trks; fr ths Grnd Trks ar t lvsh
of thr strngth, and hnc thr unctsnss is smll. As fr th
sns and th dghtrs thy bgt, why, ths sns and dghtrs mst
tk cr of thmslvs; at lst, wth only th mtrnl hlp. Fr
lk crtn othr omnvrs rvng lvrs tht mght b nmd, my
Lrd Whl hs n tst fr th nrsry, hwvr mch fr th bwr;
and s, bng a grt trvllr, h lvs hs annyms bbs all
ovr th wrld; evry bby an extc. In gd tm, nvrthlss, as
th ardr of yth dclns; as yrs and dmps incrs; as
rflctn lnds hr slmn pss; in shrt, as a gnrl lsstd
ovrtks th std Trk; thn a lv of es and vrt spplnts th
lv fr mdns; or Ottmn entrs upn th imptnt, rpntnt,
admntry stg of lf, frswrs, dsbnds th hrm, and grwn t
an exmplry, slky old sl, gs abt all aln amng th mrdns
and prllls syng hs pryrs, and wrnng ech yng Lvthn frm
hs amrs errrs.

Nw, as th hrm of whls is clld by th fshrmn a schl, s is
th lrd and mstr of tht schl tchnclly knwn as th
schlmstr. It is thrfr nt in strct chrctr, hwvr
admrbly strcl, tht aftr gng t schl hmslf, h shld thn
g abrd inclctng nt wht h lrnd thr, bt th flly of it.
Hs ttl, schlmstr, wld vry ntrlly sm drvd frm th
nm bstwd upn th hrm itslf, bt sm hv srmsd tht th
mn wh frst ths enttld ths srt of Ottmn whl, mst hv rd
th mmrs of Vdcq, and infrmd hmslf wht srt of a
cntry-schlmstr tht fms Frnchmn ws in hs yngr dys, and
wht ws th ntr of ths occlt lssns h inclctd int sm of
hs ppls.

Th sm sclddnss and isltn t whch th schlmstr whl
btks hmslf in hs advncng yrs, is tr of all agd Sprm
Whls. Almst unvrslly, a ln whl—as a sltry Lvthn is
clld—prvs an ancnt on. Lk vnrbl mss-brdd Dnl Bn,
h wll hv n on nr hm bt Ntr hrslf; and hr h tks t
wf in th wldrnss of wtrs, and th bst of wvs sh is, thgh
sh kps s mny mdy scrts.

Th schls cmpsng nn bt yng and vgrs mls, prvsly
mntnd, offr a strng cntrst t th hrm schls. Fr whl
ths fml whls ar chrctrstclly tmd, th yng mls, or
frty-brrl-blls, as thy cll thm, ar by fr th mst pgncs
of all Lvthns, and prvrblly th mst dngrs t encntr;
excptng ths wndrs gry-hdd, grzzld whls, smtms mt,
and ths wll fght y lk grm fnds exsprtd by a pnl gt.

Th Frty-brrl-bll schls ar lrgr thn th hrm schls. Lk a
mb of yng cllgns, thy ar fll of fght, fn, and wckdnss,
tmblng rnd th wrld at sch a rcklss, rllckng rt, tht n
prdnt undrwrtr wld insr thm any mr thn h wld a rts
ld at Yl or Hrvrd. Thy sn rlnqsh ths trblnc thgh,
and whn abt thr-frths grwn, brk up, and sprtly g abt
in qst of sttlmnts, tht is, hrms.

Anthr pnt of dffrnc btwn th ml and fml schls is
stll mr chrctrstc of th sxs. Sy y strk a
Frty-brrl-bll—pr dvl! all hs cmrds qt hm. Bt strk a
mmbr of th hrm schl, and hr cmpnns swm arnd hr wth
evry tkn of cncrn, smtms lngrng s nr hr and s lng, as
thmslvs t fll a pry.


CHPTR 89. Fst-Fsh and Ls-Fsh.

Th allsn t th wf and wf-pls in th lst chptr bt on,
ncsstts sm accnt of th lws and rgltns of th whl
fshry, of whch th wf my b dmd th grnd symbl and bdg.

It frqntly hppns tht whn svrl shps ar crsng in cmpny,
a whl my b strck by on vssl, thn escp, and b fnlly klld
and cptrd by anthr vssl; and hrn ar indrctly cmprsd
mny mnr cntngncs, all prtkng of ths on grnd ftr. Fr
exmpl,—aftr a wry and prls chs and cptr of a whl, th
bdy my gt ls frm th shp by rsn of a vlnt strm; and
drftng fr awy t lwrd, b rtkn by a scnd whlr, wh, in a
clm, sngly tws it alngsd, wtht rsk of lf or ln. Ths th
mst vxts and vlnt dspts wld oftn ars btwn th
fshrmn, wr thr nt sm wrttn or unwrttn, unvrsl,
undsptd lw applcbl t all css.

Prhps th only frml whlng cd athrzd by lgsltv
enctmnt, ws tht of Hllnd. It ws dcrd by th Stts-Gnrl in
A.D. 1695. Bt thgh n othr ntn hs evr hd any wrttn whlng
lw, yt th Amrcn fshrmn hv bn thr own lgsltrs and
lwyrs in ths mttr. Thy hv prvdd a systm whch fr trs
cmprhnsvnss srpsss Jstnn’s Pndcts and th By-lws of th
Chns Scty fr th Spprssn of Mddlng wth othr Ppl’s
Bsnss. Ys; ths lws mght b engrvn on a Qn Ann’s frthng,
or th brb of a hrpn, and wrn rnd th nck, s smll ar thy.

I. A Fst-Fsh blngs t th prty fst t it.

I. A Ls-Fsh is fr gm fr anybdy wh cn snst ctch it.

Bt wht plys th mschf wth ths mstrly cd is th admrbl
brvty of it, whch ncsstts a vst vlm of cmmntrs t
expnd it.

Frst: Wht is a Fst-Fsh? Alv or dd a fsh is tchnclly fst,
whn it is cnnctd wth an occpd shp or bt, by any mdm at
all cntrllbl by th occpnt or occpnts,—a mst, an or, a
nn-inch cbl, a tlgrph wr, or a strnd of cbwb, it is all th
sm. Lkws a fsh is tchnclly fst whn it brs a wf, or any
othr rcgnsd symbl of pssssn; s lng as th prty wfng it
plnly evnc thr ablty at any tm t tk it alngsd, as wll
as thr intntn s t d.

Ths ar scntfc cmmntrs; bt th cmmntrs of th whlmn
thmslvs smtms cnsst in hrd wrds and hrdr kncks—th
Ck-upn-Lttltn of th fst. Tr, amng th mr uprght and
hnrbl whlmn allwncs ar alwys md fr pclr css, whr
it wld b an otrgs mrl injstc fr on prty t clm
pssssn of a whl prvsly chsd or klld by anthr prty. Bt
othrs ar by n mns s scrpls.

Sm ffty yrs ag thr ws a crs cs of whl-trvr ltgtd
in Englnd, whrn th plntffs st frth tht aftr a hrd chs of
a whl in th Nrthrn ss; and whn indd thy (th plntffs) hd
sccdd in hrpnng th fsh; thy wr at lst, thrgh prl of
thr lvs, oblgd t frsk nt only thr lns, bt thr bt
itslf. Ultmtly th dfndnts (th crw of anthr shp) cm up
wth th whl, strck, klld, szd, and fnlly apprprtd it
bfr th vry eys of th plntffs. And whn ths dfndnts wr
rmnstrtd wth, thr cptn snppd hs fngrs in th plntffs’
tth, and assrd thm tht by wy of dxlgy t th dd h hd
dn, h wld nw rtn thr ln, hrpns, and bt, whch hd
rmnd attchd t th whl at th tm of th szr. Whrfr
th plntffs nw sd fr th rcvry of th vl of thr whl,
ln, hrpns, and bt.

Mr. Erskn ws cnsl fr th dfndnts; Lrd Ellnbrgh ws th
jdg. In th crs of th dfnc, th wtty Erskn wnt on t
illstrt hs pstn, by alldng t a rcnt crm. cn. cs,
whrn a gntlmn, aftr in vn tryng t brdl hs wf’s
vcsnss, hd at lst abndnd hr upn th ss of lf; bt in
th crs of yrs, rpntng of tht stp, h instttd an actn t
rcvr pssssn of hr. Erskn ws on th othr sd; and h thn
spprtd it by syng, tht thgh th gntlmn hd orgnlly
hrpnd th ldy, and hd onc hd hr fst, and only by rsn of
th grt strss of hr plngng vcsnss, hd at lst abndnd
hr; yt abndn hr h dd, s tht sh bcm a ls-fsh; and
thrfr whn a sbsqnt gntlmn r-hrpnd hr, th ldy thn
bcm tht sbsqnt gntlmn’s prprty, alng wth whtvr
hrpn mght hv bn fnd stckng in hr.

Nw in th prsnt cs Erskn cntndd tht th exmpls of th
whl and th ldy wr rcprclly illstrtv of ech othr.

Ths pldngs, and th cntr pldngs, bng dly hrd, th vry
lrnd jdg in st trms dcdd, t wt,—Tht as fr th bt, h
awrdd it t th plntffs, bcs thy hd mrly abndnd it t
sv thr lvs; bt tht wth rgrd t th cntrvrtd whl,
hrpns, and ln, thy blngd t th dfndnts; th whl, bcs
it ws a Ls-Fsh at th tm of th fnl cptr; and th hrpns
and ln bcs whn th fsh md off wth thm, it (th fsh)
acqrd a prprty in ths artcls; and hnc anybdy wh aftrwrds
tk th fsh hd a rght t thm. Nw th dfndnts aftrwrds tk
th fsh; erg, th afrsd artcls wr thrs.

A cmmn mn lkng at ths dcsn of th vry lrnd Jdg, mght
pssbly objct t it. Bt plghd up t th prmry rck of th
mttr, th tw grt prncpls ld dwn in th twn whlng lws
prvsly qtd, and appld and elcdtd by Lrd Ellnbrgh in
th abv ctd cs; ths tw lws tchng Fst-Fsh and Ls-Fsh,
I sy, wll, on rflctn, b fnd th fndmntls of all hmn
jrsprdnc; fr ntwthstndng its cmplctd trcry of
sclptr, th Tmpl of th Lw, lk th Tmpl of th Phlstns,
hs bt tw prps t stnd on.

Is it nt a syng in evry on’s mth, Pssssn is hlf of th lw:
tht is, rgrdlss of hw th thng cm int pssssn? Bt oftn
pssssn is th whl of th lw. Wht ar th snws and sls of
Rssn srfs and Rpblcn slvs bt Fst-Fsh, whrf pssssn
is th whl of th lw? Wht t th rpcs lndlrd is th wdw’s
lst mt bt a Fst-Fsh? Wht is yndr undtctd vlln’s mrbl
mnsn wth a dr-plt fr a wf; wht is tht bt a Fst-Fsh?
Wht is th rns dscnt whch Mrdc, th brkr, gts frm pr
Wbgn, th bnkrpt, on a ln t kp Wbgn’s fmly frm
strvtn; wht is tht rns dscnt bt a Fst-Fsh? Wht is th
Archbshp of Svsl’s incm of £100,000 szd frm th scnt brd
and chs of hndrds of thsnds of brkn-bckd lbrrs (all sr
of hvn wtht any of Svsl’s hlp) wht is tht glblr
£100,000 bt a Fst-Fsh? Wht ar th Dk of Dndr’s hrdtry
twns and hmlts bt Fst-Fsh? Wht t tht rdbtd hrpnr,
Jhn Bll, is pr Irlnd, bt a Fst-Fsh? Wht t tht apstlc
lncr, Brthr Jnthn, is Txs bt a Fst-Fsh? And cncrnng all
ths, is nt Pssssn th whl of th lw?

Bt if th dctrn of Fst-Fsh b prtty gnrlly applcbl, th
kndrd dctrn of Ls-Fsh is stll mr wdly s. Tht is
intrntnlly and unvrslly applcbl.

Wht ws Amrc in 1492 bt a Ls-Fsh, in whch Clmbs strck th
Spnsh stndrd by wy of wfng it fr hs ryl mstr and
mstrss? Wht ws Plnd t th Czr? Wht Grc t th Trk? Wht
Ind t Englnd? Wht at lst wll Mxc b t th Untd Stts? All
Ls-Fsh.

Wht ar th Rghts of Mn and th Lbrts of th Wrld bt
Ls-Fsh? Wht all mn’s mnds and opnns bt Ls-Fsh? Wht is
th prncpl of rlgs blf in thm bt a Ls-Fsh? Wht t th
ostntts smgglng vrblsts ar th thghts of thnkrs bt
Ls-Fsh? Wht is th grt glb itslf bt a Ls-Fsh? And wht
ar y, rdr, bt a Ls-Fsh and a Fst-Fsh, t?


CHPTR 90. Hds or Tls.

“D bln vr sffct, s rx hbt cpt, et rgn cdm.”
_Brctn, l. 3, c. 3._

Ltn frm th bks of th Lws of Englnd, whch tkn alng wth th
cntxt, mns, tht of all whls cptrd by anybdy on th cst of
tht lnd, th Kng, as Hnrry Grnd Hrpnr, mst hv th hd,
and th Qn b rspctflly prsntd wth th tl. A dvsn
whch, in th whl, is mch lk hlvng an appl; thr is n
intrmdt rmndr. Nw as ths lw, undr a mdfd frm, is t
ths dy in frc in Englnd; and as it offrs in vrs rspcts a
strng anmly tchng th gnrl lw of Fst and Ls-Fsh, it is
hr trtd of in a sprt chptr, on th sm crts prncpl
tht prmpts th Englsh rlwys t b at th expns of a sprt
cr, spclly rsrvd fr th accmmdtn of rylty. In th frst
plc, in crs prf of th fct tht th abv-mntnd lw is
stll in frc, I prcd t ly bfr y a crcmstnc tht
hppnd wthn th lst tw yrs.

It sms tht sm hnst mrnrs of Dvr, or Sndwch, or sm on
of th Cnq Prts, hd aftr a hrd chs sccdd in kllng and
bchng a fn whl whch thy hd orgnlly dscrd afr off frm
th shr. Nw th Cnq Prts ar prtlly or smhw undr th
jrsdctn of a srt of plcmn or bdl, clld a Lrd Wrdn.
Hldng th offc drctly frm th crwn, I blv, all th ryl
emlmnts incdnt t th Cnq Prt trrtrs bcm by assgnmnt
hs. By sm wrtrs ths offc is clld a sncr. Bt nt s.
Bcs th Lrd Wrdn is bsly emplyd at tms in fbbng hs
prqsts; whch ar hs chfly by vrt of tht sm fbbng of
thm.

Nw whn ths pr sn-brnt mrnrs, br-ftd, and wth thr
trwsrs rlld hgh up on thr ely lgs, hd wrly hld thr
ft fsh hgh and dry, prmsng thmslvs a gd £150 frm th
prcs ol and bn; and in fntsy sppng rr t wth thr
wvs, and gd al wth thr crns, upn th strngth of thr
rspctv shrs; up stps a vry lrnd and mst Chrstn and
chrtbl gntlmn, wth a cpy of Blckstn undr hs arm; and
lyng it upn th whl’s hd, h sys—“Hnds off! ths fsh, my
mstrs, is a Fst-Fsh. I sz it as th Lrd Wrdn’s.” Upn ths
th pr mrnrs in thr rspctfl cnstrntn—s trly
Englsh—knwng nt wht t sy, fll t vgrsly scrtchng thr
hds all rnd; mnwhl rflly glncng frm th whl t th
strngr. Bt tht dd in nws mnd th mttr, or at all sftn th
hrd hrt of th lrnd gntlmn wth th cpy of Blckstn. At
lngth on of thm, aftr lng scrtchng abt fr hs ids, md
bld t spk,

“Pls, sr, wh is th Lrd Wrdn?”

“Th Dk.”

“Bt th dk hd nthng t d wth tkng ths fsh?”

“It is hs.”

“W hv bn at grt trbl, and prl, and sm expns, and is all
tht t g t th Dk’s bnft; w gttng nthng at all fr or
pns bt or blstrs?”

“It is hs.”

“Is th Dk s vry pr as t b frcd t ths dsprt md of
gttng a lvlhd?”

“It is hs.”

“I thght t rlv my old bd-rddn mthr by prt of my shr of
ths whl.”

“It is hs.”

“Wn’t th Dk b cntnt wth a qrtr or a hlf?”

“It is hs.”

In a wrd, th whl ws szd and sld, and hs Grc th Dk of
Wllngtn rcvd th mny. Thnkng tht vwd in sm prtclr
lghts, th cs mght by a br pssblty in sm smll dgr b
dmd, undr th crcmstncs, a rthr hrd on, an hnst clrgymn
of th twn rspctflly addrssd a nt t hs Grc, bggng hm t
tk th cs of ths unfrtnt mrnrs int fll cnsdrtn. T
whch my Lrd Dk in sbstnc rpld (bth lttrs wr pblshd)
tht h hd alrdy dn s, and rcvd th mny, and wld b
oblgd t th rvrnd gntlmn if fr th ftr h (th rvrnd
gntlmn) wld dcln mddlng wth othr ppl’s bsnss. Is ths
th stll mltnt old mn, stndng at th crnrs of th thr
kngdms, on all hnds crcng alms of bggrs?

It wll rdly b sn tht in ths cs th allgd rght of th Dk
t th whl ws a dlgtd on frm th Svrgn. W mst nds
inqr thn on wht prncpl th Svrgn is orgnlly invstd
wth tht rght. Th lw itslf hs alrdy bn st frth. Bt Plwdn
gvs us th rsn fr it. Sys Plwdn, th whl s cght blngs
t th Kng and Qn, “bcs of its sprr excllnc.” And by th
sndst cmmnttrs ths hs evr bn hld a cgnt argmnt in sch
mttrs.

Bt why shld th Kng hv th hd, and th Qn th tl? A rsn
fr tht, y lwyrs!

In hs trts on “Qn-Gld,” or Qn-pnmny, an old Kng’s Bnch
athr, on Wllm Prynn, ths dscrsth: “Y tl is y Qn’s,
tht y Qn’s wrdrb my b sppld wth y whlbn.” Nw ths
ws wrttn at a tm whn th blck lmbr bn of th Grnlnd or
Rght whl ws lrgly usd in lds’ bdcs. Bt ths sm bn is
nt in th tl; it is in th hd, whch is a sd mstk fr a
sgcs lwyr lk Prynn. Bt is th Qn a mrmd, t b
prsntd wth a tl? An allgrcl mnng my lrk hr.

Thr ar tw ryl fsh s styld by th Englsh lw wrtrs—th whl
and th strgn; bth ryl prprty undr crtn lmttns, and
nmnlly spplyng th tnth brnch of th crwn’s ordnry rvn. I
knw nt tht any othr athr hs hntd of th mttr; bt by
infrnc it sms t m tht th strgn mst b dvdd in th sm
wy as th whl, th Kng rcvng th hghly dns and elstc hd
pclr t tht fsh, whch, symblclly rgrdd, my pssbly b
hmrsly grndd upn sm prsmd cngnlty. And ths thr
sms a rsn in all thngs, evn in lw.


CHPTR 91. Th Pqd Mts Th Rs-Bd.

“In vn it ws t rk fr Ambrgrs in th pnch of ths
Lvthn, insffrbl ftr dnyng nt inqry.” _Sr T. Brwn,
V.E._

It ws a wk or tw aftr th lst whlng scn rcntd, and whn
w wr slwly slng ovr a slpy, vpry, md-dy s, tht th
mny nss on th Pqd’s dck prvd mr vglnt dscvrrs thn
th thr prs of eys alft. A pclr and nt vry plsnt smll
ws smlt in th s.

“I wll bt smthng nw,” sd Stbb, “tht smwhr hrbts ar
sm of ths drggd whls w tckld th othr dy. I thght thy
wld kl up bfr lng.”

Prsntly, th vprs in advnc sld asd; and thr in th dstnc
ly a shp, whs frld sls btknd tht sm srt of whl mst
b alngsd. As w gldd nrr, th strngr shwd Frnch clrs
frm hs pk; and by th eddyng cld of vltr s-fwl tht
crcld, and hvrd, and swpd arnd hm, it ws pln tht th
whl alngsd mst b wht th fshrmn cll a blstd whl, tht
is, a whl tht hs dd unmlstd on th s, and s fltd an
unpprprtd crps. It my wll b cncvd, wht an unsvry odr
sch a mss mst exhl; wrs thn an Assyrn cty in th plg,
whn th lvng ar incmptnt t bry th dprtd. S intlrbl
indd is it rgrdd by sm, tht n cpdty cld prsd thm t
mr alngsd of it. Yt ar thr ths wh wll stll d it;
ntwthstndng th fct tht th ol obtnd frm sch sbjcts is of
a vry infrr qlty, and by n mns of th ntr of
attr-of-rs.

Cmng stll nrr wth th exprng brz, w sw tht th Frnchmn
hd a scnd whl alngsd; and ths scnd whl smd evn mr of
a nsgy thn th frst. In trth, it trnd ot t b on of ths
prblmtcl whls tht sm t dry up and d wth a srt of
prdgs dyspps, or indgstn; lvng thr dfnct bds
almst entrly bnkrpt of anythng lk ol. Nvrthlss, in th
prpr plc w shll s tht n knwng fshrmn wll evr trn up
hs ns at sch a whl as ths, hwvr mch h my shn blstd
whls in gnrl.

Th Pqd hd nw swpt s ngh t th strngr, tht Stbb vwd h
rcgnsd hs cttng spd-pl entngld in th lns tht wr
knttd rnd th tl of on of ths whls.

“Thr’s a prtty fllw, nw,” h bntrngly lghd, stndng in th
shp’s bws, “thr’s a jckl fr y! I wll knw tht ths Crpps
of Frnchmn ar bt pr dvls in th fshry; smtms lwrng
thr bts fr brkrs, mstkng thm fr Sprm Whl spts; ys,
and smtms slng frm thr prt wth thr hld fll of bxs of
tllw cndls, and css of snffrs, frsng tht all th ol thy
wll gt wn’t b engh t dp th Cptn’s wck int; ay, w all
knw ths thngs; bt lk y, hr’s a Crpp tht is cntnt wth
or lvngs, th drggd whl thr, I mn; ay, and is cntnt t
wth scrpng th dry bns of tht othr prcs fsh h hs thr.
Pr dvl! I sy, pss rnd a ht, sm on, and lt’s mk hm a
prsnt of a lttl ol fr dr chrty’s sk. Fr wht ol h’ll gt
frm tht drggd whl thr, wldn’t b ft t brn in a jl; n,
nt in a cndmnd cll. And as fr th othr whl, why, I’ll agr t
gt mr ol by chppng up and tryng ot ths thr msts of ors,
thn h’ll gt frm tht bndl of bns; thgh, nw tht I thnk of
it, it my cntn smthng wrth a gd dl mr thn ol; ys,
ambrgrs. I wndr nw if or old mn hs thght of tht. It’s wrth
tryng. Ys, I’m fr it;” and s syng h strtd fr th
qrtr-dck.

By ths tm th fnt ar hd bcm a cmplt clm; s tht whthr
or n, th Pqd ws nw frly entrppd in th smll, wth n hp
of escpng excpt by its brzng up agn. Issng frm th cbn,
Stbb nw clld hs bt’s crw, and plld off fr th strngr.
Drwng acrss hr bw, h prcvd tht in accrdnc wth th
fncfl Frnch tst, th uppr prt of hr stm-pc ws crvd in
th lknss of a hg drpng stlk, ws pntd grn, and fr
thrns hd cppr spks prjctng frm it hr and thr; th whl
trmntng in a symmtrcl fldd blb of a brght rd clr. Upn
hr hd brds, in lrg glt lttrs, h rd “Btn d
Rs,”—Rs-bttn, or Rs-bd; and ths ws th rmntc nm of ths
armtc shp.

Thgh Stbb dd nt undrstnd th _Btn_ prt of th inscrptn,
yt th wrd _rs_, and th blbs fgr-hd pt tgthr,
sffcntly explnd th whl t hm.

“A wdn rs-bd, eh?” h crd wth hs hnd t hs ns, “tht wll
d vry wll; bt hw lk all crtn it smlls!”

Nw in ordr t hld drct cmmnctn wth th ppl on dck, h
hd t pll rnd th bws t th strbrd sd, and ths cm cls
t th blstd whl; and s tlk ovr it.

Arrvd thn at ths spt, wth on hnd stll t hs ns, h
bwld—“Btn-d-Rs, ahy! ar thr any of y Btn-d-Rss tht
spk Englsh?”

“Ys,” rjnd a Grnsy-mn frm th blwrks, wh trnd ot t b
th chf-mt.

“Wll, thn, my Btn-d-Rs-bd, hv y sn th Wht Whl?”

“_Wht_ whl?”

“Th _Wht_ Whl—a Sprm Whl—Mby Dck, hv y sn hm?

“Nvr hrd of sch a whl. Cchlt Blnch! Wht Whl—n.”

“Vry gd, thn; gd by nw, and I’ll cll agn in a mnt.”

Thn rpdly pllng bck twrds th Pqd, and sng Ahb lnng
ovr th qrtr-dck rl awtng hs rprt, h mldd hs tw
hnds int a trmpt and shtd—“N, Sr! N!” Upn whch Ahb
rtrd, and Stbb rtrnd t th Frnchmn.

H nw prcvd tht th Grnsy-mn, wh hd jst gt int th
chns, and ws usng a cttng-spd, hd slng hs ns in a srt of
bg.

“Wht’s th mttr wth yr ns, thr?” sd Stbb. “Brk it?”

“I wsh it ws brkn, or tht I ddn’t hv any ns at all!” answrd
th Grnsy-mn, wh dd nt sm t rlsh th jb h ws at vry
mch. “Bt wht ar y hldng _yrs_ fr?”

“Oh, nthng! It’s a wx ns; I hv t hld it on. Fn dy, an’t
it? Ar rthr grdnny, I shld sy; thrw us a bnch of pss, wll
y, Btn-d-Rs?”

“Wht in th dvl’s nm d y wnt hr?” rrd th Grnsymn,
flyng int a sddn pssn.

“Oh! kp cl—cl? ys, tht’s th wrd! why dn’t y pck ths
whls in ic whl y’r wrkng at ’em? Bt jkng asd, thgh; d
y knw, Rs-bd, tht it’s all nnsns tryng t gt any ol ot of
sch whls? As fr tht drd up on, thr, h hsn’t a gll in hs
whl crcs.”

“I knw tht wll engh; bt, d’y s, th Cptn hr wn’t blv
it; ths is hs frst vyg; h ws a Clgn mnfctrr bfr. Bt
cm abrd, and myhp h’ll blv y, if h wn’t m; and s I’ll
gt ot of ths drty scrp.”

“Anythng t oblg y, my swt and plsnt fllw,” rjnd Stbb,
and wth tht h sn mntd t th dck. Thr a qr scn
prsntd itslf. Th slrs, in tsslld cps of rd wrstd, wr
gttng th hvy tckls in rdnss fr th whls. Bt thy wrkd
rthr slw and tlkd vry fst, and smd in anythng bt a gd
hmr. All thr nss upwrdly prjctd frm thr fcs lk s mny
jb-bms. Nw and thn prs of thm wld drp thr wrk, and rn up
t th mst-hd t gt sm frsh ar. Sm thnkng thy wld ctch
th plg, dppd okm in cl-tr, and at intrvls hld it t thr
nstrls. Othrs hvng brkn th stms of thr pps almst shrt
off at th bwl, wr vgrsly pffng tbcc-smk, s tht it
cnstntly flld thr olfctrs.

Stbb ws strck by a shwr of otcrs and anthms prcdng frm
th Cptn’s rnd-hs abft; and lkng in tht drctn sw a
fry fc thrst frm bhnd th dr, whch ws hld ajr frm
wthn. Ths ws th trmntd srgn, wh, aftr in vn
rmnstrtng agnst th prcdngs of th dy, hd btkn hmslf
t th Cptn’s rnd-hs (_cbnt_ h clld it) t avd th
pst; bt stll, cld nt hlp yllng ot hs entrts and
indgntns at tms.

Mrkng all ths, Stbb argd wll fr hs schm, and trnng t th
Grnsy-mn hd a lttl cht wth hm, drng whch th strngr mt
exprssd hs dtsttn of hs Cptn as a cnctd ignrms, wh
hd brght thm all int s unsvry and unprftbl a pckl.
Sndng hm crflly, Stbb frthr prcvd tht th Grnsy-mn
hd nt th slghtst sspcn cncrnng th ambrgrs. H thrfr
hld hs pc on tht hd, bt othrws ws qt frnk and
cnfdntl wth hm, s tht th tw qckly cncctd a lttl pln
fr bth crcmvntng and strzng th Cptn, wtht hs at all
drmng of dstrstng thr sncrty. Accrdng t ths lttl pln
of thrs, th Grnsy-mn, undr cvr of an intrprtr’s offc,
ws t tll th Cptn wht h plsd, bt as cmng frm Stbb; and
as fr Stbb, h ws t uttr any nnsns tht shld cm upprmst
in hm drng th intrvw.

By ths tm thr dstnd vctm apprd frm hs cbn. H ws a
smll and drk, bt rthr dlct lkng mn fr a s-cptn, wth
lrg whskrs and mstch, hwvr; and wr a rd cttn vlvt
vst wth wtch-sls at hs sd. T ths gntlmn, Stbb ws nw
pltly intrdcd by th Grnsy-mn, wh at onc ostnttsly pt
on th aspct of intrprtng btwn thm.

“Wht shll I sy t hm frst?” sd h.

“Why,” sd Stbb, eyng th vlvt vst and th wtch and sls, “y
my as wll bgn by tllng hm tht h lks a srt of bbysh t m,
thgh I dn’t prtnd t b a jdg.”

“H sys, Mnsr,” sd th Grnsy-mn, in Frnch, trnng t hs
cptn, “tht only ystrdy hs shp spk a vssl, whs cptn
and chf-mt, wth sx slrs, hd all dd of a fvr cght frm a
blstd whl thy hd brght alngsd.”

Upn ths th cptn strtd, and egrly dsrd t knw mr.

“Wht nw?” sd th Grnsy-mn t Stbb.

“Why, snc h tks it s esy, tll hm tht nw I hv eyd hm
crflly, I’m qt crtn tht h’s n mr ft t cmmnd a
whl-shp thn a St. Jg mnky. In fct, tll hm frm m h’s a
bbn.”

“H vws and dclrs, Mnsr, tht th othr whl, th drd on,
is fr mr ddly thn th blstd on; in fn, Mnsr, h cnjrs
us, as w vl or lvs, t ct ls frm ths fsh.”

Instntly th cptn rn frwrd, and in a ld vc cmmndd hs
crw t dsst frm hstng th cttng-tckls, and at onc cst
ls th cbls and chns cnfnng th whls t th shp.

“Wht nw?” sd th Grnsy-mn, whn th Cptn hd rtrnd t
thm.

“Why, lt m s; ys, y my as wll tll hm nw tht—tht—in fct,
tll hm I’v dddld hm, and (asd t hmslf) prhps smbdy
els.”

“H sys, Mnsr, tht h’s vry hppy t hv bn of any srvc t
us.”

Hrng ths, th cptn vwd tht thy wr th grtfl prts
(mnng hmslf and mt) and cncldd by invtng Stbb dwn int
hs cbn t drnk a bttl of Brdx.

“H wnts y t tk a glss of wn wth hm,” sd th intrprtr.

“Thnk hm hrtly; bt tll hm it’s agnst my prncpls t drnk
wth th mn I’v dddld. In fct, tll hm I mst g.”

“H sys, Mnsr, tht hs prncpls wn’t admt of hs drnkng;
bt tht if Mnsr wnts t lv anthr dy t drnk, thn Mnsr
hd bst drp all fr bts, and pll th shp awy frm ths whls,
fr it’s s clm thy wn’t drft.”

By ths tm Stbb ws ovr th sd, and gttng int hs bt, hld
th Grnsy-mn t ths effct,—tht hvng a lng tw-ln in hs
bt, h wld d wht h cld t hlp thm, by pllng ot th
lghtr whl of th tw frm th shp’s sd. Whl th Frnchmn’s
bts, thn, wr enggd in twng th shp on wy, Stbb
bnvlntly twd awy at hs whl th othr wy, ostnttsly
slckng ot a mst unslly lng tw-ln.

Prsntly a brz sprng up; Stbb fgnd t cst off frm th whl;
hstng hs bts, th Frnchmn sn incrsd hs dstnc, whl
th Pqd sld in btwn hm and Stbb’s whl. Whrpn Stbb
qckly plld t th fltng bdy, and hlng th Pqd t gv
ntc of hs intntns, at onc prcdd t rp th frt of hs
unrghts cnnng. Szng hs shrp bt-spd, h cmmncd an
excvtn in th bdy, a lttl bhnd th sd fn. Y wld almst
hv thght h ws dggng a cllr thr in th s; and whn at
lngth hs spd strck agnst th gnt rbs, it ws lk trnng up
old Rmn tls and pttry brd in ft Englsh lm. Hs bt’s crw
wr all in hgh exctmnt, egrly hlpng thr chf, and lkng
as anxs as gld-hntrs.

And all th tm nmbrlss fwls wr dvng, and dckng, and
scrmng, and yllng, and fghtng arnd thm. Stbb ws bgnnng
t lk dsppntd, espclly as th hrrbl nsgy incrsd,
whn sddnly frm ot th vry hrt of ths plg, thr stl a
fnt strm of prfm, whch flwd thrgh th td of bd smlls
wtht bng absrbd by it, as on rvr wll flw int and thn
alng wth anthr, wtht at all blndng wth it fr a tm.

“I hv it, I hv it,” crd Stbb, wth dlght, strkng smthng
in th sbtrrnn rgns, “a prs! a prs!”

Drppng hs spd, h thrst bth hnds in, and drw ot hndfls of
smthng tht lkd lk rp Wndsr sp, or rch mttld old
chs; vry uncts and svry wthl. Y mght esly dnt it wth
yr thmb; it is of a h btwn yllw and ash clr. And ths,
gd frnds, is ambrgrs, wrth a gld gn an onc t any
drggst. Sm sx hndfls wr obtnd; bt mr ws unvdbly
lst in th s, and stll mr, prhps, mght hv bn scrd wr
it nt fr imptnt Ahb’s ld cmmnd t Stbb t dsst, and cm
on brd, els th shp wld bd thm gd by.


CHPTR 92. Ambrgrs.

Nw ths ambrgrs is a vry crs sbstnc, and s imprtnt as an
artcl of cmmrc, tht in 1791 a crtn Nntckt-brn Cptn
Cffn ws exmnd at th br of th Englsh Hs of Cmmns on tht
sbjct. Fr at tht tm, and indd untl a cmprtvly lt dy,
th prcs orgn of ambrgrs rmnd, lk ambr itslf, a prblm
t th lrnd. Thgh th wrd ambrgrs is bt th Frnch cmpnd
fr gry ambr, yt th tw sbstncs ar qt dstnct. Fr ambr,
thgh at tms fnd on th s-cst, is als dg up in sm fr
inlnd sls, whrs ambrgrs is nvr fnd excpt upn th s.
Bsds, ambr is a hrd, trnsprnt, brttl, odrlss sbstnc,
usd fr mth-pcs t pps, fr bds and ornmnts; bt ambrgrs
is sft, wxy, and s hghly frgrnt and spcy, tht it is lrgly
usd in prfmry, in pstls, prcs cndls, hr-pwdrs, and
pmtm. Th Trks us it in ckng, and als crry it t Mcc, fr
th sm prps tht frnkncns is crrd t St. Ptr’s in Rm.
Sm wn mrchnts drp a fw grns int clrt, t flvr it.

Wh wld thnk, thn, tht sch fn lds and gntlmn shld
rgl thmslvs wth an essnc fnd in th inglrs bwls of a
sck whl! Yt s it is. By sm, ambrgrs is sppsd t b th
cs, and by othrs th effct, of th dyspps in th whl. Hw t
cr sch a dyspps it wr hrd t sy, unlss by admnstrng
thr or fr bt lds of Brndrth’s plls, and thn rnnng ot of
hrm’s wy, as lbrrs d in blstng rcks.

I hv frgttn t sy tht thr wr fnd in ths ambrgrs,
crtn hrd, rnd, bny plts, whch at frst Stbb thght mght b
slrs’ trwsrs bttns; bt it aftrwrds trnd ot tht thy wr
nthng mr thn pcs of smll sqd bns emblmd in tht mnnr.

Nw tht th incrrptn of ths mst frgrnt ambrgrs shld b
fnd in th hrt of sch dcy; is ths nthng? Bthnk th of tht
syng of St. Pl in Crnthns, abt crrptn and incrrptn;
hw tht w ar swn in dshnr, bt rsd in glry. And lkws
cll t mnd tht syng of Prclss abt wht it is tht mkth th
bst msk. Als frgt nt th strng fct tht of all thngs of
ill-svr, Clgn-wtr, in its rdmntl mnfctrng stgs, is
th wrst.

I shld lk t cncld th chptr wth th abv appl, bt
cnnt, owng t my anxty t rpl a chrg oftn md agnst
whlmn, and whch, in th estmtn of sm alrdy bsd mnds,
mght b cnsdrd as indrctly sbstnttd by wht hs bn sd
of th Frnchmn’s tw whls. Elswhr in ths vlm th slndrs
asprsn hs bn dsprvd, tht th vctn of whlng is
thrght a slttrnly, untdy bsnss. Bt thr is anthr thng t
rbt. Thy hnt tht all whls alwys smll bd. Nw hw dd ths
ods stgm orgnt?

I opn, tht it is plnly trcbl t th frst arrvl of th
Grnlnd whlng shps in Lndn, mr thn tw cntrs ag. Bcs
ths whlmn dd nt thn, and d nt nw, try ot thr ol at s
as th Sthrn shps hv alwys dn; bt cttng up th frsh
blbbr in smll bts, thrst it thrgh th bng hls of lrg csks,
and crry it hm in tht mnnr; th shrtnss of th ssn in ths
Icy Ss, and th sddn and vlnt strms t whch thy ar expsd,
frbddng any othr crs. Th cnsqnc is, tht upn brkng
int th hld, and unldng on of ths whl cmtrs, in th
Grnlnd dck, a svr is gvn frth smwht smlr t tht arsng
frm excvtng an old cty grv-yrd, fr th fndtns of a
Lyng-in Hsptl.

I prtly srms als, tht ths wckd chrg agnst whlrs my b
lkws imptd t th exstnc on th cst of Grnlnd, in frmr
tms, of a Dtch vllg clld Schmrnbrgh or Smrnbrg, whch
lttr nm is th on usd by th lrnd Fg Vn Slck, in hs grt
wrk on Smlls, a txt-bk on tht sbjct. As its nm imprts
(smr, ft; brg, t pt up), ths vllg ws fndd in ordr t
affrd a plc fr th blbbr of th Dtch whl flt t b trd
ot, wtht bng tkn hm t Hllnd fr tht prps. It ws a
cllctn of frncs, ft-kttls, and ol shds; and whn th wrks
wr in fll oprtn crtnly gv frth n vry plsnt svr. Bt
all ths is qt dffrnt wth a Sth S Sprm Whlr; whch in a
vyg of fr yrs prhps, aftr cmpltly fllng hr hld wth
ol, ds nt, prhps, cnsm ffty dys in th bsnss of blng
ot; and in th stt tht it is cskd, th ol is nrly scntlss.
Th trth is, tht lvng or dd, if bt dcntly trtd, whls as a
spcs ar by n mns crtrs of ill odr; nr cn whlmn b
rcgnsd, as th ppl of th mddl ags affctd t dtct a Jw
in th cmpny, by th ns. Nr indd cn th whl pssbly b
othrws thn frgrnt, whn, as a gnrl thng, h enjys sch hgh
hlth; tkng abndnc of exrcs; alwys ot of drs; thgh, it
is tr, sldm in th opn ar. I sy, tht th mtn of a Sprm
Whl’s flks abv wtr dspnss a prfm, as whn a msk-scntd
ldy rstls hr drss in a wrm prlr. Wht thn shll I lkn th
Sprm Whl t fr frgrnc, cnsdrng hs mgntd? Mst it nt b
t tht fms elphnt, wth jwlld tsks, and rdlnt wth myrrh,
whch ws ld ot of an Indn twn t d hnr t Alxndr th Grt?


CHPTR 93. Th Cstwy.

It ws bt sm fw dys aftr encntrng th Frnchmn, tht a mst
sgnfcnt evnt bfll th mst insgnfcnt of th Pqd’s crw;
an evnt mst lmntbl; and whch endd in prvdng th smtms
mdly mrry and prdstntd crft wth a lvng and evr accmpnyng
prphcy of whtvr shttrd sql mght prv hr own.

Nw, in th whl shp, it is nt evry on tht gs in th bts.
Sm fw hnds ar rsrvd clld shp-kprs, whs prvnc it is
t wrk th vssl whl th bts ar prsng th whl. As a gnrl
thng, ths shp-kprs ar as hrdy fllws as th mn cmprsng
th bts’ crws. Bt if thr hppn t b an undly slndr, clmsy,
or tmrs wght in th shp, tht wght is crtn t b md a
shp-kpr. It ws s in th Pqd wth th lttl ngr Pppn by
nck-nm, Pp by abbrvtn. Pr Pp! y hv hrd of hm bfr;
y mst rmmbr hs tmbrn on tht drmtc mdnght, s
glmy-jlly.

In otr aspct, Pp and Dgh-By md a mtch, lk a blck pny and
a wht on, of eql dvlpmnts, thgh of dssmlr clr, drvn
in on eccntrc spn. Bt whl hplss Dgh-By ws by ntr dll
and trpd in hs intllcts, Pp, thgh ovr tndr-hrtd, ws at
bttm vry brght, wth tht plsnt, gnl, jlly brghtnss
pclr t hs trb; a trb, whch evr enjy all hldys and
fstvts wth fnr, frr rlsh thn any othr rc. Fr blcks,
th yr’s clndr shld shw nght bt thr hndrd and sxty-fv
Frth of Jlys and Nw Yr’s Dys. Nr sml s, whl I wrt tht
ths lttl blck ws brllnt, fr evn blcknss hs its brllncy;
bhld yn lstrs ebny, pnlld in kng’s cbnts. Bt Pp lvd
lf, and all lf’s pcbl scrts; s tht th pnc-strkng
bsnss in whch h hd smhw unccntbly bcm entrppd, hd
mst sdly blrrd hs brghtnss; thgh, as er lng wll b sn,
wht ws ths tmprrly sbdd in hm, in th end ws dstnd t b
lrdly illmnd by strng wld frs, tht fcttsly shwd hm
off t tn tms th ntrl lstr wth whch in hs ntv Tllnd
Cnty in Cnnctct, h hd onc enlvnd mny a fddlr’s frlc on
th grn; and at mlds evn-td, wth hs gy h-h! hd trnd
th rnd hrzn int on str-blld tmbrn. S, thgh in th
clr ar of dy, sspndd agnst a bl-vnd nck, th
pr-wtrd dmnd drp wll hlthfl glw; yt, whn th cnnng
jwllr wld shw y th dmnd in its mst imprssv lstr, h
lys it agnst a glmy grnd, and thn lghts it up, nt by th sn,
bt by sm unntrl gss. Thn cm ot ths fry efflgncs,
infrnlly sprb; thn th evl-blzng dmnd, onc th dvnst
symbl of th crystl sks, lks lk sm crwn-jwl stln frm
th Kng of Hll. Bt lt us t th stry.

It cm t pss, tht in th ambrgrs affr Stbb’s aftr-orsmn
chncd s t sprn hs hnd, as fr a tm t bcm qt mmd;
and, tmprrly, Pp ws pt int hs plc.

Th frst tm Stbb lwrd wth hm, Pp evncd mch nrvsnss;
bt hpply, fr tht tm, escpd cls cntct wth th whl; and
thrfr cm off nt altgthr dscrdtbly; thgh Stbb obsrvng
hm, tk cr, aftrwrds, t exhrt hm t chrsh hs crgsnss
t th utmst, fr h mght oftn fnd it ndfl.

Nw upn th scnd lwrng, th bt pddld upn th whl; and as
th fsh rcvd th drtd irn, it gv its cstmry rp, whch
hppnd, in ths instnc, t b rght undr pr Pp’s st. Th
invlntry cnstrntn of th mmnt csd hm t lp, pddl in
hnd, ot of th bt; and in sch a wy, tht prt of th slck whl
ln cmng agnst hs chst, h brstd it ovrbrd wth hm, s as
t bcm entngld in it, whn at lst plmpng int th wtr. Tht
instnt th strckn whl strtd on a frc rn, th ln swftly
strghtnd; and prst! pr Pp cm all fmng up t th chcks of
th bt, rmrslssly drggd thr by th ln, whch hd tkn
svrl trns arnd hs chst and nck.

Tshtg std in th bws. H ws fll of th fr of th hnt. H
htd Pp fr a pltrn. Sntchng th bt-knf frm its shth, h
sspndd its shrp edg ovr th ln, and trnng twrds Stbb,
exclmd intrrgtvly, “Ct?” Mntm Pp’s bl, chkd fc
plnly lkd, D, fr Gd’s sk! All pssd in a flsh. In lss thn
hlf a mnt, ths entr thng hppnd.

“Dmn hm, ct!” rrd Stbb; and s th whl ws lst and Pp ws
svd.

S sn as h rcvrd hmslf, th pr lttl ngr ws assld by
ylls and excrtns frm th crw. Trnqlly prmttng ths
irrglr crsngs t evprt, Stbb thn in a pln, bsnss-lk,
bt stll hlf hmrs mnnr, crsd Pp offclly; and tht dn,
unffclly gv hm mch whlsm advc. Th sbstnc ws, Nvr
jmp frm a bt, Pp, excpt—bt all th rst ws indfnt, as th
sndst advc evr is. Nw, in gnrl, _Stck t th bt_, is yr
tr mtt in whlng; bt css wll smtms hppn whn _Lp frm
th bt_, is stll bttr. Mrvr, as if prcvng at lst tht if
h shld gv undltd cnscnts advc t Pp, h wld b
lvng hm t wd a mrgn t jmp in fr th ftr; Stbb sddnly
drppd all advc, and cncldd wth a prmptry cmmnd, “Stck t
th bt, Pp, or by th Lrd, I wn’t pck y up if y jmp; mnd
tht. W cn’t affrd t ls whls by th lks of y; a whl wld
sll fr thrty tms wht y wld, Pp, in Albm. Br tht in
mnd, and dn’t jmp any mr.” Hrby prhps Stbb indrctly hntd,
tht thgh mn lvd hs fllw, yt mn is a mny-mkng anml,
whch prpnsty t oftn intrfrs wth hs bnvlnc.

Bt w ar all in th hnds of th Gds; and Pp jmpd agn. It ws
undr vry smlr crcmstncs t th frst prfrmnc; bt ths
tm h dd nt brst ot th ln; and hnc, whn th whl strtd
t rn, Pp ws lft bhnd on th s, lk a hrrd trvllr’s
trnk. Als! Stbb ws bt t tr t hs wrd. It ws a btfl,
bnts, bl dy; th spngld s clm and cl, and fltly
strtchng awy, all rnd, t th hrzn, lk gld-btr’s skn
hmmrd ot t th extrmst. Bbbng up and dwn in tht s, Pp’s
ebn hd shwd lk a hd of clvs. N bt-knf ws lftd whn
h fll s rpdly astrn. Stbb’s inxrbl bck ws trnd upn hm;
and th whl ws wngd. In thr mnts, a whl ml of shrlss
ocn ws btwn Pp and Stbb. Ot frm th cntr of th s, pr
Pp trnd hs crsp, crlng, blck hd t th sn, anthr lnly
cstwy, thgh th lftst and th brghtst.

Nw, in clm wthr, t swm in th opn ocn is as esy t th
prctsd swmmr as t rd in a sprng-crrg ashr. Bt th awfl
lnsmnss is intlrbl. Th intns cncntrtn of slf in th
mddl of sch a hrtlss immnsty, my Gd! wh cn tll it? Mrk,
hw whn slrs in a dd clm bth in th opn s—mrk hw clsly
thy hg thr shp and only cst alng hr sds.

Bt hd Stbb rlly abndnd th pr lttl ngr t hs ft? N;
h dd nt mn t, at lst. Bcs thr wr tw bts in hs wk,
and h sppsd, n dbt, tht thy wld of crs cm up t Pp
vry qckly, and pck hm up; thgh, indd, sch cnsdrtns
twrds orsmn jprdzd thrgh thr own tmdty, is nt alwys
mnfstd by th hntrs in all smlr instncs; and sch instncs
nt unfrqntly occr; almst invrbly in th fshry, a cwrd, s
clld, is mrkd wth th sm rthlss dtsttn pclr t
mltry nvs and arms.

Bt it s hppnd, tht ths bts, wtht sng Pp, sddnly
spyng whls cls t thm on on sd, trnd, and gv chs; and
Stbb’s bt ws nw s fr awy, and h and all hs crw s intnt
upn hs fsh, tht Pp’s rngd hrzn bgn t expnd arnd hm
msrbly. By th mrst chnc th shp itslf at lst rscd hm;
bt frm tht hr th lttl ngr wnt abt th dck an idt; sch,
at lst, thy sd h ws. Th s hd jrngly kpt hs fnt bdy
up, bt drwnd th infnt of hs sl. Nt drwnd entrly, thgh.
Rthr crrd dwn alv t wndrs dpths, whr strng shps of
th unwrpd prml wrld gldd t and fr bfr hs pssv eys;
and th msr-mrmn, Wsdm, rvld hs hrdd hps; and amng th
jys, hrtlss, evr-jvnl etrnts, Pp sw th mlttdns,
Gd-omnprsnt, crl inscts, tht ot of th frmmnt of wtrs
hvd th clssl orbs. H sw Gd’s ft upn th trdl of th
lm, and spk it; and thrfr hs shpmts clld hm md. S
mn’s insnty is hvn’s sns; and wndrng frm all mrtl rsn,
mn cms at lst t tht clstl thght, whch, t rsn, is
absrd and frntc; and wl or w, fls thn uncmprmsd,
indffrnt as hs Gd.

Fr th rst, blm nt Stbb t hrdly. Th thng is cmmn in tht
fshry; and in th sql of th nrrtv, it wll thn b sn wht
lk abndnmnt bfll myslf.


CHPTR 94. A Sqz of th Hnd.

Tht whl of Stbb’s, s drly prchsd, ws dly brght t th
Pqd’s sd, whr all ths cttng and hstng oprtns
prvsly dtld, wr rglrly gn thrgh, evn t th blng of
th Hdlbrgh Tn, or Cs.

Whl sm wr occpd wth ths lttr dty, othrs wr emplyd in
drggng awy th lrgr tbs, s sn as flld wth th sprm; and
whn th prpr tm arrvd, ths sm sprm ws crflly mnpltd
er gng t th try-wrks, of whch ann.

It hd cld and crystllzd t sch a dgr, tht whn, wth
svrl othrs, I st dwn bfr a lrg Cnstntn’s bth of it, I
fnd it strngly cncrtd int lmps, hr and thr rllng abt
in th lqd prt. It ws or bsnss t sqz ths lmps bck
int fld. A swt and uncts dty! N wndr tht in old tms ths
sprm ws sch a fvrt csmtc. Sch a clrr! sch a swtnr!
sch a sftnr! sch a dlcs mlfr! Aftr hvng my hnds in it
fr only a fw mnts, my fngrs flt lk els, and bgn, as it
wr, t srpntn and sprls.

As I st thr at my es, crss-lggd on th dck; aftr th bttr
exrtn at th wndlss; undr a bl trnql sky; th shp undr
indlnt sl, and gldng s srnly alng; as I bthd my hnds
amng ths sft, gntl glbls of infltrtd tsss, wvn almst
wthn th hr; as thy rchly brk t my fngrs, and dschrgd all
thr oplnc, lk flly rp grps thr wn; as I snffd up tht
uncntmntd arm,—ltrlly and trly, lk th smll of sprng
vlts; I dclr t y, tht fr th tm I lvd as in a msky
mdw; I frgt all abt or hrrbl oth; in tht inxprssbl
sprm, I wshd my hnds and my hrt of it; I almst bgn t crdt
th old Prclsn sprsttn tht sprm is of rr vrt in
allyng th ht of angr; whl bthng in tht bth, I flt dvnly
fr frm all ill-wll, or ptlnc, or mlc, of any srt
whtsvr.

Sqz! sqz! sqz! all th mrnng lng; I sqzd tht sprm
tll I myslf almst mltd int it; I sqzd tht sprm tll a
strng srt of insnty cm ovr m; and I fnd myslf unwttngly
sqzng my c-lbrrs’ hnds in it, mstkng thr hnds fr th
gntl glbls. Sch an abndng, affctnt, frndly, lvng
flng dd ths avctn bgt; tht at lst I ws cntnlly
sqzng thr hnds, and lkng up int thr eys sntmntlly; as
mch as t sy,—Oh! my dr fllw bngs, why shld w lngr chrsh
any scl acrbts, or knw th slghtst ill-hmr or envy! Cm;
lt us sqz hnds all rnd; ny, lt us all sqz orslvs int
ech othr; lt us sqz orslvs unvrslly int th vry mlk and
sprm of kndnss.

Wld tht I cld kp sqzng tht sprm fr evr! Fr nw, snc
by mny prlngd, rptd exprncs, I hv prcvd tht in all
css mn mst evntlly lwr, or at lst shft, hs cnct of
attnbl flcty; nt plcng it anywhr in th intllct or th
fncy; bt in th wf, th hrt, th bd, th tbl, th sddl, th
frsd, th cntry; nw tht I hv prcvd all ths, I am rdy
t sqz cs etrnlly. In thghts of th vsns of th nght, I
sw lng rws of angls in prds, ech wth hs hnds in a jr of
sprmct.

Nw, whl dscrsng of sprm, it bhvs t spk of othr thngs
akn t it, in th bsnss of prprng th sprm whl fr th
try-wrks.

Frst cms wht-hrs, s clld, whch is obtnd frm th tprng
prt of th fsh, and als frm th thckr prtns of hs flks. It
is tgh wth cngld tndns—a wd of mscl—bt stll cntns sm
ol. Aftr bng svrd frm th whl, th wht-hrs is frst ct
int prtbl oblngs er gng t th mncr. Thy lk mch lk
blcks of Brkshr mrbl.

Plm-pddng is th trm bstwd upn crtn frgmntry prts of th
whl’s flsh, hr and thr adhrng t th blnkt of blbbr, and
oftn prtcptng t a cnsdrbl dgr in its unctsnss. It is
a mst rfrshng, cnvvl, btfl objct t bhld. As its nm
imprts, it is of an excdngly rch, mttld tnt, wth a bstrkd
snwy and gldn grnd, dttd wth spts of th dpst crmsn and
prpl. It is plms of rbs, in pctrs of ctrn. Spt of rsn,
it is hrd t kp yrslf frm etng it. I cnfss, tht onc I
stl bhnd th frmst t try it. It tstd smthng as I shld
cncv a ryl ctlt frm th thgh of Ls l Grs mght hv
tstd, sppsng hm t hv bn klld th frst dy aftr th
vnsn ssn, and tht prtclr vnsn ssn cntmprry wth an
unslly fn vntg of th vnyrds of Chmpgn.

Thr is anthr sbstnc, and a vry snglr on, whch trns up in
th crs of ths bsnss, bt whch I fl it t b vry pzzlng
adqtly t dscrb. It is clld slbglln; an applltn
orgnl wth th whlmn, and evn s is th ntr of th sbstnc.
It is an inffbly ozy, strngy affr, mst frqntly fnd in th
tbs of sprm, aftr a prlngd sqzng, and sbsqnt dcntng. I
hld it t b th wndrsly thn, rptrd mmbrns of th cs,
clscng.

Grry, s clld, is a trm prprly blngng t rght whlmn, bt
smtms incdntlly usd by th sprm fshrmn. It dsgnts th
drk, gltns sbstnc whch is scrpd off th bck of th
Grnlnd or rght whl, and mch of whch cvrs th dcks of ths
infrr sls wh hnt tht ignbl Lvthn.

Npprs. Strctly ths wrd is nt indgns t th whl’s
vcblry. Bt as appld by whlmn, it bcms s. A whlmn’s
nppr is a shrt frm strp of tndns stff ct frm th tprng
prt of Lvthn’s tl: it avrgs an inch in thcknss, and fr th
rst, is abt th sz of th irn prt of a h. Edgws mvd alng
th oly dck, it oprts lk a lthrn sqlg; and by nmlss
blndshmnts, as of mgc, allrs alng wth it all imprts.

Bt t lrn all abt ths rcndt mttrs, yr bst wy is at
onc t dscnd int th blbbr-rm, and hv a lng tlk wth its
inmts. Ths plc hs prvsly bn mntnd as th rcptcl fr
th blnkt-pcs, whn strpt and hstd frm th whl. Whn th
prpr tm arrvs fr cttng up its cntnts, ths aprtmnt is a
scn of trrr t all tyrs, espclly by nght. On on sd, lt by
a dll lntrn, a spc hs bn lft clr fr th wrkmn. Thy
gnrlly g in prs,—a pk-and-gffmn and a spd-mn. Th
whlng-pk is smlr t a frgt’s brdng-wpn of th sm
nm. Th gff is smthng lk a bt-hk. Wth hs gff, th
gffmn hks on t a sht of blbbr, and strvs t hld it frm
slppng, as th shp ptchs and lrchs abt. Mnwhl, th
spd-mn stnds on th sht itslf, prpndclrly chppng it int
th prtbl hrs-pcs. Ths spd is shrp as hn cn mk it; th
spdmn’s ft ar shlss; th thng h stnds on wll smtms
irrsstbly sld awy frm hm, lk a sldg. If h cts off on of
hs own ts, or on of hs assstnts’, wld y b vry mch
astnshd? Ts ar scrc amng vtrn blbbr-rm mn.


CHPTR 95. Th Cssck.

Hd y stppd on brd th Pqd at a crtn jnctr of ths
pst-mrtmzng of th whl; and hd y strlld frwrd ngh th
wndlss, prtty sr am I tht y wld hv scnnd wth n smll
crsty a vry strng, engmtcl objct, whch y wld hv sn
thr, lyng alng lngthws in th l scpprs. Nt th wndrs
cstrn in th whl’s hg hd; nt th prdgy of hs unhngd lwr
jw; nt th mrcl of hs symmtrcl tl; nn of ths wld s
srprs y, as hlf a glmps of tht unccntbl cn,—lngr thn
a Kntckn is tll, ngh a ft in dmtr at th bs, and
jt-blck as Yj, th ebny idl of Qqg. And an idl, indd, it
is; or, rthr, in old tms, its lknss ws. Sch an idl as tht
fnd in th scrt grvs of Qn Mchh in Jd; and fr
wrshppng whch, Kng As, hr sn, dd dps hr, and dstryd th
idl, and brnt it fr an abmntn at th brk Kdrn, as drkly
st frth in th 15th chptr of th Frst Bk of Kngs.

Lk at th slr, clld th mncr, wh nw cms alng, and
assstd by tw alls, hvly bcks th grndssms, as th mrnrs
cll it, and wth bwd shldrs, stggrs off wth it as if h wr a
grndr crryng a dd cmrd frm th fld. Extndng it upn th
frcstl dck, h nw prcds cylndrclly t rmv its drk plt,
as an Afrcn hntr th plt of a b. Ths dn h trns th plt
insd ot, lk a pntln lg; gvs it a gd strtchng, s as
almst t dbl its dmtr; and at lst hngs it, wll sprd, in
th rggng, t dry. Er lng, it is tkn dwn; whn rmvng sm
thr ft of it, twrds th pntd extrmty, and thn cttng tw
slts fr arm-hls at th othr end, h lngthws slps hmslf
bdly int it. Th mncr nw stnds bfr y invstd in th fll
cnncls of hs cllng. Immmrl t all hs ordr, ths
invsttr aln wll adqtly prtct hm, whl emplyd in th
pclr fnctns of hs offc.

Tht offc cnssts in mncng th hrs-pcs of blbbr fr th
pts; an oprtn whch is cndctd at a crs wdn hrs,
plntd endws agnst th blwrks, and wth a cpcs tb bnth
it, int whch th mncd pcs drp, fst as th shts frm a rpt
ortr’s dsk. Arryd in dcnt blck; occpyng a cnspcs plpt;
intnt on bbl lvs; wht a cnddt fr an archbshprc, wht a
ld fr a Pp wr ths mncr!*

*Bbl lvs! Bbl lvs! Ths is th invrbl cry frm th mts
t th mncr. It enjns hm t b crfl, and ct hs wrk int as
thn slcs as pssbl, insmch as by s dng th bsnss of
blng ot th ol is mch acclrtd, and its qntty cnsdrbly
incrsd, bsds prhps imprvng it in qlty.


CHPTR 96. Th Try-Wrks.

Bsds hr hstd bts, an Amrcn whlr is otwrdly
dstngshd by hr try-wrks. Sh prsnts th crs anmly of th
mst sld msnry jnng wth ok and hmp in cnstttng th
cmpltd shp. It is as if frm th opn fld a brck-kln wr
trnsprtd t hr plnks.

Th try-wrks ar plntd btwn th frmst and mnmst, th mst
rmy prt of th dck. Th tmbrs bnth ar of a pclr strngth,
fttd t sstn th wght of an almst sld mss of brck and
mrtr, sm tn ft by eght sqr, and fv in hght. Th
fndtn ds nt pntrt th dck, bt th msnry is frmly
scrd t th srfc by pndrs kns of irn brcng it on all
sds, and scrwng it dwn t th tmbrs. On th flnks it is csd
wth wd, and at tp cmpltly cvrd by a lrg, slpng, bttnd
htchwy. Rmvng ths htch w exps th grt try-pts, tw in
nmbr, and ech of svrl brrls’ cpcty. Whn nt in us, thy
ar kpt rmrkbly cln. Smtms thy ar plshd wth spstn
and snd, tll thy shn wthn lk slvr pnch-bwls. Drng th
nght-wtchs sm cyncl old slrs wll crwl int thm and cl
thmslvs awy thr fr a np. Whl emplyd in plshng thm—on
mn in ech pt, sd by sd—mny cnfdntl cmmnctns ar
crrd on, ovr th irn lps. It is a plc als fr prfnd
mthmtcl mdttn. It ws in th lft hnd try-pt of th Pqd,
wth th spstn dlgntly crclng rnd m, tht I ws frst
indrctly strck by th rmrkbl fct, tht in gmtry all bds
gldng alng th cycld, my spstn fr exmpl, wll dscnd frm
any pnt in prcsly th sm tm.

Rmvng th fr-brd frm th frnt of th try-wrks, th br
msnry of tht sd is expsd, pntrtd by th tw irn mths of
th frncs, drctly undrnth th pts. Ths mths ar fttd
wth hvy drs of irn. Th intns ht of th fr is prvntd
frm cmmnctng itslf t th dck, by mns of a shllw rsrvr
extndng undr th entr inclsd srfc of th wrks. By a tnnl
insrtd at th rr, ths rsrvr is kpt rplnshd wth wtr as
fst as it evprts. Thr ar n extrnl chmnys; thy opn drct
frm th rr wll. And hr lt us g bck fr a mmnt.

It ws abt nn o’clck at nght tht th Pqd’s try-wrks wr
frst strtd on ths prsnt vyg. It blngd t Stbb t ovrs
th bsnss.

“All rdy thr? Off htch, thn, and strt hr. Y ck, fr th
wrks.” Ths ws an esy thng, fr th crpntr hd bn thrstng
hs shvngs int th frnc thrght th pssg. Hr b it sd
tht in a whlng vyg th frst fr in th try-wrks hs t b fd
fr a tm wth wd. Aftr tht n wd is usd, excpt as a mns of
qck igntn t th stpl fl. In a wrd, aftr bng trd ot,
th crsp, shrvlld blbbr, nw clld scrps or frttrs, stll
cntns cnsdrbl of its uncts prprts. Ths frttrs fd
th flms. Lk a plthrc brnng mrtyr, or a slf-cnsmng
msnthrp, onc igntd, th whl sppls hs own fl and brns by
hs own bdy. Wld tht h cnsmd hs own smk! fr hs smk is
hrrbl t inhl, and inhl it y mst, and nt only tht, bt y
mst lv in it fr th tm. It hs an unspkbl, wld, Hnd odr
abt it, sch as my lrk in th vcnty of fnrl pyrs. It smlls
lk th lft wng of th dy of jdgmnt; it is an argmnt fr th
pt.

By mdnght th wrks wr in fll oprtn. W wr clr frm th
crcs; sl hd bn md; th wnd ws frshnng; th wld ocn
drknss ws intns. Bt tht drknss ws lckd up by th frc
flms, whch at intrvls frkd frth frm th sty fls, and
illmntd evry lfty rp in th rggng, as wth th fmd Grk
fr. Th brnng shp drv on, as if rmrslssly cmmssnd t
sm vngfl dd. S th ptch and slphr-frghtd brgs of th
bld Hydrt, Cnrs, issng frm thr mdnght hrbrs, wth brd
shts of flm fr sls, br dwn upn th Trksh frgts, and
fldd thm in cnflgrtns.

Th htch, rmvd frm th tp of th wrks, nw affrdd a wd
hrth in frnt of thm. Stndng on ths wr th Trtrn shps of
th pgn hrpnrs, alwys th whl-shp’s stkrs. Wth hg
prngd pls thy ptchd hssng msss of blbbr int th scldng
pts, or strrd up th frs bnth, tll th snky flms drtd,
crlng, ot of th drs t ctch thm by th ft. Th smk rlld
awy in slln hps. T evry ptch of th shp thr ws a ptch of
th blng ol, whch smd all egrnss t lp int thr fcs.
Oppst th mth of th wrks, on th frthr sd of th wd wdn
hrth, ws th wndlss. Ths srvd fr a s-sf. Hr lngd th
wtch, whn nt othrws emplyd, lkng int th rd ht of th
fr, tll thr eys flt scrchd in thr hds. Thr twny
ftrs, nw all bgrmd wth smk and swt, thr mttd brds,
and th cntrstng brbrc brllncy of thr tth, all ths wr
strngly rvld in th cprcs emblznngs of th wrks. As thy
nrrtd t ech othr thr unhly advntrs, thr tls of trrr
tld in wrds of mrth; as thr uncvlzd lghtr frkd upwrds
ot of thm, lk th flms frm th frnc; as t and fr, in thr
frnt, th hrpnrs wldly gstcltd wth thr hg prngd
frks and dpprs; as th wnd hwld on, and th s lpd, and th
shp grnd and dvd, and yt stdfstly sht hr rd hll frthr
and frthr int th blcknss of th s and th nght, and scrnflly
chmpd th wht bn in hr mth, and vcsly spt rnd hr on
all sds; thn th rshng Pqd, frghtd wth svgs, and ldn
wth fr, and brnng a crps, and plngng int tht blcknss of
drknss, smd th mtrl cntrprt of hr mnmnc cmmndr’s
sl.

S smd it t m, as I std at hr hlm, and fr lng hrs slntly
gdd th wy of ths fr-shp on th s. Wrppd, fr tht
intrvl, in drknss myslf, I bt th bttr sw th rdnss, th
mdnss, th ghstlnss of othrs. Th cntnl sght of th fnd
shps bfr m, cprng hlf in smk and hlf in fr, ths at
lst bgt kndrd vsns in my sl, s sn as I bgn t yld t
tht unccntbl drwsnss whch evr wld cm ovr m at a
mdnght hlm.

Bt tht nght, in prtclr, a strng (and evr snc inxplcbl)
thng occrrd t m. Strtng frm a brf stndng slp, I ws
hrrbly cnscs of smthng ftlly wrng. Th jw-bn tllr
smt my sd, whch lnd agnst it; in my ers ws th lw hm of
sls, jst bgnnng t shk in th wnd; I thght my eys wr
opn; I ws hlf cnscs of pttng my fngrs t th lds and
mchnclly strtchng thm stll frthr aprt. Bt, spt of all
ths, I cld s n cmpss bfr m t str by; thgh it smd
bt a mnt snc I hd bn wtchng th crd, by th stdy bnncl
lmp illmntng it. Nthng smd bfr m bt a jt glm, nw and
thn md ghstly by flshs of rdnss. Upprmst ws th imprssn,
tht whtvr swft, rshng thng I std on ws nt s mch bnd t
any hvn ahd as rshng frm all hvns astrn. A strk, bwldrd
flng, as of dth, cm ovr m. Cnvlsvly my hnds grspd th
tllr, bt wth th crzy cnct tht th tllr ws, smhw, in
sm enchntd wy, invrtd. My Gd! wht is th mttr wth m?
thght I. L! in my brf slp I hd trnd myslf abt, and ws
frntng th shp’s strn, wth my bck t hr prw and th cmpss. In
an instnt I fcd bck, jst in tm t prvnt th vssl frm flyng
up int th wnd, and vry prbbly cpszng hr. Hw gld and hw
grtfl th rlf frm ths unntrl hllcntn of th nght, and
th ftl cntngncy of bng brght by th l!

Lk nt t lng in th fc of th fr, O mn! Nvr drm wth thy
hnd on th hlm! Trn nt thy bck t th cmpss; accpt th frst
hnt of th htchng tllr; blv nt th artfcl fr, whn its
rdnss mks all thngs lk ghstly. T-mrrw, in th ntrl sn,
th sks wll b brght; ths wh glrd lk dvls in th frkng
flms, th mrn wll shw in fr othr, at lst gntlr, rlf; th
glrs, gldn, gld sn, th only tr lmp—all othrs bt lrs!

Nvrthlss th sn hds nt Vrgn’s Dsml Swmp, nr Rm’s
accrsd Cmpgn, nr wd Shr, nr all th mllns of mls of
dsrts and of grfs bnth th mn. Th sn hds nt th ocn,
whch is th drk sd of ths erth, and whch is tw thrds of ths
erth. S, thrfr, tht mrtl mn wh hth mr of jy thn srrw
in hm, tht mrtl mn cnnt b tr—nt tr, or undvlpd. Wth
bks th sm. Th trst of all mn ws th Mn of Srrws, and th
trst of all bks is Slmn’s, and Ecclssts is th fn hmmrd
stl of w. “All is vnty.” ALL. Ths wlfl wrld hth nt gt hld
of unchrstn Slmn’s wsdm yt. Bt h wh ddgs hsptls and
jls, and wlks fst crssng grvyrds, and wld rthr tlk of
oprs thn hll; clls Cwpr, Yng, Pscl, Rss, pr dvls
all of sck mn; and thrght a cr-fr lftm swrs by Rbls
as pssng ws, and thrfr jlly;—nt tht mn is fttd t st
dwn on tmb-stns, and brk th grn dmp mld wth unfthmbly
wndrs Slmn.

Bt evn Slmn, h sys, “th mn tht wndrth ot of th wy of
undrstndng shll rmn” (_i.e._, evn whl lvng) “in th
cngrgtn of th dd.” Gv nt thyslf up, thn, t fr, lst it
invrt th, ddn th; as fr th tm it dd m. Thr is a wsdm
tht is w; bt thr is a w tht is mdnss. And thr is a
Ctskll egl in sm sls tht cn alk dv dwn int th blckst
grgs, and sr ot of thm agn and bcm invsbl in th snny
spcs. And evn if h fr evr fls wthn th grg, tht grg is
in th mntns; s tht evn in hs lwst swp th mntn egl
is stll hghr thn othr brds upn th pln, evn thgh thy sr.


CHPTR 97. Th Lmp.

Hd y dscndd frm th Pqd’s try-wrks t th Pqd’s
frcstl, whr th off dty wtch wr slpng, fr on sngl
mmnt y wld hv almst thght y wr stndng in sm
illmntd shrn of cnnzd kngs and cnsllrs. Thr thy ly
in thr trnglr okn vlts, ech mrnr a chslld mtnss; a
scr of lmps flshng upn hs hdd eys.

In mrchntmn, ol fr th slr is mr scrc thn th mlk of
qns. T drss in th drk, and et in th drk, and stmbl in
drknss t hs pllt, ths is hs usl lt. Bt th whlmn, as h
sks th fd of lght, s h lvs in lght. H mks hs brth an
Alddn’s lmp, and lys hm dwn in it; s tht in th ptchst nght
th shp’s blck hll stll hss an illmntn.

S wth wht entr frdm th whlmn tks hs hndfl of
lmps—oftn bt old bttls and vls, thgh—t th cppr clr at
th try-wrks, and rplnshs thm thr, as mgs of al at a vt. H
brns, t, th prst of ol, in its unmnfctrd, and, thrfr,
unvttd stt; a fld unknwn t slr, lnr, or astrl
cntrvncs ashr. It is swt as erly grss bttr in Aprl. H
gs and hnts fr hs ol, s as t b sr of its frshnss and
gnnnss, evn as th trvllr on th prr hnts up hs own
sppr of gm.


CHPTR 98. Stwng Dwn and Clrng Up.

Alrdy hs it bn rltd hw th grt lvthn is afr off
dscrd frm th mst-hd; hw h is chsd ovr th wtry mrs,
and slghtrd in th vllys of th dp; hw h is thn twd
alngsd and bhdd; and hw (on th prncpl whch enttld th
hdsmn of old t th grmnts in whch th bhdd ws klld) hs
grt pddd srtt bcms th prprty of hs exctnr; hw, in
d tm, h is cndmnd t th pts, and, lk Shdrch, Mshch, and
Abdng, hs sprmct, ol, and bn pss unscthd thrgh th
fr;—bt nw it rmns t cncld th lst chptr of ths prt of
th dscrptn by rhrsng—sngng, if I my—th rmntc prcdng
of dcntng off hs ol int th csks and strkng thm dwn int th
hld, whr onc agn lvthn rtrns t hs ntv prfndts,
sldng alng bnth th srfc as bfr; bt, als! nvr mr t
rs and blw.

Whl stll wrm, th ol, lk ht pnch, is rcvd int th
sx-brrl csks; and whl, prhps, th shp is ptchng and rllng
ths wy and tht in th mdnght s, th enrms csks ar slwd
rnd and hdd ovr, end fr end, and smtms prlsly sct
acrss th slppry dck, lk s mny lnd slds, tll at lst
mn-hndld and styd in thr crs; and all rnd th hps, rp,
rp, g as mny hmmrs as cn ply upn thm, fr nw, _ex offc_,
evry slr is a cpr.

At lngth, whn th lst pnt is cskd, and all is cl, thn th
grt htchwys ar unsld, th bwls of th shp ar thrwn opn,
and dwn g th csks t thr fnl rst in th s. Ths dn, th
htchs ar rplcd, and hrmtclly clsd, lk a clst wlld up.

In th sprm fshry, ths is prhps on of th mst rmrkbl
incdnts in all th bsnss of whlng. On dy th plnks strm
wth frshts of bld and ol; on th scrd qrtr-dck enrms
msss of th whl’s hd ar prfnly pld; grt rsty csks l
abt, as in a brwry yrd; th smk frm th try-wrks hs bstd
all th blwrks; th mrnrs g abt sffsd wth unctsnss; th
entr shp sms grt lvthn hmslf; whl on all hnds th dn
is dfnng.

Bt a dy or tw aftr, y lk abt y, and prck yr ers in ths
slf-sm shp; and wr it nt fr th tll-tl bts and try-wrks,
y wld all bt swr y trd sm slnt mrchnt vssl, wth a
mst scrplsly nt cmmndr. Th unmnfctrd sprm ol
psssss a snglrly clnsng vrt. Ths is th rsn why th
dcks nvr lk s wht as jst aftr wht thy cll an affr of
ol. Bsds, frm th ashs of th brnd scrps of th whl, a
ptnt ly is rdly md; and whnvr any adhsvnss frm th bck
of th whl rmns clngng t th sd, tht ly qckly
extrmnts it. Hnds g dlgntly alng th blwrks, and wth
bckts of wtr and rgs rstr thm t thr fll tdnss. Th st
is brshd frm th lwr rggng. All th nmrs implmnts whch
hv bn in us ar lkws fthflly clnsd and pt awy. Th
grt htch is scrbbd and plcd upn th try-wrks, cmpltly
hdng th pts; evry csk is ot of sght; all tckls ar cld in
unsn nks; and whn by th cmbnd and smltns indstry of
almst th entr shp’s cmpny, th whl of ths cnscnts dty
is at lst cncldd, thn th crw thmslvs prcd t thr own
abltns; shft thmslvs frm tp t t; and fnlly iss t th
immclt dck, frsh and all aglw, as brdgrms nw-lpd frm
ot th dntst Hllnd.

Nw, wth eltd stp, thy pc th plnks in tws and thrs, and
hmrsly dscrs of prlrs, sfs, crpts, and fn cmbrcs;
prps t mt th dck; thnk of hvng hngng t th tp; objct nt
t tkng t by mnlght on th pzz of th frcstl. T hnt t
sch mskd mrnrs of ol, and bn, and blbbr, wr lttl shrt
of adcty. Thy knw nt th thng y dstntly alld t. Awy, and
brng us npkns!

Bt mrk: alft thr, at th thr mst hds, stnd thr mn intnt
on spyng ot mr whls, whch, if cght, infllbly wll agn sl
th old okn frntr, and drp at lst on smll grs-spt
smwhr. Ys; and mny is th tm, whn, aftr th svrst
unntrrptd lbrs, whch knw n nght; cntnng strght thrgh
fr nnty-sx hrs; whn frm th bt, whr thy hv swlld thr
wrsts wth all dy rwng on th Ln,—thy only stp t th dck t
crry vst chns, and hv th hvy wndlss, and ct and slsh,
y, and in thr vry swtngs t b smkd and brnd anw by th
cmbnd frs of th eqtrl sn and th eqtrl try-wrks;
whn, on th hl of all ths, thy hv fnlly bstrrd thmslvs
t clns th shp, and mk a sptlss dry rm of it; mny is th
tm th pr fllws, jst bttnng th ncks of thr cln frcks,
ar strtld by th cry of “Thr sh blws!” and awy thy fly t
fght anthr whl, and g thrgh th whl wry thng agn. Oh! my
frnds, bt ths is mn-kllng! Yt ths is lf. Fr hrdly hv w
mrtls by lng tlngs extrctd frm ths wrld’s vst blk its
smll bt vlbl sprm; and thn, wth wry ptnc, clnsd
orslvs frm its dflmnts, and lrnd t lv hr in cln
tbrncls of th sl; hrdly is ths dn, whn—_Thr sh
blws!_—th ghst is sptd up, and awy w sl t fght sm othr
wrld, and g thrgh yng lf’s old rtn agn.

Oh! th mtmpsychss! Oh! Pythgrs, tht in brght Grc, tw
thsnd yrs ag, dd d, s gd, s ws, s mld; I sld wth
th alng th Prvn cst lst vyg—and, flsh as I am, tght
th, a grn smpl by, hw t splc a rp!


CHPTR 99. Th Dbln.

Er nw it hs bn rltd hw Ahb ws wnt t pc hs qrtr-dck,
tkng rglr trns at ethr lmt, th bnncl and mnmst; bt in
th mltplcty of othr thngs rqrng nrrtn it hs nt bn
addd hw tht smtms in ths wlks, whn mst plngd in hs md,
h ws wnt t ps in trn at ech spt, and stnd thr strngly
eyng th prtclr objct bfr hm. Whn h hltd bfr th
bnncl, wth hs glnc fstnd on th pntd ndl in th
cmpss, tht glnc sht lk a jvln wth th pntd intnsty of
hs prps; and whn rsmng hs wlk h agn psd bfr th
mnmst, thn, as th sm rvtd glnc fstnd upn th rvtd
gld cn thr, h stll wr th sm aspct of nld frmnss, only
dshd wth a crtn wld lngng, if nt hpflnss.

Bt on mrnng, trnng t pss th dbln, h smd t b nwly
attrctd by th strng fgrs and inscrptns stmpd on it, as
thgh nw fr th frst tm bgnnng t intrprt fr hmslf in
sm mnmnc wy whtvr sgnfcnc mght lrk in thm. And sm
crtn sgnfcnc lrks in all thngs, els all thngs ar lttl
wrth, and th rnd wrld itslf bt an empty cphr, excpt t sll
by th crtld, as thy d hlls abt Bstn, t fll up sm mrss
in th Mlky Wy.

Nw ths dbln ws of prst, vrgn gld, rkd smwhr ot of
th hrt of grgs hlls, whnc, est and wst, ovr gldn snds,
th hd-wtrs of mny a Pctls flws. And thgh nw nld amdst
all th rstnss of irn blts and th vrdgrs of cppr spks,
yt, untchbl and immclt t any flnss, it stll prsrvd its
Qt glw. Nr, thgh plcd amngst a rthlss crw and evry hr
pssd by rthlss hnds, and thrgh th lvlng nghts shrdd wth
thck drknss whch mght cvr any plfrng apprch, nvrthlss
evry snrs fnd th dbln whr th snst lft it lst. Fr it
ws st aprt and snctfd t on aw-strkng end; and hwvr
wntn in thr slr wys, on and all, th mrnrs rvrd it as
th wht whl’s tlsmn. Smtms thy tlkd it ovr in th wry
wtch by nght, wndrng whs it ws t b at lst, and whthr h
wld evr lv t spnd it.

Nw ths nbl gldn cns of Sth Amrc ar as mdls of th sn
and trpc tkn-pcs. Hr plms, alpcs, and vlcns; sn’s
dsks and strs; eclptcs, hrns-of-plnty, and rch bnnrs wvng,
ar in lxrnt prfsn stmpd; s tht th prcs gld sms
almst t drv an addd prcsnss and enhncng glrs, by
pssng thrgh ths fncy mnts, s Spnshly ptc.

It s chncd tht th dbln of th Pqd ws a mst wlthy
exmpl of ths thngs. On its rnd brdr it br th lttrs,
RPBLC DL ECDR: QT. S ths brght cn cm frm a cntry
plntd in th mddl of th wrld, and bnth th grt eqtr, and
nmd aftr it; and it hd bn cst mdwy up th Ands, in th
unwnng clm tht knws n atmn. Znd by ths lttrs y sw th
lknss of thr Ands’ smmts; frm on a flm; a twr on anthr;
on th thrd a crwng cck; whl archng ovr all ws a sgmnt of
th prttnd zdc, th sgns all mrkd wth thr usl
cblstcs, and th kystn sn entrng th eqnctl pnt at
Lbr.

Bfr ths eqtrl cn, Ahb, nt unbsrvd by othrs, ws nw
psng.

“Thr’s smthng evr egtstcl in mntn-tps and twrs, and
all othr grnd and lfty thngs; lk hr,—thr pks as prd as
Lcfr. Th frm twr, tht is Ahb; th vlcn, tht is Ahb; th
crgs, th undntd, and vctrs fwl, tht, t, is Ahb; all
ar Ahb; and ths rnd gld is bt th img of th rndr glb,
whch, lk a mgcn’s glss, t ech and evry mn in trn bt
mrrrs bck hs own mystrs slf. Grt pns, smll gns fr
ths wh ask th wrld t slv thm; it cnnt slv itslf. Mthnks
nw ths cnd sn wrs a rddy fc; bt s! ay, h entrs th
sgn of strms, th eqnx! and bt sx mnths bfr h whld ot
of a frmr eqnx at Ars! Frm strm t strm! S b it, thn. Brn
in thrs, ’ts ft tht mn shld lv in pns and d in pngs! S
b it, thn! Hr’s stt stff fr w t wrk on. S b it, thn.”

“N fry fngrs cn hv prssd th gld, bt dvl’s clws mst
hv lft thr mldngs thr snc ystrdy,” mrmrd Strbck t
hmslf, lnng agnst th blwrks. “Th old mn sms t rd
Blshzzr’s awfl wrtng. I hv nvr mrkd th cn inspctngly.
H gs blw; lt m rd. A drk vlly btwn thr mghty,
hvn-abdng pks, tht almst sm th Trnty, in sm fnt
erthly symbl. S in ths vl of Dth, Gd grds us rnd; and ovr
all or glm, th sn of Rghtsnss stll shns a bcn and a
hp. If w bnd dwn or eys, th drk vl shws hr mldy sl;
bt if w lft thm, th brght sn mts or glnc hlf wy, t
chr. Yt, oh, th grt sn is n fxtr; and if, at mdnght, w
wld fn sntch sm swt slc frm hm, w gz fr hm in vn!
Ths cn spks wsly, mldly, trly, bt stll sdly t m. I wll
qt it, lst Trth shk m flsly.”

“Thr nw’s th old Mgl,” sllqzd Stbb by th try-wrks, “h’s
bn twggng it; and thr gs Strbck frm th sm, and bth wth
fcs whch I shld sy mght b smwhr wthn nn fthms lng.
And all frm lkng at a pc of gld, whch dd I hv it nw on
Ngr Hll or in Crlr’s Hk, I’d nt lk at it vry lng er
spndng it. Hmph! in my pr, insgnfcnt opnn, I rgrd ths as
qr. I hv sn dblns bfr nw in my vygngs; yr dblns
of old Spn, yr dblns of Pr, yr dblns of Chl, yr
dblns of Blv, yr dblns of Ppyn; wth plnty of gld
mdrs and pstls, and js, and hlf js, and qrtr js. Wht
thn shld thr b in ths dbln of th Eqtr tht is s kllng
wndrfl? By Glcnd! lt m rd it onc. Hll! hr’s sgns and
wndrs trly! Tht, nw, is wht old Bwdtch in hs Eptm clls th
zdc, and wht my almnc blw clls dtt. I’ll gt th almnc and
as I hv hrd dvls cn b rsd wth Dbll’s arthmtc, I’ll try
my hnd at rsng a mnng ot of ths qr crvcs hr wth th
Msschstts clndr. Hr’s th bk. Lt’s s nw. Sgns and
wndrs; and th sn, h’s alwys amng ’em. Hm, hm, hm; hr thy
ar—hr thy g—all alv:—Ars, or th Rm; Trs, or th Bll and
Jmm! hr’s Gmn hmslf, or th Twns. Wll; th sn h whls
amng ’em. Ay, hr on th cn h’s jst crssng th thrshld
btwn tw of twlv sttng-rms all in a rng. Bk! y l thr;
th fct is, y bks mst knw yr plcs. Y’ll d t gv us th
br wrds and fcts, bt w cm in t spply th thghts. Tht’s my
smll exprnc, s fr as th Msschstts clndr, and Bwdtch’s
nvgtr, and Dbll’s arthmtc g. Sgns and wndrs, eh? Pty if
thr is nthng wndrfl in sgns, and sgnfcnt in wndrs!
Thr’s a cl smwhr; wt a bt; hst—hrk! By Jv, I hv it!
Lk y, Dbln, yr zdc hr is th lf of mn in on rnd
chptr; and nw I’ll rd it off, strght ot of th bk. Cm,
Almnck! T bgn: thr’s Ars, or th Rm—lchrs dg, h bgts
us; thn, Trs, or th Bll—h bmps us th frst thng; thn Gmn,
or th Twns—tht is, Vrt and Vc; w try t rch Vrt, whn l!
cms Cncr th Crb, and drgs us bck; and hr, gng frm Vrt,
L, a rrng Ln, ls in th pth—h gvs a fw frc bts and
srly dbs wth hs pw; w escp, and hl Vrg, th Vrgn! tht’s
or frst lv; w mrry and thnk t b hppy fr ay, whn pp cms
Lbr, or th Scls—hppnss wghd and fnd wntng; and whl w
ar vry sd abt tht, Lrd! hw w sddnly jmp, as Scrp, or th
Scrpn, stngs us in th rr; w ar crng th wnd, whn whng
cm th arrws all rnd; Sgttrs, or th Archr, is amsng
hmslf. As w plck ot th shfts, stnd asd! hr’s th
bttrng-rm, Cprcrns, or th Gt; fll tlt, h cms rshng,
and hdlng w ar tssd; whn Aqrs, or th Wtr-brr, prs
ot hs whl dlg and drwns us; and t wnd up wth Pscs, or th
Fshs, w slp. Thr’s a srmn nw, wrt in hgh hvn, and th
sn gs thrgh it evry yr, and yt cms ot of it all alv and
hrty. Jllly h, alft thr, whls thrgh tl and trbl; and
s, alw hr, ds jlly Stbb. Oh, jlly’s th wrd fr ay! Ad,
Dbln! Bt stp; hr cms lttl Kng-Pst; ddg rnd th
try-wrks, nw, and lt’s hr wht h’ll hv t sy. Thr; h’s
bfr it; h’ll ot wth smthng prsntly. S, s; h’s bgnnng.”

“I s nthng hr, bt a rnd thng md of gld, and whvr rss
a crtn whl, ths rnd thng blngs t hm. S, wht’s all ths
strng bn abt? It is wrth sxtn dllrs, tht’s tr; and at
tw cnts th cgr, tht’s nn hndrd and sxty cgrs. I wn’t
smk drty pps lk Stbb, bt I lk cgrs, and hr’s nn
hndrd and sxty of thm; s hr gs Flsk alft t spy ’em ot.”

“Shll I cll tht ws or flsh, nw; if it b rlly ws it hs a
flsh lk t it; yt, if it b rlly flsh, thn hs it a srt of
wssh lk t it. Bt, avst; hr cms or old Mnxmn—th old
hrs-drvr, h mst hv bn, tht is, bfr h tk t th s.
H lffs up bfr th dbln; hll, and gs rnd on th othr
sd of th mst; why, thr’s a hrs-sh nld on tht sd; and
nw h’s bck agn; wht ds tht mn? Hrk! h’s mttrng—vc
lk an old wrn-ot cff-mll. Prck ers, and lstn!”

“If th Wht Whl b rsd, it mst b in a mnth and a dy, whn
th sn stnds in sm on of ths sgns. I’v stdd sgns, and knw
thr mrks; thy wr tght m tw scr yrs ag, by th old wtch
in Cpnhgn. Nw, in wht sgn wll th sn thn b? Th hrs-sh
sgn; fr thr it is, rght oppst th gld. And wht’s th
hrs-sh sgn? Th ln is th hrs-sh sgn—th rrng and
dvrng ln. Shp, old shp! my old hd shks t thnk of th.”

“Thr’s anthr rndrng nw; bt stll on txt. All srts of mn in
on knd of wrld, y s. Ddg agn! hr cms Qqg—all
tttng—lks lk th sgns of th Zdc hmslf. Wht sys th
Cnnbl? As I lv h’s cmprng nts; lkng at hs thgh bn;
thnks th sn is in th thgh, or in th clf, or in th bwls, I
spps, as th old wmn tlk Srgn’s Astrnmy in th bck cntry.
And by Jv, h’s fnd smthng thr in th vcnty of hs thgh—I
gss it’s Sgttrs, or th Archr. N: h dn’t knw wht t mk
of th dbln; h tks it fr an old bttn off sm kng’s
trwsrs. Bt, asd agn! hr cms tht ghst-dvl, Fdllh; tl
cld ot of sght as usl, okm in th ts of hs pmps as usl.
Wht ds h sy, wth tht lk of hs? Ah, only mks a sgn t th
sgn and bws hmslf; thr is a sn on th cn—fr wrshppr,
dpnd upn it. H! mr and mr. Ths wy cms Pp—pr by! wld
h hd dd, or I; h’s hlf hrrbl t m. H t hs bn wtchng
all of ths intrprtrs—myslf incldd—and lk nw, h cms t
rd, wth tht unrthly idt fc. Stnd awy agn and hr hm.
Hrk!”

“I lk, y lk, h lks; w lk, y lk, thy lk.”

“Upn my sl, h’s bn stdyng Mrry’s Grmmr! Imprvng hs mnd,
pr fllw! Bt wht’s tht h sys nw—hst!”

“I lk, y lk, h lks; w lk, y lk, thy lk.”

“Why, h’s gttng it by hrt—hst! agn.”

“I lk, y lk, h lks; w lk, y lk, thy lk.”

“Wll, tht’s fnny.”

“And I, y, and h; and w, y, and thy, ar all bts; and I’m a
crw, espclly whn I stnd a’tp of ths pn tr hr. Cw! cw!
cw! cw! cw! cw! An’t I a crw? And whr’s th scr-crw? Thr
h stnds; tw bns stck int a pr of old trwsrs, and tw mr
pkd int th slvs of an old jckt.”

“Wndr if h mns m?—cmplmntry!—pr ld!—I cld g hng
myslf. Any wy, fr th prsnt, I’ll qt Pp’s vcnty. I cn stnd
th rst, fr thy hv pln wts; bt h’s t crzy-wtty fr my
snty. S, s, I lv hm mttrng.”

“Hr’s th shp’s nvl, ths dbln hr, and thy ar all on fr
t unscrw it. Bt, unscrw yr nvl, and wht’s th cnsqnc?
Thn agn, if it stys hr, tht is ugly, t, fr whn aght’s
nld t th mst it’s a sgn tht thngs grw dsprt. H, h! old
Ahb! th Wht Whl; h’ll nl y! Ths is a pn tr. My fthr,
in old Tllnd cnty, ct dwn a pn tr onc, and fnd a slvr
rng grwn ovr in it; sm old drky’s wddng rng. Hw dd it gt
thr? And s thy’ll sy in th rsrrctn, whn thy cm t fsh
up ths old mst, and fnd a dbln ldgd in it, wth bddd oystrs
fr th shggy brk. Oh, th gld! th prcs, prcs, gld! th
grn msr’ll hrd y sn! Hsh! hsh! Gd gs ’mng th wrlds
blckbrryng. Ck! h, ck! and ck us! Jnny! hy, hy, hy, hy,
hy, Jnny, Jnny! and gt yr h-ck dn!”


CHPTR 100. Lg and Arm.

Th Pqd, of Nntckt, Mts th Sml Endrby, of Lndn.

“Shp, ahy! Hst sn th Wht Whl?”

S crd Ahb, onc mr hlng a shp shwng Englsh clrs,
brng dwn undr th strn. Trmpt t mth, th old mn ws
stndng in hs hstd qrtr-bt, hs ivry lg plnly rvld t
th strngr cptn, wh ws crlssly rclnng in hs own bt’s
bw. H ws a drkly-tnnd, brly, gd-ntrd, fn-lkng mn, of
sxty or thrbts, drssd in a spcs rndbt, tht hng rnd
hm in fstns of bl plt-clth; and on empty arm of ths jckt
strmd bhnd hm lk th brdrd arm of a hssr’s srct.

“Hst sn th Wht Whl?”

“S y ths?” and wthdrwng it frm th flds tht hd hddn it,
h hld up a wht arm of sprm whl bn, trmntng in a wdn
hd lk a mllt.

“Mn my bt!” crd Ahb, imptsly, and tssng abt th ors nr
hm—“Stnd by t lwr!”

In lss thn a mnt, wtht qttng hs lttl crft, h and hs
crw wr drppd t th wtr, and wr sn alngsd of th
strngr. Bt hr a crs dffclty prsntd itslf. In th
exctmnt of th mmnt, Ahb hd frgttn tht snc th lss of hs
lg h hd nvr onc stppd on brd of any vssl at s bt hs
own, and thn it ws alwys by an ingns and vry hndy mchncl
cntrvnc pclr t th Pqd, and a thng nt t b rggd and
shppd in any othr vssl at a mmnt’s wrnng. Nw, it is n vry
esy mttr fr anybdy—excpt ths wh ar almst hrly usd t it,
lk whlmn—t clmbr up a shp’s sd frm a bt on th opn s;
fr th grt swlls nw lft th bt hgh up twrds th blwrks,
and thn instntnsly drp it hlf wy dwn t th klsn. S,
dprvd of on lg, and th strng shp of crs bng altgthr
unsppld wth th kndly invntn, Ahb nw fnd hmslf abjctly
rdcd t a clmsy lndsmn agn; hplssly eyng th uncrtn
chngfl hght h cld hrdly hp t attn.

It hs bfr bn hntd, prhps, tht evry lttl untwrd
crcmstnc tht bfll hm, and whch indrctly sprng frm hs
lcklss mshp, almst invrbly irrttd or exsprtd Ahb. And
in th prsnt instnc, all ths ws hghtnd by th sght of th
tw offcrs of th strng shp, lnng ovr th sd, by th
prpndclr lddr of nld clts thr, and swngng twrds hm a
pr of tstflly-ornmntd mn-rps; fr at frst thy dd nt sm
t bthnk thm tht a on-lggd mn mst b t mch of a crppl t
us thr s bnnstrs. Bt ths awkwrdnss only lstd a mnt,
bcs th strng cptn, obsrvng at a glnc hw affrs std,
crd ot, “I s, I s!—avst hvng thr! Jmp, bys, and swng
ovr th cttng-tckl.”

As gd lck wld hv it, thy hd hd a whl alngsd a dy or tw
prvs, and th grt tckls wr stll alft, and th mssv
crvd blbbr-hk, nw cln and dry, ws stll attchd t th end.
Ths ws qckly lwrd t Ahb, wh at onc cmprhndng it all,
sld hs sltry thgh int th crv of th hk (it ws lk sttng
in th flk of an anchr, or th crtch of an appl tr), and thn
gvng th wrd, hld hmslf fst, and at th sm tm als hlpd t
hst hs own wght, by pllng hnd-ovr-hnd upn on of th rnnng
prts of th tckl. Sn h ws crflly swng insd th hgh
blwrks, and gntly lndd upn th cpstn hd. Wth hs ivry arm
frnkly thrst frth in wlcm, th othr cptn advncd, and Ahb,
pttng ot hs ivry lg, and crssng th ivry arm (lk tw
swrd-fsh blds) crd ot in hs wlrs wy, “Ay, ay, hrty! lt
us shk bns tgthr!—an arm and a lg!—an arm tht nvr cn
shrnk, d’y s; and a lg tht nvr cn rn. Whr dd’st th s
th Wht Whl?—hw lng ag?”

“Th Wht Whl,” sd th Englshmn, pntng hs ivry arm twrds
th Est, and tkng a rfl sght alng it, as if it hd bn a
tlscp; “thr I sw hm, on th Ln, lst ssn.”

“And h tk tht arm off, dd h?” askd Ahb, nw sldng dwn frm
th cpstn, and rstng on th Englshmn’s shldr, as h dd s.

“Ay, h ws th cs of it, at lst; and tht lg, t?”

“Spn m th yrn,” sd Ahb; “hw ws it?”

“It ws th frst tm in my lf tht I evr crsd on th Ln,”
bgn th Englshmn. “I ws ignrnt of th Wht Whl at tht tm.
Wll, on dy w lwrd fr a pd of fr or fv whls, and my bt
fstnd t on of thm; a rglr crcs hrs h ws, t, tht wnt
mllng and mllng rnd s, tht my bt’s crw cld only trm dsh,
by sttng all thr strns on th otr gnwl. Prsntly up brchs
frm th bttm of th s a bncng grt whl, wth a mlky-wht
hd and hmp, all crws’ ft and wrnkls.”

“It ws h, it ws h!” crd Ahb, sddnly lttng ot hs sspndd
brth.

“And hrpns stckng in nr hs strbrd fn.”

“Ay, ay—thy wr mn—_my_ irns,” crd Ahb, exltngly—“bt on!”

“Gv m a chnc, thn,” sd th Englshmn, gd-hmrdly. “Wll,
ths old grt-grndfthr, wth th wht hd and hmp, rns all
afm int th pd, and gs t snppng frsly at my fst-ln!

“Ay, I s!—wntd t prt it; fr th fst-fsh—an old trck—I knw
hm.”

“Hw it ws exctly,” cntnd th on-armd cmmndr, “I d nt
knw; bt in btng th ln, it gt fl of hs tth, cght thr
smhw; bt w ddn’t knw it thn; s tht whn w aftrwrds plld
on th ln, bnc w cm plmp on t hs hmp! instd of th othr
whl’s; tht wnt off t wndwrd, all flkng. Sng hw mttrs
std, and wht a nbl grt whl it ws—th nblst and bggst I
evr sw, sr, in my lf—I rslvd t cptr hm, spt of th
blng rg h smd t b in. And thnkng th hp-hzrd ln wld
gt ls, or th tth it ws tngld t mght drw (fr I hv a
dvl of a bt’s crw fr a pll on a whl-ln); sng all ths, I
sy, I jmpd int my frst mt’s bt—Mr. Mnttp’s hr (by th
wy, Cptn—Mnttp; Mnttp—th cptn);—as I ws syng, I jmpd
int Mnttp’s bt, whch, d’y s, ws gnwl and gnwl wth
mn, thn; and sntchng th frst hrpn, lt ths old
grt-grndfthr hv it. Bt, Lrd, lk y, sr—hrts and sls
alv, mn—th nxt instnt, in a jff, I ws blnd as a bt—bth eys
ot—all bfggd and bddnd wth blck fm—th whl’s tl
lmng strght up ot of it, prpndclr in th ar, lk a mrbl
stpl. N us strnng all, thn; bt as I ws grpng at mddy,
wth a blndng sn, all crwn-jwls; as I ws grpng, I sy, aftr
th scnd irn, t tss it ovrbrd—dwn cms th tl lk a Lm
twr, cttng my bt in tw, lvng ech hlf in splntrs; and,
flks frst, th wht hmp bckd thrgh th wrck, as thgh it ws
all chps. W all strck ot. T escp hs trrbl fllngs, I
szd hld of my hrpn-pl stckng in hm, and fr a mmnt clng
t tht lk a sckng fsh. Bt a cmbng s dshd m off, and at
th sm instnt, th fsh, tkng on gd drt frwrds, wnt dwn
lk a flsh; and th brb of tht crsd scnd irn twng alng nr
m cght m hr” (clppng hs hnd jst blw hs shldr); “ys,
cght m jst hr, I sy, and br m dwn t Hll’s flms, I ws
thnkng; whn, whn, all of a sddn, thnk th gd Gd, th brb
rpt its wy alng th flsh—clr alng th whl lngth of my
arm—cm ot ngh my wrst, and up I fltd;—and tht gntlmn thr
wll tll y th rst (by th wy, cptn—Dr. Bngr, shp’s srgn:
Bngr, my ld,—th cptn). Nw, Bngr by, spn yr prt of th
yrn.”

Th prfssnl gntlmn ths fmlrly pntd ot, hd bn all
th tm stndng nr thm, wth nthng spcfc vsbl, t dnt
hs gntlmnly rnk on brd. Hs fc ws an excdngly rnd bt
sbr on; h ws drssd in a fdd bl wlln frck or shrt, and
ptchd trwsrs; and hd ths fr bn dvdng hs attntn btwn
a mrlngspk h hld in on hnd, and a pll-bx hld in th othr,
occsnlly cstng a crtcl glnc at th ivry lmbs of th tw
crppld cptns. Bt, at hs sprr’s intrdctn of hm t Ahb,
h pltly bwd, and strghtwy wnt on t d hs cptn’s bddng.

“It ws a shckng bd wnd,” bgn th whl-srgn; “and, tkng my
advc, Cptn Bmr hr, std or old Smmy—”

“Sml Endrby is th nm of my shp,” intrrptd th on-armd
cptn, addrssng Ahb; “g on, by.”

“Std or old Smmy off t th nrthwrd, t gt ot of th blzng
ht wthr thr on th Ln. Bt it ws n us—I dd all I cld; st
up wth hm nghts; ws vry svr wth hm in th mttr of dt—”

“Oh, vry svr!” chmd in th ptnt hmslf; thn sddnly
altrng hs vc, “Drnkng ht rm tdds wth m evry nght, tll
h cldn’t s t pt on th bndgs; and sndng m t bd, hlf
ss ovr, abt thr o’clck in th mrnng. Oh, y strs! h st up
wth m indd, and ws vry svr in my dt. Oh! a grt wtchr,
and vry dttclly svr, is Dr. Bngr. (Bngr, y dg, lgh
ot! why dn’t y? Y knw y’r a prcs jlly rscl.) Bt, hv
ahd, by, I’d rthr b klld by y thn kpt alv by any othr
mn.”

“My cptn, y mst hv er ths prcvd, rspctd sr”—sd th
imprtrbbl gdly-lkng Bngr, slghtly bwng t Ahb—“is apt t
b fcts at tms; h spns us mny clvr thngs of tht srt. Bt
I my as wll sy—en pssnt, as th Frnch rmrk—tht I myslf—tht
is t sy, Jck Bngr, lt of th rvrnd clrgy—am a strct ttl
abstnnc mn; I nvr drnk—”

“Wtr!” crd th cptn; “h nvr drnks it; it’s a srt of fts t
hm; frsh wtr thrws hm int th hydrphb; bt g on—g on wth
th arm stry.”

“Ys, I my as wll,” sd th srgn, clly. “I ws abt obsrvng,
sr, bfr Cptn Bmr’s fcts intrrptn, tht spt of my
bst and svrst endvrs, th wnd kpt gttng wrs and wrs;
th trth ws, sr, it ws as ugly gpng wnd as srgn evr sw;
mr thn tw ft and svrl inchs lng. I msrd it wth th ld
ln. In shrt, it grw blck; I knw wht ws thrtnd, and off it
cm. Bt I hd n hnd in shppng tht ivry arm thr; tht thng is
agnst all rl”—pntng at it wth th mrlngspk—“tht is th
cptn’s wrk, nt mn; h ordrd th crpntr t mk it; h hd
tht clb-hmmr thr pt t th end, t knck sm on’s brns ot
wth, I spps, as h trd mn onc. H fls int dblcl
pssns smtms. D y s ths dnt, sr”—rmvng hs ht, and
brshng asd hs hr, and expsng a bwl-lk cvty in hs skll,
bt whch br nt th slghtst scrry trc, or any tkn of evr
hvng bn a wnd—“Wll, th cptn thr wll tll y hw tht
cm hr; h knws.”

“N, I dn’t,” sd th cptn, “bt hs mthr dd; h ws brn wth
it. Oh, y slmn rg, y—y Bngr! ws thr evr sch anthr
Bngr in th wtry wrld? Bngr, whn y d, y oght t d in
pckl, y dg; y shld b prsrvd t ftr ags, y rscl.”

“Wht bcm of th Wht Whl?” nw crd Ahb, wh ths fr hd bn
imptntly lstnng t ths by-ply btwn th tw Englshmn.

“Oh!” crd th on-armd cptn, “oh, ys! Wll; aftr h sndd, w
ddn’t s hm agn fr sm tm; in fct, as I bfr hntd, I
ddn’t thn knw wht whl it ws tht hd srvd m sch a trck,
tll sm tm aftrwrds, whn cmng bck t th Ln, w hrd abt
Mby Dck—as sm cll hm—and thn I knw it ws h.”

“Dd’st th crss hs wk agn?”

“Twc.”

“Bt cld nt fstn?”

“Ddn’t wnt t try t: an’t on lmb engh? Wht shld I d wtht
ths othr arm? And I’m thnkng Mby Dck dsn’t bt s mch as h
swllws.”

“Wll, thn,” intrrptd Bngr, “gv hm yr lft arm fr bt t
gt th rght. D y knw, gntlmn”—vry grvly and mthmtclly
bwng t ech Cptn in sccssn—“D y knw, gntlmn, tht th
dgstv orgns of th whl ar s inscrtbly cnstrctd by Dvn
Prvdnc, tht it is qt impssbl fr hm t cmpltly dgst
evn a mn’s arm? And h knws it t. S tht wht y tk fr th
Wht Whl’s mlc is only hs awkwrdnss. Fr h nvr mns t
swllw a sngl lmb; h only thnks t trrfy by fnts. Bt
smtms h is lk th old jgglng fllw, frmrly a ptnt of
mn in Cyln, tht mkng blv swllw jck-knvs, onc upn a
tm lt on drp int hm in gd ernst, and thr it styd fr a
twlvmnth or mr; whn I gv hm an emtc, and h hvd it up in
smll tcks, d’y s. N pssbl wy fr hm t dgst tht
jck-knf, and flly incrprt it int hs gnrl bdly systm.
Ys, Cptn Bmr, if y ar qck engh abt it, and hv a mnd
t pwn on arm fr th sk of th prvlg of gvng dcnt brl
t th othr, why in tht cs th arm is yrs; only lt th whl
hv anthr chnc at y shrtly, tht’s all.”

“N, thnk y, Bngr,” sd th Englsh Cptn, “h’s wlcm t th
arm h hs, snc I cn’t hlp it, and ddn’t knw hm thn; bt nt t
anthr on. N mr Wht Whls fr m; I’v lwrd fr hm onc,
and tht hs stsfd m. Thr wld b grt glry in kllng hm, I
knw tht; and thr is a shp-ld of prcs sprm in hm, bt, hrk
y, h’s bst lt aln; dn’t y thnk s, Cptn?”—glncng at th
ivry lg.

“H is. Bt h wll stll b hntd, fr all tht. Wht is bst lt
aln, tht accrsd thng is nt alwys wht lst allrs. H’s all a
mgnt! Hw lng snc th sw’st hm lst? Whch wy hdng?”

“Blss my sl, and crs th fl fnd’s,” crd Bngr, stpngly
wlkng rnd Ahb, and lk a dg, strngly snffng; “ths mn’s
bld—brng th thrmmtr!—it’s at th blng pnt!—hs pls mks
ths plnks bt!—sr!”—tkng a lnct frm hs pckt, and drwng
nr t Ahb’s arm.

“Avst!” rrd Ahb, dshng hm agnst th blwrks—“Mn th bt!
Whch wy hdng?”

“Gd Gd!” crd th Englsh Cptn, t whm th qstn ws pt.
“Wht’s th mttr? H ws hdng est, I thnk.—Is yr Cptn
crzy?” whsprng Fdllh.

Bt Fdllh, pttng a fngr on hs lp, sld ovr th blwrks t
tk th bt’s strng or, and Ahb, swngng th cttng-tckl
twrds hm, cmmndd th shp’s slrs t stnd by t lwr.

In a mmnt h ws stndng in th bt’s strn, and th Mnll mn
wr sprngng t thr ors. In vn th Englsh Cptn hld hm.
Wth bck t th strngr shp, and fc st lk a flnt t hs own,
Ahb std uprght tll alngsd of th Pqd.


CHPTR 101. Th Dcntr.

Er th Englsh shp fds frm sght, b it st dwn hr, tht sh
hld frm Lndn, and ws nmd aftr th lt Sml Endrby,
mrchnt of tht cty, th orgnl of th fms whlng hs of
Endrby & Sns; a hs whch in my pr whlmn’s opnn, cms nt
fr bhnd th untd ryl hss of th Tdrs and Brbns, in pnt
of rl hstrcl intrst. Hw lng, prr t th yr of or Lrd
1775, ths grt whlng hs ws in exstnc, my nmrs
fsh-dcmnts d nt mk pln; bt in tht yr (1775) it fttd ot
th frst Englsh shps tht evr rglrly hntd th Sprm Whl;
thgh fr sm scr of yrs prvs (evr snc 1726) or vlnt
Cffns and Mcys of Nntckt and th Vnyrd hd in lrg flts
prsd tht Lvthn, bt only in th Nrth and Sth Atlntc: nt
elswhr. B it dstnctly rcrdd hr, tht th Nntcktrs wr
th frst amng mnknd t hrpn wth cvlzd stl th grt Sprm
Whl; and tht fr hlf a cntry thy wr th only ppl of th
whl glb wh s hrpnd hm.

In 1778, a fn shp, th Aml, fttd ot fr th exprss prps,
and at th sl chrg of th vgrs Endrbys, bldly rndd Cp
Hrn, and ws th frst amng th ntns t lwr a whl-bt of any
srt in th grt Sth S. Th vyg ws a sklfl and lcky on;
and rtrnng t hr brth wth hr hld fll of th prcs sprm,
th Aml’s exmpl ws sn fllwd by othr shps, Englsh and
Amrcn, and ths th vst Sprm Whl grnds of th Pcfc wr
thrwn opn. Bt nt cntnt wth ths gd dd, th indftgbl
hs agn bstrrd itslf: Sml and all hs Sns—hw mny, thr
mthr only knws—and undr thr immdt aspcs, and prtly, I
thnk, at thr expns, th Brtsh gvrnmnt ws indcd t snd th
slp-of-wr Rttlr on a whlng vyg of dscvry int th Sth
S. Cmmndd by a nvl Pst-Cptn, th Rttlr md a rttlng
vyg of it, and dd sm srvc; hw mch ds nt appr. Bt ths
is nt all. In 1819, th sm hs fttd ot a dscvry whl shp
of thr own, t g on a tstng crs t th rmt wtrs of Jpn.
Tht shp—wll clld th “Syrn”—md a nbl exprmntl crs; and
it ws ths tht th grt Jpns Whlng Grnd frst bcm
gnrlly knwn. Th Syrn in ths fms vyg ws cmmndd by a
Cptn Cffn, a Nntcktr.

All hnr t th Endrbs, thrfr, whs hs, I thnk, exsts t
th prsnt dy; thgh dbtlss th orgnl Sml mst lng ag
hv slppd hs cbl fr th grt Sth S of th othr wrld.

Th shp nmd aftr hm ws wrthy of th hnr, bng a vry fst
slr and a nbl crft evry wy. I brdd hr onc at mdnght
smwhr off th Ptgnn cst, and drnk gd flp dwn in th
frcstl. It ws a fn gm w hd, and thy wr all trmps—evry
sl on brd. A shrt lf t thm, and a jlly dth. And tht fn
gm I hd—lng, vry lng aftr old Ahb tchd hr plnks wth hs
ivry hl—it mnds m of th nbl, sld, Sxn hsptlty of tht
shp; and my my prsn frgt m, and th dvl rmmbr m, if I evr
ls sght of it. Flp? Dd I sy w hd flp? Ys, and w flppd it
at th rt of tn gllns th hr; and whn th sqll cm (fr it’s
sqlly off thr by Ptgn), and all hnds—vstrs and all—wr
clld t rf tpsls, w wr s tp-hvy tht w hd t swng ech
othr alft in bwlns; and w ignrntly frld th skrts of or
jckts int th sls, s tht w hng thr, rfd fst in th
hwlng gl, a wrnng exmpl t all drnkn trs. Hwvr, th msts
dd nt g ovrbrd; and by and by w scrmbld dwn, s sbr, tht
w hd t pss th flp agn, thgh th svg slt spry brstng
dwn th frcstl scttl, rthr t mch dltd and pckld it t
my tst.

Th bf ws fn—tgh, bt wth bdy in it. Thy sd it ws
bll-bf; othrs, tht it ws drmdry bf; bt I d nt knw, fr
crtn, hw tht ws. Thy hd dmplngs t; smll, bt sbstntl,
symmtrclly glblr, and indstrctbl dmplngs. I fncd tht
y cld fl thm, and rll thm abt in y aftr thy wr
swllwd. If y stpd ovr t fr frwrd, y rskd thr
ptchng ot of y lk bllrd-blls. Th brd—bt tht cldn’t b
hlpd; bsds, it ws an ant-scrbtc; in shrt, th brd
cntnd th only frsh fr thy hd. Bt th frcstl ws nt vry
lght, and it ws vry esy t stp ovr int a drk crnr whn y
at it. Bt all in all, tkng hr frm trck t hlm, cnsdrng th
dmnsns of th ck’s blrs, incldng hs own lv prchmnt
blrs; fr and aft, I sy, th Sml Endrby ws a jlly shp; of
gd fr and plnty; fn flp and strng; crck fllws all, and
cptl frm bt hls t ht-bnd.

Bt why ws it, thnk y, tht th Sml Endrby, and sm othr
Englsh whlrs I knw of—nt all thgh—wr sch fms, hsptbl
shps; tht pssd rnd th bf, and th brd, and th cn, and th
jk; and wr nt sn wry of etng, and drnkng, and lghng? I
wll tll y. Th abndng gd chr of ths Englsh whlrs is
mttr fr hstrcl rsrch. Nr hv I bn at all sprng of
hstrcl whl rsrch, whn it hs smd ndd.

Th Englsh wr prcdd in th whl fshry by th Hllndrs,
Zlndrs, and Dns; frm whm thy drvd mny trms stll extnt
in th fshry; and wht is yt mr, thr ft old fshns, tchng
plnty t et and drnk. Fr, as a gnrl thng, th Englsh
mrchnt-shp scrmps hr crw; bt nt s th Englsh whlr. Hnc,
in th Englsh, ths thng of whlng gd chr is nt nrml and
ntrl, bt incdntl and prtclr; and, thrfr, mst hv sm
spcl orgn, whch is hr pntd ot, and wll b stll frthr
elcdtd.

Drng my rsrchs in th Lvthnc hstrs, I stmbld upn an
ancnt Dtch vlm, whch, by th msty whlng smll of it, I knw
mst b abt whlrs. Th ttl ws, “Dn Cpmn,” whrfr I
cncldd tht ths mst b th invlbl mmrs of sm Amstrdm
cpr in th fshry, as evry whl shp mst crry its cpr. I ws
rnfrcd in ths opnn by sng tht it ws th prdctn of on
“Ftz Swckhmmr.” Bt my frnd Dr. Sndhd, a vry lrnd mn,
prfssr of Lw Dtch and Hgh Grmn in th cllg of Snt Cls
and St. Ptt’s, t whm I hndd th wrk fr trnsltn, gvng hm a
bx of sprm cndls fr hs trbl—ths sm Dr. Sndhd, s sn as
h spd th bk, assrd m tht “Dn Cpmn” dd nt mn “Th
Cpr,” bt “Th Mrchnt.” In shrt, ths ancnt and lrnd Lw
Dtch bk trtd of th cmmrc of Hllnd; and, amng othr
sbjcts, cntnd a vry intrstng accnt of its whl fshry.
And in ths chptr it ws, hdd, “Smr,” or “Ft,” tht I fnd a
lng dtld lst of th otfts fr th lrdrs and cllrs of 180
sl of Dtch whlmn; frm whch lst, as trnsltd by Dr. Sndhd,
I trnscrb th fllwng:

400,000 lbs. of bf. 60,000 lbs. Frslnd prk. 150,000 lbs. of stck
fsh. 550,000 lbs. of bsct. 72,000 lbs. of sft brd. 2,800 frkns
of bttr. 20,000 lbs. Txl & Lydn chs. 144,000 lbs. chs
(prbbly an infrr artcl). 550 ankrs of Gnv. 10,800 brrls of
br.

Mst sttstcl tbls ar prchngly dry in th rdng; nt s in
th prsnt cs, hwvr, whr th rdr is fldd wth whl
pps, brrls, qrts, and glls of gd gn and gd chr.

At th tm, I dvtd thr dys t th stds dgstng of all ths
br, bf, and brd, drng whch mny prfnd thghts wr
incdntlly sggstd t m, cpbl of a trnscndntl and Pltnc
applctn; and, frthrmr, I cmpld spplmntry tbls of my
own, tchng th prbbl qntty of stck-fsh, etc., cnsmd by
evry Lw Dtch hrpnr in tht ancnt Grnlnd and Sptzbrgn
whl fshry. In th frst plc, th amnt of bttr, and Txl and
Lydn chs cnsmd, sms amzng. I impt it, thgh, t thr
ntrlly uncts ntrs, bng rndrd stll mr uncts by th
ntr of thr vctn, and espclly by thr prsng thr gm
in ths frgd Plr Ss, on th vry csts of tht Esqmx
cntry whr th cnvvl ntvs pldg ech othr in bmprs of
trn ol.

Th qntty of br, t, is vry lrg, 10,800 brrls. Nw, as ths
plr fshrs cld only b prsctd in th shrt smmr of tht
clmt, s tht th whl crs of on of ths Dtch whlmn,
incldng th shrt vyg t and frm th Sptzbrgn s, dd nt
mch excd thr mnths, sy, and rcknng 30 mn t ech of thr
flt of 180 sl, w hv 5,400 Lw Dtch smn in all; thrfr, I
sy, w hv prcsly tw brrls of br pr mn, fr a twlv wks’
allwnc, exclsv of hs fr prprtn of tht 550 ankrs of gn.
Nw, whthr ths gn and br hrpnrs, s fddld as on mght
fncy thm t hv bn, wr th rght srt of mn t stnd up in a
bt’s hd, and tk gd am at flyng whls; ths wld sm
smwht imprbbl. Yt thy dd am at thm, and ht thm t. Bt
ths ws vry fr Nrth, b it rmmbrd, whr br agrs wll wth
th cnstttn; upn th Eqtr, in or sthrn fshry, br wld
b apt t mk th hrpnr slpy at th mst-hd and bzy in hs
bt; and grvs lss mght ens t Nntckt and Nw Bdfrd.

Bt n mr; engh hs bn sd t shw tht th old Dtch whlrs of
tw or thr cntrs ag wr hgh lvrs; and tht th Englsh
whlrs hv nt nglctd s excllnt an exmpl. Fr, sy thy, whn
crsng in an empty shp, if y cn gt nthng bttr ot of th
wrld, gt a gd dnnr ot of it, at lst. And ths empts th
dcntr.


CHPTR 102. A Bwr in th Arscds.

Hthrt, in dscrptvly trtng of th Sprm Whl, I hv chfly
dwlt upn th mrvls of hs otr aspct; or sprtly and in dtl
upn sm fw intrr strctrl ftrs. Bt t a lrg and thrgh
swpng cmprhnsn of hm, it bhvs m nw t unbttn hm stll
frthr, and untggng th pnts of hs hs, unbcklng hs grtrs,
and cstng ls th hks and th eys of th jnts of hs innrmst
bns, st hm bfr y in hs ultmtm; tht is t sy, in hs
uncndtnl skltn.

Bt hw nw, Ishml? Hw is it, tht y, a mr orsmn in th
fshry, prtnd t knw aght abt th sbtrrnn prts of th
whl? Dd erdt Stbb, mntd upn yr cpstn, dlvr lctrs
on th antmy of th Ctc; and by hlp of th wndlss, hld up a
spcmn rb fr exhbtn? Expln thyslf, Ishml. Cn y lnd a
fll-grwn whl on yr dck fr exmntn, as a ck dshs a
rst-pg? Srly nt. A vrtbl wtnss hv y hthrt bn,
Ishml; bt hv a cr hw y sz th prvlg of Jnh aln;
th prvlg of dscrsng upn th jsts and bms; th rftrs,
rdg-pl, slprs, and undr-pnnngs, mkng up th frm-wrk of
lvthn; and blk of th tllw-vts, dry-rms, bttrs, and
chsrs in hs bwls.

I cnfss, tht snc Jnh, fw whlmn hv pntrtd vry fr
bnth th skn of th adlt whl; nvrthlss, I hv bn blssd
wth an opprtnty t dssct hm in mntr. In a shp I blngd
t, a smll cb Sprm Whl ws onc bdly hstd t th dck fr hs
pk or bg, t mk shths fr th brbs of th hrpns, and fr th
hds of th lncs. Thnk y I lt tht chnc g, wtht usng my
bt-htcht and jck-knf, and brkng th sl and rdng all th
cntnts of tht yng cb?

And as fr my exct knwldg of th bns of th lvthn in thr
ggntc, fll grwn dvlpmnt, fr tht rr knwldg I am indbtd
t my lt ryl frnd Trnq, kng of Trnq, on of th Arscds.
Fr bng at Trnq, yrs ag, whn attchd t th trdng-shp Dy
of Algrs, I ws invtd t spnd prt of th Arscdn hldys wth
th lrd of Trnq, at hs rtrd plm vll at Ppll; a s-sd
gln nt vry fr dstnt frm wht or slrs clld Bmb-Twn, hs
cptl.

Amng mny othr fn qlts, my ryl frnd Trnq, bng gftd
wth a dvt lv fr all mttrs of brbrc vrt, hd brght
tgthr in Ppll whtvr rr thngs th mr ingns of hs
ppl cld invnt; chfly crvd wds of wndrfl dvcs,
chslld shlls, inld sprs, cstly pddls, armtc cns; and
all ths dstrbtd amng whtvr ntrl wndrs, th
wndr-frghtd, trbt-rndrng wvs hd cst upn hs shrs.

Chf amng ths lttr ws a grt Sprm Whl, whch, aftr an
unslly lng rgng gl, hd bn fnd dd and strndd, wth hs
hd agnst a cc-nt tr, whs plmg-lk, tftd drpngs
smd hs vrdnt jt. Whn th vst bdy hd at lst bn strppd of
its fthm-dp enfldngs, and th bns bcm dst dry in th sn,
thn th skltn ws crflly trnsprtd up th Ppll gln, whr
a grnd tmpl of lrdly plms nw shltrd it.

Th rbs wr hng wth trphs; th vrtbræ wr crvd wth
Arscdn annls, in strng hrglyphcs; in th skll, th prsts
kpt up an unxtngshd armtc flm, s tht th mystc hd agn
snt frth its vpry spt; whl, sspndd frm a bgh, th
trrfc lwr jw vbrtd ovr all th dvts, lk th hr-hng
swrd tht s affrghtd Dmcls.

It ws a wndrs sght. Th wd ws grn as msss of th Icy Gln;
th trs std hgh and hghty, flng thr lvng sp; th
indstrs erth bnth ws as a wvr’s lm, wth a grgs
crpt on it, whrf th grnd-vn tndrls frmd th wrp and
wf, and th lvng flwrs th fgrs. All th trs, wth all thr
ldn brnchs; all th shrbs, and frns, and grsss; th
mssg-crryng ar; all ths uncsngly wr actv. Thrgh th
lcngs of th lvs, th grt sn smd a flyng shttl wvng
th unwrd vrdr. Oh, bsy wvr! unsn wvr!—ps!—on
wrd!—whthr flws th fbrc? wht plc my it dck? whrfr all
ths cslss tlngs? Spk, wvr!—sty thy hnd!—bt on sngl
wrd wth th! Ny—th shttl fls—th fgrs flt frm frth th
lm; th frsht-rshng crpt fr evr slds awy. Th wvr-gd,
h wvs; and by tht wvng is h dfnd, tht h hrs n mrtl
vc; and by tht hmmng, w, t, wh lk on th lm ar dfnd;
and only whn w escp it shll w hr th thsnd vcs tht spk
thrgh it. Fr evn s it is in all mtrl fctrs. Th spkn
wrds tht ar indbl amng th flyng spndls; ths sm wrds
ar plnly hrd wtht th wlls, brstng frm th opnd
csmnts. Thrby hv vllns bn dtctd. Ah, mrtl! thn, b
hdfl; fr s, in all ths dn of th grt wrld’s lm, thy
sbtlst thnkngs my b ovrhrd afr.

Nw, amd th grn, lf-rstlss lm of tht Arscdn wd, th
grt, wht, wrshppd skltn ly lngng—a ggntc idlr! Yt,
as th evr-wvn vrdnt wrp and wf intrmxd and hmmd arnd
hm, th mghty idlr smd th cnnng wvr; hmslf all wvn ovr
wth th vns; evry mnth assmng grnr, frshr vrdr; bt
hmslf a skltn. Lf fldd Dth; Dth trllsd Lf; th grm
gd wvd wth ythfl Lf, and bgt hm crly-hdd glrs.

Nw, whn wth ryl Trnq I vstd ths wndrs whl, and sw th
skll an altr, and th artfcl smk ascndng frm whr th rl
jt hd issd, I mrvlld tht th kng shld rgrd a chpl as an
objct of vrt. H lghd. Bt mr I mrvlld tht th prsts
shld swr tht smky jt of hs ws gnn. T and fr I pcd
bfr ths skltn—brshd th vns asd—brk thrgh th rbs—and
wth a bll of Arscdn twn, wndrd, eddd lng amd its mny
wndng, shdd clnnds and arbrs. Bt sn my ln ws ot; and
fllwng it bck, I emrgd frm th opnng whr I entrd. I sw n
lvng thng wthn; nght ws thr bt bns.

Cttng m a grn msrng-rd, I onc mr dvd wthn th
skltn. Frm thr arrw-slt in th skll, th prsts prcvd m
tkng th alttd of th fnl rb, “Hw nw!” thy shtd; “Dr’st
th msr ths or gd! Tht’s fr us.” “Ay, prsts—wll, hw lng
d y mk hm, thn?” Bt hrpn a frc cntst rs amng thm,
cncrnng ft and inchs; thy crckd ech othr’s scncs wth
thr yrd-stcks—th grt skll echd—and szng tht lcky chnc,
I qckly cncldd my own admsrmnts.

Ths admsrmnts I nw prps t st bfr y. Bt frst, b it
rcrdd, tht, in ths mttr, I am nt fr t uttr any fncd
msrmnt I pls. Bcs thr ar skltn athrts y cn
rfr t, t tst my accrcy. Thr is a Lvthnc Msm, thy tll
m, in Hll, Englnd, on of th whlng prts of tht cntry, whr
thy hv sm fn spcmns of fn-bcks and othr whls. Lkws,
I hv hrd tht in th msm of Mnchstr, in Nw Hmpshr, thy
hv wht th prprtrs cll “th only prfct spcmn of a
Grnlnd or Rvr Whl in th Untd Stts.” Mrvr, at a plc in
Yrkshr, Englnd, Brtn Cnstbl by nm, a crtn Sr Clffrd
Cnstbl hs in hs pssssn th skltn of a Sprm Whl, bt of
mdrt sz, by n mns of th fll-grwn mgntd of my frnd
Kng Trnq’s.

In bth css, th strndd whls t whch ths tw skltns
blngd, wr orgnlly clmd by thr prprtrs upn smlr
grnds. Kng Trnq szng hs bcs h wntd it; and Sr
Clffrd, bcs h ws lrd of th sgnrs of ths prts. Sr
Clffrd’s whl hs bn artcltd thrght; s tht, lk a grt
chst of drwrs, y cn opn and sht hm, in all hs bny
cvts—sprd ot hs rbs lk a ggntc fn—and swng all dy upn
hs lwr jw. Lcks ar t b pt upn sm of hs trp-drs and
shttrs; and a ftmn wll shw rnd ftr vstrs wth a bnch of
kys at hs sd. Sr Clffrd thnks of chrgng twpnc fr a pp
at th whsprng gllry in th spnl clmn; thrpnc t hr th
ech in th hllw of hs crbllm; and sxpnc fr th unrvlld
vw frm hs frhd.

Th skltn dmnsns I shll nw prcd t st dwn ar cpd
vrbtm frm my rght arm, whr I hd thm tttd; as in my wld
wndrngs at tht prd, thr ws n othr scr wy of prsrvng
sch vlbl sttstcs. Bt as I ws crwdd fr spc, and wshd
th othr prts of my bdy t rmn a blnk pg fr a pm I ws thn
cmpsng—at lst, wht untttd prts mght rmn—I dd nt
trbl myslf wth th odd inchs; nr, indd, shld inchs at all
entr int a cngnl admsrmnt of th whl.


CHPTR 103. Msrmnt of Th Whl’s Skltn.

In th frst plc, I wsh t ly bfr y a prtclr, pln
sttmnt, tchng th lvng blk of ths lvthn, whs skltn
w ar brfly t exhbt. Sch a sttmnt my prv usfl hr.

Accrdng t a crfl clcltn I hv md, and whch I prtly bs
upn Cptn Scrsby’s estmt, of svnty tns fr th lrgst szd
Grnlnd whl of sxty ft in lngth; accrdng t my crfl
clcltn, I sy, a Sprm Whl of th lrgst mgntd, btwn
eghty-fv and nnty ft in lngth, and smthng lss thn frty
ft in its fllst crcmfrnc, sch a whl wll wgh at lst
nnty tns; s tht, rcknng thrtn mn t a tn, h wld
cnsdrbly otwgh th cmbnd ppltn of a whl vllg of on
thsnd on hndrd inhbtnts.

Thnk y nt thn tht brns, lk ykd cttl, shld b pt t
ths lvthn, t mk hm at all bdg t any lndsmn’s imgntn?

Hvng alrdy in vrs wys pt bfr y hs skll, spt-hl,
jw, tth, tl, frhd, fns, and dvrs othr prts, I shll nw
smply pnt ot wht is mst intrstng in th gnrl blk of hs
unbstrctd bns. Bt as th clssl skll embrcs s vry lrg a
prprtn of th entr extnt of th skltn; as it is by fr th
mst cmplctd prt; and as nthng is t b rptd cncrnng it
in ths chptr, y mst nt fl t crry it in yr mnd, or undr
yr arm, as w prcd, othrws y wll nt gn a cmplt ntn
of th gnrl strctr w ar abt t vw.

In lngth, th Sprm Whl’s skltn at Trnq msrd svnty-tw
ft; s tht whn flly invstd and extndd in lf, h mst hv
bn nnty ft lng; fr in th whl, th skltn lss abt on
ffth in lngth cmprd wth th lvng bdy. Of ths svnty-tw
ft, hs skll and jw cmprsd sm twnty ft, lvng sm ffty
ft of pln bck-bn. Attchd t ths bck-bn, fr smthng lss
thn a thrd of its lngth, ws th mghty crclr bskt of rbs
whch onc enclsd hs vtls.

T m ths vst ivry-rbbd chst, wth th lng, unrlvd spn,
extndng fr awy frm it in a strght ln, nt a lttl rsmbld
th hll of a grt shp nw-ld upn th stcks, whn only sm
twnty of hr nkd bw-rbs ar insrtd, and th kl is othrws,
fr th tm, bt a lng, dscnnctd tmbr.

Th rbs wr tn on a sd. Th frst, t bgn frm th nck, ws
nrly sx ft lng; th scnd, thrd, and frth wr ech
sccssvly lngr, tll y cm t th clmx of th ffth, or on
of th mddl rbs, whch msrd eght ft and sm inchs. Frm
tht prt, th rmnng rbs dmnshd, tll th tnth and lst only
spnnd fv ft and sm inchs. In gnrl thcknss, thy all br
a smly crrspndnc t thr lngth. Th mddl rbs wr th mst
archd. In sm of th Arscds thy ar usd fr bms whrn t ly
ftpth brdgs ovr smll strms.

In cnsdrng ths rbs, I cld nt bt b strck anw wth th
crcmstnc, s vrsly rptd in ths bk, tht th skltn of
th whl is by n mns th mld of hs invstd frm. Th lrgst of
th Trnq rbs, on of th mddl ons, occpd tht prt of th
fsh whch, in lf, is grtst in dpth. Nw, th grtst dpth of
th invstd bdy of ths prtclr whl mst hv bn at lst
sxtn ft; whrs, th crrspndng rb msrd bt lttl mr
thn eght ft. S tht ths rb only cnvyd hlf of th tr ntn
of th lvng mgntd of tht prt. Bsds, fr sm wy, whr I
nw sw bt a nkd spn, all tht hd bn onc wrppd rnd wth
tns of addd blk in flsh, mscl, bld, and bwls. Stll mr, fr
th ampl fns, I hr sw bt a fw dsrdrd jnts; and in plc of
th wghty and mjstc, bt bnlss flks, an uttr blnk!

Hw vn and flsh, thn, thght I, fr tmd untrvlld mn t try
t cmprhnd arght ths wndrs whl, by mrly prng ovr hs
dd attntd skltn, strtchd in ths pcfl wd. N. Only in
th hrt of qckst prls; only whn wthn th eddyngs of hs
angry flks; only on th prfnd unbndd s, cn th flly
invstd whl b trly and lvngly fnd ot.

Bt th spn. Fr tht, th bst wy w cn cnsdr it is, wth a
crn, t pl its bns hgh up on end. N spdy entrprs. Bt nw
it’s dn, it lks mch lk Pmpy’s Pllr.

Thr ar frty and odd vrtbræ in all, whch in th skltn ar nt
lckd tgthr. Thy mstly l lk th grt knbbd blcks on a
Gthc spr, frmng sld crss of hvy msnry. Th lrgst, a
mddl on, is in wdth smthng lss thn thr ft, and in dpth
mr thn fr. Th smllst, whr th spn tprs awy int th
tl, is only tw inchs in wdth, and lks smthng lk a wht
bllrd-bll. I ws tld tht thr wr stll smllr ons, bt thy
hd bn lst by sm lttl cnnbl urchns, th prst’s chldrn,
wh hd stln thm t ply mrbls wth. Ths w s hw tht th
spn of evn th hgst of lvng thngs tprs off at lst int
smpl chld’s ply.


CHPTR 104. Th Fssl Whl.

Frm hs mghty blk th whl affrds a mst cngnl thm whrn
t enlrg, amplfy, and gnrlly exptt. Wld y, y cld nt
cmprss hm. By gd rghts h shld only b trtd of in imprl
fl. Nt t tll ovr agn hs frlngs frm sprcl t tl, and
th yrds h msrs abt th wst; only thnk of th ggntc
invltns of hs intstns, whr thy l in hm lk grt cbls
and hwsrs cld awy in th sbtrrnn orlp-dck of a
ln-of-bttl-shp.

Snc I hv undrtkn t mnhndl ths Lvthn, it bhvs m t
apprv myslf omnscntly exhstv in th entrprs; nt
ovrlkng th mntst smnl grms of hs bld, and spnnng hm
ot t th uttrmst cl of hs bwls. Hvng alrdy dscrbd hm
in mst of hs prsnt hbttry and antmcl pclrts, it nw
rmns t mgnfy hm in an archæolgcl, fsslfrs, and
antdlvn pnt of vw. Appld t any othr crtr thn th
Lvthn—t an ant or a fl—sch prtly trms mght jstly b dmd
unwrrntbly grndlqnt. Bt whn Lvthn is th txt, th cs
is altrd. Fn am I t stggr t ths emprs undr th wghtst
wrds of th dctnry. And hr b it sd, tht whnvr it hs bn
cnvnnt t cnslt on in th crs of ths dssrttns, I hv
invrbly usd a hg qrt edtn of Jhnsn, exprssly prchsd
fr tht prps; bcs tht fms lxcgrphr’s uncmmn prsnl
blk mr fttd hm t cmpl a lxcn t b usd by a whl athr
lk m.

On oftn hrs of wrtrs tht rs and swll wth thr sbjct,
thgh it my sm bt an ordnry on. Hw, thn, wth m, wrtng of
ths Lvthn? Uncnscsly my chrgrphy expnds int plcrd
cptls. Gv m a cndr’s qll! Gv m Vsvs’ crtr fr an
inkstnd! Frnds, hld my arms! Fr in th mr act of pnnng my
thghts of ths Lvthn, thy wry m, and mk m fnt wth thr
otrchng cmprhnsvnss of swp, as if t incld th whl
crcl of th scncs, and all th gnrtns of whls, and mn, and
mstdns, pst, prsnt, and t cm, wth all th rvlvng pnrms
of empr on erth, and thrght th whl unvrs, nt excldng
its sbrbs. Sch, and s mgnfyng, is th vrt of a lrg and
lbrl thm! W expnd t its blk. T prdc a mghty bk, y
mst chs a mghty thm. N grt and endrng vlm cn evr b
wrttn on th fl, thgh mny thr b wh hv trd it.

Er entrng upn th sbjct of Fssl Whls, I prsnt my
crdntls as a glgst, by sttng tht in my mscllns tm I
hv bn a stn-msn, and als a grt dggr of dtchs, cnls and
wlls, wn-vlts, cllrs, and cstrns of all srts. Lkws, by
wy of prlmnry, I dsr t rmnd th rdr, tht whl in th
erlr glgcl strt thr ar fnd th fssls of mnstrs nw
almst cmpltly extnct; th sbsqnt rlcs dscvrd in wht ar
clld th Trtry frmtns sm th cnnctng, or at any rt
intrcptd lnks, btwn th antchrncl crtrs, and ths whs
rmt pstrty ar sd t hv entrd th Ark; all th Fssl
Whls hthrt dscvrd blng t th Trtry prd, whch is th
lst prcdng th sprfcl frmtns. And thgh nn of thm
prcsly answr t any knwn spcs of th prsnt tm, thy ar yt
sffcntly akn t thm in gnrl rspcts, t jstfy thr tkng
rnk as Ctcn fssls.

Dtchd brkn fssls of pr-admt whls, frgmnts of thr bns
and skltns, hv wthn thrty yrs pst, at vrs intrvls,
bn fnd at th bs of th Alps, in Lmbrdy, in Frnc, in Englnd,
in Sctlnd, and in th Stts of Lsn, Msssspp, and Albm.
Amng th mr crs of sch rmns is prt of a skll, whch in th
yr 1779 ws dsntrrd in th R Dphn in Prs, a shrt strt
opnng almst drctly upn th plc of th Tlrs; and bns
dsntrrd in excvtng th grt dcks of Antwrp, in Npln’s
tm. Cvr prnncd ths frgmnts t hv blngd t sm
uttrly unknwn Lvthnc spcs.

Bt by fr th mst wndrfl of all Ctcn rlcs ws th almst
cmplt vst skltn of an extnct mnstr, fnd in th yr 1842,
on th plnttn of Jdg Crgh, in Albm. Th aw-strckn
crdls slvs in th vcnty tk it fr th bns of on of th
flln angls. Th Albm dctrs dclrd it a hg rptl, and
bstwd upn it th nm of Bslsrs. Bt sm spcmn bns of
it bng tkn acrss th s t Own, th Englsh Antmst, it trnd
ot tht ths allgd rptl ws a whl, thgh of a dprtd
spcs. A sgnfcnt illstrtn of th fct, agn and agn
rptd in ths bk, tht th skltn of th whl frnshs bt
lttl cl t th shp of hs flly invstd bdy. S Own
rchrstnd th mnstr Zgldn; and in hs ppr rd bfr th
Lndn Glgcl Scty, prnncd it, in sbstnc, on of th mst
extrrdnry crtrs whch th mttns of th glb hv blttd
ot of exstnc.

Whn I stnd amng ths mghty Lvthn skltns, sklls, tsks,
jws, rbs, and vrtbræ, all chrctrzd by prtl rsmblncs t
th exstng brds of s-mnstrs; bt at th sm tm brng on
th othr hnd smlr affnts t th annhltd antchrncl
Lvthns, thr inclclbl snrs; I am, by a fld, brn bck t
tht wndrs prd, er tm itslf cn b sd t hv bgn; fr
tm bgn wth mn. Hr Strn’s gry chs rlls ovr m, and I
obtn dm, shddrng glmpss int ths Plr etrnts; whn
wdgd bstns of ic prssd hrd upn wht ar nw th Trpcs; and
in all th 25,000 mls of ths wrld’s crcmfrnc, nt an
inhbtbl hnd’s brdth of lnd ws vsbl. Thn th whl wrld
ws th whl’s; and, kng of crtn, h lft hs wk alng th
prsnt lns of th Ands and th Hmmlhs. Wh cn shw a pdgr
lk Lvthn? Ahb’s hrpn hd shd oldr bld thn th Phrh’s.
Mthslh sms a schl-by. I lk rnd t shk hnds wth Shm. I
am hrrr-strck at ths antmsc, unsrcd exstnc of th
unspkbl trrrs of th whl, whch, hvng bn bfr all tm,
mst nds exst aftr all hmn ags ar ovr.

Bt nt aln hs ths Lvthn lft hs pr-admt trcs in th
strtyp plts of ntr, and in lmstn and mrl bqthd hs
ancnt bst; bt upn Egyptn tblts, whs antqty sms t clm
fr thm an almst fsslfrs chrctr, w fnd th unmstkbl
prnt of hs fn. In an aprtmnt of th grt tmpl of Dndrh, sm
ffty yrs ag, thr ws dscvrd upn th grnt clng a
sclptrd and pntd plnsphr, abndng in cntrs, grffns,
and dlphns, smlr t th grtsq fgrs on th clstl glb
of th mdrns. Gldng amng thm, old Lvthn swm as of yr; ws
thr swmmng in tht plnsphr, cntrs bfr Slmn ws
crdld.

Nr mst thr b omttd anthr strng attsttn of th antqty
of th whl, in hs own osss pst-dlvn rlty, as st dwn by
th vnrbl Jhn L, th old Brbry trvllr.

“Nt fr frm th S-sd, thy hv a Tmpl, th Rftrs and Bms
of whch ar md of Whl-Bns; fr Whls of a mnstrs sz ar
oftntms cst up dd upn tht shr. Th Cmmn Ppl imgn,
tht by a scrt Pwr bstwd by Gd upn th Tmpl, n Whl cn
pss it wtht immdt dth. Bt th trth of th Mttr is, tht
on ethr sd of th Tmpl, thr ar Rcks tht sht tw Mls int
th S, and wnd th Whls whn thy lght upn ’em. Thy kp a
Whl’s Rb of an incrdbl lngth fr a Mrcl, whch lyng upn th
Grnd wth its cnvx prt upprmst, mks an Arch, th Hd of whch
cnnt b rchd by a Mn upn a Cml’s Bck. Ths Rb (sys Jhn
L) is sd t hv lyn thr a hndrd Yrs bfr I sw it. Thr
Hstrns affrm, tht a Prpht wh prphsy’d of Mhmt, cm frm
ths Tmpl, and sm d nt stnd t assrt, tht th Prpht Jns
ws cst frth by th Whl at th Bs of th Tmpl.”

In ths Afrc Tmpl of th Whl I lv y, rdr, and if y b a
Nntcktr, and a whlmn, y wll slntly wrshp thr.


CHPTR 105. Ds th Whl’s Mgntd Dmnsh?—Wll H Prsh?

Insmch, thn, as ths Lvthn cms flndrng dwn upn us frm
th hd-wtrs of th Etrnts, it my b ftly inqrd, whthr,
in th lng crs of hs gnrtns, h hs nt dgnrtd frm th
orgnl blk of hs srs.

Bt upn invstgtn w fnd, tht nt only ar th whls of th
prsnt dy sprr in mgntd t ths whs fssl rmns ar
fnd in th Trtry systm (embrcng a dstnct glgcl prd
prr t mn), bt of th whls fnd in tht Trtry systm, ths
blngng t its lttr frmtns excd in sz ths of its erlr
ons.

Of all th pr-admt whls yt exhmd, by fr th lrgst is th
Albm on mntnd in th lst chptr, and tht ws lss thn
svnty ft in lngth in th skltn. Whrs, w hv alrdy sn,
tht th tp-msr gvs svnty-tw ft fr th skltn of a
lrg szd mdrn whl. And I hv hrd, on whlmn’s athrty,
tht Sprm Whls hv bn cptrd nr a hndrd ft lng at th
tm of cptr.

Bt my it nt b, tht whl th whls of th prsnt hr ar an
advnc in mgntd upn ths of all prvs glgcl prds; my
it nt b, tht snc Adm’s tm thy hv dgnrtd?

Assrdly, w mst cncld s, if w ar t crdt th accnts of
sch gntlmn as Plny, and th ancnt ntrlsts gnrlly. Fr
Plny tlls us of whls tht embrcd acrs of lvng blk, and
Aldrvnds of othrs whch msrd eght hndrd ft in lngth—Rp
Wlks and Thms Tnnls of Whls! And evn in th dys of Bnks and
Slndr, Ck’s ntrlsts, w fnd a Dnsh mmbr of th Acdmy
of Scncs sttng dwn crtn Iclnd Whls (rydn-sskr, or
Wrnkld Blls) at on hndrd and twnty yrds; tht is, thr
hndrd and sxty ft. And Lcépèd, th Frnch ntrlst, in hs
elbrt hstry of whls, in th vry bgnnng of hs wrk (pg
3), sts dwn th Rght Whl at on hndrd mtrs, thr hndrd and
twnty-eght ft. And ths wrk ws pblshd s lt as A.D. 1825.

Bt wll any whlmn blv ths strs? N. Th whl of t-dy is
as bg as hs ancstrs in Plny’s tm. And if evr I g whr Plny
is, I, a whlmn (mr thn h ws), wll mk bld t tll hm s.
Bcs I cnnt undrstnd hw it is, tht whl th Egyptn mmms
tht wr brd thsnds of yrs bfr evn Plny ws brn, d nt
msr s mch in thr cffns as a mdrn Kntckn in hs scks;
and whl th cttl and othr anmls sclptrd on th oldst
Egyptn and Nnvh tblts, by th rltv prprtns in whch thy
ar drwn, jst as plnly prv tht th hgh-brd, stll-fd, prz
cttl of Smthfld, nt only eql, bt fr excd in mgntd th
fttst of Phrh’s ft kn; in th fc of all ths, I wll nt
admt tht of all anmls th whl aln shld hv dgnrtd.

Bt stll anthr inqry rmns; on oftn agttd by th mr
rcndt Nntcktrs. Whthr owng t th almst omnscnt
lk-ots at th mst-hds of th whl-shps, nw pntrtng evn
thrgh Bhrng’s strts, and int th rmtst scrt drwrs and
lckrs of th wrld; and th thsnd hrpns and lncs drtd alng
all cntnntl csts; th mt pnt is, whthr Lvthn cn lng
endr s wd a chs, and s rmrslss a hvc; whthr h mst nt
at lst b extrmntd frm th wtrs, and th lst whl, lk th
lst mn, smk hs lst pp, and thn hmslf evprt in th fnl
pff.

Cmprng th hmpd hrds of whls wth th hmpd hrds of bffl,
whch, nt frty yrs ag, ovrsprd by tns of thsnds th
prrs of Illns and Mssr, and shk thr irn mns and
scwld wth thr thndr-clttd brws upn th sts of ppls
rvr-cptls, whr nw th plt brkr slls y lnd at a dllr
an inch; in sch a cmprsn an irrsstbl argmnt wld sm
frnshd, t shw tht th hntd whl cnnt nw escp spdy
extnctn.

Bt y mst lk at ths mttr in evry lght. Thgh s shrt a
prd ag—nt a gd lftm—th cnss of th bffl in Illns
excdd th cnss of mn nw in Lndn, and thgh at th prsnt dy
nt on hrn or hf of thm rmns in all tht rgn; and thgh th
cs of ths wndrs extrmntn ws th spr of mn; yt th fr
dffrnt ntr of th whl-hnt prmptrly frbds s inglrs
an end t th Lvthn. Frty mn in on shp hntng th Sprm Whls
fr frty-eght mnths thnk thy hv dn extrmly wll, and thnk
Gd, if at lst thy crry hm th ol of frty fsh. Whrs, in th
dys of th old Cndn and Indn hntrs and trpprs of th Wst,
whn th fr wst (in whs snst sns stll rs) ws a wldrnss
and a vrgn, th sm nmbr of mccsnd mn, fr th sm nmbr of
mnths, mntd on hrs instd of slng in shps, wld hv sln
nt frty, bt frty thsnd and mr bffls; a fct tht, if nd
wr, cld b sttstclly sttd.

Nr, cnsdrd arght, ds it sm any argmnt in fvr of th
grdl extnctn of th Sprm Whl, fr exmpl, tht in frmr
yrs (th lttr prt of th lst cntry, sy) ths Lvthns, in
smll pds, wr encntrd mch oftnr thn at prsnt, and, in
cnsqnc, th vygs wr nt s prlngd, and wr als mch mr
rmnrtv. Bcs, as hs bn elswhr ntcd, ths whls,
inflncd by sm vws t sfty, nw swm th ss in immns
crvns, s tht t a lrg dgr th scttrd sltrs, yks,
and pds, and schls of othr dys ar nw aggrgtd int vst bt
wdly sprtd, unfrqnt arms. Tht is all. And eqlly
fllcs sms th cnct, tht bcs th s-clld whl-bn
whls n lngr hnt mny grnds in frmr yrs abndng wth
thm, hnc tht spcs als is dclnng. Fr thy ar only bng
drvn frm prmntry t cp; and if on cst is n lngr enlvnd
wth thr jts, thn, b sr, sm othr and rmtr strnd hs bn
vry rcntly strtld by th unfmlr spctcl.

Frthrmr: cncrnng ths lst mntnd Lvthns, thy hv tw
frm frtrsss, whch, in all hmn prbblty, wll fr evr rmn
imprgnbl. And as upn th invsn of thr vllys, th frsty
Swss hv rtrtd t thr mntns; s, hntd frm th svnns
and glds of th mddl ss, th whl-bn whls cn at lst rsrt
t thr Plr ctdls, and dvng undr th ultmt glssy brrrs
and wlls thr, cm up amng icy flds and fls; and in a chrmd
crcl of evrlstng Dcmbr, bd dfnc t all prst frm mn.

Bt as prhps ffty of ths whl-bn whls ar hrpnd fr on
cchlt, sm phlsphrs of th frcstl hv cncldd tht ths
pstv hvc hs alrdy vry srsly dmnshd thr bttlns.
Bt thgh fr sm tm pst a nmbr of ths whls, nt lss thn
13,000, hv bn annlly sln on th nr’ wst cst by th
Amrcns aln; yt thr ar cnsdrtns whch rndr evn ths
crcmstnc of lttl or n accnt as an oppsng argmnt in ths
mttr.

Ntrl as it is t b smwht incrdls cncrnng th pplsnss
of th mr enrms crtrs of th glb, yt wht shll w sy t
Hrt, th hstrn of G, whn h tlls us tht at on hntng th
Kng of Sm tk 4,000 elphnts; tht in ths rgns elphnts ar
nmrs as drvs of cttl in th tmprt clms. And thr sms
n rsn t dbt tht if ths elphnts, whch hv nw bn hntd
fr thsnds of yrs, by Smrms, by Prs, by Hnnbl, and by all
th sccssv mnrchs of th Est—if thy stll srvv thr in
grt nmbrs, mch mr my th grt whl otlst all hntng, snc
h hs a pstr t exptt in, whch is prcsly twc as lrg as
all As, bth Amrcs, Erp and Afrc, Nw Hllnd, and all th
Isls of th s cmbnd.

Mrvr: w ar t cnsdr, tht frm th prsmd grt lngvty of
whls, thr prbbly attnng th ag of a cntry and mr,
thrfr at any on prd of tm, svrl dstnct adlt gnrtns
mst b cntmprry. And wht tht is, w my sn gn sm id of,
by imgnng all th grv-yrds, cmtrs, and fmly vlts of
crtn yldng up th lv bds of all th mn, wmn, and
chldrn wh wr alv svnty-fv yrs ag; and addng ths
cntlss hst t th prsnt hmn ppltn of th glb.

Whrfr, fr all ths thngs, w accnt th whl immrtl in hs
spcs, hwvr prshbl in hs indvdlty. H swm th ss
bfr th cntnnts brk wtr; h onc swm ovr th st of th
Tlrs, and Wndsr Cstl, and th Krmln. In Nh’s fld h
dspsd Nh’s Ark; and if evr th wrld is t b agn fldd, lk
th Nthrlnds, t kll off its rts, thn th etrnl whl wll
stll srvv, and rrng upn th tpmst crst of th eqtrl
fld, spt hs frthd dfnc t th sks.


CHPTR 106. Ahb’s Lg.

Th prcpttng mnnr in whch Cptn Ahb hd qttd th Sml
Endrby of Lndn, hd nt bn unttndd wth sm smll vlnc t
hs own prsn. H hd lghtd wth sch enrgy upn a thwrt of hs
bt tht hs ivry lg hd rcvd a hlf-splntrng shck. And whn
aftr gnng hs own dck, and hs own pvt-hl thr, h s
vhmntly whld rnd wth an urgnt cmmnd t th strsmn (it
ws, as evr, smthng abt hs nt strng inflxbly engh);
thn, th alrdy shkn ivry rcvd sch an addtnl twst and
wrnch, tht thgh it stll rmnd entr, and t all apprncs
lsty, yt Ahb dd nt dm it entrly trstwrthy.

And, indd, it smd smll mttr fr wndr, tht fr all hs
prvdng, md rcklssnss, Ahb dd at tms gv crfl hd t th
cndtn of tht dd bn upn whch h prtly std. Fr it hd nt
bn vry lng prr t th Pqd’s slng frm Nntckt, tht h
hd bn fnd on nght lyng prn upn th grnd, and insnsbl;
by sm unknwn, and smngly inxplcbl, unmgnbl cslty, hs
ivry lmb hvng bn s vlntly dsplcd, tht it hd stk-ws
smttn, and all bt prcd hs grn; nr ws it wtht extrm
dffclty tht th agnzng wnd ws entrly crd.

Nr, at th tm, hd it fld t entr hs mnmnc mnd, tht all
th angsh of tht thn prsnt sffrng ws bt th drct iss of
a frmr w; and h t plnly smd t s, tht as th mst
psns rptl of th mrsh prptts hs knd as invtbly as
th swtst sngstr of th grv; s, eqlly wth evry flcty,
all msrbl evnts d ntrlly bgt thr lk. Y, mr thn
eqlly, thght Ahb; snc bth th ancstry and pstrty of Grf
g frthr thn th ancstry and pstrty of Jy. Fr, nt t hnt of
ths: tht it is an infrnc frm crtn cnnc tchngs, tht
whl sm ntrl enjymnts hr shll hv n chldrn brn t thm
fr th othr wrld, bt, on th cntrry, shll b fllwd by th
jy-chldlssnss of all hll’s dspr; whrs, sm glty mrtl
msrs shll stll frtlly bgt t thmslvs an etrnlly
prgrssv prgny of grfs bynd th grv; nt at all t hnt of
ths, thr stll sms an inqlty in th dpr anlyss of th
thng. Fr, thght Ahb, whl evn th hghst erthly flcts
evr hv a crtn unsgnfyng pttnss lrkng in thm, bt, at
bttm, all hrtws, a mystc sgnfcnc, and, in sm mn, an
archnglc grndr; s d thr dlgnt trcngs-ot nt bl th
obvs ddctn. T trl th gnlgs of ths hgh mrtl
msrs, crrs us at lst amng th srclss prmgntrs of th
gds; s tht, in th fc of all th gld, hy-mkng sns, and sft
cymbllng, rnd hrvst-mns, w mst nds gv in t ths: tht
th gds thmslvs ar nt fr evr gld. Th inffcbl, sd
brth-mrk in th brw of mn, is bt th stmp of srrw in th
sgnrs.

Unwttngly hr a scrt hs bn dvlgd, whch prhps mght mr
prprly, in st wy, hv bn dsclsd bfr. Wth mny othr
prtclrs cncrnng Ahb, alwys hd it rmnd a mystry t sm,
why it ws, tht fr a crtn prd, bth bfr and aftr th
slng of th Pqd, h hd hddn hmslf awy wth sch
Grnd-Lm-lk exclsvnss; and, fr tht on intrvl, sght
spchlss rfg, as it wr, amng th mrbl snt of th dd.
Cptn Plg’s brtd rsn fr ths thng apprd by n mns
adqt; thgh, indd, as tchng all Ahb’s dpr prt, evry
rvltn prtk mr of sgnfcnt drknss thn of explntry
lght. Bt, in th end, it all cm ot; ths on mttr dd, at lst.
Tht drfl mshp ws at th bttm of hs tmprry rclsnss. And
nt only ths, bt t tht evr-cntrctng, drppng crcl ashr,
wh, fr any rsn, pssssd th prvlg of a lss bnnd apprch
t hm; t tht tmd crcl th abv hntd cslty—rmnng, as it
dd, mdly unccntd fr by Ahb—invstd itslf wth trrrs, nt
entrly undrvd frm th lnd of sprts and of wls. S tht,
thrgh thr zl fr hm, thy hd all cnsprd, s fr as in thm
ly, t mffl up th knwldg of ths thng frm othrs; and hnc it
ws, tht nt tll a cnsdrbl intrvl hd elpsd, dd it
trnspr upn th Pqd’s dcks.

Bt b all ths as it my; lt th unsn, ambgs synd in th ar,
or th vndctv prncs and ptntts of fr, hv t d or nt
wth erthly Ahb, yt, in ths prsnt mttr of hs lg, h tk
pln prctcl prcdrs;—h clld th crpntr.

And whn tht fnctnry apprd bfr hm, h bd hm wtht
dly st abt mkng a nw lg, and drctd th mts t s hm
sppld wth all th stds and jsts of jw-ivry (Sprm Whl) whch
hd ths fr bn accmltd on th vyg, in ordr tht a crfl
slctn of th sttst, clrst-grnd stff mght b scrd.
Ths dn, th crpntr rcvd ordrs t hv th lg cmpltd tht
nght; and t prvd all th fttngs fr it, indpndnt of ths
prtnng t th dstrstd on in us. Mrvr, th shp’s frg ws
ordrd t b hstd ot of its tmprry idlnss in th hld; and,
t acclrt th affr, th blcksmth ws cmmndd t prcd at
onc t th frgng of whtvr irn cntrvncs mght b ndd.


CHPTR 107. Th Crpntr.

St thyslf sltnclly amng th mns of Strn, and tk hgh
abstrctd mn aln; and h sms a wndr, a grndr, and a w. Bt
frm th sm pnt, tk mnknd in mss, and fr th mst prt, thy
sm a mb of unncssry dplcts, bth cntmprry and hrdtry.
Bt mst hmbl thgh h ws, and fr frm frnshng an exmpl of
th hgh, hmn abstrctn; th Pqd’s crpntr ws n dplct;
hnc, h nw cms in prsn on ths stg.

Lk all s-gng shp crpntrs, and mr espclly ths blngng
t whlng vssls, h ws, t a crtn off-hndd, prctcl extnt,
alk exprncd in nmrs trds and cllngs clltrl t hs
own; th crpntr’s prst bng th ancnt and otbrnchng trnk
of all ths nmrs hndcrfts whch mr or lss hv t d wth
wd as an axlry mtrl. Bt, bsds th applctn t hm of
th gnrc rmrk abv, ths crpntr of th Pqd ws snglrly
effcnt in ths thsnd nmlss mchncl emrgncs cntnlly
rcrrng in a lrg shp, upn a thr or fr yrs’ vyg, in
uncvlzd and fr-dstnt ss. Fr nt t spk of hs rdnss in
ordnry dts:—rprng stv bts, sprng sprs, rfrmng th
shp of clmsy-bldd ors, insrtng bll’s eys in th dck, or nw
tr-nls in th sd plnks, and othr mscllns mttrs mr
drctly prtnng t hs spcl bsnss; h ws mrvr
unhsttngly exprt in all mnnr of cnflctng apttds, bth
usfl and cprcs.

Th on grnd stg whr h enctd all hs vrs prts s mnfld,
ws hs vc-bnch; a lng rd pndrs tbl frnshd wth svrl
vcs, of dffrnt szs, and bth of irn and of wd. At all tms
excpt whn whls wr alngsd, ths bnch ws scrly lshd
athwrtshps agnst th rr of th Try-wrks.

A blyng pn is fnd t lrg t b esly insrtd int its hl:
th crpntr clps it int on of hs evr-rdy vcs, and
strghtwy fls it smllr. A lst lnd-brd of strng plmg
strys on brd, and is md a cptv: ot of cln shvd rds of
rght-whl bn, and crss-bms of sprm whl ivry, th crpntr
mks a pgd-lkng cg fr it. An orsmn sprns hs wrst: th
crpntr cnccts a sthng ltn. Stbb lngd fr vrmlln strs
t b pntd upn th bld of hs evry or; scrwng ech or in hs
bg vc of wd, th crpntr symmtrclly sppls th
cnstlltn. A slr tks a fncy t wr shrk-bn er-rngs: th
crpntr drlls hs ers. Anthr hs th tthch: th crpntr ot
pncrs, and clppng on hnd upn hs bnch bds hm b std thr;
bt th pr fllw unmngbly wncs undr th uncncldd
oprtn; whrlng rnd th hndl of hs wdn vc, th crpntr
sgns hm t clp hs jw in tht, if h wld hv hm drw th tth.

Ths, ths crpntr ws prprd at all pnts, and alk indffrnt
and wtht rspct in all. Tth h accntd bts of ivry; hds h
dmd bt tp-blcks; mn thmslvs h lghtly hld fr cpstns. Bt
whl nw upn s wd a fld ths vrsly accmplshd and wth
sch lvlnss of exprtnss in hm, t; all ths wld sm t arg
sm uncmmn vvcty of intllgnc. Bt nt prcsly s. Fr
nthng ws ths mn mr rmrkbl, thn fr a crtn imprsnl
stldty as it wr; imprsnl, I sy; fr it s shdd off int th
srrndng infnt of thngs, tht it smd on wth th gnrl
stldty dscrnbl in th whl vsbl wrld; whch whl
pslssly actv in uncntd mds, stll etrnlly hlds its pc,
and ignrs y, thgh y dg fndtns fr cthdrls. Yt ws
ths hlf-hrrbl stldty in hm, invlvng, t, as it apprd, an
all-rmfyng hrtlssnss;—yt ws it oddly dshd at tms, wth an
old, crtch-lk, antdlvn, whzng hmrsnss, nt unstrkd
nw and thn wth a crtn grzzld wttnss; sch as mght hv
srvd t pss th tm drng th mdnght wtch on th brdd
frcstl of Nh’s ark. Ws it tht ths old crpntr hd bn a
lf-lng wndrr, whs mch rllng, t and fr, nt only hd
gthrd n mss; bt wht is mr, hd rbbd off whtvr smll
otwrd clngngs mght hv orgnlly prtnd t hm? H ws a
strpt abstrct; an unfrctnd intgrl; uncmprmsd as a nw-brn
bb; lvng wtht prmdttd rfrnc t ths wrld or th nxt.
Y mght almst sy, tht ths strng uncmprmsdnss in hm
invlvd a srt of unntllgnc; fr in hs nmrs trds, h dd
nt sm t wrk s mch by rsn or by instnct, or smply bcs h
hd bn ttrd t it, or by any intrmxtr of all ths, evn or
unvn; bt mrly by a knd of df and dmb, spntns ltrl
prcss. H ws a pr mnpltr; hs brn, if h hd evr hd on,
mst hv erly ozd alng int th mscls of hs fngrs. H ws
lk on of ths unrsnng bt stll hghly usfl, _mltm in
prv_, Shffld cntrvncs, assmng th extrr—thgh a lttl
swlld—of a cmmn pckt knf; bt cntnng, nt only blds of
vrs szs, bt als scrw-drvrs, crk-scrws, twzrs, awls,
pns, rlrs, nl-flrs, cntrsnkrs. S, if hs sprrs wntd
t us th crpntr fr a scrw-drvr, all thy hd t d ws t opn
tht prt of hm, and th scrw ws fst: or if fr twzrs, tk hm
up by th lgs, and thr thy wr.

Yt, as prvsly hntd, ths omntld, opn-and-sht crpntr,
ws, aftr all, n mr mchn of an atmtn. If h dd nt hv a
cmmn sl in hm, h hd a sbtl smthng tht smhw anmlsly
dd its dty. Wht tht ws, whthr essnc of qckslvr, or a fw
drps of hrtshrn, thr is n tllng. Bt thr it ws; and thr it
hd abdd fr nw sm sxty yrs or mr. And ths it ws, ths sm
unccntbl, cnnng lf-prncpl in hm; ths it ws, tht kpt
hm a grt prt of th tm sllqzng; bt only lk an
unrsnng whl, whch als hmmngly sllqzs; or rthr, hs
bdy ws a sntry-bx and ths sllqzr on grd thr, and tlkng
all th tm t kp hmslf awk.


CHPTR 108. Ahb and th Crpntr.

Th Dck—Frst Nght Wtch.

(_Crpntr stndng bfr hs vc-bnch, and by th lght of tw
lntrns bsly flng th ivry jst fr th lg, whch jst is
frmly fxd in th vc. Slbs of ivry, lthr strps, pds, scrws,
and vrs tls of all srts lyng abt th bnch. Frwrd, th rd
flm of th frg is sn, whr th blcksmth is at wrk._)

Drt th fl, and drt th bn! Tht is hrd whch shld b sft,
and tht is sft whch shld b hrd. S w g, wh fl old jws and
shnbns. Lt’s try anthr. Ay, nw, ths wrks bttr (_snzs_).
Hll, ths bn dst is (_snzs_)—why it’s (_snzs_)—ys it’s
(_snzs_)—blss my sl, it wn’t lt m spk! Ths is wht an old
fllw gts nw fr wrkng in dd lmbr. Sw a lv tr, and y
dn’t gt ths dst; amptt a lv bn, and y dn’t gt it
(_snzs_). Cm, cm, y old Smt, thr, br a hnd, and lt’s
hv tht frl and bckl-scrw; I’ll b rdy fr thm prsntly.
Lcky nw (_snzs_) thr’s n kn-jnt t mk; tht mght pzzl
a lttl; bt a mr shnbn—why it’s esy as mkng hp-pls; only I
shld lk t pt a gd fnsh on. Tm, tm; if I bt only hd th
tm, I cld trn hm ot as nt a lg nw as evr (_snzs_)
scrpd t a ldy in a prlr. Ths bckskn lgs and clvs of lgs
I’v sn in shp wndws wldn’t cmpr at all. Thy sk wtr,
thy d; and of crs gt rhmtc, and hv t b dctrd
(_snzs_) wth wshs and ltns, jst lk lv lgs. Thr; bfr
I sw it off, nw, I mst cll hs old Mglshp, and s whthr th
lngth wll b all rght; t shrt, if anythng, I gss. H! tht’s
th hl; w ar in lck; hr h cms, or it’s smbdy els, tht’s
crtn.

AHB (_advncng_). (_Drng th ensng scn, th crpntr cntns
snzng at tms._)

Wll, mnmkr!

Jst in tm, sr. If th cptn plss, I wll nw mrk th lngth.
Lt m msr, sr.

Msrd fr a lg! gd. Wll, it’s nt th frst tm. Abt it!
Thr; kp thy fngr on it. Ths is a cgnt vc th hst hr,
crpntr; lt m fl its grp onc. S, s; it ds pnch sm.

Oh, sr, it wll brk bns—bwr, bwr!

N fr; I lk a gd grp; I lk t fl smthng in ths slppry
wrld tht cn hld, mn. Wht’s Prmths abt thr?—th
blcksmth, I mn—wht’s h abt?

H mst b frgng th bckl-scrw, sr, nw.

Rght. It’s a prtnrshp; h sppls th mscl prt. H mks a
frc rd flm thr!

Ay, sr; h mst hv th wht ht fr ths knd of fn wrk.

Um-m. S h mst. I d dm it nw a mst mnng thng, tht tht old
Grk, Prmths, wh md mn, thy sy, shld hv bn a
blcksmth, and anmtd thm wth fr; fr wht’s md in fr mst
prprly blng t fr; and s hll’s prbbl. Hw th st fls!
Ths mst b th rmndr th Grk md th Afrcns of. Crpntr,
whn h’s thrgh wth tht bckl, tll hm t frg a pr of stl
shldr-blds; thr’s a pdlr abrd wth a crshng pck.

Sr?

Hld; whl Prmths is abt it, I’ll ordr a cmplt mn aftr a
dsrbl pttrn. Imprms, ffty ft hgh in hs scks; thn, chst
mdlld aftr th Thms Tnnl; thn, lgs wth rts t ’em, t sty
in on plc; thn, arms thr ft thrgh th wrst; n hrt at all,
brss frhd, and abt a qrtr of an acr of fn brns; and lt
m s—shll I ordr eys t s otwrds? N, bt pt a sky-lght on
tp of hs hd t illmnt inwrds. Thr, tk th ordr, and awy.

Nw, wht’s h spkng abt, and wh’s h spkng t, I shld lk
t knw? Shll I kp stndng hr? (_asd_).

’Ts bt indffrnt archtctr t mk a blnd dm; hr’s on. N,
n, n; I mst hv a lntrn.

H, h! Tht’s it, hy? Hr ar tw, sr; on wll srv my trn.

Wht art th thrstng tht thf-ctchr int my fc fr, mn?
Thrstd lght is wrs thn prsntd pstls.

I thght, sr, tht y spk t crpntr.

Crpntr? why tht’s—bt n;—a vry tdy, and, I my sy, an extrmly
gntlmnlk srt of bsnss th art in hr, crpntr;—or wld’st
th rthr wrk in cly?

Sr?—Cly? cly, sr? Tht’s md; w lv cly t dtchrs, sr.

Th fllw’s imps! Wht art th snzng abt?

Bn is rthr dsty, sr.

Tk th hnt, thn; and whn th art dd, nvr bry thyslf undr
lvng ppl’s nss.

Sr?—oh! ah!—I gss s;—ys—oh, dr!

Lk y, crpntr, I dr sy th cllst thyslf a rght gd
wrkmnlk wrkmn, eh? Wll, thn, wll it spk thrghly wll fr
thy wrk, if, whn I cm t mnt ths lg th mkst, I shll
nvrthlss fl anthr lg in th sm idntcl plc wth it; tht
is, crpntr, my old lst lg; th flsh and bld on, I mn. Cnst
th nt drv tht old Adm awy?

Trly, sr, I bgn t undrstnd smwht nw. Ys, I hv hrd
smthng crs on tht scr, sr; hw tht a dsmstd mn nvr
entrly lss th flng of hs old spr, bt it wll b stll
prckng hm at tms. My I hmbly ask if it b rlly s, sr?

It is, mn. Lk, pt thy lv lg hr in th plc whr mn onc
ws; s, nw, hr is only on dstnct lg t th ey, yt tw t th
sl. Whr th flst tnglng lf; thr, exctly thr, thr t
a hr, d I. Is’t a rddl?

I shld hmbly cll it a psr, sr.

Hst, thn. Hw dst th knw tht sm entr, lvng, thnkng thng
my nt b invsbly and unntrpntrtngly stndng prcsly whr
th nw stndst; ay, and stndng thr in thy spt? In thy mst
sltry hrs, thn, dst th nt fr evsdrpprs? Hld, dn’t
spk! And if I stll fl th smrt of my crshd lg, thgh it b
nw s lng dsslvd; thn, why myst nt th, crpntr, fl th
fry pns of hll fr evr, and wtht a bdy? Hh!

Gd Lrd! Trly, sr, if it cms t tht, I mst clclt ovr
agn; I thnk I ddn’t crry a smll fgr, sr.

Lk y, pddng-hds shld nvr grnt prmss.—Hw lng bfr th
lg is dn?

Prhps an hr, sr.

Bngl awy at it thn, and brng it t m (_trns t g_). Oh, Lf!
Hr I am, prd as Grk gd, and yt stndng dbtr t ths
blckhd fr a bn t stnd on! Crsd b tht mrtl
intr-indbtdnss whch wll nt d awy wth ldgrs. I wld b fr
as ar; and I’m dwn in th whl wrld’s bks. I am s rch, I cld
hv gvn bd fr bd wth th wlthst Prætrns at th actn of
th Rmn empr (whch ws th wrld’s); and yt I ow fr th flsh
in th tng I brg wth. By hvns! I’ll gt a crcbl, and int
it, and dsslv myslf dwn t on smll, cmpnds vrtbr. S.

CRPNTR (_rsmng hs wrk_).

Wll, wll, wll! Stbb knws hm bst of all, and Stbb alwys sys
h’s qr; sys nthng bt tht on sffcnt lttl wrd qr;
h’s qr, sys Stbb; h’s qr—qr, qr; and kps dnnng it
int Mr. Strbck all th tm—qr—sr—qr, qr, vry qr. And
hr’s hs lg! Ys, nw tht I thnk of it, hr’s hs bdfllw! hs
a stck of whl’s jw-bn fr a wf! And ths is hs lg; h’ll
stnd on ths. Wht ws tht nw abt on lg stndng in thr
plcs, and all thr plcs stndng in on hll—hw ws tht? Oh! I
dn’t wndr h lkd s scrnfl at m! I’m a srt of
strng-thghtd smtms, thy sy; bt tht’s only hphzrd-lk.
Thn, a shrt, lttl old bdy lk m, shld nvr undrtk t wd
ot int dp wtrs wth tll, hrn-blt cptns; th wtr chcks
y undr th chn prtty qck, and thr’s a grt cry fr
lf-bts. And hr’s th hrn’s lg! lng and slm, sr engh!
Nw, fr mst flks on pr of lgs lsts a lftm, and tht mst b
bcs thy us thm mrcflly, as a tndr-hrtd old ldy uss hr
rly-ply old cch-hrss. Bt Ahb; oh h’s a hrd drvr. Lk,
drvn on lg t dth, and spvnd th othr fr lf, and nw wrs
ot bn lgs by th crd. Hll, thr, y Smt! br a hnd thr
wth ths scrws, and lt’s fnsh it bfr th rsrrctn fllw
cms a-cllng wth hs hrn fr all lgs, tr or fls, as
brwry-mn g rnd cllctng old br brrls, t fll ’em up agn.
Wht a lg ths is! It lks lk a rl lv lg, fld dwn t
nthng bt th cr; h’ll b stndng on ths t-mrrw; h’ll b
tkng alttds on it. Hll! I almst frgt th lttl ovl slt,
smthd ivry, whr h fgrs up th lttd. S, s; chsl, fl,
and snd-ppr, nw!


CHPTR 109. Ahb and Strbck in th Cbn.

Accrdng t usg thy wr pmpng th shp nxt mrnng; and l! n
incnsdrbl ol cm up wth th wtr; th csks blw mst hv
sprng a bd lk. Mch cncrn ws shwn; and Strbck wnt dwn int
th cbn t rprt ths unfvrbl affr.*

*In Sprm-whlmn wth any cnsdrbl qntty of ol on brd, it
is a rglr sm-wkly dty t cndct a hs int th hld, and
drnch th csks wth s-wtr; whch aftrwrds, at vryng
intrvls, is rmvd by th shp’s pmps. Hrby th csks ar sght
t b kpt dmply tght; whl by th chngd chrctr of th
wthdrwn wtr, th mrnrs rdly dtct any srs lkg in th
prcs crg.

Nw, frm th Sth and Wst th Pqd ws drwng ngh t Frms and
th Bsh Isls, btwn whch ls on of th trpcl otlts frm
th Chn wtrs int th Pcfc. And s Strbck fnd Ahb wth a
gnrl chrt of th orntl archplgs sprd bfr hm; and
anthr sprt on rprsntng th lng estrn csts of th
Jpns islnds—Nphn, Mtsm, and Skk. Wth hs snw-wht nw
ivry lg brcd agnst th scrwd lg of hs tbl, and wth a lng
prnng-hk of a jck-knf in hs hnd, th wndrs old mn, wth
hs bck t th gngwy dr, ws wrnklng hs brw, and trcng hs
old crss agn.

“Wh’s thr?” hrng th ftstp at th dr, bt nt trnng rnd
t it. “On dck! Bgn!”

“Cptn Ahb mstks; it is I. Th ol in th hld is lkng, sr.
W mst up Brtns and brk ot.”

“Up Brtns and brk ot? Nw tht w ar nrng Jpn; hv-t hr
fr a wk t tnkr a prcl of old hps?”

“Ethr d tht, sr, or wst in on dy mr ol thn w my mk
gd in a yr. Wht w cm twnty thsnd mls t gt is wrth
svng, sr.”

“S it is, s it is; if w gt it.”

“I ws spkng of th ol in th hld, sr.”

“And I ws nt spkng or thnkng of tht at all. Bgn! Lt it
lk! I’m all alk myslf. Ay! lks in lks! nt only fll of lky
csks, bt ths lky csks ar in a lky shp; and tht’s a fr
wrs plght thn th Pqd’s, mn. Yt I dn’t stp t plg my lk;
fr wh cn fnd it in th dp-ldd hll; or hw hp t plg it,
evn if fnd, in ths lf’s hwlng gl? Strbck! I’ll nt hv th
Brtns hstd.”

“Wht wll th ownrs sy, sr?”

“Lt th ownrs stnd on Nntckt bch and otyll th Typhns. Wht
crs Ahb? Ownrs, ownrs? Th art alwys prtng t m, Strbck,
abt ths msrly ownrs, as if th ownrs wr my cnscnc. Bt
lk y, th only rl ownr of anythng is its cmmndr; and hrk y,
my cnscnc is in ths shp’s kl.—On dck!”

“Cptn Ahb,” sd th rddnng mt, mvng frthr int th cbn,
wth a drng s strngly rspctfl and cts tht it almst
smd nt only evry wy skng t avd th slghtst otwrd
mnfsttn of itslf, bt wthn als smd mr thn hlf
dstrstfl of itslf; “A bttr mn thn I mght wll pss ovr in
th wht h wld qckly engh rsnt in a yngr mn; ay, and in
a hppr, Cptn Ahb.”

“Dvls! Dst th thn s mch as dr t crtclly thnk of m?—On
dck!”

“Ny, sr, nt yt; I d entrt. And I d dr, sr—t b frbrng!
Shll w nt undrstnd ech othr bttr thn hthrt, Cptn Ahb?”

Ahb szd a ldd mskt frm th rck (frmng prt of mst
Sth-S-mn’s cbn frntr), and pntng it twrds Strbck,
exclmd: “Thr is on Gd tht is Lrd ovr th erth, and on
Cptn tht is lrd ovr th Pqd.—On dck!”

Fr an instnt in th flshng eys of th mt, and hs fry chks,
y wld hv almst thght tht h hd rlly rcvd th blz of
th lvlld tb. Bt, mstrng hs emtn, h hlf clmly rs, and
as h qttd th cbn, psd fr an instnt and sd: “Th hst
otrgd, nt insltd m, sr; bt fr tht I ask th nt t bwr
of Strbck; th wldst bt lgh; bt lt Ahb bwr of Ahb;
bwr of thyslf, old mn.”

“H wxs brv, bt nvrthlss obys; mst crfl brvry tht!”
mrmrd Ahb, as Strbck dspprd. “Wht’s tht h sd—Ahb
bwr of Ahb—thr’s smthng thr!” Thn uncnscsly usng th
mskt fr a stff, wth an irn brw h pcd t and fr in th lttl
cbn; bt prsntly th thck plts of hs frhd rlxd, and
rtrnng th gn t th rck, h wnt t th dck.

“Th art bt t gd a fllw, Strbck,” h sd lwly t th mt;
thn rsng hs vc t th crw: “Frl th t’gllnt-sls, and
cls-rf th tp-sls, fr and aft; bck th mn-yrd; up Brtn,
and brk ot in th mn-hld.”

It wr prhps vn t srms exctly why it ws, tht as rspctng
Strbck, Ahb ths actd. It my hv bn a flsh of hnsty in hm;
or mr prdntl plcy whch, undr th crcmstnc, imprsly
frbd th slghtst symptm of opn dsffctn, hwvr trnsnt,
in th imprtnt chf offcr of hs shp. Hwvr it ws, hs ordrs
wr exctd; and th Brtns wr hstd.


CHPTR 110. Qqg in Hs Cffn.

Upn srchng, it ws fnd tht th csks lst strck int th hld
wr prfctly snd, and tht th lk mst b frthr off. S, it
bng clm wthr, thy brk ot dpr and dpr, dstrbng th
slmbrs of th hg grnd-tr btts; and frm tht blck mdnght
sndng ths ggntc mls int th dylght abv. S dp dd thy
g; and s ancnt, and crrdd, and wdy th aspct of th lwrmst
pnchns, tht y almst lkd nxt fr sm mldy crnr-stn
csk cntnng cns of Cptn Nh, wth cps of th pstd
plcrds, vnly wrnng th infttd old wrld frm th fld.
Trc aftr trc, t, of wtr, and brd, and bf, and shks of
stvs, and irn bndls of hps, wr hstd ot, tll at lst th
pld dcks wr hrd t gt abt; and th hllw hll echd undr
ft, as if y wr trdng ovr empty ctcmbs, and rld and
rlld in th s lk an ar-frghtd dmjhn. Tp-hvy ws th
shp as a dnnrlss stdnt wth all Arsttl in hs hd. Wll ws
it tht th Typhns dd nt vst thm thn.

Nw, at ths tm it ws tht my pr pgn cmpnn, and fst
bsm-frnd, Qqg, ws szd wth a fvr, whch brght hm ngh
t hs endlss end.

B it sd, tht in ths vctn of whlng, sncrs ar unknwn;
dgnty and dngr g hnd in hnd; tll y gt t b Cptn, th
hghr y rs th hrdr y tl. S wth pr Qqg, wh, as
hrpnr, mst nt only fc all th rg of th lvng whl, bt—as
w hv elswhr sn—mnt hs dd bck in a rllng s; and
fnlly dscnd int th glm of th hld, and bttrly swtng all
dy in tht sbtrrns cnfnmnt, rsltly mnhndl th
clmsst csks and s t thr stwg. T b shrt, amng whlmn,
th hrpnrs ar th hldrs, s clld.

Pr Qqg! whn th shp ws abt hlf dsmbwlld, y shld
hv stpd ovr th htchwy, and prd dwn upn hm thr; whr,
strppd t hs wlln drwrs, th tttd svg ws crwlng abt
amd tht dmpnss and slm, lk a grn spttd lzrd at th bttm
of a wll. And a wll, or an ic-hs, it smhw prvd t hm, pr
pgn; whr, strng t sy, fr all th ht of hs swtngs, h
cght a trrbl chll whch lpsd int a fvr; and at lst, aftr
sm dys’ sffrng, ld hm in hs hmmck, cls t th vry sll
of th dr of dth. Hw h wstd and wstd awy in ths fw
lng-lngrng dys, tll thr smd bt lttl lft of hm bt hs
frm and tttng. Bt as all els in hm thnnd, and hs
chk-bns grw shrpr, hs eys, nvrthlss, smd grwng fllr
and fllr; thy bcm of a strng sftnss of lstr; and mldly bt
dply lkd ot at y thr frm hs scknss, a wndrs tstmny
t tht immrtl hlth in hm whch cld nt d, or b wknd. And
lk crcls on th wtr, whch, as thy grw fntr, expnd; s hs
eys smd rndng and rndng, lk th rngs of Etrnty. An aw
tht cnnt b nmd wld stl ovr y as y st by th sd of
ths wnng svg, and sw as strng thngs in hs fc, as any
bhld wh wr bystndrs whn Zrstr dd. Fr whtvr is trly
wndrs and frfl in mn, nvr yt ws pt int wrds or bks. And
th drwng nr of Dth, whch alk lvls all, alk imprsss all
wth a lst rvltn, whch only an athr frm th dd cld
adqtly tll. S tht—lt us sy it agn—n dyng Chld or Grk
hd hghr and hlr thghts thn ths, whs mystrs shds y
sw crpng ovr th fc of pr Qqg, as h qtly ly in hs
swyng hmmck, and th rllng s smd gntly rckng hm t hs
fnl rst, and th ocn’s invsbl fld-td lftd hm hghr and
hghr twrds hs dstnd hvn.

Nt a mn of th crw bt gv hm up; and, as fr Qqg hmslf,
wht h thght of hs cs ws frcbly shwn by a crs fvr h
askd. H clld on t hm in th gry mrnng wtch, whn th dy ws
jst brkng, and tkng hs hnd, sd tht whl in Nntckt h hd
chncd t s crtn lttl cns of drk wd, lk th rch
wr-wd of hs ntv isl; and upn inqry, h hd lrnd tht all
whlmn wh dd in Nntckt, wr ld in ths sm drk cns,
and tht th fncy of bng s ld hd mch plsd hm; fr it ws
nt unlk th cstm of hs own rc, wh, aftr emblmng a dd
wrrr, strtchd hm ot in hs cn, and s lft hm t b fltd
awy t th strry archplgs; fr nt only d thy blv tht th
strs ar isls, bt tht fr bynd all vsbl hrzns, thr own
mld, uncntnntd ss, intrflw wth th bl hvns; and s frm
th wht brkrs of th mlky wy. H addd, tht h shddrd at th
thght of bng brd in hs hmmck, accrdng t th usl
s-cstm, tssd lk smthng vl t th dth-dvrng shrks.
N: h dsrd a cn lk ths of Nntckt, all th mr cngnl
t hm, bng a whlmn, tht lk a whl-bt ths cffn-cns
wr wtht a kl; thgh tht invlvd bt uncrtn strng, and
mch l-wy adwn th dm ags.

Nw, whn ths strng crcmstnc ws md knwn aft, th crpntr
ws at onc cmmndd t d Qqg’s bddng, whtvr it mght
incld. Thr ws sm hthnsh, cffn-clrd old lmbr abrd,
whch, upn a lng prvs vyg, hd bn ct frm th abrgnl
grvs of th Lckdy islnds, and frm ths drk plnks th cffn
ws rcmmndd t b md. N snr ws th crpntr apprsd of th
ordr, thn tkng hs rl, h frthwth wth all th indffrnt
prmpttd of hs chrctr, prcdd int th frcstl and tk
Qqg’s msr wth grt accrcy, rglrly chlkng Qqg’s
prsn as h shftd th rl.

“Ah! pr fllw! h’ll hv t d nw,” ejcltd th Lng Islnd
slr.

Gng t hs vc-bnch, th crpntr fr cnvnnc sk and gnrl
rfrnc, nw trnsfrrngly msrd on it th exct lngth th
cffn ws t b, and thn md th trnsfr prmnnt by cttng tw
ntchs at its extrmts. Ths dn, h mrshlld th plnks and hs
tls, and t wrk.

Whn th lst nl ws drvn, and th ld dly plnd and fttd, h
lghtly shldrd th cffn and wnt frwrd wth it, inqrng
whthr thy wr rdy fr it yt in tht drctn.

Ovrhrng th indgnnt bt hlf-hmrs crs wth whch th ppl
on dck bgn t drv th cffn awy, Qqg, t evry on’s
cnstrntn, cmmndd tht th thng shld b instntly brght t
hm, nr ws thr any dnyng hm; sng tht, of all mrtls, sm
dyng mn ar th mst tyrnncl; and crtnly, snc thy wll
shrtly trbl us s lttl fr evrmr, th pr fllws oght t b
indlgd.

Lnng ovr in hs hmmck, Qqg lng rgrdd th cffn wth an
attntv ey. H thn clld fr hs hrpn, hd th wdn stck
drwn frm it, and thn hd th irn prt plcd in th cffn alng
wth on of th pddls of hs bt. All by hs own rqst, als,
bscts wr thn rngd rnd th sds wthn: a flsk of frsh
wtr ws plcd at th hd, and a smll bg of wdy erth scrpd up
in th hld at th ft; and a pc of sl-clth bng rlld up fr
a pllw, Qqg nw entrtd t b lftd int hs fnl bd, tht
h mght mk trl of its cmfrts, if any it hd. H ly wtht
mvng a fw mnts, thn tld on t g t hs bg and brng ot hs
lttl gd, Yj. Thn crssng hs arms on hs brst wth Yj
btwn, h clld fr th cffn ld (htch h clld it) t b plcd
ovr hm. Th hd prt trnd ovr wth a lthr hng, and thr ly
Qqg in hs cffn wth lttl bt hs cmpsd cntnnc in
vw. “Rrm” (it wll d; it is esy), h mrmrd at lst, and
sgnd t b rplcd in hs hmmck.

Bt er ths ws dn, Pp, wh hd bn slly hvrng nr by all
ths whl, drw ngh t hm whr h ly, and wth sft sbbngs, tk
hm by th hnd; in th othr, hldng hs tmbrn.

“Pr rvr! wll y nvr hv dn wth all ths wry rvng? whr
g y nw? Bt if th crrnts crry y t ths swt Antlls whr
th bchs ar only bt wth wtr-lls, wll y d on lttl
errnd fr m? Sk ot on Pp, wh’s nw bn mssng lng: I thnk
h’s in ths fr Antlls. If y fnd hm, thn cmfrt hm; fr h
mst b vry sd; fr lk! h’s lft hs tmbrn bhnd;—I fnd
it. Rg-a-dg, dg, dg! Nw, Qqg, d; and I’ll bt y yr
dyng mrch.”

“I hv hrd,” mrmrd Strbck, gzng dwn th scttl, “tht in
vlnt fvrs, mn, all ignrnc, hv tlkd in ancnt tngs; and
tht whn th mystry is prbd, it trns ot alwys tht in thr
whlly frgttn chldhd ths ancnt tngs hd bn rlly spkn
in thr hrng by sm lfty schlrs. S, t my fnd fth, pr
Pp, in ths strng swtnss of hs lncy, brngs hvnly vchrs
of all or hvnly hms. Whr lrnd h tht, bt thr?—Hrk! h
spks agn: bt mr wldly nw.”

“Frm tw and tw! Lt’s mk a Gnrl of hm! H, whr’s hs
hrpn? Ly it acrss hr.—Rg-a-dg, dg, dg! hzz! Oh fr a gm
cck nw t st upn hs hd and crw! Qqg ds gm!—mnd y
tht; Qqg ds gm!—tk y gd hd of tht; Qqg ds
gm! I sy; gm, gm, gm! bt bs lttl Pp, h dd a cwrd;
dd all a’shvr;—ot upn Pp! Hrk y; if y fnd Pp, tll all th
Antlls h’s a rnwy; a cwrd, a cwrd, a cwrd! Tll thm h
jmpd frm a whl-bt! I’d nvr bt my tmbrn ovr bs Pp,
and hl hm Gnrl, if h wr onc mr dyng hr. N, n! shm
upn all cwrds—shm upn thm! Lt ’em g drwn lk Pp, tht
jmpd frm a whl-bt. Shm! shm!”

Drng all ths, Qqg ly wth clsd eys, as if in a drm. Pp
ws ld awy, and th sck mn ws rplcd in hs hmmck.

Bt nw tht h hd apprntly md evry prprtn fr dth; nw
tht hs cffn ws prvd a gd ft, Qqg sddnly rlld; sn
thr smd n nd of th crpntr’s bx: and thrpn, whn sm
exprssd thr dlghtd srprs, h, in sbstnc, sd, tht th
cs of hs sddn cnvlscnc ws ths;—at a crtcl mmnt, h
hd jst rclld a lttl dty ashr, whch h ws lvng undn;
and thrfr hd chngd hs mnd abt dyng: h cld nt d yt,
h avrrd. Thy askd hm, thn, whthr t lv or d ws a mttr
of hs own svrgn wll and plsr. H answrd, crtnly. In a
wrd, it ws Qqg’s cnct, tht if a mn md up hs mnd t
lv, mr scknss cld nt kll hm: nthng bt a whl, or a gl,
or sm vlnt, ungvrnbl, unntllgnt dstryr of tht srt.

Nw, thr is ths ntwrthy dffrnc btwn svg and cvlzd;
tht whl a sck, cvlzd mn my b sx mnths cnvlscng,
gnrlly spkng, a sck svg is almst hlf-wll agn in a dy.
S, in gd tm my Qqg gnd strngth; and at lngth aftr
sttng on th wndlss fr a fw indlnt dys (bt etng wth a
vgrs apptt) h sddnly lpd t hs ft, thrw ot hs arms
and lgs, gv hmslf a gd strtchng, ywnd a lttl bt, and thn
sprngng int th hd of hs hstd bt, and psng a hrpn,
prnncd hmslf ft fr a fght.

Wth a wld whmsnss, h nw usd hs cffn fr a s-chst; and
emptyng int it hs cnvs bg of clths, st thm in ordr thr.
Mny spr hrs h spnt, in crvng th ld wth all mnnr of
grtsq fgrs and drwngs; and it smd tht hrby h ws
strvng, in hs rd wy, t cpy prts of th twstd tttng on
hs bdy. And ths tttng hd bn th wrk of a dprtd prpht
and sr of hs islnd, wh, by ths hrglyphc mrks, hd wrttn
ot on hs bdy a cmplt thry of th hvns and th erth, and a
mystcl trts on th art of attnng trth; s tht Qqg in
hs own prpr prsn ws a rddl t unfld; a wndrs wrk in on
vlm; bt whs mystrs nt evn hmslf cld rd, thgh hs own
lv hrt bt agnst thm; and ths mystrs wr thrfr
dstnd in th end t mldr awy wth th lvng prchmnt whrn
thy wr inscrbd, and s b unslvd t th lst. And ths thght
it mst hv bn whch sggstd t Ahb tht wld exclmtn of hs,
whn on mrnng trnng awy frm srvyng pr Qqg—“Oh,
dvlsh tntlztn of th gds!”


CHPTR 111. Th Pcfc.

Whn gldng by th Bsh isls w emrgd at lst upn th grt
Sth S; wr it nt fr othr thngs, I cld hv grtd my dr
Pcfc wth uncntd thnks, fr nw th lng spplctn of my
yth ws answrd; tht srn ocn rlld estwrds frm m a
thsnd lgs of bl.

Thr is, on knws nt wht swt mystry abt ths s, whs gntly
awfl strrngs sm t spk of sm hddn sl bnth; lk ths
fbld undltns of th Ephsn sd ovr th brd Evnglst St.
Jhn. And mt it is, tht ovr ths s-pstrs, wd-rllng wtry
prrs and Pttrs’ Flds of all fr cntnnts, th wvs shld
rs and fll, and ebb and flw uncsngly; fr hr, mllns of
mxd shds and shdws, drwnd drms, smnmblsms, rvrs; all
tht w cll lvs and sls, l drmng, drmng, stll; tssng
lk slmbrrs in thr bds; th evr-rllng wvs bt md s by
thr rstlssnss.

T any mdttv Mgn rvr, ths srn Pcfc, onc bhld, mst
evr aftr b th s of hs adptn. It rlls th mdmst wtrs of
th wrld, th Indn ocn and Atlntc bng bt its arms. Th sm
wvs wsh th mls of th nw-blt Clfrnn twns, bt ystrdy
plntd by th rcntst rc of mn, and lv th fdd bt stll
grgs skrts of Astc lnds, oldr thn Abrhm; whl all btwn
flt mlky-wys of crl isls, and lw-lyng, endlss, unknwn
Archplgs, and impntrbl Jpns. Ths ths mystrs, dvn
Pcfc zns th wrld’s whl blk abt; mks all csts on by t
it; sms th td-btng hrt of erth. Lftd by ths etrnl
swlls, y nds mst own th sdctv gd, bwng yr hd t Pn.

Bt fw thghts of Pn strrd Ahb’s brn, as stndng lk an irn
stt at hs accstmd plc bsd th mzn rggng, wth on
nstrl h unthnkngly snffd th sgry msk frm th Bsh isls
(in whs swt wds mld lvrs mst b wlkng), and wth th othr
cnscsly inhld th slt brth of th nw fnd s; tht s in
whch th htd Wht Whl mst evn thn b swmmng. Lnchd at
lngth upn ths almst fnl wtrs, and gldng twrds th Jpns
crsng-grnd, th old mn’s prps intnsfd itslf. Hs frm
lps mt lk th lps of a vc; th Dlt of hs frhd’s vns
swlld lk ovrldn brks; in hs vry slp, hs rngng cry rn
thrgh th vltd hll, “Strn all! th Wht Whl spts thck
bld!”


CHPTR 112. Th Blcksmth.

Avlng hmslf of th mld, smmr-cl wthr tht nw rgnd in
ths lttds, and in prprtn fr th pclrly actv prsts
shrtly t b antcptd, Prth, th bgrmd, blstrd old
blcksmth, hd nt rmvd hs prtbl frg t th hld agn, aftr
cncldng hs cntrbtry wrk fr Ahb’s lg, bt stll rtnd it
on dck, fst lshd t rngblts by th frmst; bng nw almst
incssntly invkd by th hdsmn, and hrpnrs, and bwsmn t d
sm lttl jb fr thm; altrng, or rprng, or nw shpng thr
vrs wpns and bt frntr. Oftn h wld b srrndd by an
egr crcl, all wtng t b srvd; hldng bt-spds,
pk-hds, hrpns, and lncs, and jlsly wtchng hs evry
sty mvmnt, as h tld. Nvrthlss, ths old mn’s ws a
ptnt hmmr wldd by a ptnt arm. N mrmr, n imptnc, n
ptlnc dd cm frm hm. Slnt, slw, and slmn; bwng ovr
stll frthr hs chrnclly brkn bck, h tld awy, as if tl
wr lf itslf, and th hvy btng of hs hmmr th hvy btng
of hs hrt. And s it ws.—Mst msrbl!

A pclr wlk in ths old mn, a crtn slght bt pnfl apprng
ywng in hs gt, hd at an erly prd of th vyg exctd th
crsty of th mrnrs. And t th imprtnty of thr prsstd
qstnngs h hd fnlly gvn in; and s it cm t pss tht evry
on nw knw th shmfl stry of hs wrtchd ft.

Bltd, and nt inncntly, on bttr wntr’s mdnght, on th rd
rnnng btwn tw cntry twns, th blcksmth hlf-stpdly flt
th ddly nmbnss stlng ovr hm, and sght rfg in a lnng,
dlpdtd brn. Th iss ws, th lss of th extrmts of bth
ft. Ot of ths rvltn, prt by prt, at lst cm ot th fr
acts of th gldnss, and th on lng, and as yt unctstrphd
ffth act of th grf of hs lf’s drm.

H ws an old mn, wh, at th ag of nrly sxty, hd pstpndly
encntrd tht thng in srrw’s tchncls clld rn. H hd bn
an artsn of fmd excllnc, and wth plnty t d; ownd a hs
and grdn; embrcd a ythfl, dghtr-lk, lvng wf, and thr
blth, rddy chldrn; evry Sndy wnt t a chrfl-lkng chrch,
plntd in a grv. Bt on nght, undr cvr of drknss, and frthr
cncld in a mst cnnng dsgsmnt, a dsprt brglr sld int
hs hppy hm, and rbbd thm all of evrythng. And drkr yt t
tll, th blcksmth hmslf dd ignrntly cndct ths brglr int
hs fmly’s hrt. It ws th Bttl Cnjrr! Upn th opnng of
tht ftl crk, frth flw th fnd, and shrvlld up hs hm. Nw,
fr prdnt, mst ws, and ecnmc rsns, th blcksmth’s shp ws
in th bsmnt of hs dwllng, bt wth a sprt entrnc t it; s
tht alwys hd th yng and lvng hlthy wf lstnd wth n
unhppy nrvsnss, bt wth vgrs plsr, t th stt rngng
of hr yng-armd old hsbnd’s hmmr; whs rvrbrtns, mffld
by pssng thrgh th flrs and wlls, cm up t hr, nt unswtly,
in hr nrsry; and s, t stt Lbr’s irn lllby, th blcksmth’s
infnts wr rckd t slmbr.

Oh, w on w! Oh, Dth, why cnst th nt smtms b tmly?
Hdst th tkn ths old blcksmth t thyslf er hs fll rn cm
upn hm, thn hd th yng wdw hd a dlcs grf, and hr
orphns a trly vnrbl, lgndry sr t drm of in thr aftr
yrs; and all of thm a cr-kllng cmptncy. Bt Dth plckd
dwn sm vrts eldr brthr, on whs whstlng dly tl slly
hng th rspnsblts of sm othr fmly, and lft th wrs thn
uslss old mn stndng, tll th hds rt of lf shld mk hm
esr t hrvst.

Why tll th whl? Th blws of th bsmnt hmmr evry dy grw
mr and mr btwn; and ech blw evry dy grw fntr thn th
lst; th wf st frzn at th wndw, wth trlss eys,
glttrngly gzng int th wpng fcs of hr chldrn; th bllws
fll; th frg chkd up wth cndrs; th hs ws sld; th mthr
dvd dwn int th lng chrch-yrd grss; hr chldrn twc fllwd
hr ththr; and th hslss, fmlylss old mn stggrd off a
vgbnd in crp; hs evry w unrvrncd; hs gry hd a scrn t
flxn crls!

Dth sms th only dsrbl sql fr a crr lk ths; bt Dth
is only a lnchng int th rgn of th strng Untrd; it is bt
th frst slttn t th pssblts of th immns Rmt, th
Wld, th Wtry, th Unshrd; thrfr, t th dth-lngng eys of
sch mn, wh stll hv lft in thm sm intrr cmpnctns
agnst scd, ds th all-cntrbtd and all-rcptv ocn
allrngly sprd frth hs whl pln of unmgnbl, tkng
trrrs, and wndrfl, nw-lf advntrs; and frm th hrts of
infnt Pcfcs, th thsnd mrmds sng t thm—“Cm hthr,
brkn-hrtd; hr is anthr lf wtht th glt of intrmdt
dth; hr ar wndrs sprntrl, wtht dyng fr thm. Cm
hthr! bry thyslf in a lf whch, t yr nw eqlly abhrrd and
abhrrng, lndd wrld, is mr oblvs thn dth. Cm hthr! pt
up _thy_ grvstn, t, wthn th chrchyrd, and cm hthr, tll
w mrry th!”

Hrknng t ths vcs, Est and Wst, by erly snrs, and by
fll of ev, th blcksmth’s sl rspndd, Ay, I cm! And s Prth
wnt a-whlng.


CHPTR 113. Th Frg.

Wth mttd brd, and swthd in a brstlng shrk-skn aprn, abt
md-dy, Prth ws stndng btwn hs frg and anvl, th lttr
plcd upn an irn-wd lg, wth on hnd hldng a pk-hd in th
cls, and wth th othr at hs frg’s lngs, whn Cptn Ahb cm
alng, crryng in hs hnd a smll rsty-lkng lthrn bg. Whl
yt a lttl dstnc frm th frg, mdy Ahb psd; tll at lst,
Prth, wthdrwng hs irn frm th fr, bgn hmmrng it upn th
anvl—th rd mss sndng off th sprks in thck hvrng flghts,
sm of whch flw cls t Ahb.

“Ar ths thy Mthr Cry’s chckns, Prth? thy ar alwys flyng
in thy wk; brds of gd omn, t, bt nt t all;—lk hr, thy
brn; bt th—th lv’st amng thm wtht a scrch.”

“Bcs I am scrchd all ovr, Cptn Ahb,” answrd Prth, rstng
fr a mmnt on hs hmmr; “I am pst scrchng; nt esly cn’st
th scrch a scr.”

“Wll, wll; n mr. Thy shrnk vc snds t clmly, snly wfl
t m. In n Prds myslf, I am imptnt of all msry in othrs
tht is nt md. Th shld’st g md, blcksmth; sy, why dst th
nt g md? Hw cn’st th endr wtht bng md? D th hvns
yt ht th, tht th cn’st nt g md?—Wht wrt th mkng
thr?”

“Wldng an old pk-hd, sr; thr wr sms and dnts in it.”

“And cn’st th mk it all smth agn, blcksmth, aftr sch hrd
usg as it hd?”

“I thnk s, sr.”

“And I spps th cn’st smth almst any sms and dnts; nvr
mnd hw hrd th mtl, blcksmth?”

“Ay, sr, I thnk I cn; all sms and dnts bt on.”

“Lk y hr, thn,” crd Ahb, pssntly advncng, and lnng
wth bth hnds on Prth’s shldrs; “lk y hr—_hr_—cn y
smth ot a sm lk ths, blcksmth,” swpng on hnd acrss hs
rbbd brw; “if th cld’st, blcksmth, gld engh wld I ly my
hd upn thy anvl, and fl thy hvst hmmr btwn my eys.
Answr! Cn’st th smth ths sm?”

“Oh! tht is th on, sr! Sd I nt all sms and dnts bt on?”

“Ay, blcksmth, it is th on; ay, mn, it is unsmthbl; fr
thgh th only s’st it hr in my flsh, it hs wrkd dwn int
th bn of my skll—_tht_ is all wrnkls! Bt, awy wth chld’s
ply; n mr gffs and pks t-dy. Lk y hr!” jnglng th
lthrn bg, as if it wr fll of gld cns. “I, t, wnt a hrpn
md; on tht a thsnd yk of fnds cld nt prt, Prth;
smthng tht wll stck in a whl lk hs own fn-bn. Thr’s th
stff,” flngng th pch upn th anvl. “Lk y, blcksmth, ths
ar th gthrd nl-stbbs of th stl shs of rcng hrss.”

“Hrs-sh stbbs, sr? Why, Cptn Ahb, th hst hr, thn, th
bst and stbbrnst stff w blcksmths evr wrk.”

“I knw it, old mn; ths stbbs wll wld tgthr lk gl frm th
mltd bns of mrdrrs. Qck! frg m th hrpn. And frg m
frst, twlv rds fr its shnk; thn wnd, and twst, and hmmr
ths twlv tgthr lk th yrns and strnds of a tw-ln. Qck!
I’ll blw th fr.”

Whn at lst th twlv rds wr md, Ahb trd thm, on by on, by
sprllng thm, wth hs own hnd, rnd a lng, hvy irn blt. “A
flw!” rjctng th lst on. “Wrk tht ovr agn, Prth.”

Ths dn, Prth ws abt t bgn wldng th twlv int on, whn
Ahb styd hs hnd, and sd h wld wld hs own irn. As, thn,
wth rglr, gspng hms, h hmmrd on th anvl, Prth pssng t
hm th glwng rds, on aftr th othr, and th hrd prssd frg
shtng up its intns strght flm, th Prs pssd slntly, and
bwng ovr hs hd twrds th fr, smd invkng sm crs or
sm blssng on th tl. Bt, as Ahb lkd up, h sld asd.

“Wht’s tht bnch of lcfrs ddgng abt thr fr?” mttrd
Stbb, lkng on frm th frcstl. “Tht Prs smlls fr lk a
fs; and smlls of it hmslf, lk a ht mskt’s pwdr-pn.”

At lst th shnk, in on cmplt rd, rcvd its fnl ht; and as
Prth, t tmpr it, plngd it all hssng int th csk of wtr nr
by, th scldng stm sht up int Ahb’s bnt fc.

“Wld’st th brnd m, Prth?” wncng fr a mmnt wth th pn;
“hv I bn bt frgng my own brndng-irn, thn?”

“Pry Gd, nt tht; yt I fr smthng, Cptn Ahb. Is nt ths
hrpn fr th Wht Whl?”

“Fr th wht fnd! Bt nw fr th brbs; th mst mk thm
thyslf, mn. Hr ar my rzrs—th bst of stl; hr, and mk th
brbs shrp as th ndl-slt of th Icy S.”

Fr a mmnt, th old blcksmth eyd th rzrs as thgh h wld
fn nt us thm.

“Tk thm, mn, I hv n nd fr thm; fr I nw nthr shv, sp,
nr pry tll—bt hr—t wrk!”

Fshnd at lst int an arrwy shp, and wldd by Prth t th
shnk, th stl sn pntd th end of th irn; and as th
blcksmth ws abt gvng th brbs thr fnl ht, prr t
tmprng thm, h crd t Ahb t plc th wtr-csk nr.

“N, n—n wtr fr tht; I wnt it of th tr dth-tmpr. Ahy,
thr! Tshtg, Qqg, Dgg! Wht sy y, pgns! Wll y gv m
as mch bld as wll cvr ths brb?” hldng it hgh up. A clstr
of drk nds rpld, Ys. Thr pnctrs wr md in th hthn
flsh, and th Wht Whl’s brbs wr thn tmprd.

“Eg nn bptz t in nmn ptrs, sd in nmn dbl!”
dlrsly hwld Ahb, as th mlgnnt irn scrchngly dvrd th
bptsml bld.

Nw, mstrng th spr pls frm blw, and slctng on of
hckry, wth th brk stll invstng it, Ahb fttd th end t th
sckt of th irn. A cl of nw tw-ln ws thn unwnd, and sm
fthms of it tkn t th wndlss, and strtchd t a grt tnsn.
Prssng hs ft upn it, tll th rp hmmd lk a hrp-strng,
thn egrly bndng ovr it, and sng n strndngs, Ahb exclmd,
“Gd! and nw fr th szngs.”

At on extrmty th rp ws unstrndd, and th sprt sprd yrns
wr all brdd and wvn rnd th sckt of th hrpn; th pl
ws thn drvn hrd up int th sckt; frm th lwr end th rp
ws trcd hlf-wy alng th pl’s lngth, and frmly scrd s,
wth intrtwstngs of twn. Ths dn, pl, irn, and rp—lk th
Thr Fts—rmnd insprbl, and Ahb mdly stlkd awy wth
th wpn; th snd of hs ivry lg, and th snd of th hckry
pl, bth hllwly rngng alng evry plnk. Bt er h entrd hs
cbn, lght, unntrl, hlf-bntrng, yt mst pts snd ws
hrd. Oh, Pp! thy wrtchd lgh, thy idl bt unrstng ey; all thy
strng mmmrs nt unmnngly blndd wth th blck trgdy of th
mlnchly shp, and mckd it!


CHPTR 114. Th Gldr.

Pntrtng frthr and frthr int th hrt of th Jpns crsng
grnd, th Pqd ws sn all astr in th fshry. Oftn, in mld,
plsnt wthr, fr twlv, fftn, eghtn, and twnty hrs on
th strtch, thy wr enggd in th bts, stdly pllng, or
slng, or pddlng aftr th whls, or fr an intrld of sxty or
svnty mnts clmly awtng thr uprsng; thgh wth bt smll
sccss fr thr pns.

At sch tms, undr an abtd sn; aflt all dy upn smth, slw
hvng swlls; std in hs bt, lght as a brch cn; and s
scbly mxng wth th sft wvs thmslvs, tht lk hrth-stn
cts thy prr agnst th gnwl; ths ar th tms of drmy
qtd, whn bhldng th trnql bty and brllncy of th
ocn’s skn, on frgts th tgr hrt tht pnts bnth it; and
wld nt wllngly rmmbr, tht ths vlvt pw bt cncls a
rmrslss fng.

Ths ar th tms, whn in hs whl-bt th rvr sftly fls a
crtn fll, cnfdnt, lnd-lk flng twrds th s; tht h
rgrds it as s mch flwry erth; and th dstnt shp rvlng
only th tps of hr msts, sms strgglng frwrd, nt thrgh hgh
rllng wvs, bt thrgh th tll grss of a rllng prr: as whn
th wstrn emgrnts’ hrss only shw thr erctd ers, whl thr
hddn bds wdly wd thrgh th amzng vrdr.

Th lng-drwn vrgn vls; th mld bl hll-sds; as ovr ths
thr stls th hsh, th hm; y almst swr tht ply-wrd
chldrn l slpng in ths sltds, in sm gld My-tm, whn
th flwrs of th wds ar plckd. And all ths mxs wth yr mst
mystc md; s tht fct and fncy, hlf-wy mtng, intrpntrt,
and frm on smlss whl.

Nr dd sch sthng scns, hwvr tmprry, fl of at lst as
tmprry an effct on Ahb. Bt if ths scrt gldn kys dd sm
t opn in hm hs own scrt gldn trsrs, yt dd hs brth
upn thm prv bt trnshng.

Oh, grssy glds! oh, evr vrnl endlss lndscps in th sl; in
y,—thgh lng prchd by th dd drght of th erthy lf,—in y,
mn yt my rll, lk yng hrss in nw mrnng clvr; and fr sm
fw fltng mmnts, fl th cl dw of th lf immrtl on thm.
Wld t Gd ths blssd clms wld lst. Bt th mngld, mnglng
thrds of lf ar wvn by wrp and wf: clms crssd by strms, a
strm fr evry clm. Thr is n stdy unrtrcng prgrss in ths
lf; w d nt advnc thrgh fxd grdtns, and at th lst on
ps:—thrgh infncy’s uncnscs spll, byhd’s thghtlss
fth, adlscnc’ dbt (th cmmn dm), thn scptcsm, thn
dsblf, rstng at lst in mnhd’s pndrng rps of If. Bt
onc gn thrgh, w trc th rnd agn; and ar infnts, bys, and
mn, and Ifs etrnlly. Whr ls th fnl hrbr, whnc w unmr
n mr? In wht rpt ethr sls th wrld, of whch th wrst wll
nvr wry? Whr is th fndlng’s fthr hddn? Or sls ar lk
ths orphns whs unwddd mthrs d in brng thm: th scrt of
or ptrnty ls in thr grv, and w mst thr t lrn it.

And tht sm dy, t, gzng fr dwn frm hs bt’s sd int tht
sm gldn s, Strbck lwly mrmrd:—

“Lvlnss unfthmbl, as evr lvr sw in hs yng brd’s
ey!—Tll m nt of thy tth-trd shrks, and thy kdnppng
cnnbl wys. Lt fth ost fct; lt fncy ost mmry; I lk dp
dwn and d blv.”

And Stbb, fsh-lk, wth sprklng scls, lpd up in tht sm
gldn lght:—

“I am Stbb, and Stbb hs hs hstry; bt hr Stbb tks oths tht
h hs alwys bn jlly!”


CHPTR 115. Th Pqd Mts Th Bchlr.

And jlly engh wr th sghts and th snds tht cm brng dwn
bfr th wnd, sm fw wks aftr Ahb’s hrpn hd bn wldd.

It ws a Nntckt shp, th Bchlr, whch hd jst wdgd in hr
lst csk of ol, and bltd dwn hr brstng htchs; and nw, in
gld hldy apprl, ws jysly, thgh smwht vn-glrsly,
slng rnd amng th wdly-sprtd shps on th grnd, prvs
t pntng hr prw fr hm.

Th thr mn at hr mst-hd wr lng strmrs of nrrw rd
bntng at thr hts; frm th strn, a whl-bt ws sspndd,
bttm dwn; and hngng cptv frm th bwsprt ws sn th lng
lwr jw of th lst whl thy hd sln. Sgnls, ensgns, and jcks
of all clrs wr flyng frm hr rggng, on evry sd. Sdwys
lshd in ech of hr thr bsktd tps wr tw brrls of sprm;
abv whch, in hr tp-mst crss-trs, y sw slndr brkrs of
th sm prcs fld; and nld t hr mn trck ws a brzn
lmp.

As ws aftrwrds lrnd, th Bchlr hd mt wth th mst
srprsng sccss; all th mr wndrfl, fr tht whl crsng in
th sm ss nmrs othr vssls hd gn entr mnths wtht
scrng a sngl fsh. Nt only hd brrls of bf and brd bn
gvn awy t mk rm fr th fr mr vlbl sprm, bt addtnl
spplmntl csks hd bn brtrd fr, frm th shps sh hd mt;
and ths wr stwd alng th dck, and in th cptn’s and
offcrs’ stt-rms. Evn th cbn tbl itslf hd bn knckd
int kndlng-wd; and th cbn mss dnd off th brd hd of an
ol-btt, lshd dwn t th flr fr a cntrpc. In th
frcstl, th slrs hd actlly clkd and ptchd thr chsts,
and flld thm; it ws hmrsly addd, tht th ck hd clppd a
hd on hs lrgst blr, and flld it; tht th stwrd hd plggd
hs spr cff-pt and flld it; tht th hrpnrs hd hdd th
sckts of thr irns and flld thm; tht indd evrythng ws
flld wth sprm, excpt th cptn’s pntlns pckts, and ths
h rsrvd t thrst hs hnds int, in slf-cmplcnt tstmny of
hs entr stsfctn.

As ths gld shp of gd lck br dwn upn th mdy Pqd, th
brbrn snd of enrms drms cm frm hr frcstl; and drwng
stll nrr, a crwd of hr mn wr sn stndng rnd hr hg
try-pts, whch, cvrd wth th prchmnt-lk _pk_ or stmch skn
of th blck fsh, gv frth a ld rr t evry strk of th
clnchd hnds of th crw. On th qrtr-dck, th mts and
hrpnrs wr dncng wth th olv-hd grls wh hd elpd wth
thm frm th Plynsn Isls; whl sspndd in an ornmntd bt,
frmly scrd alft btwn th frmst and mnmst, thr Lng
Islnd ngrs, wth glttrng fddl-bws of whl ivry, wr
prsdng ovr th hlrs jg. Mnwhl, othrs of th shp’s
cmpny wr tmltsly bsy at th msnry of th try-wrks, frm
whch th hg pts hd bn rmvd. Y wld hv almst thght
thy wr pllng dwn th crsd Bstll, sch wld crs thy
rsd, as th nw uslss brck and mrtr wr bng hrld int th
s.

Lrd and mstr ovr all ths scn, th cptn std erct on th
shp’s elvtd qrtr-dck, s tht th whl rjcng drm ws
fll bfr hm, and smd mrly cntrvd fr hs own indvdl
dvrsn.

And Ahb, h t ws stndng on hs qrtr-dck, shggy and blck,
wth a stbbrn glm; and as th tw shps crssd ech othr’s
wks—on all jbltns fr thngs pssd, th othr all frbdngs
as t thngs t cm—thr tw cptns in thmslvs imprsntd th
whl strkng cntrst of th scn.

“Cm abrd, cm abrd!” crd th gy Bchlr’s cmmndr, lftng
a glss and a bttl in th ar.

“Hst sn th Wht Whl?” grttd Ahb in rply.

“N; only hrd of hm; bt dn’t blv in hm at all,” sd th
othr gd-hmrdly. “Cm abrd!”

“Th art t dmnd jlly. Sl on. Hst lst any mn?”

“Nt engh t spk of—tw islndrs, tht’s all;—bt cm abrd, old
hrty, cm alng. I’ll sn tk tht blck frm yr brw. Cm
alng, wll y (mrry’s th ply); a fll shp and hmwrd-bnd.”

“Hw wndrs fmlr is a fl!” mttrd Ahb; thn ald, “Th art
a fll shp and hmwrd bnd, th syst; wll, thn, cll m an
empty shp, and otwrd-bnd. S g thy wys, and I wll mn. Frwrd
thr! St all sl, and kp hr t th wnd!”

And ths, whl th on shp wnt chrly bfr th brz, th othr
stbbrnly fght agnst it; and s th tw vssls prtd; th crw
of th Pqd lkng wth grv, lngrng glncs twrds th
rcdng Bchlr; bt th Bchlr’s mn nvr hdng thr gz fr
th lvly rvlry thy wr in. And as Ahb, lnng ovr th
tffrl, eyd th hmwrd-bnd crft, h tk frm hs pckt a
smll vl of snd, and thn lkng frm th shp t th vl, smd
thrby brngng tw rmt assctns tgthr, fr tht vl ws
flld wth Nntckt sndngs.


CHPTR 116. Th Dyng Whl.

Nt sldm in ths lf, whn, on th rght sd, frtn’s fvrts
sl cls by us, w, thgh all adrp bfr, ctch smwht of th
rshng brz, and jyflly fl or bggng sls fll ot. S smd
it wth th Pqd. Fr nxt dy aftr encntrng th gy Bchlr,
whls wr sn and fr wr sln; and on of thm by Ahb.

It ws fr dwn th aftrnn; and whn all th sprngs of th
crmsn fght wr dn: and fltng in th lvly snst s and sky,
sn and whl bth stlly dd tgthr; thn, sch a swtnss and
sch plntvnss, sch inwrthng orsns crld up in tht rsy
ar, tht it almst smd as if fr ovr frm th dp grn cnvnt
vllys of th Mnll isls, th Spnsh lnd-brz, wntnly trnd
slr, hd gn t s, frghtd wth ths vspr hymns.

Sthd agn, bt only sthd t dpr glm, Ahb, wh hd strnd
off frm th whl, st intntly wtchng hs fnl wnngs frm th
nw trnql bt. Fr tht strng spctcl obsrvbl in all sprm
whls dyng—th trnng snwrds of th hd, and s exprng—tht
strng spctcl, bhld of sch a plcd evnng, smhw t Ahb
cnvyd a wndrsnss unknwn bfr.

“H trns and trns hm t it,—hw slwly, bt hw stdfstly, hs
hmg-rndrng and invkng brw, wth hs lst dyng mtns. H t
wrshps fr; mst fthfl, brd, brnl vssl of th sn!—Oh
tht ths t-fvrng eys shld s ths t-fvrng sghts.
Lk! hr, fr wtr-lckd; bynd all hm of hmn wl or w; in
ths mst cndd and imprtl ss; whr t trdtns n rcks
frnsh tblts; whr fr lng Chns ags, th bllws hv stll
rlld on spchlss and unspkn t, as strs tht shn upn th
Ngr’s unknwn src; hr, t, lf ds snwrds fll of fth;
bt s! n snr dd, thn dth whrls rnd th crps, and it
hds sm othr wy.

“Oh, th drk Hnd hlf of ntr, wh of drwnd bns hst bldd
thy sprt thrn smwhr in th hrt of ths unvrdrd ss;
th art an infdl, th qn, and t trly spkst t m in th
wd-slghtrng Typhn, and th hshd brl of its aftr clm. Nr
hs ths thy whl snwrds trnd hs dyng hd, and thn gn rnd
agn, wtht a lssn t m.

“Oh, trbly hpd and wldd hp of pwr! Oh, hgh asprng,
rnbwd jt!—tht on strvst, ths on jttst all in vn! In
vn, oh whl, dst th sk intrcdngs wth yn all-qcknng
sn, tht only clls frth lf, bt gvs it nt agn. Yt dst th,
drkr hlf, rck m wth a prdr, if a drkr fth. All thy
unnmbl immnglngs flt bnth m hr; I am byd by brths of
onc lvng thngs, exhld as ar, bt wtr nw.

“Thn hl, fr evr hl, O s, in whs etrnl tssngs th wld
fwl fnds hs only rst. Brn of erth, yt sckld by th s; thgh
hll and vlly mthrd m, y bllws ar my fstr-brthrs!”


CHPTR 117. Th Whl Wtch.

Th fr whls sln tht evnng hd dd wd aprt; on, fr t
wndwrd; on, lss dstnt, t lwrd; on ahd; on astrn. Ths
lst thr wr brght alngsd er nghtfll; bt th wndwrd on
cld nt b rchd tll mrnng; and th bt tht hd klld it ly
by its sd all nght; and tht bt ws Ahb’s.

Th wf-pl ws thrst uprght int th dd whl’s spt-hl; and
th lntrn hngng frm its tp, cst a trbld flckrng glr upn
th blck, glssy bck, and fr ot upn th mdnght wvs, whch
gntly chfd th whl’s brd flnk, lk sft srf upn a bch.

Ahb and all hs bt’s crw smd aslp bt th Prs; wh
crchng in th bw, st wtchng th shrks, tht spctrlly plyd
rnd th whl, and tppd th lght cdr plnks wth thr tls. A
snd lk th mnng in sqdrns ovr Asphltts of unfrgvn
ghsts of Gmrrh, rn shddrng thrgh th ar.

Strtd frm hs slmbrs, Ahb, fc t fc, sw th Prs; and
hpd rnd by th glm of th nght thy smd th lst mn in a
fldd wrld. “I hv drmd it agn,” sd h.

“Of th hrss? Hv I nt sd, old mn, tht nthr hrs nr
cffn cn b thn?”

“And wh ar hrsd tht d on th s?”

“Bt I sd, old mn, tht er th cldst d on ths vyg, tw
hrss mst vrly b sn by th on th s; th frst nt md by
mrtl hnds; and th vsbl wd of th lst on mst b grwn in
Amrc.”

“Ay, ay! a strng sght tht, Prs:—a hrs and its plms
fltng ovr th ocn wth th wvs fr th pll-brrs. H! Sch a
sght w shll nt sn s.”

“Blv it or nt, th cnst nt d tll it b sn, old mn.”

“And wht ws tht syng abt thyslf?”

“Thgh it cm t th lst, I shll stll g bfr th thy plt.”

“And whn th art s gn bfr—if tht evr bfll—thn er I cn
fllw, th mst stll appr t m, t plt m stll?—Ws it nt s?
Wll, thn, dd I blv all y sy, oh my plt! I hv hr tw
pldgs tht I shll yt sly Mby Dck and srvv it.”

“Tk anthr pldg, old mn,” sd th Prs, as hs eys lghtd up
lk fr-fls in th glm—“Hmp only cn kll th.”

“Th gllws, y mn.—I am immrtl thn, on lnd and on s,” crd
Ahb, wth a lgh of drsn;—“Immrtl on lnd and on s!”

Bth wr slnt agn, as on mn. Th gry dwn cm on, and th
slmbrng crw ars frm th bt’s bttm, and er nn th dd
whl ws brght t th shp.


CHPTR 118. Th Qdrnt.

Th ssn fr th Ln at lngth drw nr; and evry dy whn Ahb,
cmng frm hs cbn, cst hs eys alft, th vglnt hlmsmn wld
ostnttsly hndl hs spks, and th egr mrnrs qckly rn t
th brcs, and wld stnd thr wth all thr eys cntrlly fxd
on th nld dbln; imptnt fr th ordr t pnt th shp’s
prw fr th eqtr. In gd tm th ordr cm. It ws hrd upn
hgh nn; and Ahb, std in th bws of hs hgh-hstd bt, ws
abt tkng hs wntd dly obsrvtn of th sn t dtrmn hs
lttd.

Nw, in tht Jpns s, th dys in smmr ar as frshts of
efflgncs. Tht unblnkngly vvd Jpns sn sms th blzng
fcs of th glssy ocn’s immsrbl brnng-glss. Th sky lks
lcqrd; clds thr ar nn; th hrzn flts; and ths
nkdnss of unrlvd rdnc is as th insffrbl splndrs of
Gd’s thrn. Wll tht Ahb’s qdrnt ws frnshd wth clrd
glsss, thrgh whch t tk sght of tht slr fr. S, swngng
hs std frm t th rll of th shp, and wth hs
astrlgcl-lkng instrmnt plcd t hs ey, h rmnd in tht
pstr fr sm mmnts t ctch th prcs instnt whn th sn
shld gn its prcs mrdn. Mntm whl hs whl attntn
ws absrbd, th Prs ws knlng bnth hm on th shp’s dck,
and wth fc thrwn up lk Ahb’s, ws eyng th sm sn wth hm;
only th lds of hs eys hlf hdd thr orbs, and hs wld fc ws
sbdd t an erthly pssnlssnss. At lngth th dsrd
obsrvtn ws tkn; and wth hs pncl upn hs ivry lg, Ahb
sn clcltd wht hs lttd mst b at tht prcs instnt. Thn
fllng int a mmnt’s rvry, h agn lkd up twrds th sn and
mrmrd t hmslf: “Th s-mrk! th hgh and mghty Plt! th
tllst m trly whr I _am_—bt cnst th cst th lst hnt whr
I _shll_ b? Or cnst th tll whr sm othr thng bsds m is
ths mmnt lvng? Whr is Mby Dck? Ths instnt th mst b
eyng hm. Ths eys of mn lk int th vry ey tht is evn nw
bhldng hm; ay, and int th ey tht is evn nw eqlly bhldng
th objcts on th unknwn, ththr sd of th, th sn!”

Thn gzng at hs qdrnt, and hndlng, on aftr th othr, its
nmrs cblstcl cntrvncs, h pndrd agn, and mttrd:
“Flsh ty! bbs’ plythng of hghty Admrls, and Cmmdrs,
and Cptns; th wrld brgs of th, of thy cnnng and mght; bt
wht aftr all cnst th d, bt tll th pr, ptfl pnt, whr
th thyslf hppnst t b on ths wd plnt, and th hnd tht
hlds th: n! nt on jt mr! Th cnst nt tll whr on drp of
wtr or on grn of snd wll b t-mrrw nn; and yt wth thy
imptnc th insltst th sn! Scnc! Crs th, th vn ty;
and crsd b all th thngs tht cst mn’s eys alft t tht hvn,
whs lv vvdnss bt scrchs hm, as ths old eys ar evn nw
scrchd wth thy lght, O sn! Lvl by ntr t ths erth’s hrzn
ar th glncs of mn’s eys; nt sht frm th crwn of hs hd, as
if Gd hd mnt hm t gz on hs frmmnt. Crs th, th
qdrnt!” dshng it t th dck, “n lngr wll I gd my erthly
wy by th; th lvl shp’s cmpss, and th lvl dd-rcknng, by
lg and by ln; _ths_ shll cndct m, and shw m my plc on th
s. Ay,” lghtng frm th bt t th dck, “ths I trmpl on th,
th pltry thng tht fbly pntst on hgh; ths I splt and
dstry th!”

As th frntc old mn ths spk and ths trmpld wth hs lv and
dd ft, a snrng trmph tht smd mnt fr Ahb, and a
ftlstc dspr tht smd mnt fr hmslf—ths pssd ovr th
mt, mtnlss Prs’s fc. Unbsrvd h rs and gldd awy;
whl, awstrck by th aspct of thr cmmndr, th smn clstrd
tgthr on th frcstl, tll Ahb, trbldly pcng th dck,
shtd ot—“T th brcs! Up hlm!—sqr in!”

In an instnt th yrds swng rnd; and as th shp hlf-whld upn
hr hl, hr thr frm-std grcfl msts erctly psd upn hr
lng, rbbd hll, smd as th thr Hrt prttng on on
sffcnt std.

Stndng btwn th knght-hds, Strbck wtchd th Pqd’s
tmlts wy, and Ahb’s als, as h wnt lrchng alng th dck.

“I hv st bfr th dns cl fr and wtchd it all aglw, fll
of its trmntd flmng lf; and I hv sn it wn at lst, dwn,
dwn, t dmbst dst. Old mn of ocns! of all ths fry lf of
thn, wht wll at lngth rmn bt on lttl hp of ashs!”

“Ay,” crd Stbb, “bt s-cl ashs—mnd y tht, Mr.
Strbck—s-cl, nt yr cmmn chrcl. Wll, wll; I hrd Ahb
mttr, ‘Hr sm on thrsts ths crds int ths old hnds of
mn; swrs tht I mst ply thm, and n othrs.’ And dmn m, Ahb,
bt th actst rght; lv in th gm, and d in it!”


CHPTR 119. Th Cndls.

Wrmst clms bt nrs th crllst fngs: th tgr of Bngl
crchs in spcd grvs of cslss vrdr. Sks th mst
efflgnt bt bskt th ddlst thndrs: grgs Cb knws
trnds tht nvr swpt tm nrthrn lnds. S, t, it is, tht in
ths rsplndnt Jpns ss th mrnr encntrs th drst of
all strms, th Typhn. It wll smtms brst frm ot tht
cldlss sky, lk an expldng bmb upn a dzd and slpy twn.

Twrds evnng of tht dy, th Pqd ws trn of hr cnvs, and
br-pld ws lft t fght a Typhn whch hd strck hr drctly
ahd. Whn drknss cm on, sky and s rrd and splt wth th
thndr, and blzd wth th lghtnng, tht shwd th dsbld msts
flttrng hr and thr wth th rgs whch th frst fry of th
tmpst hd lft fr its aftr sprt.

Hldng by a shrd, Strbck ws stndng on th qrtr-dck; at
evry flsh of th lghtnng glncng alft, t s wht addtnl
dsstr mght hv bflln th intrct hmpr thr; whl Stbb
and Flsk wr drctng th mn in th hghr hstng and frmr
lshng of th bts. Bt all thr pns smd nght. Thgh lftd
t th vry tp of th crns, th wndwrd qrtr bt (Ahb’s) dd
nt escp. A grt rllng s, dshng hgh up agnst th rlng
shp’s hgh ttrng sd, stv in th bt’s bttm at th strn,
and lft it agn, all drppng thrgh lk a sv.

“Bd wrk, bd wrk! Mr. Strbck,” sd Stbb, rgrdng th wrck,
“bt th s wll hv its wy. Stbb, fr on, cn’t fght it. Y
s, Mr. Strbck, a wv hs sch a grt lng strt bfr it lps,
all rnd th wrld it rns, and thn cms th sprng! Bt as fr m,
all th strt I hv t mt it, is jst acrss th dck hr. Bt
nvr mnd; it’s all in fn: s th old sng sys;”—(_sngs_.)


  Oh! jlly is th gl, And a jkr is th whl, A’ flrshn’ hs
  tl,— Sch a fnny, sprty, gmy, jsty, jky, hky-pky ld, is th
  Ocn, oh!

  Th scd all a flyn’, Tht’s hs flp only fmn’; Whn h strs in
  th spcn’,— Sch a fnny, sprty, gmy, jsty, jky, hky-pky ld,
  is th Ocn, oh!

  Thndr splts th shps, Bt h only smcks hs lps, A tstn’ of
  ths flp,— Sch a fnny, sprty, gmy, jsty, jky, hky-pky ld,
  is th Ocn, oh!



“Avst Stbb,” crd Strbck, “lt th Typhn sng, and strk hs
hrp hr in or rggng; bt if th art a brv mn th wlt hld
thy pc.”

“Bt I am nt a brv mn; nvr sd I ws a brv mn; I am a cwrd;
and I sng t kp up my sprts. And I tll y wht it is, Mr.
Strbck, thr’s n wy t stp my sngng in ths wrld bt t ct my
thrt. And whn tht’s dn, tn t on I sng y th dxlgy fr a
wnd-up.”

“Mdmn! lk thrgh my eys if th hst nn of thn own.”

“Wht! hw cn y s bttr of a drk nght thn anybdy els, nvr
mnd hw flsh?”

“Hr!” crd Strbck, szng Stbb by th shldr, and pntng hs
hnd twrds th wthr bw, “mrkst th nt tht th gl cms
frm th estwrd, th vry crs Ahb is t rn fr Mby Dck? th
vry crs h swng t ths dy nn? nw mrk hs bt thr; whr
is tht stv? In th strn-shts, mn; whr h is wnt t stnd—hs
stnd-pnt is stv, mn! Nw jmp ovrbrd, and sng awy, if th
mst!

“I dn’t hlf undrstnd y: wht’s in th wnd?”

“Ys, ys, rnd th Cp of Gd Hp is th shrtst wy t
Nntckt,” sllqzd Strbck sddnly, hdlss of Stbb’s
qstn. “Th gl tht nw hmmrs at us t stv us, w cn trn it
int a fr wnd tht wll drv us twrds hm. Yndr, t wndwrd,
all is blcknss of dm; bt t lwrd, hmwrd—I s it lghtns up
thr; bt nt wth th lghtnng.”

At tht mmnt in on of th intrvls of prfnd drknss, fllwng
th flshs, a vc ws hrd at hs sd; and almst at th sm
instnt a vlly of thndr pls rlld ovrhd.

“Wh’s thr?”

“Old Thndr!” sd Ahb, grpng hs wy alng th blwrks t hs
pvt-hl; bt sddnly fndng hs pth md pln t hm by elbwd
lncs of fr.

Nw, as th lghtnng rd t a spr on shr is intndd t crry off
th prls fld int th sl; s th kndrd rd whch at s sm
shps crry t ech mst, is intndd t cndct it int th wtr. Bt
as ths cndctr mst dscnd t cnsdrbl dpth, tht its end my
avd all cntct wth th hll; and as mrvr, if kpt cnstntly
twng thr, it wld b lbl t mny mshps, bsds intrfrng
nt a lttl wth sm of th rggng, and mr or lss impdng th
vssl’s wy in th wtr; bcs of all ths, th lwr prts of a
shp’s lghtnng-rds ar nt alwys ovrbrd; bt ar gnrlly md
in lng slndr lnks, s as t b th mr rdly hld up int th
chns otsd, or thrwn dwn int th s, as occsn my rqr.

“Th rds! th rds!” crd Strbck t th crw, sddnly admnshd
t vglnc by th vvd lghtnng tht hd jst bn drtng
flmbx, t lght Ahb t hs pst. “Ar thy ovrbrd? drp thm
ovr, fr and aft. Qck!”

“Avst!” crd Ahb; “lt’s hv fr ply hr, thgh w b th
wkr sd. Yt I’ll cntrbt t rs rds on th Hmmlhs and
Ands, tht all th wrld my b scrd; bt ot on prvlgs! Lt
thm b, sr.”

“Lk alft!” crd Strbck. “Th crpsnts! th crpsnts!”

All th yrd-arms wr tppd wth a plld fr; and tchd at ech
tr-pntd lghtnng-rd-end wth thr tprng wht flms, ech of
th thr tll msts ws slntly brnng in tht slphrs ar, lk
thr ggntc wx tprs bfr an altr.

“Blst th bt! lt it g!” crd Stbb at ths instnt, as a swshng
s hvd up undr hs own lttl crft, s tht its gnwl vlntly
jmmd hs hnd, as h ws pssng a lshng. “Blst it!”—bt slppng
bckwrd on th dck, hs uplftd eys cght th flms; and
immdtly shftng hs tn h crd—“Th crpsnts hv mrcy on us
all!”

T slrs, oths ar hshld wrds; thy wll swr in th trnc of
th clm, and in th tth of th tmpst; thy wll imprct crss
frm th tpsl-yrd-arms, whn mst thy ttr ovr t a sthng
s; bt in all my vygngs, sldm hv I hrd a cmmn oth whn
Gd’s brnng fngr hs bn ld on th shp; whn Hs “Mn, Mn,
Tkl Uphrsn” hs bn wvn int th shrds and th crdg.

Whl ths plldnss ws brnng alft, fw wrds wr hrd frm th
enchntd crw; wh in on thck clstr std on th frcstl, all
thr eys glmng in tht pl phsphrscnc, lk a fr awy
cnstlltn of strs. Rlvd agnst th ghstly lght, th
ggntc jt ngr, Dgg, lmd up t thrc hs rl sttr, and
smd th blck cld frm whch th thndr hd cm. Th prtd
mth of Tshtg rvld hs shrk-wht tth, whch strngly
glmd as if thy t hd bn tppd by crpsnts; whl lt up by
th prtrntrl lght, Qqg’s tttng brnd lk Stnc bl
flms on hs bdy.

Th tbl all wnd at lst wth th plldnss alft; and onc mr
th Pqd and evry sl on hr dcks wr wrppd in a pll. A mmnt
or tw pssd, whn Strbck, gng frwrd, pshd agnst sm on.
It ws Stbb. “Wht thnkst th nw, mn; I hrd thy cry; it ws nt
th sm in th sng.”

“N, n, it wsn’t; I sd th crpsnts hv mrcy on us all; and I
hp thy wll, stll. Bt d thy only hv mrcy on lng fcs?—hv
thy n bwls fr a lgh? And lk y, Mr. Strbck—bt it’s t drk
t lk. Hr m, thn: I tk tht mst-hd flm w sw fr a sgn
of gd lck; fr ths msts ar rtd in a hld tht is gng t b
chck a’ blck wth sprm-ol, d’y s; and s, all tht sprm wll
wrk up int th msts, lk sp in a tr. Ys, or thr msts wll
yt b as thr sprmct cndls—tht’s th gd prms w sw.”

At tht mmnt Strbck cght sght of Stbb’s fc slwly bgnnng
t glmmr int sght. Glncng upwrds, h crd: “S! s!” and onc
mr th hgh tprng flms wr bhld wth wht smd rdbld
sprntrlnss in thr pllr.

“Th crpsnts hv mrcy on us all,” crd Stbb, agn.

At th bs of th mnmst, fll bnth th dbln and th flm,
th Prs ws knlng in Ahb’s frnt, bt wth hs hd bwd awy
frm hm; whl nr by, frm th archd and ovrhngng rggng, whr
thy hd jst bn enggd scrng a spr, a nmbr of th smn,
arrstd by th glr, nw chrd tgthr, and hng pndls, lk a
knt of nmbd wsps frm a drpng, orchrd twg. In vrs
enchntd atttds, lk th stndng, or stppng, or rnnng
skltns in Hrclnm, othrs rmnd rtd t th dck; bt all
thr eys upcst.

“Ay, ay, mn!” crd Ahb. “Lk up at it; mrk it wll; th wht
flm bt lghts th wy t th Wht Whl! Hnd m ths mnmst
lnks thr; I wld fn fl ths pls, and lt mn bt agnst
it; bld agnst fr! S.”

Thn trnng—th lst lnk hld fst in hs lft hnd, h pt hs ft
upn th Prs; and wth fxd upwrd ey, and hgh-flng rght arm,
h std erct bfr th lfty tr-pntd trnty of flms.

“Oh! th clr sprt of clr fr, whm on ths ss I as Prsn
onc dd wrshp, tll in th scrmntl act s brnd by th, tht
t ths hr I br th scr; I nw knw th, th clr sprt, and I
nw knw tht thy rght wrshp is dfnc. T nthr lv nr
rvrnc wlt th b knd; and e’en fr ht th cnst bt kll; and
all ar klld. N frlss fl nw frnts th. I own thy spchlss,
plclss pwr; bt t th lst gsp of my erthqk lf wll
dspt its uncndtnl, unntgrl mstry in m. In th mdst of
th prsnfd imprsnl, a prsnlty stnds hr. Thgh bt a
pnt at bst; whncs’er I cm; whrs’er I g; yt whl I
erthly lv, th qnly prsnlty lvs in m, and fls hr ryl
rghts. Bt wr is pn, and ht is w. Cm in thy lwst frm of
lv, and I wll knl and kss th; bt at thy hghst, cm as mr
sprnl pwr; and thgh th lnchst nvs of fll-frghtd
wrlds, thr’s tht in hr tht stll rmns indffrnt. Oh, th
clr sprt, of thy fr th mdst m, and lk a tr chld of
fr, I brth it bck t th.”

[_Sddn, rptd flshs of lghtnng; th nn flms lp
lngthws t thrc thr prvs hght; Ahb, wth th rst, clss
hs eys, hs rght hnd prssd hrd upn thm._]

“I own thy spchlss, plclss pwr; sd I nt s? Nr ws it wrng
frm m; nr d I nw drp ths lnks. Th cnst blnd; bt I cn
thn grp. Th cnst cnsm; bt I cn thn b ashs. Tk th
hmg of ths pr eys, and shttr-hnds. I wld nt tk it. Th
lghtnng flshs thrgh my skll; mn ey-blls ach and ach; my
whl btn brn sms as bhdd, and rllng on sm stnnng
grnd. Oh, oh! Yt blndfld, yt wll I tlk t th. Lght thgh
th b, th lpst ot of drknss; bt I am drknss lpng ot of
lght, lpng ot of th! Th jvlns cs; opn eys; s, or nt?
Thr brn th flms! Oh, th mgnnms! nw I d glry in my
gnlgy. Bt th art bt my fry fthr; my swt mthr, I knw
nt. Oh, crl! wht hst th dn wth hr? Thr ls my pzzl; bt
thn is grtr. Th knwst nt hw cm y, hnc cllst thyslf
unbgttn; crtnly knwst nt thy bgnnng, hnc cllst thyslf
unbgn. I knw tht of m, whch th knwst nt of thyslf, oh, th
omnptnt. Thr is sm unsffsng thng bynd th, th clr
sprt, t whm all thy etrnty is bt tm, all thy crtvnss
mchncl. Thrgh th, thy flmng slf, my scrchd eys d dmly
s it. Oh, th fndlng fr, th hrmt immmrl, th t hst
thy incmmncbl rddl, thy unprtcptd grf. Hr agn wth
hghty agny, I rd my sr. Lp! lp up, and lck th sky! I lp
wth th; I brn wth th; wld fn b wldd wth th; dfyngly
I wrshp th!”

“Th bt! th bt!” crd Strbck, “lk at thy bt, old mn!”

Ahb’s hrpn, th on frgd at Prth’s fr, rmnd frmly lshd
in its cnspcs crtch, s tht it prjctd bynd hs whl-bt’s
bw; bt th s tht hd stv its bttm hd csd th ls lthr
shth t drp off; and frm th kn stl brb thr nw cm a
lvlld flm of pl, frkd fr. As th slnt hrpn brnd thr
lk a srpnt’s tng, Strbck grspd Ahb by th arm—“Gd, Gd is
agnst th, old mn; frbr! ’ts an ill vyg! ill bgn, ill
cntnd; lt m sqr th yrds, whl w my, old mn, and mk a
fr wnd of it hmwrds, t g on a bttr vyg thn ths.”

Ovrhrng Strbck, th pnc-strckn crw instntly rn t th
brcs—thgh nt a sl ws lft alft. Fr th mmnt all th aghst
mt’s thghts smd thrs; thy rsd a hlf mtns cry. Bt
dshng th rttlng lghtnng lnks t th dck, and sntchng th
brnng hrpn, Ahb wvd it lk a trch amng thm; swrng t
trnsfx wth it th frst slr tht bt cst ls a rp’s end.
Ptrfd by hs aspct, and stll mr shrnkng frm th fry drt
tht h hld, th mn fll bck in dsmy, and Ahb agn spk:—

“All yr oths t hnt th Wht Whl ar as bndng as mn; and
hrt, sl, and bdy, lngs and lf, old Ahb is bnd. And tht y
my knw t wht tn ths hrt bts; lk y hr; ths I blw ot
th lst fr!” And wth on blst of hs brth h extngshd th
flm.

As in th hrrcn tht swps th pln, mn fly th nghbrhd of
sm ln, ggntc elm, whs vry hght and strngth bt rndr it
s mch th mr unsf, bcs s mch th mr a mrk fr
thndrblts; s at ths lst wrds of Ahb’s mny of th mrnrs dd
rn frm hm in a trrr of dsmy.


CHPTR 120. Th Dck Twrds th End of th Frst Nght Wtch.

_Ahb stndng by th hlm. Strbck apprchng hm._

“W mst snd dwn th mn-tp-sl yrd, sr. Th bnd is wrkng
ls and th l lft is hlf-strndd. Shll I strk it, sr?”

“Strk nthng; lsh it. If I hd sky-sl pls, I’d swy thm up
nw.”

“Sr!—in Gd’s nm!—sr?”

“Wll.”

“Th anchrs ar wrkng, sr. Shll I gt thm inbrd?”

“Strk nthng, and str nthng, bt lsh evrythng. Th wnd rss,
bt it hs nt gt up t my tbl-lnds yt. Qck, and s t it.—By
msts and kls! h tks m fr th hnch-bckd skppr of sm
cstng smck. Snd dwn my mn-tp-sl yrd! H, glpts! Lftst
trcks wr md fr wldst wnds, and ths brn-trck of mn nw
sls amd th cld-scd. Shll I strk tht? Oh, nn bt cwrds
snd dwn thr brn-trcks in tmpst tm. Wht a hrsh alft
thr! I wld e’en tk it fr sblm, dd I nt knw tht th clc
is a nsy mldy. Oh, tk mdcn, tk mdcn!”


CHPTR 121. Mdnght.—Th Frcstl Blwrks.

_Stbb and Flsk mntd on thm, and pssng addtnl lshngs ovr
th anchrs thr hngng._

“N, Stbb; y my pnd tht knt thr as mch as y pls, bt
y wll nvr pnd int m wht y wr jst nw syng. And hw
lng ag is it snc y sd th vry cntrry? Ddn’t y onc sy
tht whtvr shp Ahb sls in, tht shp shld py smthng extr
on its insrnc plcy, jst as thgh it wr ldd wth pwdr
brrls aft and bxs of lcfrs frwrd? Stp, nw; ddn’t y sy
s?”

“Wll, spps I dd? Wht thn? I’v prt chngd my flsh snc tht
tm, why nt my mnd? Bsds, sppsng w _ar_ ldd wth pwdr
brrls aft and lcfrs frwrd; hw th dvl cld th lcfrs gt
afr in ths drnchng spry hr? Why, my lttl mn, y hv prtty
rd hr, bt y cldn’t gt afr nw. Shk yrslf; y’r
Aqrs, or th wtr-brr, Flsk; mght fll ptchrs at yr ct
cllr. Dn’t y s, thn, tht fr ths extr rsks th Mrn
Insrnc cmpns hv extr grnts? Hr ar hydrnts, Flsk.
Bt hrk, agn, and I’ll answr y th othr thng. Frst tk yr
lg off frm th crwn of th anchr hr, thgh, s I cn pss th
rp; nw lstn. Wht’s th mghty dffrnc btwn hldng a mst’s
lghtnng-rd in th strm, and stndng cls by a mst tht hsn’t
gt any lghtnng-rd at all in a strm? Dn’t y s, y
tmbr-hd, tht n hrm cn cm t th hldr of th rd, unlss th
mst is frst strck? Wht ar y tlkng abt, thn? Nt on shp in
a hndrd crrs rds, and Ahb,—ay, mn, and all of us,—wr in n
mr dngr thn, in my pr opnn, thn all th crws in tn
thsnd shps nw slng th ss. Why, y Kng-Pst, y, I spps
y wld hv evry mn in th wrld g abt wth a smll
lghtnng-rd rnnng up th crnr of hs ht, lk a mlt
offcr’s skwrd fthr, and trlng bhnd lk hs ssh. Why
dn’t y b snsbl, Flsk? it’s esy t b snsbl; why dn’t y,
thn? any mn wth hlf an ey cn b snsbl.”

“I dn’t knw tht, Stbb. Y smtms fnd it rthr hrd.”

“Ys, whn a fllw’s skd thrgh, it’s hrd t b snsbl, tht’s
a fct. And I am abt drnchd wth ths spry. Nvr mnd; ctch th
trn thr, and pss it. Sms t m w ar lshng dwn ths anchrs
nw as if thy wr nvr gng t b usd agn. Tyng ths tw
anchrs hr, Flsk, sms lk tyng a mn’s hnds bhnd hm. And
wht bg gnrs hnds thy ar, t b sr. Ths ar yr irn
fsts, hy? Wht a hld thy hv, t! I wndr, Flsk, whthr th
wrld is anchrd anywhr; if sh is, sh swngs wth an uncmmn lng
cbl, thgh. Thr, hmmr tht knt dwn, and w’v dn. S; nxt
t tchng lnd, lghtng on dck is th mst stsfctry. I sy,
jst wrng ot my jckt skrts, wll y? Thnk y. Thy lgh at
lng-tgs s, Flsk; bt sms t m, a lng tld ct oght alwys
t b wrn in all strms aflt. Th tls tprng dwn tht wy,
srv t crry off th wtr, d’y s. Sm wth cckd hts; th
ccks frm gbl-end ev-trghs, Flsk. N mr mnky-jckts and
trplns fr m; I mst mnt a swllw-tl, and drv dwn a
bvr; s. Hll! whw! thr gs my trpln ovrbrd; Lrd,
Lrd, tht th wnds tht cm frm hvn shld b s unmnnrly!
Ths is a nsty nght, ld.”


CHPTR 122. Mdnght Alft.—Thndr and Lghtnng.

_Th mn-tp-sl yrd_.—_Tshtg pssng nw lshngs arnd it_.

“Um, um, um. Stp tht thndr! Plnty t mch thndr up hr. Wht’s
th us of thndr? Um, um, um. W dn’t wnt thndr; w wnt rm;
gv us a glss of rm. Um, um, um!”


CHPTR 123. Th Mskt.

Drng th mst vlnt shcks of th Typhn, th mn at th Pqd’s
jw-bn tllr hd svrl tms bn rlngly hrld t th dck by
its spsmdc mtns, evn thgh prvntr tckls hd bn attchd
t it—fr thy wr slck—bcs sm ply t th tllr ws
indspnsbl.

In a svr gl lk ths, whl th shp is bt a tssd shttlcck
t th blst, it is by n mns uncmmn t s th ndls in th
cmpsss, at intrvls, g rnd and rnd. It ws ths wth th
Pqd’s; at almst evry shck th hlmsmn hd nt fld t ntc
th whrlng vlcty wth whch thy rvlvd upn th crds; it is a
sght tht hrdly anyn cn bhld wtht sm srt of unwntd
emtn.

Sm hrs aftr mdnght, th Typhn abtd s mch, tht thrgh th
strns exrtns of Strbck and Stbb—on enggd frwrd and th
othr aft—th shvrd rmnnts of th jb and fr and mn-tp-sls
wr ct adrft frm th sprs, and wnt eddyng awy t lwrd, lk
th fthrs of an albtrss, whch smtms ar cst t th wnds
whn tht strm-tssd brd is on th wng.

Th thr crrspndng nw sls wr nw bnt and rfd, and a
strm-trysl ws st frthr aft; s tht th shp sn wnt thrgh
th wtr wth sm prcsn agn; and th crs—fr th prsnt,
Est-sth-est—whch h ws t str, if prctcbl, ws onc mr
gvn t th hlmsmn. Fr drng th vlnc of th gl, h hd only
strd accrdng t its vcsstds. Bt as h ws nw brngng th
shp as nr hr crs as pssbl, wtchng th cmpss mnwhl,
l! a gd sgn! th wnd smd cmng rnd astrn; ay, th fl
brz bcm fr!

Instntly th yrds wr sqrd, t th lvly sng of “_H! th fr
wnd! oh-y-h, chrly mn!_” th crw sngng fr jy, tht s
prmsng an evnt shld s sn hv flsfd th evl prtnts
prcdng it.

In cmplnc wth th stndng ordr of hs cmmndr—t rprt
immdtly, and at any on of th twnty-fr hrs, any dcdd
chng in th affrs of th dck,—Strbck hd n snr trmmd th
yrds t th brz—hwvr rlctntly and glmly,—thn h
mchnclly wnt blw t apprs Cptn Ahb of th crcmstnc.

Er knckng at hs stt-rm, h invlntrly psd bfr it a
mmnt. Th cbn lmp—tkng lng swngs ths wy and tht—ws brnng
ftflly, and cstng ftfl shdws upn th old mn’s bltd dr,—a
thn on, wth fxd blnds insrtd, in plc of uppr pnls. Th
isltd sbtrrnsnss of th cbn md a crtn hmmng slnc
t rgn thr, thgh it ws hpd rnd by all th rr of th
elmnts. Th ldd mskts in th rck wr shnngly rvld, as
thy std uprght agnst th frwrd blkhd. Strbck ws an
hnst, uprght mn; bt ot of Strbck’s hrt, at tht instnt whn
h sw th mskts, thr strngly evlvd an evl thght; bt s
blnt wth its ntrl or gd accmpnmnts tht fr th instnt h
hrdly knw it fr itslf.

“H wld hv sht m onc,” h mrmrd, “ys, thr’s th vry
mskt tht h pntd at m;—tht on wth th stddd stck; lt m
tch it—lft it. Strng, tht I, wh hv hndld s mny ddly
lncs, strng, tht I shld shk s nw. Ldd? I mst s. Ay,
ay; and pwdr in th pn;—tht’s nt gd. Bst spll it?—wt. I’ll
cr myslf of ths. I’ll hld th mskt bldly whl I thnk.—I cm
t rprt a fr wnd t hm. Bt hw fr? Fr fr dth and
dm,—_tht’s_ fr fr Mby Dck. It’s a fr wnd tht’s only fr
fr tht accrsd fsh.—Th vry tb h pntd at m!—th vry on;
_ths_ on—I hld it hr; h wld hv klld m wth th vry thng
I hndl nw.—Ay and h wld fn kll all hs crw. Ds h nt sy
h wll nt strk hs sprs t any gl? Hs h nt dshd hs
hvnly qdrnt? and in ths sm prls ss, grps h nt hs
wy by mr dd rcknng of th errr-abndng lg? and in ths vry
Typhn, dd h nt swr tht h wld hv n lghtnng-rds? Bt
shll ths crzd old mn b tmly sffrd t drg a whl shp’s
cmpny dwn t dm wth hm?—Ys, it wld mk hm th wlfl
mrdrr of thrty mn and mr, if ths shp cm t any ddly hrm;
and cm t ddly hrm, my sl swrs ths shp wll, if Ahb hv
hs wy. If, thn, h wr ths instnt—pt asd, tht crm wld nt
b hs. H! is h mttrng in hs slp? Ys, jst thr,—in thr,
h’s slpng. Slpng? ay, bt stll alv, and sn awk agn. I
cn’t wthstnd th, thn, old mn. Nt rsnng; nt rmnstrnc;
nt entrty wlt th hrkn t; all ths th scrnst. Flt
obdnc t thy own flt cmmnds, ths is all th brthst. Ay,
and sy’st th mn hv vw’d thy vw; sy’st all of us ar Ahbs.
Grt Gd frbd!—Bt is thr n othr wy? n lwfl wy?—Mk hm a
prsnr t b tkn hm? Wht! hp t wrst ths old mn’s lvng
pwr frm hs own lvng hnds? Only a fl wld try it. Sy h wr
pnnd evn; knttd all ovr wth rps and hwsrs; chnd dwn t
rng-blts on ths cbn flr; h wld b mr hds thn a cgd
tgr, thn. I cld nt endr th sght; cld nt pssbly fly hs
hwlngs; all cmfrt, slp itslf, instmbl rsn wld lv m
on th lng intlrbl vyg. Wht, thn, rmns? Th lnd is
hndrds of lgs awy, and lckd Jpn th nrst. I stnd aln
hr upn an opn s, wth tw ocns and a whl cntnnt btwn m
and lw.—Ay, ay, ’ts s.—Is hvn a mrdrr whn its lghtnng
strks a wld-b mrdrr in hs bd, tndrng shts and skn
tgthr?—And wld I b a mrdrr, thn, if”—and slwly, stlthly,
and hlf sdwys lkng, h plcd th ldd mskt’s end agnst
th dr.

“On ths lvl, Ahb’s hmmck swngs wthn; hs hd ths wy. A
tch, and Strbck my srvv t hg hs wf and chld agn.—Oh
Mry! Mry!—by! by! by!—Bt if I wk th nt t dth, old mn,
wh cn tll t wht unsndd dps Strbck’s bdy ths dy wk my
snk, wth all th crw! Grt Gd, whr art Th? Shll I? shll
I?—Th wnd hs gn dwn and shftd, sr; th fr and mn tpsls
ar rfd and st; sh hds hr crs.”

“Strn all! Oh Mby Dck, I cltch thy hrt at lst!”

Sch wr th snds tht nw cm hrtlng frm ot th old mn’s
trmntd slp, as if Strbck’s vc hd csd th lng dmb drm
t spk.

Th yt lvlld mskt shk lk a drnkrd’s arm agnst th pnl;
Strbck smd wrstlng wth an angl; bt trnng frm th dr, h
plcd th dth-tb in its rck, and lft th plc.

“H’s t snd aslp, Mr. Stbb; g th dwn, and wk hm, and tll
hm. I mst s t th dck hr. Th knw’st wht t sy.”


CHPTR 124. Th Ndl.

Nxt mrnng th nt-yt-sbsdd s rlld in lng slw bllws of
mghty blk, and strvng in th Pqd’s grglng trck, pshd hr on
lk gnts’ plms otsprd. Th strng, unstggrng brz abndd
s, tht sky and ar smd vst otbllyng sls; th whl wrld
bmd bfr th wnd. Mffld in th fll mrnng lght, th
invsbl sn ws only knwn by th sprd intnsty of hs plc;
whr hs bynt rys mvd on in stcks. Emblznngs, as of crwnd
Bbylnn kngs and qns, rgnd ovr evrythng. Th s ws as a
crcbl of mltn gld, tht bbblngly lps wth lght and ht.

Lng mntnng an enchntd slnc, Ahb std aprt; and evry tm
th ttrng shp lwrngly ptchd dwn hr bwsprt, h trnd t
ey th brght sn’s rys prdcd ahd; and whn sh prfndly
sttld by th strn, h trnd bhnd, and sw th sn’s rrwrd
plc, and hw th sm yllw rys wr blndng wth hs undvtng
wk.

“H, h, my shp! th mghtst wll b tkn nw fr th s-chrt
of th sn. H, h! all y ntns bfr my prw, I brng th sn t
y! Yk on th frthr bllws; hll! a tndm, I drv th s!”

Bt sddnly rnd bck by sm cntr thght, h hrrd twrds
th hlm, hskly dmndng hw th shp ws hdng.

“Est-s-est, sr,” sd th frghtnd strsmn.

“Th lst!” smtng hm wth hs clnchd fst. “Hdng Est at ths
hr in th mrnng, and th sn astrn?”

Upn ths evry sl ws cnfndd; fr th phnmnn jst thn
obsrvd by Ahb hd unccntbly escpd evry on els; bt its vry
blndng plpblnss mst hv bn th cs.

Thrstng hs hd hlf wy int th bnncl, Ahb cght on glmps
of th cmpsss; hs uplftd arm slwly fll; fr a mmnt h almst
smd t stggr. Stndng bhnd hm Strbck lkd, and l! th tw
cmpsss pntd Est, and th Pqd ws as infllbly gng Wst.

Bt er th frst wld alrm cld gt ot abrd amng th crw, th
old mn wth a rgd lgh exclmd, “I hv it! It hs hppnd
bfr. Mr. Strbck, lst nght’s thndr trnd or cmpsss—tht’s
all. Th hst bfr nw hrd of sch a thng, I tk it.”

“Ay; bt nvr bfr hs it hppnd t m, sr,” sd th pl mt,
glmly.

Hr, it mst nds b sd, tht accdnts lk ths hv in mr thn
on cs occrrd t shps in vlnt strms. Th mgntc enrgy, as
dvlpd in th mrnr’s ndl, is, as all knw, essntlly on
wth th elctrcty bhld in hvn; hnc it is nt t b mch
mrvlld at, tht sch thngs shld b. Instncs whr th lghtnng
hs actlly strck th vssl, s as t smt dwn sm of th sprs
and rggng, th effct upn th ndl hs at tms bn stll mr
ftl; all its ldstn vrt bng annhltd, s tht th bfr
mgntc stl ws of n mr us thn an old wf’s knttng ndl.
Bt in ethr cs, th ndl nvr agn, of itslf, rcvrs th
orgnl vrt ths mrrd or lst; and if th bnncl cmpsss b
affctd, th sm ft rchs all th othrs tht my b in th shp;
evn wr th lwrmst on insrtd int th klsn.

Dlbrtly stndng bfr th bnncl, and eyng th trnspntd
cmpsss, th old mn, wth th shrp of hs extndd hnd, nw tk
th prcs brng of th sn, and stsfd tht th ndls wr
exctly invrtd, shtd ot hs ordrs fr th shp’s crs t b
chngd accrdngly. Th yrds wr hrd up; and onc mr th Pqd
thrst hr undntd bws int th oppsng wnd, fr th sppsd fr
on hd only bn jgglng hr.

Mnwhl, whtvr wr hs own scrt thghts, Strbck sd
nthng, bt qtly h issd all rqst ordrs; whl Stbb and
Flsk—wh in sm smll dgr smd thn t b shrng hs
flngs—lkws unmrmrngly acqscd. As fr th mn, thgh sm
of thm lwly rmbld, thr fr of Ahb ws grtr thn thr fr
of Ft. Bt as evr bfr, th pgn hrpnrs rmnd almst
whlly unmprssd; or if imprssd, it ws only wth a crtn
mgntsm sht int thr cngnl hrts frm inflxbl Ahb’s.

Fr a spc th old mn wlkd th dck in rllng rvrs. Bt
chncng t slp wth hs ivry hl, h sw th crshd cppr
sght-tbs of th qdrnt h hd th dy bfr dshd t th dck.

“Th pr, prd hvn-gzr and sn’s plt! ystrdy I wrckd
th, and t-dy th cmpsss wld fn hv wrckd m. S, s. Bt
Ahb is lrd ovr th lvl ldstn yt. Mr. Strbck—a lnc wtht
a pl; a tp-ml, and th smllst of th sl-mkr’s ndls.
Qck!”

Accssry, prhps, t th impls dcttng th thng h ws nw abt
t d, wr crtn prdntl mtvs, whs objct mght hv bn t
rvv th sprts of hs crw by a strk of hs sbtl skll, in a
mttr s wndrs as tht of th invrtd cmpsss. Bsds, th old
mn wll knw tht t str by trnspntd ndls, thgh clmsly
prctcbl, ws nt a thng t b pssd ovr by sprstts
slrs, wtht sm shddrngs and evl prtnts.

“Mn,” sd h, stdly trnng upn th crw, as th mt hndd hm
th thngs h hd dmndd, “my mn, th thndr trnd old Ahb’s
ndls; bt ot of ths bt of stl Ahb cn mk on of hs own,
tht wll pnt as tr as any.”

Abshd glncs of srvl wndr wr exchngd by th slrs, as
ths ws sd; and wth fscntd eys thy awtd whtvr mgc
mght fllw. Bt Strbck lkd awy.

Wth a blw frm th tp-ml Ahb knckd off th stl hd of th
lnc, and thn hndng t th mt th lng irn rd rmnng, bd
hm hld it uprght, wtht its tchng th dck. Thn, wth th
ml, aftr rptdly smtng th uppr end of ths irn rd, h
plcd th blntd ndl endws on th tp of it, and lss strngly
hmmrd tht, svrl tms, th mt stll hldng th rd as bfr.
Thn gng thrgh sm smll strng mtns wth it—whthr
indspnsbl t th mgntzng of th stl, or mrly intndd t
agmnt th aw of th crw, is uncrtn—h clld fr lnn thrd;
and mvng t th bnncl, slppd ot th tw rvrsd ndls thr,
and hrzntlly sspndd th sl-ndl by its mddl, ovr on of
th cmpss-crds. At frst, th stl wnt rnd and rnd, qvrng
and vbrtng at ethr end; bt at lst it sttld t its plc, whn
Ahb, wh hd bn intntly wtchng fr ths rslt, stppd frnkly
bck frm th bnncl, and pntng hs strtchd arm twrds it,
exclmd,—“Lk y, fr yrslvs, if Ahb b nt lrd of th lvl
ldstn! Th sn is Est, and tht cmpss swrs it!”

On aftr anthr thy prd in, fr nthng bt thr own eys cld
prsd sch ignrnc as thrs, and on aftr anthr thy slnk
awy.

In hs fry eys of scrn and trmph, y thn sw Ahb in all hs
ftl prd.


CHPTR 125. Th Lg and Ln.

Whl nw th ftd Pqd hd bn s lng aflt ths vyg, th lg
and ln hd bt vry sldm bn in us. Owng t a cnfdnt rlnc
upn othr mns of dtrmnng th vssl’s plc, sm mrchntmn,
and mny whlmn, espclly whn crsng, whlly nglct t hv
th lg; thgh at th sm tm, and frqntly mr fr frm’s sk
thn anythng els, rglrly pttng dwn upn th cstmry slt th
crs strd by th shp, as wll as th prsmd avrg rt of
prgrssn evry hr. It hd bn ths wth th Pqd. Th wdn
rl and anglr lg attchd hng, lng untchd, jst bnth th
rlng of th aftr blwrks. Rns and spry hd dmpd it; sn and
wnd hd wrpd it; all th elmnts hd cmbnd t rt a thng tht
hng s idly. Bt hdlss of all ths, hs md szd Ahb, as h
hppnd t glnc upn th rl, nt mny hrs aftr th mgnt
scn, and h rmmbrd hw hs qdrnt ws n mr, and rclld hs
frntc oth abt th lvl lg and ln. Th shp ws slng
plngngly; astrn th bllws rlld in rts.

“Frwrd, thr! Hv th lg!”

Tw smn cm. Th gldn-hd Thtn and th grzzly Mnxmn.
“Tk th rl, on of y, I’ll hv.”

Thy wnt twrds th extrm strn, on th shp’s l sd, whr th
dck, wth th oblq enrgy of th wnd, ws nw almst dppng int
th crmy, sdlng-rshng s.

Th Mnxmn tk th rl, and hldng it hgh up, by th prjctng
hndl-ends of th spndl, rnd whch th spl of ln rvlvd, s
std wth th anglr lg hngng dwnwrds, tll Ahb advncd t
hm.

Ahb std bfr hm, and ws lghtly unwndng sm thrty or frty
trns t frm a prlmnry hnd-cl t tss ovrbrd, whn th old
Mnxmn, wh ws intntly eyng bth hm and th ln, md bld t
spk.

“Sr, I mstrst it; ths ln lks fr gn, lng ht and wt hv
spld it.”

“’Twll hld, old gntlmn. Lng ht and wt, hv thy spld th?
Th sm’st t hld. Or, trr prhps, lf hlds th; nt th it.”

“I hld th spl, sr. Bt jst as my cptn sys. Wth ths gry
hrs of mn ’ts nt wrth whl dsptng, ’spclly wth a
sprr, wh’ll n’er cnfss.”

“Wht’s tht? Thr nw’s a ptchd prfssr in Qn Ntr’s
grnt-fndd Cllg; bt mthnks h’s t sbsrvnt. Whr wrt
th brn?”

“In th lttl rcky Isl of Mn, sr.”

“Excllnt! Th’st ht th wrld by tht.”

“I knw nt, sr, bt I ws brn thr.”

“In th Isl of Mn, hy? Wll, th othr wy, it’s gd. Hr’s a mn
frm Mn; a mn brn in onc indpndnt Mn, and nw unmnnd of Mn;
whch is sckd in—by wht? Up wth th rl! Th dd, blnd wll
btts all inqrng hds at lst. Up wth it! S.”

Th lg ws hvd. Th ls cls rpdly strghtnd ot in a lng
drggng ln astrn, and thn, instntly, th rl bgn t whrl. In
trn, jrkngly rsd and lwrd by th rllng bllws, th twng
rsstnc of th lg csd th old rlmn t stggr strngly.

“Hld hrd!”

Snp! th ovrstrnd ln sggd dwn in on lng fstn; th
tggng lg ws gn.

“I crsh th qdrnt, th thndr trns th ndls, and nw th md
s prts th lg-ln. Bt Ahb cn mnd all. Hl in hr, Thtn;
rl up, Mnxmn. And lk y, lt th crpntr mk anthr lg, and
mnd th th ln. S t it.”

“Thr h gs nw; t hm nthng’s hppnd; bt t m, th skwr
sms lsnng ot of th mddl of th wrld. Hl in, hl in,
Thtn! Ths lns rn whl, and whrlng ot: cm in brkn, and
drggng slw. H, Pp? cm t hlp; eh, Pp?”

“Pp? whm cll y Pp? Pp jmpd frm th whl-bt. Pp’s mssng.
Lt’s s nw if y hvn’t fshd hm up hr, fshrmn. It drgs
hrd; I gss h’s hldng on. Jrk hm, Tht! Jrk hm off; w hl
in n cwrds hr. H! thr’s hs arm jst brkng wtr. A htcht!
a htcht! ct it off—w hl in n cwrds hr. Cptn Ahb! sr,
sr! hr’s Pp, tryng t gt on brd agn.”

“Pc, th crzy ln,” crd th Mnxmn, szng hm by th arm.
“Awy frm th qrtr-dck!”

“Th grtr idt evr sclds th lssr,” mttrd Ahb, advncng.
“Hnds off frm tht hlnss! Whr syst th Pp ws, by?

“Astrn thr, sr, astrn! L! l!”

“And wh art th, by? I s nt my rflctn in th vcnt ppls of
thy eys. Oh Gd! tht mn shld b a thng fr immrtl sls t
sv thrgh! Wh art th, by?”

“Bll-by, sr; shp’s-crr; dng, dng, dng! Pp! Pp! Pp! On
hndrd pnds of cly rwrd fr Pp; fv ft hgh—lks
cwrdly—qckst knwn by tht! Dng, dng, dng! Wh’s sn Pp th
cwrd?”

“Thr cn b n hrts abv th snw-ln. Oh, y frzn hvns!
lk dwn hr. Y dd bgt ths lcklss chld, and hv abndnd
hm, y crtv lbrtns. Hr, by; Ahb’s cbn shll b Pp’s
hm hncfrth, whl Ahb lvs. Th tchst my inmst cntr, by;
th art td t m by crds wvn of my hrt-strngs. Cm, lt’s
dwn.”

“Wht’s ths? hr’s vlvt shrk-skn,” intntly gzng at Ahb’s
hnd, and flng it. “Ah, nw, hd pr Pp bt flt s knd a thng
as ths, prhps h hd n’er bn lst! Ths sms t m, sr, as a
mn-rp; smthng tht wk sls my hld by. Oh, sr, lt old Prth
nw cm and rvt ths tw hnds tgthr; th blck on wth th
wht, fr I wll nt lt ths g.”

“Oh, by, nr wll I th, unlss I shld thrby drg th t wrs
hrrrs thn ar hr. Cm, thn, t my cbn. L! y blvrs in
gds all gdnss, and in mn all ill, l y! s th omnscnt gds
oblvs of sffrng mn; and mn, thgh idtc, and knwng nt
wht h ds, yt fll of th swt thngs of lv and grttd. Cm!
I fl prdr ldng th by thy blck hnd, thn thgh I grspd an
Emprr’s!”

“Thr g tw dft ons nw,” mttrd th old Mnxmn. “On dft wth
strngth, th othr dft wth wknss. Bt hr’s th end of th
rttn ln—all drppng, t. Mnd it, eh? I thnk w hd bst hv a
nw ln altgthr. I’ll s Mr. Stbb abt it.”


CHPTR 126. Th Lf-By.

Strng nw sth-estwrd by Ahb’s lvlld stl, and hr prgrss
slly dtrmnd by Ahb’s lvl lg and ln; th Pqd hld on hr
pth twrds th Eqtr. Mkng s lng a pssg thrgh sch
unfrqntd wtrs, dscryng n shps, and er lng, sdwys
implld by unvryng trd wnds, ovr wvs mntnsly mld; all
ths smd th strng clm thngs prldng sm rts and
dsprt scn.

At lst, whn th shp drw nr t th otskrts, as it wr, of th
Eqtrl fshng-grnd, and in th dp drknss tht gs bfr
th dwn, ws slng by a clstr of rcky islts; th wtch—thn
hdd by Flsk—ws strtld by a cry s plntvly wld and
unrthly—lk hlf-artcltd wlngs of th ghsts of all Hrd’s
mrdrd Inncnts—tht on and all, thy strtd frm thr rvrs,
and fr th spc of sm mmnts std, or st, or lnd all
trnsfxdly lstnng, lk th crvd Rmn slv, whl tht wld
cry rmnd wthn hrng. Th Chrstn or cvlzd prt of th
crw sd it ws mrmds, and shddrd; bt th pgn hrpnrs
rmnd unpplld. Yt th gry Mnxmn—th oldst mrnr of
all—dclrd tht th wld thrllng snds tht wr hrd, wr th
vcs of nwly drwnd mn in th s.

Blw in hs hmmck, Ahb dd nt hr of ths tll gry dwn, whn h
cm t th dck; it ws thn rcntd t hm by Flsk, nt
unccmpnd wth hntd drk mnngs. H hllwly lghd, and ths
explnd th wndr.

Ths rcky islnds th shp hd pssd wr th rsrt of grt
nmbrs of sls, and sm yng sls tht hd lst thr dms, or
sm dms tht hd lst thr cbs, mst hv rsn ngh th shp and
kpt cmpny wth hr, cryng and sbbng wth thr hmn srt of
wl. Bt ths only th mr affctd sm of thm, bcs mst
mrnrs chrsh a vry sprstts flng abt sls, arsng nt
only frm thr pclr tns whn in dstrss, bt als frm th
hmn lk of thr rnd hds and sm-intllgnt fcs, sn
prngly uprsng frm th wtr alngsd. In th s, undr crtn
crcmstncs, sls hv mr thn onc bn mstkn fr mn.

Bt th bdngs of th crw wr dstnd t rcv a mst plsbl
cnfrmtn in th ft of on of thr nmbr tht mrnng. At
sn-rs ths mn wnt frm hs hmmck t hs mst-hd at th fr;
and whthr it ws tht h ws nt yt hlf wkd frm hs slp (fr
slrs smtms g alft in a trnstn stt), whthr it ws ths
wth th mn, thr is nw n tllng; bt, b tht as it my, h hd
nt bn lng at hs prch, whn a cry ws hrd—a cry and a
rshng—and lkng up, thy sw a fllng phntm in th ar; and
lkng dwn, a lttl tssd hp of wht bbbls in th bl of th
s.

Th lf-by—a lng slndr csk—ws drppd frm th strn, whr it
alwys hng obdnt t a cnnng sprng; bt n hnd rs t sz it,
and th sn hvng lng bt upn ths csk it hd shrnkn, s tht it
slwly flld, and tht prchd wd als flld at its evry pr; and
th stddd irn-bnd csk fllwd th slr t th bttm, as if t
yld hm hs pllw, thgh in sth bt a hrd on.

And ths th frst mn of th Pqd tht mntd th mst t lk ot
fr th Wht Whl, on th Wht Whl’s own pclr grnd; tht mn
ws swllwd up in th dp. Bt fw, prhps, thght of tht at th
tm. Indd, in sm srt, thy wr nt grvd at ths evnt, at
lst as a prtnt; fr thy rgrdd it, nt as a frshdwng of
evl in th ftr, bt as th flflmnt of an evl alrdy prsgd.
Thy dclrd tht nw thy knw th rsn of ths wld shrks thy
hd hrd th nght bfr. Bt agn th old Mnxmn sd ny.

Th lst lf-by ws nw t b rplcd; Strbck ws drctd t s
t it; bt as n csk of sffcnt lghtnss cld b fnd, and as in
th fvrsh egrnss of wht smd th apprchng crss of th
vyg, all hnds wr imptnt of any tl bt wht ws drctly
cnnctd wth its fnl end, whtvr tht mght prv t b;
thrfr, thy wr gng t lv th shp’s strn unprvdd wth a
by, whn by crtn strng sgns and innds Qqg hntd a
hnt cncrnng hs cffn.

“A lf-by of a cffn!” crd Strbck, strtng.

“Rthr qr, tht, I shld sy,” sd Stbb.

“It wll mk a gd engh on,” sd Flsk, “th crpntr hr cn
arrng it esly.”

“Brng it up; thr’s nthng els fr it,” sd Strbck, aftr a
mlnchly ps. “Rg it, crpntr; d nt lk at m s—th cffn,
I mn. Dst th hr m? Rg it.”

“And shll I nl dwn th ld, sr?” mvng hs hnd as wth a hmmr.

“Ay.”

“And shll I clk th sms, sr?” mvng hs hnd as wth a
clkng-irn.

“Ay.”

“And shll I thn py ovr th sm wth ptch, sr?” mvng hs hnd
as wth a ptch-pt.

“Awy! wht psssss th t ths? Mk a lf-by of th cffn, and
n mr.—Mr. Stbb, Mr. Flsk, cm frwrd wth m.”

“H gs off in a hff. Th whl h cn endr; at th prts h
blks. Nw I dn’t lk ths. I mk a lg fr Cptn Ahb, and h
wrs it lk a gntlmn; bt I mk a bndbx fr Qqg, and h
wn’t pt hs hd int it. Ar all my pns t g fr nthng wth
tht cffn? And nw I’m ordrd t mk a lf-by of it. It’s lk
trnng an old ct; gng t brng th flsh on th othr sd nw. I
dn’t lk ths cbblng srt of bsnss—I dn’t lk it at all; it’s
undgnfd; it’s nt my plc. Lt tnkrs’ brts d tnkrngs; w
ar thr bttrs. I lk t tk in hnd nn bt cln, vrgn,
fr-and-sqr mthmtcl jbs, smthng tht rglrly bgns at
th bgnnng, and is at th mddl whn mdwy, and cms t an end at
th cnclsn; nt a cbblr’s jb, tht’s at an end in th mddl,
and at th bgnnng at th end. It’s th old wmn’s trcks t b
gvng cbblng jbs. Lrd! wht an affctn all old wmn hv fr
tnkrs. I knw an old wmn of sxty-fv wh rn awy wth a
bld-hdd yng tnkr onc. And tht’s th rsn I nvr wld wrk
fr lnly wdw old wmn ashr, whn I kpt my jb-shp in th
Vnyrd; thy mght hv tkn it int thr lnly old hds t rn
off wth m. Bt hgh-h! thr ar n cps at s bt snw-cps. Lt
m s. Nl dwn th ld; clk th sms; py ovr th sm wth
ptch; bttn thm dwn tght, and hng it wth th snp-sprng ovr
th shp’s strn. Wr evr sch thngs dn bfr wth a cffn? Sm
sprstts old crpntrs, nw, wld b td up in th rggng, er
thy wld d th jb. Bt I’m md of kntty Arstk hmlck; I
dn’t bdg. Crpprd wth a cffn! Slng abt wth a grv-yrd
try! Bt nvr mnd. W wrkrs in wds mk brdl-bdstds and
crd-tbls, as wll as cffns and hrss. W wrk by th mnth, or
by th jb, or by th prft; nt fr us t ask th why and whrfr
of or wrk, unlss it b t cnfndd cbblng, and thn w stsh it
if w cn. Hm! I’ll d th jb, nw, tndrly. I’ll hv m—lt’s
s—hw mny in th shp’s cmpny, all tld? Bt I’v frgttn. Any
wy, I’ll hv m thrty sprt, Trk’s-hdd lf-lns, ech thr
ft lng hngng all rnd t th cffn. Thn, if th hll g dwn,
thr’ll b thrty lvly fllws all fghtng fr on cffn, a sght
nt sn vry oftn bnth th sn! Cm hmmr, clkng-irn,
ptch-pt, and mrlng-spk! Lt’s t it.”


CHPTR 127. Th Dck.

_Th cffn ld upn tw ln-tbs, btwn th vc-bnch and th
opn htchwy; th Crpntr clkng its sms; th strng of twstd
okm slwly unwndng frm a lrg rll of it plcd in th bsm of
hs frck.—Ahb cms slwly frm th cbn-gngwy, and hrs Pp
fllwng hm._

“Bck, ld; I wll b wth y agn prsntly. H gs! Nt ths hnd
cmpls wth my hmr mr gnlly thn tht by.—Mddl asl of a
chrch! Wht’s hr?”

“Lf-by, sr. Mr. Strbck’s ordrs. Oh, lk, sr! Bwr th
htchwy!”

“Thnk y, mn. Thy cffn ls hndy t th vlt.”

“Sr? Th htchwy? oh! S it ds, sr, s it ds.”

“Art nt th th lg-mkr? Lk, dd nt ths stmp cm frm thy
shp?”

“I blv it dd, sr; ds th frrl stnd, sr?”

“Wll engh. Bt art th nt als th undrtkr?”

“Ay, sr; I ptchd up ths thng hr as a cffn fr Qqg; bt
thy’v st m nw t trnng it int smthng els.”

“Thn tll m; art th nt an arrnt, all-grspng, intrmddlng,
mnplsng, hthnsh old scmp, t b on dy mkng lgs, and th
nxt dy cffns t clp thm in, and yt agn lf-bys ot of ths
sm cffns? Th art as unprncpld as th gds, and as mch of a
jck-of-all-trds.”

“Bt I d nt mn anythng, sr. I d as I d.”

“Th gds agn. Hrk y, dst th nt evr sng wrkng abt a
cffn? Th Ttns, thy sy, hmmd sntchs whn chppng ot th
crtrs fr vlcns; and th grv-dggr in th ply sngs, spd in
hnd. Dst th nvr?”

“Sng, sr? D I sng? Oh, I’m indffrnt engh, sr, fr tht; bt
th rsn why th grv-dggr md msc mst hv bn bcs thr
ws nn in hs spd, sr. Bt th clkng mllt is fll of it. Hrk
t it.”

“Ay, and tht’s bcs th ld thr’s a sndng-brd; and wht in
all thngs mks th sndng-brd is ths—thr’s nght bnth. And
yt, a cffn wth a bdy in it rngs prtty mch th sm, Crpntr.
Hst th evr hlpd crry a br, and hrd th cffn knck agnst
th chrchyrd gt, gng in?

“Fth, sr, I’v——”

“Fth? Wht’s tht?”

“Why, fth, sr, it’s only a srt of exclmtn-lk—tht’s all,
sr.”

“Um, um; g on.”

“I ws abt t sy, sr, tht——”

“Art th a slk-wrm? Dst th spn thy own shrd ot of thyslf?
Lk at thy bsm! Dsptch! and gt ths trps ot of sght.”

“H gs aft. Tht ws sddn, nw; bt sqlls cm sddn in ht
lttds. I’v hrd tht th Isl of Albmrl, on of th
Gllpgs, is ct by th Eqtr rght in th mddl. Sms t m sm
srt of Eqtr cts yn old mn, t, rght in hs mddl. H’s alwys
undr th Ln—fry ht, I tll y! H’s lkng ths wy—cm, okm;
qck. Hr w g agn. Ths wdn mllt is th crk, and I’m th
prfssr of mscl glsss—tp, tp!”

(_Ahb t hmslf_.)

“Thr’s a sght! Thr’s a snd! Th gryhdd wdpckr tppng
th hllw tr! Blnd and dmb mght wll b envd nw. S! tht
thng rsts on tw ln-tbs, fll of tw-lns. A mst mlcs wg,
tht fllw. Rt-tt! S mn’s scnds tck! Oh! hw immtrl ar all
mtrls! Wht thngs rl ar thr, bt impndrbl thghts? Hr
nw’s th vry drdd symbl of grm dth, by a mr hp, md th
exprssv sgn of th hlp and hp of mst endngrd lf. A
lf-by of a cffn! Ds it g frthr? Cn it b tht in sm
sprtl sns th cffn is, aftr all, bt an immrtlty-prsrvr!
I’ll thnk of tht. Bt n. S fr gn am I in th drk sd of erth,
tht its othr sd, th thrtc brght on, sms bt uncrtn
twlght t m. Wll y nvr hv dn, Crpntr, wth tht accrsd
snd? I g blw; lt m nt s tht thng hr whn I rtrn agn.
Nw, thn, Pp, w’ll tlk ths ovr; I d sck mst wndrs
phlsphs frm th! Sm unknwn cndts frm th unknwn wrlds
mst empty int th!”


CHPTR 128. Th Pqd Mts Th Rchl.

Nxt dy, a lrg shp, th Rchl, ws dscrd, brng drctly dwn
upn th Pqd, all hr sprs thckly clstrng wth mn. At th tm
th Pqd ws mkng gd spd thrgh th wtr; bt as th
brd-wngd wndwrd strngr sht ngh t hr, th bstfl sls all
fll tgthr as blnk blddrs tht ar brst, and all lf fld frm
th smttn hll.

“Bd nws; sh brngs bd nws,” mttrd th old Mnxmn. Bt er hr
cmmndr, wh, wth trmpt t mth, std up in hs bt; er h
cld hpflly hl, Ahb’s vc ws hrd.

“Hst sn th Wht Whl?”

“Ay, ystrdy. Hv y sn a whl-bt adrft?”

Thrttlng hs jy, Ahb ngtvly answrd ths unxpctd qstn;
and wld thn hv fn brdd th strngr, whn th strngr
cptn hmslf, hvng stppd hs vssl’s wy, ws sn dscndng
hr sd. A fw kn plls, and hs bt-hk sn clnchd th
Pqd’s mn-chns, and h sprng t th dck. Immdtly h ws
rcgnsd by Ahb fr a Nntcktr h knw. Bt n frml slttn
ws exchngd.

“Whr ws h?—nt klld!—nt klld!” crd Ahb, clsly advncng.
“Hw ws it?”

It smd tht smwht lt on th aftrnn of th dy prvs,
whl thr of th strngr’s bts wr enggd wth a shl of
whls, whch hd ld thm sm fr or fv mls frm th shp; and
whl thy wr yt in swft chs t wndwrd, th wht hmp and hd
of Mby Dck hd sddnly lmd up ot of th wtr, nt vry fr t
lwrd; whrpn, th frth rggd bt—a rsrvd on—hd bn
instntly lwrd in chs. Aftr a kn sl bfr th wnd, ths
frth bt—th swftst kld of all—smd t hv sccdd in
fstnng—at lst, as wll as th mn at th mst-hd cld tll
anythng abt it. In th dstnc h sw th dmnshd dttd bt;
and thn a swft glm of bbblng wht wtr; and aftr tht nthng
mr; whnc it ws cncldd tht th strckn whl mst hv
indfntly rn awy wth hs prsrs, as oftn hppns. Thr ws
sm apprhnsn, bt n pstv alrm, as yt. Th rcll sgnls
wr plcd in th rggng; drknss cm on; and frcd t pck up hr
thr fr t wndwrd bts—er gng in qst of th frth on in th
prcsly oppst drctn—th shp hd nt only bn ncssttd t
lv tht bt t its ft tll nr mdnght, bt, fr th tm, t
incrs hr dstnc frm it. Bt th rst of hr crw bng at lst
sf abrd, sh crwdd all sl—stnsl on stnsl—aftr th
mssng bt; kndlng a fr in hr try-pts fr a bcn; and evry
othr mn alft on th lk-ot. Bt thgh whn sh hd ths sld a
sffcnt dstnc t gn th prsmd plc of th absnt ons whn
lst sn; thgh sh thn psd t lwr hr spr bts t pll all
arnd hr; and nt fndng anythng, hd agn dshd on; agn
psd, and lwrd hr bts; and thgh sh hd ths cntnd dng
tll dylght; yt nt th lst glmps of th mssng kl hd bn
sn.

Th stry tld, th strngr Cptn immdtly wnt on t rvl hs
objct in brdng th Pqd. H dsrd tht shp t unt wth hs
own in th srch; by slng ovr th s sm fr or fv mls
aprt, on prlll lns, and s swpng a dbl hrzn, as it wr.

“I wll wgr smthng nw,” whsprd Stbb t Flsk, “tht sm on
in tht mssng bt wr off tht Cptn’s bst ct; myhp, hs
wtch—h’s s crsd anxs t gt it bck. Wh evr hrd of tw
ps whl-shps crsng aftr on mssng whl-bt in th hght
of th whlng ssn? S, Flsk, only s hw pl h lks—pl in
th vry bttns of hs eys—lk—it wsn’t th ct—it mst hv bn
th—”

“My by, my own by is amng thm. Fr Gd’s sk—I bg, I
cnjr”—hr exclmd th strngr Cptn t Ahb, wh ths fr hd
bt icly rcvd hs pttn. “Fr eght-and-frty hrs lt m
chrtr yr shp—I wll gldly py fr it, and rndly py fr it—if
thr b n othr wy—fr eght-and-frty hrs only—only tht—y
mst, oh, y mst, and y _shll_ d ths thng.”

“Hs sn!” crd Stbb, “oh, it’s hs sn h’s lst! I tk bck th
ct and wtch—wht sys Ahb? W mst sv tht by.”

“H’s drwnd wth th rst on ’em, lst nght,” sd th old Mnx
slr stndng bhnd thm; “I hrd; all of y hrd thr sprts.”

Nw, as it shrtly trnd ot, wht md ths incdnt of th Rchl’s
th mr mlnchly, ws th crcmstnc, tht nt only ws on of th
Cptn’s sns amng th nmbr of th mssng bt’s crw; bt amng
th nmbr of th othr bt’s crws, at th sm tm, bt on th
othr hnd, sprtd frm th shp drng th drk vcsstds of th
chs, thr hd bn stll anthr sn; as tht fr a tm, th
wrtchd fthr ws plngd t th bttm of th crllst prplxty;
whch ws only slvd fr hm by hs chf mt’s instnctvly
adptng th ordnry prcdr of a whl-shp in sch emrgncs,
tht is, whn plcd btwn jprdzd bt dvdd bts, alwys t
pck up th mjrty frst. Bt th cptn, fr sm unknwn
cnstttnl rsn, hd rfrnd frm mntnng all ths, and nt
tll frcd t it by Ahb’s icnss dd h alld t hs on yt
mssng by; a lttl ld, bt twlv yrs old, whs fthr wth th
ernst bt unmsgvng hrdhd of a Nntcktr’s ptrnl lv, hd
ths erly sght t intt hm in th prls and wndrs of a
vctn almst immmrlly th dstny of all hs rc. Nr ds it
unfrqntly occr, tht Nntckt cptns wll snd a sn of sch
tndr ag awy frm thm, fr a prtrctd thr or fr yrs’ vyg
in sm othr shp thn thr own; s tht thr frst knwldg of a
whlmn’s crr shll b unnrvtd by any chnc dsply of a
fthr’s ntrl bt untmly prtlty, or und apprhnsvnss and
cncrn.

Mntm, nw th strngr ws stll bschng hs pr bn of Ahb;
and Ahb stll std lk an anvl, rcvng evry shck, bt wtht
th lst qvrng of hs own.

“I wll nt g,” sd th strngr, “tll y sy _ay_ t m. D t m
as y wld hv m d t y in th lk cs. Fr _y_ t hv a
by, Cptn Ahb—thgh bt a chld, and nstlng sfly at hm nw—a
chld of yr old ag t—Ys, ys, y rlnt; I s it—rn, rn, mn,
nw, and stnd by t sqr in th yrds.”

“Avst,” crd Ahb—“tch nt a rp-yrn”; thn in a vc tht
prlngngly mldd evry wrd—“Cptn Grdnr, I wll nt d it.
Evn nw I ls tm. Gd-by, gd-by. Gd blss y, mn, and my I
frgv myslf, bt I mst g. Mr. Strbck, lk at th bnncl
wtch, and in thr mnts frm ths prsnt instnt wrn off all
strngrs: thn brc frwrd agn, and lt th shp sl as bfr.”

Hrrdly trnng, wth avrtd fc, h dscndd int hs cbn,
lvng th strng cptn trnsfxd at ths uncndtnl and uttr
rjctn of hs s ernst st. Bt strtng frm hs enchntmnt,
Grdnr slntly hrrd t th sd; mr fll thn stppd int hs
bt, and rtrnd t hs shp.

Sn th tw shps dvrgd thr wks; and lng as th strng vssl
ws in vw, sh ws sn t yw hthr and ththr at evry drk spt,
hwvr smll, on th s. Ths wy and tht hr yrds wr swng
rnd; strbrd and lrbrd, sh cntnd t tck; nw sh bt
agnst a hd s; and agn it pshd hr bfr it; whl all th
whl, hr msts and yrds wr thckly clstrd wth mn, as thr
tll chrry trs, whn th bys ar chrryng amng th bghs.

Bt by hr stll hltng crs and wndng, wfl wy, y plnly
sw tht ths shp tht s wpt wth spry, stll rmnd wtht
cmfrt. Sh ws Rchl, wpng fr hr chldrn, bcs thy wr
nt.


CHPTR 129. Th Cbn.

(_Ahb mvng t g on dck; Pp ctchs hm by th hnd t fllw._)

“Ld, ld, I tll th th mst nt fllw Ahb nw. Th hr is
cmng whn Ahb wld nt scr th frm hm, yt wld nt hv th
by hm. Thr is tht in th, pr ld, whch I fl t crng t my
mldy. Lk crs lk; and fr ths hnt, my mldy bcms my mst
dsrd hlth. D th abd blw hr, whr thy shll srv th,
as if th wrt th cptn. Ay, ld, th shlt st hr in my own
scrwd chr; anthr scrw t it, th mst b.”

“N, n, n! y hv nt a whl bdy, sr; d y bt us pr m fr
yr on lst lg; only trd upn m, sr; I ask n mr, s I rmn
a prt of y.”

“Oh! spt of mlln vllns, ths mks m a bgt in th fdlss
fdlty of mn!—and a blck! and crzy!—bt mthnks lk-crs-lk
appls t hm t; h grws s sn agn.”

“Thy tll m, sr, tht Stbb dd onc dsrt pr lttl Pp, whs
drwnd bns nw shw wht, fr all th blcknss of hs lvng skn.
Bt I wll nvr dsrt y, sr, as Stbb dd hm. Sr, I mst g wth
y.”

“If th spkst ths t m mch mr, Ahb’s prps kls up in hm.
I tll th n; it cnnt b.”

“Oh gd mstr, mstr, mstr!”

“Wp s, and I wll mrdr th! hv a cr, fr Ahb t is md.
Lstn, and th wlt oftn hr my ivry ft upn th dck, and stll
knw tht I am thr. And nw I qt th. Thy hnd!—Mt! Tr art
th, ld, as th crcmfrnc t its cntr. S: Gd fr evr blss
th; and if it cm t tht,—Gd fr evr sv th, lt wht wll
bfll.”

(_Ahb gs; Pp stps on stp frwrd._)

“Hr h ths instnt std; I stnd in hs ar,—bt I’m aln. Nw
wr evn pr Pp hr I cld endr it, bt h’s mssng. Pp! Pp!
Dng, dng, dng! Wh’s sn Pp? H mst b up hr; lt’s try th
dr. Wht? nthr lck, nr blt, nr br; and yt thr’s n opnng
it. It mst b th spll; h tld m t sty hr: Ay, and tld m
ths scrwd chr ws mn. Hr, thn, I’ll st m, agnst th
trnsm, in th shp’s fll mddl, all hr kl and hr thr msts
bfr m. Hr, or old slrs sy, in thr blck svnty-frs
grt admrls smtms st at tbl, and lrd it ovr rws of
cptns and ltnnts. H! wht’s ths? eplts! eplts! th
eplts all cm crwdng! Pss rnd th dcntrs; gld t s y;
fll up, mnsrs! Wht an odd flng, nw, whn a blck by’s hst
t wht mn wth gld lc upn thr cts!—Mnsrs, hv y sn
on Pp?—a lttl ngr ld, fv ft hgh, hng-dg lk, and
cwrdly! Jmpd frm a whl-bt onc;—sn hm? N! Wll thn, fll
up agn, cptns, and lt’s drnk shm upn all cwrds! I nm n
nms. Shm upn thm! Pt on ft upn th tbl. Shm upn all
cwrds.—Hst! abv thr, I hr ivry—Oh, mstr! mstr! I am
indd dwn-hrtd whn y wlk ovr m. Bt hr I’ll sty, thgh
ths strn strks rcks; and thy blg thrgh; and oystrs cm t
jn m.”


CHPTR 130. Th Ht.

And nw tht at th prpr tm and plc, aftr s lng and wd a
prlmnry crs, Ahb,—all othr whlng wtrs swpt—smd t hv
chsd hs f int an ocn-fld, t sly hm th mr scrly thr;
nw, tht h fnd hmslf hrd by th vry lttd and lngtd
whr hs trmntng wnd hd bn inflctd; nw tht a vssl hd
bn spkn whch on th vry dy prcdng hd actlly encntrd
Mby Dck;—and nw tht all hs sccssv mtngs wth vrs shps
cntrstngly cncrrd t shw th dmnc indffrnc wth whch
th wht whl tr hs hntrs, whthr snnng or snnd agnst;
nw it ws tht thr lrkd a smthng in th old mn’s eys, whch
it ws hrdly sffrbl fr fbl sls t s. As th unsttng
plr str, whch thrgh th lvlng, arctc, sx mnths’ nght
sstns its prcng, stdy, cntrl gz; s Ahb’s prps nw
fxdly glmd dwn upn th cnstnt mdnght of th glmy crw. It
dmnrd abv thm s, tht all thr bdngs, dbts, msgvngs,
frs, wr fn t hd bnth thr sls, and nt sprt frth a
sngl spr or lf.

In ths frshdwng intrvl t, all hmr, frcd or ntrl,
vnshd. Stbb n mr strv t rs a sml; Strbck n mr
strv t chck on. Alk, jy and srrw, hp and fr, smd
grnd t fnst dst, and pwdrd, fr th tm, in th clmpd
mrtr of Ahb’s irn sl. Lk mchns, thy dmbly mvd abt th
dck, evr cnscs tht th old mn’s dspt ey ws on thm.

Bt dd y dply scn hm in hs mr scrt cnfdntl hrs; whn
h thght n glnc bt on ws on hm; thn y wld hv sn tht
evn as Ahb’s eys s awd th crw’s, th inscrtbl Prs’s glnc
awd hs; or smhw, at lst, in sm wld wy, at tms affctd it.
Sch an addd, gldng strngnss bgn t invst th thn Fdllh
nw; sch cslss shddrngs shk hm; tht th mn lkd dbs
at hm; hlf uncrtn, as it smd, whthr indd h wr a mrtl
sbstnc, or els a trmls shdw cst upn th dck by sm unsn
bng’s bdy. And tht shdw ws alwys hvrng thr. Fr nt by
nght, evn, hd Fdllh evr crtnly bn knwn t slmbr, or g
blw. H wld stnd stll fr hrs: bt nvr st or lnd; hs wn
bt wndrs eys dd plnly sy—W tw wtchmn nvr rst.

Nr, at any tm, by nght or dy cld th mrnrs nw stp upn th
dck, unlss Ahb ws bfr thm; ethr stndng in hs pvt-hl,
or exctly pcng th plnks btwn tw undvtng lmts,—th
mn-mst and th mzn; or els thy sw hm stndng in th
cbn-scttl,—hs lvng ft advncd upn th dck, as if t stp;
hs ht slchd hvly ovr hs eys; s tht hwvr mtnlss h
std, hwvr th dys and nghts wr addd on, tht h hd nt swng
in hs hmmck; yt hddn bnth tht slchng ht, thy cld nvr
tll unrrngly whthr, fr all ths, hs eys wr rlly clsd at
tms; or whthr h ws stll intntly scnnng thm; n mttr,
thgh h std s in th scttl fr a whl hr on th strtch, and
th unhdd nght-dmp gthrd in bds of dw upn tht stn-crvd
ct and ht. Th clths tht th nght hd wt, th nxt dy’s
snshn drd upn hm; and s, dy aftr dy, and nght aftr nght;
h wnt n mr bnth th plnks; whtvr h wntd frm th cbn
tht thng h snt fr.

H at in th sm opn ar; tht is, hs tw only mls,—brkfst and
dnnr: sppr h nvr tchd; nr rpd hs brd; whch drkly
grw all gnrld, as unrthd rts of trs blwn ovr, whch stll
grw idly on at nkd bs, thgh prshd in th uppr vrdr. Bt
thgh hs whl lf ws nw bcm on wtch on dck; and thgh th
Prs’s mystc wtch ws wtht intrmssn as hs own; yt ths
tw nvr smd t spk—on mn t th othr—unlss at lng intrvls
sm pssng unmmnts mttr md it ncssry. Thgh sch a ptnt
spll smd scrtly t jn th twn; opnly, and t th aw-strck
crw, thy smd pl-lk asndr. If by dy thy chncd t spk
on wrd; by nght, dmb mn wr bth, s fr as cncrnd th
slghtst vrbl intrchng. At tms, fr lngst hrs, wtht a
sngl hl, thy std fr prtd in th strlght; Ahb in hs
scttl, th Prs by th mnmst; bt stll fxdly gzng upn ech
othr; as if in th Prs Ahb sw hs frthrwn shdw, in Ahb th
Prs hs abndnd sbstnc.

And yt, smhw, dd Ahb—in hs own prpr slf, as dly, hrly,
and evry instnt, cmmndngly rvld t hs sbrdnts,—Ahb
smd an indpndnt lrd; th Prs bt hs slv. Stll agn bth
smd ykd tgthr, and an unsn tyrnt drvng thm; th ln
shd sdng th sld rb. Fr b ths Prs wht h my, all rb and
kl ws sld Ahb.

At th frst fntst glmmrng of th dwn, hs irn vc ws hrd
frm aft,—“Mn th mst-hds!”—and all thrgh th dy, tll aftr
snst and aftr twlght, th sm vc evry hr, at th strkng
of th hlmsmn’s bll, ws hrd—“Wht d’y s?—shrp! shrp!”

Bt whn thr or fr dys hd sldd by, aftr mtng th
chldrn-skng Rchl; and n spt hd yt bn sn; th mnmnc
old mn smd dstrstfl of hs crw’s fdlty; at lst, of nrly
all excpt th Pgn hrpnrs; h smd t dbt, evn, whthr
Stbb and Flsk mght nt wllngly ovrlk th sght h sght. Bt
if ths sspcns wr rlly hs, h sgcsly rfrnd frm
vrblly exprssng thm, hwvr hs actns mght sm t hnt thm.

“I wll hv th frst sght of th whl myslf,”—h sd. “Ay! Ahb
mst hv th dbln!” and wth hs own hnds h rggd a nst of
bsktd bwlns; and sndng a hnd alft, wth a sngl shvd
blck, t scr t th mn-mst hd, h rcvd th tw ends of th
dwnwrd-rvd rp; and attchng on t hs bskt prprd a pn
fr th othr end, in ordr t fstn it at th rl. Ths dn, wth
tht end yt in hs hnd and stndng bsd th pn, h lkd rnd
upn hs crw, swpng frm on t th othr; psng hs glnc lng
upn Dgg, Qqg, Tshtg; bt shnnng Fdllh; and thn
sttlng hs frm rlyng ey upn th chf mt, sd,—“Tk th
rp, sr—I gv it int thy hnds, Strbck.” Thn arrngng hs
prsn in th bskt, h gv th wrd fr thm t hst hm t hs
prch, Strbck bng th on wh scrd th rp at lst; and
aftrwrds std nr it. And ths, wth on hnd clngng rnd th
ryl mst, Ahb gzd abrd upn th s fr mls and mls,—ahd,
astrn, ths sd, and tht,—wthn th wd expndd crcl cmmndd
at s grt a hght.

Whn in wrkng wth hs hnds at sm lfty almst isltd plc in
th rggng, whch chncs t affrd n fthld, th slr at s is
hstd up t tht spt, and sstnd thr by th rp; undr ths
crcmstncs, its fstnd end on dck is alwys gvn in strct
chrg t sm on mn wh hs th spcl wtch of it. Bcs in sch
a wldrnss of rnnng rggng, whs vrs dffrnt rltns
alft cnnt alwys b infllbly dscrnd by wht is sn of thm at
th dck; and whn th dck-ends of ths rps ar bng evry fw
mnts cst dwn frm th fstnngs, it wld b bt a ntrl
ftlty, if, unprvdd wth a cnstnt wtchmn, th hstd slr
shld by sm crlssnss of th crw b cst adrft and fll all
swpng t th s. S Ahb’s prcdngs in ths mttr wr nt
unsl; th only strng thng abt thm smd t b, tht Strbck,
almst th on only mn wh hd evr vntrd t opps hm wth
anythng in th slghtst dgr apprchng t dcsn—on of ths
t, whs fthflnss on th lk-ot h hd smd t dbt
smwht;—it ws strng, tht ths ws th vry mn h shld slct
fr hs wtchmn; frly gvng hs whl lf int sch an othrws
dstrstd prsn’s hnds.

Nw, th frst tm Ahb ws prchd alft; er h hd bn thr tn
mnts; on of ths rd-blld svg s-hwks whch s oftn fly
incmmdsly cls rnd th mnnd mst-hds of whlmn in ths
lttds; on of ths brds cm whlng and scrmng rnd hs
hd in a mz of untrckbly swft crclngs. Thn it drtd a
thsnd ft strght up int th ar; thn sprlzd dwnwrds, and
wnt eddyng agn rnd hs hd.

Bt wth hs gz fxd upn th dm and dstnt hrzn, Ahb smd
nt t mrk ths wld brd; nr, indd, wld any on els hv mrkd
it mch, it bng n uncmmn crcmstnc; only nw almst th lst
hdfl ey smd t s sm srt of cnnng mnng in almst evry
sght.

“Yr ht, yr ht, sr!” sddnly crd th Scln smn, wh
bng pstd at th mzn-mst-hd, std drctly bhnd Ahb, thgh
smwht lwr thn hs lvl, and wth a dp glf of ar dvdng
thm.

Bt alrdy th sbl wng ws bfr th old mn’s eys; th lng
hkd bll at hs hd: wth a scrm, th blck hwk drtd awy wth
hs prz.

An egl flw thrc rnd Trqn’s hd, rmvng hs cp t rplc
it, and thrpn Tnql, hs wf, dclrd tht Trqn wld b
kng of Rm. Bt only by th rplcng of th cp ws tht omn
accntd gd. Ahb’s ht ws nvr rstrd; th wld hwk flw on
and on wth it; fr in advnc of th prw: and at lst dspprd;
whl frm th pnt of tht dspprnc, a mnt blck spt ws
dmly dscrnd, fllng frm tht vst hght int th s.


CHPTR 131. Th Pqd Mts Th Dlght.

Th intns Pqd sld on; th rllng wvs and dys wnt by; th
lf-by-cffn stll lghtly swng; and anthr shp, mst msrbly
msnmd th Dlght, ws dscrd. As sh drw ngh, all eys wr
fxd upn hr brd bms, clld shrs, whch, in sm
whlng-shps, crss th qrtr-dck at th hght of eght or nn
ft; srvng t crry th spr, unrggd, or dsbld bts.

Upn th strngr’s shrs wr bhld th shttrd, wht rbs, and
sm fw splntrd plnks, of wht hd onc bn a whl-bt; bt y
nw sw thrgh ths wrck, as plnly as y s thrgh th pld,
hlf-unhngd, and blchng skltn of a hrs.

“Hst sn th Wht Whl?”

“Lk!” rpld th hllw-chkd cptn frm hs tffrl; and wth
hs trmpt h pntd t th wrck.

“Hst klld hm?”

“Th hrpn is nt yt frgd tht evr wll d tht,” answrd th
othr, sdly glncng upn a rndd hmmck on th dck, whs
gthrd sds sm nslss slrs wr bsy in swng tgthr.

“Nt frgd!” and sntchng Prth’s lvlld irn frm th crtch, Ahb
hld it ot, exclmng—“Lk y, Nntcktr; hr in ths hnd I hld
hs dth! Tmprd in bld, and tmprd by lghtnng ar ths
brbs; and I swr t tmpr thm trply in tht ht plc bhnd th
fn, whr th Wht Whl mst fls hs accrsd lf!”

“Thn Gd kp th, old mn—s’st th tht”—pntng t th
hmmck—“I bry bt on of fv stt mn, wh wr alv only
ystrdy; bt wr dd er nght. Only _tht_ on I bry; th rst
wr brd bfr thy dd; y sl upn thr tmb.” Thn trnng
t hs crw—“Ar y rdy thr? plc th plnk thn on th rl, and
lft th bdy; s, thn—Oh! Gd”—advncng twrds th hmmck wth
uplftd hnds—“my th rsrrctn and th lf——”

“Brc frwrd! Up hlm!” crd Ahb lk lghtnng t hs mn.

Bt th sddnly strtd Pqd ws nt qck engh t escp th
snd of th splsh tht th crps sn md as it strck th s; nt
s qck, indd, bt tht sm of th flyng bbbls mght hv
sprnkld hr hll wth thr ghstly bptsm.

As Ahb nw gldd frm th djctd Dlght, th strng lf-by
hngng at th Pqd’s strn cm int cnspcs rlf.

“H! yndr! lk yndr, mn!” crd a frbdng vc in hr wk.
“In vn, oh, y strngrs, y fly or sd brl; y bt trn us yr
tffrl t shw us yr cffn!”


CHPTR 132. Th Symphny.

It ws a clr stl-bl dy. Th frmmnts of ar and s wr
hrdly sprbl in tht all-prvdng azr; only, th pnsv ar ws
trnsprntly pr and sft, wth a wmn’s lk, and th rbst and
mn-lk s hvd wth lng, strng, lngrng swlls, as Smsn’s
chst in hs slp.

Hthr, and ththr, on hgh, gldd th snw-wht wngs of smll,
unspckld brds; ths wr th gntl thghts of th fmnn ar;
bt t and fr in th dps, fr dwn in th bttmlss bl, rshd
mghty lvthns, swrd-fsh, and shrks; and ths wr th strng,
trbld, mrdrs thnkngs of th mscln s.

Bt thgh ths cntrstng wthn, th cntrst ws only in shds and
shdws wtht; ths tw smd on; it ws only th sx, as it wr,
tht dstngshd thm.

Alft, lk a ryl czr and kng, th sn smd gvng ths gntl
ar t ths bld and rllng s; evn as brd t grm. And at th
grdlng ln of th hrzn, a sft and trmls mtn—mst sn
hr at th eqtr—dntd th fnd, thrbbng trst, th lvng
alrms, wth whch th pr brd gv hr bsm awy.

Td up and twstd; gnrld and knttd wth wrnkls; hggrdly frm
and unyldng; hs eys glwng lk cls, tht stll glw in th
ashs of rn; untttrng Ahb std frth in th clrnss of th
mrn; lftng hs splntrd hlmt of a brw t th fr grl’s
frhd of hvn.

Oh, immrtl infncy, and inncncy of th azr! Invsbl wngd
crtrs tht frlc all rnd us! Swt chldhd of ar and sky! hw
oblvs wr y of old Ahb’s cls-cld w! Bt s hv I sn
lttl Mrm and Mrth, lghng-eyd elvs, hdlssly gmbl arnd
thr old sr; sprtng wth th crcl of sngd lcks whch grw on
th mrg of tht brnt-ot crtr of hs brn.

Slwly crssng th dck frm th scttl, Ahb lnd ovr th sd
and wtchd hw hs shdw in th wtr snk and snk t hs gz, th
mr and th mr tht h strv t prc th prfndty. Bt th
lvly arms in tht enchntd ar dd at lst sm t dspl, fr a
mmnt, th cnkrs thng in hs sl. Tht gld, hppy ar, tht
wnsm sky, dd at lst strk and crss hm; th stp-mthr wrld,
s lng crl—frbddng—nw thrw affctnt arms rnd hs stbbrn
nck, and dd sm t jysly sb ovr hm, as if ovr on, tht
hwvr wlfl and errng, sh cld yt fnd it in hr hrt t sv
and t blss. Frm bnth hs slchd ht Ahb drppd a tr int
th s; nr dd all th Pcfc cntn sch wlth as tht on w
drp.

Strbck sw th old mn; sw hm, hw h hvly lnd ovr th sd;
and h smd t hr in hs own tr hrt th msrlss sbbng
tht stl ot of th cntr of th srnty arnd. Crfl nt t
tch hm, or b ntcd by hm, h yt drw nr t hm, and std
thr.

Ahb trnd.

“Strbck!”

“Sr.”

“Oh, Strbck! it is a mld, mld wnd, and a mld lkng sky. On sch
a dy—vry mch sch a swtnss as ths—I strck my frst whl—a
by-hrpnr of eghtn! Frty—frty—frty yrs ag!—ag! Frty
yrs of cntnl whlng! frty yrs of prvtn, and prl, and
strm-tm! frty yrs on th ptlss s! fr frty yrs hs Ahb
frskn th pcfl lnd, fr frty yrs t mk wr on th hrrrs
of th dp! Ay and ys, Strbck, ot of ths frty yrs I hv nt
spnt thr ashr. Whn I thnk of ths lf I hv ld; th
dsltn of sltd it hs bn; th msnd, wlld-twn of a
Cptn’s exclsvnss, whch admts bt smll entrnc t any
sympthy frm th grn cntry wtht—oh, wrnss! hvnss!
Gn-cst slvry of sltry cmmnd!—whn I thnk of all ths;
only hlf-sspctd, nt s knly knwn t m bfr—and hw fr frty
yrs I hv fd upn dry sltd fr—ft emblm of th dry nrshmnt
of my sl!—whn th prst lndsmn hs hd frsh frt t hs dly
hnd, and brkn th wrld’s frsh brd t my mldy crsts—awy,
whl ocns awy, frm tht yng grl-wf I wddd pst ffty, and
sld fr Cp Hrn th nxt dy, lvng bt on dnt in my mrrg
pllw—wf? wf?—rthr a wdw wth hr hsbnd alv! Ay, I
wdwd tht pr grl whn I mrrd hr, Strbck; and thn, th
mdnss, th frnzy, th blng bld and th smkng brw, wth
whch, fr a thsnd lwrngs old Ahb hs frsly, fmngly
chsd hs pry—mr a dmn thn a mn!—ay, ay! wht a frty yrs’
fl—fl—old fl, hs old Ahb bn! Why ths strf of th chs?
why wry, and plsy th arm at th or, and th irn, and th lnc?
hw th rchr or bttr is Ahb nw? Bhld. Oh, Strbck! is it nt
hrd, tht wth ths wry ld I br, on pr lg shld hv bn
sntchd frm undr m? Hr, brsh ths old hr asd; it blnds m,
tht I sm t wp. Lcks s gry dd nvr grw bt frm ot sm
ashs! Bt d I lk vry old, s vry, vry old, Strbck? I fl
ddly fnt, bwd, and hmpd, as thgh I wr Adm, stggrng
bnth th pld cntrs snc Prds. Gd! Gd! Gd!—crck my
hrt!—stv my brn!—mckry! mckry! bttr, btng mckry of gry
hrs, hv I lvd engh jy t wr y; and sm and fl ths
intlrbly old? Cls! stnd cls t m, Strbck; lt m lk int a
hmn ey; it is bttr thn t gz int s or sky; bttr thn t
gz upn Gd. By th grn lnd; by th brght hrth-stn! ths is
th mgc glss, mn; I s my wf and my chld in thn ey. N, n;
sty on brd, on brd!—lwr nt whn I d; whn brndd Ahb gvs
chs t Mby Dck. Tht hzrd shll nt b thn. N, n! nt wth
th fr awy hm I s in tht ey!”

“Oh, my Cptn! my Cptn! nbl sl! grnd old hrt, aftr all!
why shld any on gv chs t tht htd fsh! Awy wth m! lt us
fly ths ddly wtrs! lt us hm! Wf and chld, t, ar
Strbck’s—wf and chld of hs brthrly, sstrly, ply-fllw
yth; evn as thn, sr, ar th wf and chld of thy lvng,
lngng, ptrnl old ag! Awy! lt us awy!—ths instnt lt m altr
th crs! Hw chrly, hw hlrsly, O my Cptn, wld w bwl
on or wy t s old Nntckt agn! I thnk, sr, thy hv sm
sch mld bl dys, evn as ths, in Nntckt.”

“Thy hv, thy hv. I hv sn thm—sm smmr dys in th
mrnng. Abt ths tm—ys, it is hs nn np nw—th by
vvcsly wks; sts up in bd; and hs mthr tlls hm of m, of
cnnbl old m; hw I am abrd upn th dp, bt wll yt cm bck
t dnc hm agn.”

“’Ts my Mry, my Mry hrslf! Sh prmsd tht my by, evry
mrnng, shld b crrd t th hll t ctch th frst glmps of
hs fthr’s sl! Ys, ys! n mr! it is dn! w hd fr
Nntckt! Cm, my Cptn, stdy ot th crs, and lt us awy!
S, s! th by’s fc frm th wndw! th by’s hnd on th hll!”

Bt Ahb’s glnc ws avrtd; lk a blghtd frt tr h shk, and
cst hs lst, cndrd appl t th sl.

“Wht is it, wht nmlss, inscrtbl, unrthly thng is it; wht
cznng, hddn lrd and mstr, and crl, rmrslss emprr
cmmnds m; tht agnst all ntrl lvngs and lngngs, I s kp
pshng, and crwdng, and jmmng myslf on all th tm; rcklssly
mkng m rdy t d wht in my own prpr, ntrl hrt, I drst nt
s mch as dr? Is Ahb, Ahb? Is it I, Gd, or wh, tht lfts ths
arm? Bt if th grt sn mv nt of hmslf; bt is as an errnd-by
in hvn; nr on sngl str cn rvlv, bt by sm invsbl
pwr; hw thn cn ths on smll hrt bt; ths on smll brn
thnk thghts; unlss Gd ds tht btng, ds tht thnkng, ds
tht lvng, and nt I. By hvn, mn, w ar trnd rnd and rnd
in ths wrld, lk yndr wndlss, and Ft is th hndspk. And all
th tm, l! tht smlng sky, and ths unsndd s! Lk! s yn
Albcr! wh pt it int hm t chs and fng tht flyng-fsh? Whr
d mrdrrs g, mn! Wh’s t dm, whn th jdg hmslf is drggd
t th br? Bt it is a mld, mld wnd, and a mld lkng sky; and
th ar smlls nw, as if it blw frm a fr-awy mdw; thy hv
bn mkng hy smwhr undr th slps of th Ands, Strbck, and
th mwrs ar slpng amng th nw-mwn hy. Slpng? Ay, tl w
hw w my, w all slp at lst on th fld. Slp? Ay, and rst
amd grnnss; as lst yr’s scyths flng dwn, and lft in th
hlf-ct swths—Strbck!”

Bt blnchd t a crps’s h wth dspr, th Mt hd stln awy.

Ahb crssd th dck t gz ovr on th othr sd; bt strtd at
tw rflctd, fxd eys in th wtr thr. Fdllh ws mtnlssly
lnng ovr th sm rl.


CHPTR 133. Th Chs—Frst Dy.

Tht nght, in th md-wtch, whn th old mn—as hs wnt at
intrvls—stppd frth frm th scttl in whch h lnd, and wnt
t hs pvt-hl, h sddnly thrst ot hs fc frcly, snffng
up th s ar as a sgcs shp’s dg wll, in drwng ngh t sm
brbrs isl. H dclrd tht a whl mst b nr. Sn tht
pclr odr, smtms t a grt dstnc gvn frth by th lvng
sprm whl, ws plpbl t all th wtch; nr ws any mrnr
srprsd whn, aftr inspctng th cmpss, and thn th dg-vn,
and thn ascrtnng th prcs brng of th odr as nrly as
pssbl, Ahb rpdly ordrd th shp’s crs t b slghtly
altrd, and th sl t b shrtnd.

Th act plcy dcttng ths mvmnts ws sffcntly vndctd
at dybrk, by th sght of a lng slk on th s drctly and
lngthws ahd, smth as ol, and rsmblng in th pltd wtry
wrnkls brdrng it, th plshd mtllc-lk mrks of sm swft
td-rp, at th mth of a dp, rpd strm.

“Mn th mst-hds! Cll all hnds!”

Thndrng wth th btts of thr clbbd hndspks on th frcstl
dck, Dgg rsd th slprs wth sch jdgmnt clps tht thy
smd t exhl frm th scttl, s instntnsly dd thy appr
wth thr clths in thr hnds.

“Wht d’y s?” crd Ahb, flttnng hs fc t th sky.

“Nthng, nthng sr!” ws th snd hlng dwn in rply.

“T’gllnt sls!—stnsls! alw and alft, and on bth sds!”

All sl bng st, h nw cst ls th lf-ln, rsrvd fr
swyng hm t th mn ryl-mst hd; and in a fw mmnts thy wr
hstng hm ththr, whn, whl bt tw thrds of th wy alft, and
whl prng ahd thrgh th hrzntl vcncy btwn th
mn-tp-sl and tp-gllnt-sl, h rsd a gll-lk cry in th
ar. “Thr sh blws!—thr sh blws! A hmp lk a snw-hll! It is
Mby Dck!”

Frd by th cry whch smd smltnsly tkn up by th thr
lk-ots, th mn on dck rshd t th rggng t bhld th fms
whl thy hd s lng bn prsng. Ahb hd nw gnd hs fnl
prch, sm ft abv th othr lk-ots, Tshtg stndng jst
bnth hm on th cp of th tp-gllnt-mst, s tht th Indn’s
hd ws almst on a lvl wth Ahb’s hl. Frm ths hght th whl
ws nw sn sm ml or s ahd, at evry rll of th s rvlng
hs hgh sprklng hmp, and rglrly jttng hs slnt spt int
th ar. T th crdls mrnrs it smd th sm slnt spt thy
hd s lng ag bhld in th mnlt Atlntc and Indn Ocns.

“And dd nn of y s it bfr?” crd Ahb, hlng th prchd mn
all arnd hm.

“I sw hm almst tht sm instnt, sr, tht Cptn Ahb dd, and I
crd ot,” sd Tshtg.

“Nt th sm instnt; nt th sm—n, th dbln is mn, Ft
rsrvd th dbln fr m. _I_ only; nn of y cld hv rsd
th Wht Whl frst. Thr sh blws!—thr sh blws!—thr sh
blws! Thr agn!—thr agn!” h crd, in lng-drwn, lngrng,
mthdc tns, attnd t th grdl prlngngs of th whl’s
vsbl jts. “H’s gng t snd! In stnsls! Dwn
tp-gllnt-sls! Stnd by thr bts. Mr. Strbck, rmmbr, sty
on brd, and kp th shp. Hlm thr! Lff, lff a pnt! S;
stdy, mn, stdy! Thr g flks! N, n; only blck wtr! All
rdy th bts thr? Stnd by, stnd by! Lwr m, Mr. Strbck;
lwr, lwr,—qck, qckr!” and h sld thrgh th ar t th dck.

“H is hdng strght t lwrd, sr,” crd Stbb, “rght awy frm
us; cnnt hv sn th shp yt.”

“B dmb, mn! Stnd by th brcs! Hrd dwn th hlm!—brc up!
Shvr hr!—shvr hr!—S; wll tht! Bts, bts!”

Sn all th bts bt Strbck’s wr drppd; all th bt-sls
st—all th pddls plyng; wth rpplng swftnss, shtng t
lwrd; and Ahb hdng th onst. A pl, dth-glmmr lt up
Fdllh’s snkn eys; a hds mtn gnwd hs mth.

Lk nslss ntls shlls, thr lght prws spd thrgh th s;
bt only slwly thy nrd th f. As thy nrd hm, th ocn grw
stll mr smth; smd drwng a crpt ovr its wvs; smd a
nn-mdw, s srnly it sprd. At lngth th brthlss hntr
cm s ngh hs smngly unsspctng pry, tht hs entr dzzlng
hmp ws dstnctly vsbl, sldng alng th s as if an isltd
thng, and cntnlly st in a rvlvng rng of fnst, flcy,
grnsh fm. H sw th vst, invlvd wrnkls of th slghtly
prjctng hd bynd. Bfr it, fr ot on th sft Trksh-rggd
wtrs, wnt th glstnng wht shdw frm hs brd, mlky
frhd, a mscl rpplng plyflly accmpnyng th shd; and
bhnd, th bl wtrs intrchngbly flwd ovr int th mvng
vlly of hs stdy wk; and on ethr hnd brght bbbls ars and
dncd by hs sd. Bt ths wr brkn agn by th lght ts of
hndrds of gy fwl sftly fthrng th s, altrnt wth thr
ftfl flght; and lk t sm flg-stff rsng frm th pntd hll
of an argsy, th tll bt shttrd pl of a rcnt lnc prjctd
frm th wht whl’s bck; and at intrvls on of th cld of
sft-td fwls hvrng, and t and fr skmmng lk a cnpy ovr
th fsh, slntly prchd and rckd on ths pl, th lng tl
fthrs strmng lk pnnns.

A gntl jysnss—a mghty mldnss of rps in swftnss, invstd
th gldng whl. Nt th wht bll Jptr swmmng awy wth
rvshd Erp clngng t hs grcfl hrns; hs lvly, lrng
eys sdwys intnt upn th md; wth smth bwtchng fltnss,
rpplng strght fr th nptl bwr in Crt; nt Jv, nt tht
grt mjsty Sprm! dd srpss th glrfd Wht Whl as h s
dvnly swm.

On ech sft sd—cncdnt wth th prtd swll, tht bt onc
lvng hm, thn flwd s wd awy—on ech brght sd, th whl
shd off entcngs. N wndr thr hd bn sm amng th hntrs wh
nmlssly trnsprtd and allrd by all ths srnty, hd vntrd
t assl it; bt hd ftlly fnd tht qtd bt th vstr of
trnds. Yt clm, entcng clm, oh, whl! th gldst on, t all
wh fr th frst tm ey th, n mttr hw mny in tht sm wy
th my’st hv bjggld and dstryd bfr.

And ths, thrgh th srn trnqllts of th trpcl s, amng
wvs whs hnd-clppngs wr sspndd by excdng rptr, Mby
Dck mvd on, stll wthhldng frm sght th fll trrrs of hs
sbmrgd trnk, entrly hdng th wrnchd hdsnss of hs jw.
Bt sn th fr prt of hm slwly rs frm th wtr; fr an
instnt hs whl mrblzd bdy frmd a hgh arch, lk Vrgn’s
Ntrl Brdg, and wrnngly wvng hs bnnrd flks in th ar,
th grnd gd rvld hmslf, sndd, and wnt ot of sght.
Hvrngly hltng, and dppng on th wng, th wht s-fwls
lngngly lngrd ovr th agttd pl tht h lft.

Wth ors apk, and pddls dwn, th shts of thr sls adrft,
th thr bts nw stlly fltd, awtng Mby Dck’s rpprnc.

“An hr,” sd Ahb, stndng rtd in hs bt’s strn; and h gzd
bynd th whl’s plc, twrds th dm bl spcs and wd wng
vcncs t lwrd. It ws only an instnt; fr agn hs eys smd
whrlng rnd in hs hd as h swpt th wtry crcl. Th brz
nw frshnd; th s bgn t swll.

“Th brds!—th brds!” crd Tshtg.

In lng Indn fl, as whn hrns tk wng, th wht brds wr nw
all flyng twrds Ahb’s bt; and whn wthn a fw yrds bgn
flttrng ovr th wtr thr, whlng rnd and rnd, wth jys,
expctnt crs. Thr vsn ws knr thn mn’s; Ahb cld
dscvr n sgn in th s. Bt sddnly as h prd dwn and dwn
int its dpths, h prfndly sw a wht lvng spt n bggr thn a
wht wsl, wth wndrfl clrty uprsng, and mgnfyng as it
rs, tll it trnd, and thn thr wr plnly rvld tw lng
crkd rws of wht, glstnng tth, fltng up frm th
undscvrbl bttm. It ws Mby Dck’s opn mth and scrlld jw;
hs vst, shdwd blk stll hlf blndng wth th bl of th s.
Th glttrng mth ywnd bnth th bt lk an opn-drd mrbl
tmb; and gvng on sdlng swp wth hs strng or, Ahb whrld
th crft asd frm ths trmnds apprtn. Thn, cllng upn
Fdllh t chng plcs wth hm, wnt frwrd t th bws, and
szng Prth’s hrpn, cmmndd hs crw t grsp thr ors and
stnd by t strn.

Nw, by rsn of ths tmly spnnng rnd th bt upn its axs,
its bw, by antcptn, ws md t fc th whl’s hd whl yt
undr wtr. Bt as if prcvng ths strtgm, Mby Dck, wth tht
mlcs intllgnc ascrbd t hm, sdlngly trnsplntd
hmslf, as it wr, in an instnt, shtng hs pltd hd
lngthws bnth th bt.

Thrgh and thrgh; thrgh evry plnk and ech rb, it thrlld fr
an instnt, th whl oblqly lyng on hs bck, in th mnnr of a
btng shrk, slwly and flngly tkng its bws fll wthn hs
mth, s tht th lng, nrrw, scrlld lwr jw crld hgh up int
th opn ar, and on of th tth cght in a rw-lck. Th blsh
prl-wht of th insd of th jw ws wthn sx inchs of Ahb’s
hd, and rchd hghr thn tht. In ths atttd th Wht Whl
nw shk th slght cdr as a mldly crl ct hr ms. Wth
unstnshd eys Fdllh gzd, and crssd hs arms; bt th
tgr-yllw crw wr tmblng ovr ech othr’s hds t gn th
uttrmst strn.

And nw, whl bth elstc gnwls wr sprngng in and ot, as th
whl dlld wth th dmd crft in ths dvlsh wy; and frm hs
bdy bng sbmrgd bnth th bt, h cld nt b drtd at frm
th bws, fr th bws wr almst insd of hm, as it wr; and whl
th othr bts invlntrly psd, as bfr a qck crss
impssbl t wthstnd, thn it ws tht mnmnc Ahb, frs wth
ths tntlzng vcnty of hs f, whch plcd hm all alv and
hlplss in th vry jws h htd; frnzd wth all ths, h szd
th lng bn wth hs nkd hnds, and wldly strv t wrnch it frm
its grp. As nw h ths vnly strv, th jw slppd frm hm; th
frl gnwls bnt in, cllpsd, and snppd, as bth jws, lk an
enrms shrs, sldng frthr aft, bt th crft cmpltly in
twn, and lckd thmslvs fst agn in th s, mdwy btwn th
tw fltng wrcks. Ths fltd asd, th brkn ends drpng, th
crw at th strn-wrck clngng t th gnwls, and strvng t hld
fst t th ors t lsh thm acrss.

At tht prldng mmnt, er th bt ws yt snppd, Ahb, th frst
t prcv th whl’s intnt, by th crfty uprsng of hs hd, a
mvmnt tht lsd hs hld fr th tm; at tht mmnt hs hnd hd
md on fnl effrt t psh th bt ot of th bt. Bt only
slppng frthr int th whl’s mth, and tltng ovr sdwys as
it slppd, th bt hd shkn off hs hld on th jw; splld hm
ot of it, as h lnd t th psh; and s h fll flt-fcd upn th
s.

Rpplngly wthdrwng frm hs pry, Mby Dck nw ly at a lttl
dstnc, vrtclly thrstng hs oblng wht hd up and dwn in th
bllws; and at th sm tm slwly rvlvng hs whl spndld bdy;
s tht whn hs vst wrnkld frhd rs—sm twnty or mr ft
ot of th wtr—th nw rsng swlls, wth all thr cnflnt wvs,
dzzlngly brk agnst it; vndctvly tssng thr shvrd spry
stll hghr int th ar.* S, in a gl, th bt hlf bffld Chnnl
bllws only rcl frm th bs of th Eddystn, trmphntly t
ovrlp its smmt wth thr scd.

*Ths mtn is pclr t th sprm whl. It rcvs its
dsgntn (ptchplng) frm its bng lknd t tht prlmnry
up-and-dwn ps of th whl-lnc, in th exrcs clld
ptchplng, prvsly dscrbd. By ths mtn th whl mst bst
and mst cmprhnsvly vw whtvr objcts my b encrclng hm.

Bt sn rsmng hs hrzntl atttd, Mby Dck swm swftly rnd
and rnd th wrckd crw; sdwys chrnng th wtr in hs vngfl
wk, as if lshng hmslf up t stll anthr and mr ddly
asslt. Th sght of th splntrd bt smd t mddn hm, as th
bld of grps and mlbrrs cst bfr Antchs’s elphnts in th
bk of Mccbs. Mnwhl Ahb hlf smthrd in th fm of th
whl’s inslnt tl, and t mch of a crppl t swm,—thgh h
cld stll kp aflt, evn in th hrt of sch a whrlpl as tht;
hlplss Ahb’s hd ws sn, lk a tssd bbbl whch th lst
chnc shck mght brst. Frm th bt’s frgmntry strn, Fdllh
incrsly and mldly eyd hm; th clngng crw, at th othr
drftng end, cld nt sccr hm; mr thn engh ws it fr thm t
lk t thmslvs. Fr s rvlvngly appllng ws th Wht Whl’s
aspct, and s plntrly swft th evr-cntrctng crcls h md,
tht h smd hrzntlly swpng upn thm. And thgh th othr
bts, unhrmd, stll hvrd hrd by; stll thy drd nt pll int
th eddy t strk, lst tht shld b th sgnl fr th instnt
dstrctn of th jprdzd cstwys, Ahb and all; nr in tht
cs cld thy thmslvs hp t escp. Wth strnng eys, thn,
thy rmnd on th otr edg of th drfl zn, whs cntr hd
nw bcm th old mn’s hd.

Mntm, frm th bgnnng all ths hd bn dscrd frm th shp’s
mst hds; and sqrng hr yrds, sh hd brn dwn upn th scn;
and ws nw s ngh, tht Ahb in th wtr hld hr!—“Sl on
th”—bt tht mmnt a brkng s dshd on hm frm Mby Dck, and
whlmd hm fr th tm. Bt strgglng ot of it agn, and chncng
t rs on a twrng crst, h shtd,—“Sl on th whl!—Drv hm
off!”

Th Pqd’s prws wr pntd; and brkng up th chrmd crcl,
sh effctlly prtd th wht whl frm hs vctm. As h sllnly
swm off, th bts flw t th rsc.

Drggd int Stbb’s bt wth bld-sht, blndd eys, th wht
brn ckng in hs wrnkls; th lng tnsn of Ahb’s bdly
strngth dd crck, and hlplssly h yldd t hs bdy’s dm: fr a
tm, lyng all crshd in th bttm of Stbb’s bt, lk on trddn
undr ft of hrds of elphnts. Fr inlnd, nmlss wls cm frm
hm, as dslt snds frm ot rvns.

Bt ths intnsty of hs physcl prstrtn dd bt s mch th mr
abbrvt it. In an instnt’s cmpss, grt hrts smtms cndns
t on dp png, th sm ttl of ths shllw pns kndly dffsd
thrgh fblr mn’s whl lvs. And s, sch hrts, thgh smmry
in ech on sffrng; stll, if th gds dcr it, in thr lf-tm
aggrgt a whl ag of w, whlly md up of instntns
intnsts; fr evn in thr pntlss cntrs, ths nbl ntrs
cntn th entr crcmfrncs of infrr sls.

“Th hrpn,” sd Ahb, hlf wy rsng, and drggngly lnng on
on bndd arm—“is it sf?”

“Ay, sr, fr it ws nt drtd; ths is it,” sd Stbb, shwng it.

“Ly it bfr m;—any mssng mn?”

“On, tw, thr, fr, fv;—thr wr fv ors, sr, and hr ar
fv mn.”

“Tht’s gd.—Hlp m, mn; I wsh t stnd. S, s, I s hm! thr!
thr! gng t lwrd stll; wht a lpng spt!—Hnds off frm m!
Th etrnl sp rns up in Ahb’s bns agn! St th sl; ot ors;
th hlm!”

It is oftn th cs tht whn a bt is stv, its crw, bng pckd
up by anthr bt, hlp t wrk tht scnd bt; and th chs is
ths cntnd wth wht is clld dbl-bnkd ors. It ws ths nw.
Bt th addd pwr of th bt dd nt eql th addd pwr of th
whl, fr h smd t hv trbl-bnkd hs evry fn; swmmng wth
a vlcty whch plnly shwd, tht if nw, undr ths
crcmstncs, pshd on, th chs wld prv an indfntly
prlngd, if nt a hplss on; nr cld any crw endr fr s lng
a prd, sch an unntrmttd, intns strnng at th or; a thng
brly tlrbl only in sm on brf vcsstd. Th shp itslf,
thn, as it smtms hppns, offrd th mst prmsng intrmdt
mns of ovrtkng th chs. Accrdngly, th bts nw md fr hr,
and wr sn swyd up t thr crns—th tw prts of th wrckd
bt hvng bn prvsly scrd by hr—and thn hstng evrythng
t hr sd, and stckng hr cnvs hgh up, and sdwys
otstrtchng it wth stn-sls, lk th dbl-jntd wngs of an
albtrss; th Pqd br dwn in th lwrd wk of Mby-Dck. At
th wll knwn, mthdc intrvls, th whl’s glttrng spt ws
rglrly annncd frm th mnnd mst-hds; and whn h wld b
rprtd as jst gn dwn, Ahb wld tk th tm, and thn pcng
th dck, bnncl-wtch in hnd, s sn as th lst scnd of th
allttd hr exprd, hs vc ws hrd.—“Whs is th dbln nw?
D’y s hm?” and if th rply ws, N, sr! strghtwy h cmmndd
thm t lft hm t hs prch. In ths wy th dy wr on; Ahb, nw
alft and mtnlss; ann, unrstngly pcng th plnks.

As h ws ths wlkng, uttrng n snd, excpt t hl th mn
alft, or t bd thm hst a sl stll hghr, or t sprd on t a
stll grtr brdth—ths t and fr pcng, bnth hs slchd ht,
at evry trn h pssd hs own wrckd bt, whch hd bn drppd
upn th qrtr-dck, and ly thr rvrsd; brkn bw t shttrd
strn. At lst h psd bfr it; and as in an alrdy ovr-cldd
sky frsh trps of clds wll smtms sl acrss, s ovr th old
mn’s fc thr nw stl sm sch addd glm as ths.

Stbb sw hm ps; and prhps intndng, nt vnly, thgh, t
evnc hs own unbtd frttd, and ths kp up a vlnt plc in
hs Cptn’s mnd, h advncd, and eyng th wrck exclmd—“Th
thstl th ass rfsd; it prckd hs mth t knly, sr; h! h!”

“Wht sllss thng is ths tht lghs bfr a wrck? Mn, mn! dd
I nt knw th brv as frlss fr (and as mchncl) I cld
swr th wrt a pltrn. Grn nr lgh shld b hrd bfr a
wrck.”

“Ay, sr,” sd Strbck drwng nr, “’ts a slmn sght; an omn,
and an ill on.”

“Omn? omn?—th dctnry! If th gds thnk t spk otrght t
mn, thy wll hnrbly spk otrght; nt shk thr hds, and
gv an old wvs’ drklng hnt.—Bgn! Y tw ar th oppst pls
of on thng; Strbck is Stbb rvrsd, and Stbb is Strbck; and y
tw ar all mnknd; and Ahb stnds aln amng th mllns of th
ppld erth, nr gds nr mn hs nghbrs! Cld, cld—I shvr!—Hw
nw? Alft thr! D’y s hm? Sng ot fr evry spt, thgh h
spt tn tms a scnd!”

Th dy ws nrly dn; only th hm of hs gldn rb ws rstlng.
Sn, it ws almst drk, bt th lk-ot mn stll rmnd unst.

“Cn’t s th spt nw, sr;—t drk”—crd a vc frm th ar.

“Hw hdng whn lst sn?”

“As bfr, sr,—strght t lwrd.”

“Gd! h wll trvl slwr nw ’ts nght. Dwn ryls and
tp-gllnt stn-sls, Mr. Strbck. W mst nt rn ovr hm bfr
mrnng; h’s mkng a pssg nw, and my hv-t a whl. Hlm
thr! kp hr fll bfr th wnd!—Alft! cm dwn!—Mr. Stbb, snd
a frsh hnd t th fr-mst hd, and s it mnnd tll
mrnng.”—Thn advncng twrds th dbln in th mn-mst—“Mn,
ths gld is mn, fr I ernd it; bt I shll lt it abd hr tll
th Wht Whl is dd; and thn, whsvr of y frst rss hm,
upn th dy h shll b klld, ths gld is tht mn’s; and if on
tht dy I shll agn rs hm, thn, tn tms its sm shll b
dvdd amng all of y! Awy nw!—th dck is thn, sr!”

And s syng, h plcd hmslf hlf wy wthn th scttl, and
slchng hs ht, std thr tll dwn, excpt whn at intrvls
rsng hmslf t s hw th nght wr on.


CHPTR 134. Th Chs—Scnd Dy.

At dy-brk, th thr mst-hds wr pnctlly mnnd afrsh.

“D’y s hm?” crd Ahb aftr allwng a lttl spc fr th lght
t sprd.

“S nthng, sr.”

“Trn up all hnds and mk sl! h trvls fstr thn I thght
fr;—th tp-gllnt sls!—ay, thy shld hv bn kpt on hr all
nght. Bt n mttr—’ts bt rstng fr th rsh.”

Hr b it sd, tht ths prtncs prst of on prtclr
whl, cntnd thrgh dy int nght, and thrgh nght int dy, is
a thng by n mns unprcdntd in th Sth s fshry. Fr sch is
th wndrfl skll, prscnc of exprnc, and invncbl
cnfdnc acqrd by sm grt ntrl gnss amng th Nntckt
cmmndrs; tht frm th smpl obsrvtn of a whl whn lst
dscrd, thy wll, undr crtn gvn crcmstncs, prtty
accrtly frtll bth th drctn in whch h wll cntn t
swm fr a tm, whl ot of sght, as wll as hs prbbl rt of
prgrssn drng tht prd. And, in ths css, smwht as a
plt, whn abt lsng sght of a cst, whs gnrl trndng h
wll knws, and whch h dsrs shrtly t rtrn t agn, bt at
sm frthr pnt; lk as ths plt stnds by hs cmpss, and tks
th prcs brng of th cp at prsnt vsbl, in ordr th mr
crtnly t ht arght th rmt, unsn hdlnd, evntlly t b
vstd: s ds th fshrmn, at hs cmpss, wth th whl; fr
aftr bng chsd, and dlgntly mrkd, thrgh svrl hrs of
dylght, thn, whn nght obscrs th fsh, th crtr’s ftr
wk thrgh th drknss is almst as estblshd t th sgcs
mnd of th hntr, as th plt’s cst is t hm. S tht t ths
hntr’s wndrs skll, th prvrbl evnscnc of a thng wrt in
wtr, a wk, is t all dsrd prpss wll ngh as rlbl as th
stdfst lnd. And as th mghty irn Lvthn of th mdrn rlwy
is s fmlrly knwn in its evry pc, tht, wth wtchs in thr
hnds, mn tm hs rt as dctrs tht of a bby’s pls; and lghtly
sy of it, th up trn or th dwn trn wll rch sch or sch a
spt, at sch or sch an hr; evn s, almst, thr ar occsns
whn ths Nntcktrs tm tht othr Lvthn of th dp,
accrdng t th obsrvd hmr of hs spd; and sy t thmslvs, s
mny hrs hnc ths whl wll hv gn tw hndrd mls, wll hv
abt rchd ths or tht dgr of lttd or lngtd. Bt t
rndr ths actnss at all sccssfl in th end, th wnd and th
s mst b th whlmn’s alls; fr of wht prsnt avl t th
bclmd or wndbnd mrnr is th skll tht assrs hm h is
exctly nnty-thr lgs and a qrtr frm hs prt? Infrbl
frm ths sttmnts, ar mny clltrl sbtl mttrs tchng th
chs of whls.

Th shp tr on; lvng sch a frrw in th s as whn a
cnnn-bll, mssnt, bcms a plgh-shr and trns up th lvl
fld.

“By slt and hmp!” crd Stbb, “bt ths swft mtn of th dck
crps up on’s lgs and tngls at th hrt. Ths shp and I ar tw
brv fllws!—H, h! Sm on tk m up, and lnch m, spn-ws,
on th s,—fr by lv-oks! my spn’s a kl. H, h! w g th gt
tht lvs n dst bhnd!”

“Thr sh blws—sh blws!—sh blws!—rght ahd!” ws nw th
mst-hd cry.

“Ay, ay!” crd Stbb, “I knw it—y cn’t escp—blw on and splt
yr spt, O whl! th md fnd hmslf is aftr y! blw yr
trmp—blstr yr lngs!—Ahb wll dm off yr bld, as a mllr
shts hs wtrgt upn th strm!”

And Stbb dd bt spk ot fr wll ngh all tht crw. Th frnzs
of th chs hd by ths tm wrkd thm bbblngly up, lk old wn
wrkd anw. Whtvr pl frs and frbdngs sm of thm mght
hv flt bfr; ths wr nt only nw kpt ot of sght thrgh th
grwng aw of Ahb, bt thy wr brkn up, and on all sds rtd,
as tmd prr hrs tht scttr bfr th bndng bsn. Th hnd
of Ft hd sntchd all thr sls; and by th strrng prls of th
prvs dy; th rck of th pst nght’s sspns; th fxd,
unfrng, blnd, rcklss wy in whch thr wld crft wnt plngng
twrds its flyng mrk; by all ths thngs, thr hrts wr bwld
alng. Th wnd tht md grt blls of thr sls, and rshd th
vssl on by arms invsbl as irrsstbl; ths smd th symbl of
tht unsn agncy whch s enslvd thm t th rc.

Thy wr on mn, nt thrty. Fr as th on shp tht hld thm all;
thgh it ws pt tgthr of all cntrstng thngs—ok, and mpl,
and pn wd; irn, and ptch, and hmp—yt all ths rn int ech
othr in th on cncrt hll, whch sht on its wy, bth blncd
and drctd by th lng cntrl kl; evn s, all th indvdlts
of th crw, ths mn’s vlr, tht mn’s fr; glt and gltnss,
all vrts wr wldd int onnss, and wr all drctd t tht
ftl gl whch Ahb thr on lrd and kl dd pnt t.

Th rggng lvd. Th mst-hds, lk th tps of tll plms, wr
otsprdngly tftd wth arms and lgs. Clngng t a spr wth on
hnd, sm rchd frth th othr wth imptnt wvngs; othrs,
shdng thr eys frm th vvd snlght, st fr ot on th rckng
yrds; all th sprs in fll brng of mrtls, rdy and rp fr
thr ft. Ah! hw thy stll strv thrgh tht infnt blnss t
sk ot th thng tht mght dstry thm!

“Why sng y nt ot fr hm, if y s hm?” crd Ahb, whn, aftr
th lps of sm mnts snc th frst cry, n mr hd bn hrd.
“Swy m up, mn; y hv bn dcvd; nt Mby Dck csts on odd
jt tht wy, and thn dspprs.”

It ws evn s; in thr hdlng egrnss, th mn hd mstkn sm
othr thng fr th whl-spt, as th evnt itslf sn prvd; fr
hrdly hd Ahb rchd hs prch; hrdly ws th rp blyd t its
pn on dck, whn h strck th ky-nt t an orchstr, tht md th
ar vbrt as wth th cmbnd dschrgs of rfls. Th trmphnt
hll of thrty bckskn lngs ws hrd, as—mch nrr t th shp
thn th plc of th imgnry jt, lss thn a ml ahd—Mby Dck
bdly brst int vw! Fr nt by any clm and indlnt sptngs; nt
by th pcbl gsh of tht mystc fntn in hs hd, dd th
Wht Whl nw rvl hs vcnty; bt by th fr mr wndrs
phnmnn of brchng. Rsng wth hs utmst vlcty frm th
frthst dpths, th Sprm Whl ths bms hs entr blk int th
pr elmnt of ar, and plng up a mntn of dzzlng fm, shws
hs plc t th dstnc of svn mls and mr. In ths mmnts,
th trn, enrgd wvs h shks off, sm hs mn; in sm css,
ths brchng is hs act of dfnc.

“Thr sh brchs! thr sh brchs!” ws th cry, as in hs
immsrbl brvds th Wht Whl tssd hmslf slmn-lk t
Hvn. S sddnly sn in th bl pln of th s, and rlvd
agnst th stll blr mrgn of th sky, th spry tht h rsd,
fr th mmnt, intlrbly glttrd and glrd lk a glcr; and
std thr grdlly fdng and fdng awy frm its frst sprklng
intnsty, t th dm mstnss of an advncng shwr in a vl.

“Ay, brch yr lst t th sn, Mby Dck!” crd Ahb, “thy hr
and thy hrpn ar at hnd!—Dwn! dwn all of y, bt on mn at th
fr. Th bts!—stnd by!”

Unmndfl of th tds rp-lddrs of th shrds, th mn, lk
shtng strs, sld t th dck, by th isltd bckstys and
hlyrds; whl Ahb, lss drtngly, bt stll rpdly ws drppd
frm hs prch.

“Lwr awy,” h crd, s sn as h hd rchd hs bt—a spr on,
rggd th aftrnn prvs. “Mr. Strbck, th shp is thn—kp
awy frm th bts, bt kp nr thm. Lwr, all!”

As if t strk a qck trrr int thm, by ths tm bng th frst
asslnt hmslf, Mby Dck hd trnd, and ws nw cmng fr th
thr crws. Ahb’s bt ws cntrl; and chrng hs mn, h tld
thm h wld tk th whl hd-and-hd,—tht is, pll strght up
t hs frhd,—a nt uncmmn thng; fr whn wthn a crtn lmt,
sch a crs exclds th cmng onst frm th whl’s sdlng
vsn. Bt er tht cls lmt ws gnd, and whl yt all thr
bts wr pln as th shp’s thr msts t hs ey; th Wht Whl
chrnng hmslf int frs spd, almst in an instnt as it wr,
rshng amng th bts wth opn jws, and a lshng tl, offrd
appllng bttl on evry sd; and hdlss of th irns drtd at hm
frm evry bt, smd only intnt on annhltng ech sprt plnk
of whch ths bts wr md. Bt sklflly mnœuvrd, incssntly
whlng lk trnd chrgrs in th fld; th bts fr a whl
eldd hm; thgh, at tms, bt by a plnk’s brdth; whl all th
tm, Ahb’s unrthly slgn tr evry othr cry bt hs t shrds.

Bt at lst in hs untrcbl evltns, th Wht Whl s crssd
and rcrssd, and in a thsnd wys entngld th slck of th thr
lns nw fst t hm, tht thy frshrtnd, and, of thmslvs,
wrpd th dvtd bts twrds th plntd irns in hm; thgh nw
fr a mmnt th whl drw asd a lttl, as if t rlly fr a mr
trmnds chrg. Szng tht opprtnty, Ahb frst pd ot mr
ln: and thn ws rpdly hlng and jrkng in upn it agn—hpng
tht wy t dsncmbr it of sm snrls—whn l!—a sght mr svg
thn th embttld tth of shrks!

Cght and twstd—crkscrwd in th mzs of th ln, ls hrpns
and lncs, wth all thr brstlng brbs and pnts, cm flshng
and drppng up t th chcks in th bws of Ahb’s bt. Only on
thng cld b dn. Szng th bt-knf, h crtclly rchd
wthn—thrgh—and thn, wtht—th rys of stl; drggd in th ln
bynd, pssd it, inbrd, t th bwsmn, and thn, twc sndrng
th rp nr th chcks—drppd th intrcptd fgt of stl int
th s; and ws all fst agn. Tht instnt, th Wht Whl md a
sddn rsh amng th rmnng tngls of th othr lns; by s
dng, irrsstbly drggd th mr invlvd bts of Stbb and Flsk
twrds hs flks; dshd thm tgthr lk tw rllng hsks on a
srf-btn bch, and thn, dvng dwn int th s, dspprd in a
blng mlstrm, in whch, fr a spc, th odrs cdr chps of
th wrcks dncd rnd and rnd, lk th grtd ntmg in a swftly
strrd bwl of pnch.

Whl th tw crws wr yt crclng in th wtrs, rchng ot aftr
th rvlvng ln-tbs, ors, and othr fltng frntr, whl
aslp lttl Flsk bbbd up and dwn lk an empty vl, twtchng
hs lgs upwrds t escp th drdd jws of shrks; and Stbb ws
lstly sngng ot fr sm on t ldl hm up; and whl th old
mn’s ln—nw prtng—admttd of hs pllng int th crmy pl t
rsc whm h cld;—in tht wld smltnsnss of a thsnd
cncrtd prls,—Ahb’s yt unstrckn bt smd drwn up twrds
Hvn by invsbl wrs,—as, arrw-lk, shtng prpndclrly
frm th s, th Wht Whl dshd hs brd frhd agnst its
bttm, and snt it, trnng ovr and ovr, int th ar; tll it fll
agn—gnwl dwnwrds—and Ahb and hs mn strggld ot frm undr
it, lk sls frm a s-sd cv.

Th frst uprsng mmntm of th whl—mdfyng its drctn as h
strck th srfc—invlntrly lnchd hm alng it, t a lttl
dstnc frm th cntr of th dstrctn h hd md; and wth hs
bck t it, h nw ly fr a mmnt slwly flng wth hs flks frm
sd t sd; and whnvr a stry or, bt of plnk, th lst chp or
crmb of th bts tchd hs skn, hs tl swftly drw bck, and
cm sdwys smtng th s. Bt sn, as if stsfd tht hs wrk
fr tht tm ws dn, h pshd hs pltd frhd thrgh th
ocn, and trlng aftr hm th intrtngld lns, cntnd hs
lwrd wy at a trvllr’s mthdc pc.

As bfr, th attntv shp hvng dscrd th whl fght, agn
cm brng dwn t th rsc, and drppng a bt, pckd up th
fltng mrnrs, tbs, ors, and whtvr els cld b cght at,
and sfly lndd thm on hr dcks. Sm sprnd shldrs, wrsts,
and ankls; lvd cntsns; wrnchd hrpns and lncs;
inxtrcbl intrccs of rp; shttrd ors and plnks; all ths
wr thr; bt n ftl or evn srs ill smd t hv bflln
any on. As wth Fdllh th dy bfr, s Ahb ws nw fnd grmly
clngng t hs bt’s brkn hlf, whch affrdd a cmprtvly esy
flt; nr dd it s exhst hm as th prvs dy’s mshp.

Bt whn h ws hlpd t th dck, all eys wr fstnd upn hm; as
instd of stndng by hmslf h stll hlf-hng upn th shldr of
Strbck, wh hd ths fr bn th frmst t assst hm. Hs ivry
lg hd bn snppd off, lvng bt on shrt shrp splntr.

“Ay, ay, Strbck, ’ts swt t ln smtms, b th lnr wh h
wll; and wld old Ahb hd lnd oftnr thn h hs.”

“Th frrl hs nt std, sr,” sd th crpntr, nw cmng up; “I
pt gd wrk int tht lg.”

“Bt n bns brkn, sr, I hp,” sd Stbb wth tr cncrn.

“Ay! and all splntrd t pcs, Stbb!—d’y s it.—Bt evn wth a
brkn bn, old Ahb is untchd; and I accnt n lvng bn of
mn on jt mr m, thn ths dd on tht’s lst. Nr wht whl,
nr mn, nr fnd, cn s mch as grz old Ahb in hs own prpr and
inccssbl bng. Cn any ld tch yndr flr, any mst scrp
yndr rf?—Alft thr! whch wy?”

“Dd t lwrd, sr.”

“Up hlm, thn; pl on th sl agn, shp kprs! dwn th rst of
th spr bts and rg thm—Mr. Strbck awy, and mstr th bt’s
crws.”

“Lt m frst hlp th twrds th blwrks, sr.”

“Oh, oh, oh! hw ths splntr grs m nw! Accrsd ft! tht th
uncnqrbl cptn in th sl shld hv sch a crvn mt!”

“Sr?”

“My bdy, mn, nt th. Gv m smthng fr a cn—thr, tht
shvrd lnc wll d. Mstr th mn. Srly I hv nt sn hm yt.
By hvn it cnnt b!—mssng?—qck! cll thm all.”

Th old mn’s hntd thght ws tr. Upn mstrng th cmpny, th
Prs ws nt thr.

“Th Prs!” crd Stbb—“h mst hv bn cght in——”

“Th blck vmt wrnch th!—rn all of y abv, alw, cbn,
frcstl—fnd hm—nt gn—nt gn!”

Bt qckly thy rtrnd t hm wth th tdngs tht th Prs ws
nwhr t b fnd.

“Ay, sr,” sd Stbb—“cght amng th tngls of yr ln—I thght
I sw hm drggng undr.”

“_My_ ln! _my_ ln? Gn?—gn? Wht mns tht lttl wrd?—Wht
dth-knll rngs in it, tht old Ahb shks as if h wr th blfry.
Th hrpn, t!—tss ovr th lttr thr,—d’y s it?—th frgd
irn, mn, th wht whl’s—n, n, n,—blstrd fl! ths hnd dd
drt it!—’ts in th fsh!—Alft thr! Kp hm nld—Qck!—all
hnds t th rggng of th bts—cllct th ors—hrpnrs! th
irns, th irns!—hst th ryls hghr—a pll on all th
shts!—hlm thr! stdy, stdy fr yr lf! I’ll tn tms grdl
th unmsrd glb; y and dv strght thrgh it, bt I’ll sly
hm yt!”

“Grt Gd! bt fr on sngl instnt shw thyslf,” crd Strbck;
“nvr, nvr wlt th cptr hm, old mn—In Jss’ nm n mr of
ths, tht’s wrs thn dvl’s mdnss. Tw dys chsd; twc stv
t splntrs; thy vry lg onc mr sntchd frm undr th; thy evl
shdw gn—all gd angls mbbng th wth wrnngs:—wht mr
wldst th hv?—Shll w kp chsng ths mrdrs fsh tll h
swmps th lst mn? Shll w b drggd by hm t th bttm of th
s? Shll w b twd by hm t th infrnl wrld? Oh, oh,—Impty
and blsphmy t hnt hm mr!”

“Strbck, of lt I’v flt strngly mvd t th; evr snc tht
hr w bth sw—th knw’st wht, in on anthr’s eys. Bt in ths
mttr of th whl, b th frnt of thy fc t m as th plm of ths
hnd—a lplss, unftrd blnk. Ahb is fr evr Ahb, mn. Ths
whl act’s immtbly dcrd. ’Tws rhrsd by th and m a blln
yrs bfr ths ocn rlld. Fl! I am th Fts’ ltnnt; I act
undr ordrs. Lk th, undrlng! tht th obyst mn.—Stnd rnd
m, mn. Y s an old mn ct dwn t th stmp; lnng on a shvrd
lnc; prppd up on a lnly ft. ’Ts Ahb—hs bdy’s prt; bt
Ahb’s sl’s a cntpd, tht mvs upn a hndrd lgs. I fl
strnd, hlf strndd, as rps tht tw dsmstd frgts in a
gl; and I my lk s. Bt er I brk, y’ll hr m crck; and tll
y hr _tht_, knw tht Ahb’s hwsr tws hs prps yt. Blv
y, mn, in th thngs clld omns? Thn lgh ald, and cry encr!
Fr er thy drwn, drwnng thngs wll twc rs t th srfc;
thn rs agn, t snk fr evrmr. S wth Mby Dck—tw dys h’s
fltd—tmrrw wll b th thrd. Ay, mn, h’ll rs onc mr,—bt
only t spt hs lst! D’y fl brv mn, brv?”

“As frlss fr,” crd Stbb.

“And as mchncl,” mttrd Ahb. Thn as th mn wnt frwrd, h
mttrd on: “Th thngs clld omns! And ystrdy I tlkd th sm
t Strbck thr, cncrnng my brkn bt. Oh! hw vlntly I sk
t drv ot of othrs’ hrts wht’s clnchd s fst in mn!—Th
Prs—th Prs!—gn, gn? and h ws t g bfr:—bt stll ws
t b sn agn er I cld prsh—Hw’s tht?—Thr’s a rddl nw
mght bffl all th lwyrs bckd by th ghsts of th whl ln of
jdgs:—lk a hwk’s bk it pcks my brn. _I’ll_, _I’ll_ slv it,
thgh!”

Whn dsk dscndd, th whl ws stll in sght t lwrd.

S onc mr th sl ws shrtnd, and evrythng pssd nrly as on
th prvs nght; only, th snd of hmmrs, and th hm of th
grndstn ws hrd tll nrly dylght, as th mn tld by
lntrns in th cmplt and crfl rggng of th spr bts and
shrpnng thr frsh wpns fr th mrrw. Mntm, of th brkn
kl of Ahb’s wrckd crft th crpntr md hm anthr lg; whl
stll as on th nght bfr, slchd Ahb std fxd wthn hs
scttl; hs hd, hltrp glnc antcptngly gn bckwrd on its
dl; st d estwrd fr th erlst sn.


CHPTR 135. Th Chs.—Thrd Dy.

Th mrnng of th thrd dy dwnd fr and frsh, and onc mr th
sltry nght-mn at th fr-mst-hd ws rlvd by crwds of th
dylght lk-ots, wh dttd evry mst and almst evry spr.

“D’y s hm?” crd Ahb; bt th whl ws nt yt in sght.

“In hs infllbl wk, thgh; bt fllw tht wk, tht’s all. Hlm
thr; stdy, as th gst, and hst bn gng. Wht a lvly dy
agn! wr it a nw-md wrld, and md fr a smmr-hs t th
angls, and ths mrnng th frst of its thrwng opn t thm, a
frr dy cld nt dwn upn tht wrld. Hr’s fd fr thght, hd
Ahb tm t thnk; bt Ahb nvr thnks; h only fls, fls, fls;
_tht’s_ tnglng engh fr mrtl mn! t thnk’s adcty. Gd only
hs tht rght and prvlg. Thnkng is, or oght t b, a clnss
and a clmnss; and or pr hrts thrb, and or pr brns bt t
mch fr tht. And yt, I’v smtms thght my brn ws vry
clm—frzn clm, ths old skll crcks s, lk a glss in whch th
cntnts trnd t ic, and shvr it. And stll ths hr is grwng
nw; ths mmnt grwng, and ht mst brd it; bt n, it’s lk
tht srt of cmmn grss tht wll grw anywhr, btwn th erthy
clfts of Grnlnd ic or in Vsvs lv. Hw th wld wnds blw
it; thy whp it abt m as th trn shrds of splt sls lsh th
tssd shp thy clng t. A vl wnd tht hs n dbt blwn er ths
thrgh prsn crrdrs and clls, and wrds of hsptls, and
vntltd thm, and nw cms blwng hthr as inncnt as flcs.
Ot upn it!—it’s tntd. Wr I th wnd, I’d blw n mr on sch a
wckd, msrbl wrld. I’d crwl smwhr t a cv, and slnk
thr. And yt, ’ts a nbl and hrc thng, th wnd! wh evr
cnqrd it? In evry fght it hs th lst and bttrst blw. Rn
tltng at it, and y bt rn thrgh it. H! a cwrd wnd tht
strks strk nkd mn, bt wll nt stnd t rcv a sngl blw.
Evn Ahb is a brvr thng—a nblr thng thn _tht_. Wld nw th
wnd bt hd a bdy; bt all th thngs tht mst exsprt and
otrg mrtl mn, all ths thngs ar bdlss, bt only bdlss as
objcts, nt as agnts. Thr’s a mst spcl, a mst cnnng, oh, a
mst mlcs dffrnc! And yt, I sy agn, and swr it nw, tht
thr’s smthng all glrs and grcs in th wnd. Ths wrm
Trd Wnds, at lst, tht in th clr hvns blw strght on, in
strng and stdfst, vgrs mldnss; and vr nt frm thr mrk,
hwvr th bsr crrnts of th s my trn and tck, and mghtst
Msssspps of th lnd swft and swrv abt, uncrtn whr t g
at lst. And by th etrnl Pls! ths sm Trds tht s drctly
blw my gd shp on; ths Trds, or smthng lk thm—smthng s
unchngbl, and fll as strng, blw my kld sl alng! T it!
Alft thr! Wht d’y s?”

“Nthng, sr.”

“Nthng! and nn at hnd! Th dbln gs a-bggng! S th sn!
Ay, ay, it mst b s. I’v ovrsld hm. Hw, gt th strt? Ay,
h’s chsng _m_ nw; nt I, _hm_—tht’s bd; I mght hv knwn it,
t. Fl! th lns—th hrpns h’s twng. Ay, ay, I hv rn hm
by lst nght. Abt! abt! Cm dwn, all of y, bt th rglr lk
ots! Mn th brcs!”

Strng as sh hd dn, th wnd hd bn smwht on th Pqd’s
qrtr, s tht nw bng pntd in th rvrs drctn, th brcd
shp sld hrd upn th brz as sh rchrnd th crm in hr own
wht wk.

“Agnst th wnd h nw strs fr th opn jw,” mrmrd Strbck t
hmslf, as h cld th nw-hld mn-brc upn th rl. “Gd
kp us, bt alrdy my bns fl dmp wthn m, and frm th insd
wt my flsh. I msdbt m tht I dsby my Gd in obyng hm!”

“Stnd by t swy m up!” crd Ahb, advncng t th hmpn bskt.
“W shld mt hm sn.”

“Ay, ay, sr,” and strghtwy Strbck dd Ahb’s bddng, and onc
mr Ahb swng on hgh.

A whl hr nw pssd; gld-btn ot t ags. Tm itslf nw hld
lng brths wth kn sspns. Bt at lst, sm thr pnts off th
wthr bw, Ahb dscrd th spt agn, and instntly frm th
thr mst-hds thr shrks wnt up as if th tngs of fr hd
vcd it.

“Frhd t frhd I mt th, ths thrd tm, Mby Dck! On dck
thr!—brc shrpr up; crwd hr int th wnd’s ey. H’s t fr
off t lwr yt, Mr. Strbck. Th sls shk! Stnd ovr tht
hlmsmn wth a tp-ml! S, s; h trvls fst, and I mst dwn. Bt
lt m hv on mr gd rnd lk alft hr at th s; thr’s
tm fr tht. An old, old sght, and yt smhw s yng; ay, and
nt chngd a wnk snc I frst sw it, a by, frm th snd-hlls of
Nntckt! Th sm!—th sm!—th sm t Nh as t m. Thr’s a
sft shwr t lwrd. Sch lvly lwrdngs! Thy mst ld
smwhr—t smthng els thn cmmn lnd, mr plmy thn th
plms. Lwrd! th wht whl gs tht wy; lk t wndwrd, thn;
th bttr if th bttrr qrtr. Bt gd by, gd by, old
mst-hd! Wht’s ths?—grn? ay, tny msss in ths wrpd crcks.
N sch grn wthr stns on Ahb’s hd! Thr’s th dffrnc nw
btwn mn’s old ag and mttr’s. Bt ay, old mst, w bth grw old
tgthr; snd in or hlls, thgh, ar w nt, my shp? Ay, mns a
lg, tht’s all. By hvn ths dd wd hs th bttr of my lv
flsh evry wy. I cn’t cmpr wth it; and I’v knwn sm shps
md of dd trs otlst th lvs of mn md of th mst vtl
stff of vtl fthrs. Wht’s tht h sd? h shld stll g bfr
m, my plt; and yt t b sn agn? Bt whr? Wll I hv eys at
th bttm of th s, sppsng I dscnd ths endlss strs? and
all nght I’v bn slng frm hm, whrvr h dd snk t. Ay,
ay, lk mny mr th tld’st drfl trth as tchng thyslf, O
Prs; bt, Ahb, thr thy sht fll shrt. Gd-by, mst-hd—kp
a gd ey upn th whl, th whl I’m gn. W’ll tlk t-mrrw,
ny, t-nght, whn th wht whl ls dwn thr, td by hd and
tl.”

H gv th wrd; and stll gzng rnd hm, ws stdly lwrd
thrgh th clvn bl ar t th dck.

In d tm th bts wr lwrd; bt as stndng in hs shllp’s
strn, Ahb jst hvrd upn th pnt of th dscnt, h wvd t th
mt,—wh hld on of th tckl-rps on dck—and bd hm ps.

“Strbck!”

“Sr?”

“Fr th thrd tm my sl’s shp strts upn ths vyg, Strbck.”

“Ay, sr, th wlt hv it s.”

“Sm shps sl frm thr prts, and evr aftrwrds ar mssng,
Strbck!”

“Trth, sr: sddst trth.”

“Sm mn d at ebb td; sm at lw wtr; sm at th fll of th
fld;—and I fl nw lk a bllw tht’s all on crstd cmb,
Strbck. I am old;—shk hnds wth m, mn.”

Thr hnds mt; thr eys fstnd; Strbck’s trs th gl.

“Oh, my cptn, my cptn!—nbl hrt—g nt—g nt!—s, it’s a
brv mn tht wps; hw grt th agny of th prssn thn!”

“Lwr awy!”—crd Ahb, tssng th mt’s arm frm hm. “Stnd by
th crw!”

In an instnt th bt ws pllng rnd cls undr th strn.

“Th shrks! th shrks!” crd a vc frm th lw cbn-wndw
thr; “O mstr, my mstr, cm bck!”

Bt Ahb hrd nthng; fr hs own vc ws hgh-lftd thn; and th
bt lpd on.

Yt th vc spk tr; fr scrc hd h pshd frm th shp, whn
nmbrs of shrks, smngly rsng frm ot th drk wtrs bnth
th hll, mlcsly snppd at th blds of th ors, evry tm
thy dppd in th wtr; and in ths wy accmpnd th bt wth
thr bts. It is a thng nt uncmmnly hppnng t th whl-bts
in ths swrmng ss; th shrks at tms apprntly fllwng thm
in th sm prscnt wy tht vltrs hvr ovr th bnnrs of
mrchng rgmnts in th est. Bt ths wr th frst shrks tht
hd bn obsrvd by th Pqd snc th Wht Whl hd bn frst
dscrd; and whthr it ws tht Ahb’s crw wr all sch
tgr-yllw brbrns, and thrfr thr flsh mr msky t th
snss of th shrks—a mttr smtms wll knwn t affct
thm,—hwvr it ws, thy smd t fllw tht on bt wtht
mlstng th othrs.

“Hrt of wrght stl!” mrmrd Strbck gzng ovr th sd, and
fllwng wth hs eys th rcdng bt—“cnst th yt rng bldly
t tht sght?—lwrng thy kl amng rvnng shrks, and fllwd by
thm, opn-mthd t th chs; and ths th crtcl thrd dy?—Fr
whn thr dys flw tgthr in on cntns intns prst; b
sr th frst is th mrnng, th scnd th nn, and th thrd th
evnng and th end of tht thng—b tht end wht it my. Oh! my Gd!
wht is ths tht shts thrgh m, and lvs m s ddly clm, yt
expctnt,—fxd at th tp of a shddr! Ftr thngs swm bfr m,
as in empty otlns and skltns; all th pst is smhw grwn dm.
Mry, grl! th fdst in pl glrs bhnd m; by! I sm t s
bt thy eys grwn wndrs bl. Strngst prblms of lf sm
clrng; bt clds swp btwn—Is my jrny’s end cmng? My lgs
fl fnt; lk hs wh hs ftd it all dy. Fl thy hrt,—bts
it yt? Str thyslf, Strbck!—stv it off—mv, mv! spk
ald!—Mst-hd thr! S y my by’s hnd on th hll?—Crzd;—alft
thr!—kp thy knst ey upn th bts:—mrk wll th whl!—H!
agn!—drv off tht hwk! s! h pcks—h trs th vn”—pntng
t th rd flg flyng at th mn-trck—“H! h srs awy wth
it!—Whr’s th old mn nw? s’st th tht sght, oh Ahb!—shddr,
shddr!”

Th bts hd nt gn vry fr, whn by a sgnl frm th mst-hds—a
dwnwrd pntd arm, Ahb knw tht th whl hd sndd; bt
intndng t b nr hm at th nxt rsng, h hld on hs wy a
lttl sdwys frm th vssl; th bchrmd crw mntnng th
prfndst slnc, as th hd-bt wvs hmmrd and hmmrd
agnst th oppsng bw.

“Drv, drv in yr nls, oh y wvs! t thr uttrmst hds
drv thm in! y bt strk a thng wtht a ld; and n cffn and
n hrs cn b mn:—and hmp only cn kll m! H! h!”

Sddnly th wtrs arnd thm slwly swlld in brd crcls; thn
qckly uphvd, as if sdwys sldng frm a sbmrgd brg of ic,
swftly rsng t th srfc. A lw rmblng snd ws hrd; a
sbtrrns hm; and thn all hld thr brths; as bdrggld wth
trlng rps, and hrpns, and lncs, a vst frm sht lngthws,
bt oblqly frm th s. Shrdd in a thn drpng vl of mst,
it hvrd fr a mmnt in th rnbwd ar; and thn fll swmpng
bck int th dp. Crshd thrty ft upwrds, th wtrs flshd fr
an instnt lk hps of fntns, thn brknly snk in a shwr of
flks, lvng th crclng srfc crmd lk nw mlk rnd th
mrbl trnk of th whl.

“Gv wy!” crd Ahb t th orsmn, and th bts drtd frwrd t
th attck; bt mddnd by ystrdy’s frsh irns tht crrdd in
hm, Mby Dck smd cmbndly pssssd by all th angls tht fll
frm hvn. Th wd trs of wldd tndns ovrsprdng hs brd
wht frhd, bnth th trnsprnt skn, lkd knttd tgthr;
as hd on, h cm chrnng hs tl amng th bts; and onc mr
flld thm aprt; spllng ot th irns and lncs frm th tw
mts’ bts, and dshng in on sd of th uppr prt of thr bws,
bt lvng Ahb’s almst wtht a scr.

Whl Dgg and Qqg wr stppng th strnd plnks; and as th
whl swmmng ot frm thm, trnd, and shwd on entr flnk as h
sht by thm agn; at tht mmnt a qck cry wnt up. Lshd rnd
and rnd t th fsh’s bck; pnnd in th trns upn trns in
whch, drng th pst nght, th whl hd rld th invltns of
th lns arnd hm, th hlf trn bdy of th Prs ws sn; hs
sbl rmnt fryd t shrds; hs dstndd eys trnd fll upn old
Ahb.

Th hrpn drppd frm hs hnd.

“Bfld, bfld!”—drwng in a lng ln brth—“Ay, Prs! I s
th agn.—Ay, and th gst bfr; and ths, _ths_ thn is th
hrs tht th ddst prms. Bt I hld th t th lst lttr of
thy wrd. Whr is th scnd hrs? Awy, mts, t th shp! ths
bts ar uslss nw; rpr thm if y cn in tm, and rtrn t m;
if nt, Ahb is engh t d—Dwn, mn! th frst thng tht bt
offrs t jmp frm ths bt I stnd in, tht thng I hrpn. Y ar
nt othr mn, bt my arms and my lgs; and s oby m.—Whr’s th
whl? gn dwn agn?”

Bt h lkd t ngh th bt; fr as if bnt upn escpng wth th
crps h br, and as if th prtclr plc of th lst encntr
hd bn bt a stg in hs lwrd vyg, Mby Dck ws nw agn
stdly swmmng frwrd; and hd almst pssd th shp,—whch ths
fr hd bn slng in th cntrry drctn t hm, thgh fr th
prsnt hr hdwy hd bn stppd. H smd swmmng wth hs
utmst vlcty, and nw only intnt upn prsng hs own strght
pth in th s.

“Oh! Ahb,” crd Strbck, “nt t lt is it, evn nw, th thrd
dy, t dsst. S! Mby Dck sks th nt. It is th, th, tht
mdly skst hm!”

Sttng sl t th rsng wnd, th lnly bt ws swftly implld
t lwrd, by bth ors and cnvs. And at lst whn Ahb ws sldng
by th vssl, s nr as plnly t dstngsh Strbck’s fc as h
lnd ovr th rl, h hld hm t trn th vssl abt, and
fllw hm, nt t swftly, at a jdcs intrvl. Glncng upwrds,
h sw Tshtg, Qqg, and Dgg, egrly mntng t th thr
mst-hds; whl th orsmn wr rckng in th tw stvd bts
whch hd bt jst bn hstd t th sd, and wr bsly at wrk in
rprng thm. On aftr th othr, thrgh th prt-hls, as h
spd, h als cght flyng glmpss of Stbb and Flsk, bsyng
thmslvs on dck amng bndls of nw irns and lncs. As h sw all
ths; as h hrd th hmmrs in th brkn bts; fr othr hmmrs
smd drvng a nl int hs hrt. Bt h rlld. And nw mrkng
tht th vn or flg ws gn frm th mn-mst-hd, h shtd t
Tshtg, wh hd jst gnd tht prch, t dscnd agn fr anthr
flg, and a hmmr and nls, and s nl it t th mst.

Whthr fggd by th thr dys’ rnnng chs, and th rsstnc t
hs swmmng in th knttd hmpr h br; or whthr it ws sm
ltnt dctflnss and mlc in hm: whchvr ws tr, th Wht
Whl’s wy nw bgn t abt, as it smd, frm th bt s rpdly
nrng hm onc mr; thgh indd th whl’s lst strt hd nt
bn s lng a on as bfr. And stll as Ahb gldd ovr th wvs
th unptyng shrks accmpnd hm; and s prtncsly stck t
th bt; and s cntnlly bt at th plyng ors, tht th blds
bcm jggd and crnchd, and lft smll splntrs in th s, at
almst evry dp.

“Hd thm nt! ths tth bt gv nw rwlcks t yr ors. Pll
on! ’ts th bttr rst, th shrk’s jw thn th yldng wtr.”

“Bt at evry bt, sr, th thn blds grw smllr and smllr!”

“Thy wll lst lng engh! pll on!—Bt wh cn tll”—h
mttrd—“whthr ths shrks swm t fst on th whl or on
Ahb?—Bt pll on! Ay, all alv, nw—w nr hm. Th hlm! tk th
hlm! lt m pss,”—and s syng tw of th orsmn hlpd hm frwrd
t th bws of th stll flyng bt.

At lngth as th crft ws cst t on sd, and rn rngng alng wth
th Wht Whl’s flnk, h smd strngly oblvs of its
advnc—as th whl smtms wll—and Ahb ws frly wthn th
smky mntn mst, whch, thrwn off frm th whl’s spt, crld
rnd hs grt, Mndnck hmp; h ws evn ths cls t hm; whn,
wth bdy archd bck, and bth arms lngthws hgh-lftd t th
ps, h drtd hs frc irn, and hs fr frcr crs int th
htd whl. As bth stl and crs snk t th sckt, as if sckd
int a mrss, Mby Dck sdwys wrthd; spsmdclly rlld hs
ngh flnk agnst th bw, and, wtht stvng a hl in it, s
sddnly cntd th bt ovr, tht hd it nt bn fr th elvtd
prt of th gnwl t whch h thn clng, Ahb wld onc mr hv
bn tssd int th s. As it ws, thr of th orsmn—wh frknw
nt th prcs instnt of th drt, and wr thrfr unprprd fr
its effcts—ths wr flng ot; bt s fll, tht, in an instnt tw
of thm cltchd th gnwl agn, and rsng t its lvl on a
cmbng wv, hrld thmslvs bdly inbrd agn; th thrd mn
hlplssly drppng astrn, bt stll aflt and swmmng.

Almst smltnsly, wth a mghty vltn of ungrdtd,
instntns swftnss, th Wht Whl drtd thrgh th wltrng
s. Bt whn Ahb crd ot t th strsmn t tk nw trns wth
th ln, and hld it s; and cmmndd th crw t trn rnd on thr
sts, and tw th bt up t th mrk; th mmnt th trchrs ln
flt tht dbl strn and tg, it snppd in th empty ar!

“Wht brks in m? Sm snw crcks!—’ts whl agn; ors! ors!
Brst in upn hm!”

Hrng th trmnds rsh of th s-crshng bt, th whl whld
rnd t prsnt hs blnk frhd at by; bt in tht evltn,
ctchng sght of th nrng blck hll of th shp; smngly sng
in it th src of all hs prsctns; bthnkng it—it my b—a
lrgr and nblr f; of a sddn, h br dwn upn its advncng
prw, smtng hs jws amd fry shwrs of fm.

Ahb stggrd; hs hnd smt hs frhd. “I grw blnd; hnds!
strtch ot bfr m tht I my yt grp my wy. Is’t nght?”

“Th whl! Th shp!” crd th crngng orsmn.

“Ors! ors! Slp dwnwrds t thy dpths, O s, tht er it b fr
evr t lt, Ahb my sld ths lst, lst tm upn hs mrk! I
s: th shp! th shp! Dsh on, my mn! Wll y nt sv my shp?”

Bt as th orsmn vlntly frcd thr bt thrgh th
sldg-hmmrng ss, th bfr whl-smttn bw-ends of tw plnks
brst thrgh, and in an instnt almst, th tmprrly dsbld bt
ly nrly lvl wth th wvs; its hlf-wdng, splshng crw,
tryng hrd t stp th gp and bl ot th prng wtr.

Mntm, fr tht on bhldng instnt, Tshtg’s mst-hd hmmr
rmnd sspndd in hs hnd; and th rd flg, hlf-wrppng hm as
wth a pld, thn strmd itslf strght ot frm hm, as hs own
frwrd-flwng hrt; whl Strbck and Stbb, stndng upn th
bwsprt bnth, cght sght of th dwn-cmng mnstr jst as sn
as h.

“Th whl, th whl! Up hlm, up hlm! Oh, all y swt pwrs of
ar, nw hg m cls! Lt nt Strbck d, if d h mst, in a
wmn’s fntng ft. Up hlm, I sy—y fls, th jw! th jw! Is
ths th end of all my brstng pryrs? all my lf-lng fdlts?
Oh, Ahb, Ahb, l, thy wrk. Stdy! hlmsmn, stdy. Ny, ny! Up
hlm agn! H trns t mt us! Oh, hs unppsbl brw drvs on
twrds on, whs dty tlls hm h cnnt dprt. My Gd, stnd by m
nw!”

“Stnd nt by m, bt stnd undr m, whvr y ar tht wll nw
hlp Stbb; fr Stbb, t, stcks hr. I grn at th, th grnnng
whl! Wh evr hlpd Stbb, or kpt Stbb awk, bt Stbb’s own
unwnkng ey? And nw pr Stbb gs t bd upn a mttrss tht is
all t sft; wld it wr stffd wth brshwd! I grn at th,
th grnnng whl! Lk y, sn, mn, and strs! I cll y assssns
of as gd a fllw as evr sptd up hs ghst. Fr all tht, I wld
yt rng glsss wth y, wld y bt hnd th cp! Oh, oh! oh, oh!
th grnnng whl, bt thr’ll b plnty of glpng sn! Why fly y
nt, O Ahb! Fr m, off shs and jckt t it; lt Stbb d in hs
drwrs! A mst mldy and ovr sltd dth, thgh;—chrrs!
chrrs! chrrs! Oh, Flsk, fr on rd chrry er w d!”

“Chrrs? I only wsh tht w wr whr thy grw. Oh, Stbb, I hp
my pr mthr’s drwn my prt-py er ths; if nt, fw cpprs wll
nw cm t hr, fr th vyg is up.”

Frm th shp’s bws, nrly all th smn nw hng inctv; hmmrs,
bts of plnk, lncs, and hrpns, mchnclly rtnd in thr
hnds, jst as thy hd drtd frm thr vrs emplymnts; all
thr enchntd eys intnt upn th whl, whch frm sd t sd
strngly vbrtng hs prdstntng hd, snt a brd bnd of
ovrsprdng smcrclr fm bfr hm as h rshd. Rtrbtn,
swft vngnc, etrnl mlc wr in hs whl aspct, and spt of
all tht mrtl mn cld d, th sld wht bttrss of hs frhd
smt th shp’s strbrd bw, tll mn and tmbrs rld. Sm fll
flt upn thr fcs. Lk dsldgd trcks, th hds of th
hrpnrs alft shk on thr bll-lk ncks. Thrgh th brch,
thy hrd th wtrs pr, as mntn trrnts dwn a flm.

“Th shp! Th hrs!—th scnd hrs!” crd Ahb frm th bt;
“its wd cld only b Amrcn!”

Dvng bnth th sttlng shp, th whl rn qvrng alng its
kl; bt trnng undr wtr, swftly sht t th srfc agn, fr
off th othr bw, bt wthn a fw yrds of Ahb’s bt, whr, fr a
tm, h ly qscnt.

“I trn my bdy frm th sn. Wht h, Tshtg! lt m hr thy
hmmr. Oh! y thr unsrrndrd sprs of mn; th uncrckd kl;
and only gd-blld hll; th frm dck, and hghty hlm, and
Pl-pntd prw,—dth-glrs shp! mst y thn prsh, and
wtht m? Am I ct off frm th lst fnd prd of mnst
shpwrckd cptns? Oh, lnly dth on lnly lf! Oh, nw I fl
my tpmst grtnss ls in my tpmst grf. H, h! frm all yr
frthst bnds, pr y nw in, y bld bllws of my whl frgn
lf, and tp ths on pld cmbr of my dth! Twrds th I rll,
th all-dstryng bt uncnqrng whl; t th lst I grppl wth
th; frm hll’s hrt I stb at th; fr ht’s sk I spt my lst
brth at th. Snk all cffns and all hrss t on cmmn pl!
and snc nthr cn b mn, lt m thn tw t pcs, whl stll
chsng th, thgh td t th, th dmnd whl! _Ths_, I gv up
th spr!”

Th hrpn ws drtd; th strckn whl flw frwrd; wth igntng
vlcty th ln rn thrgh th grvs;—rn fl. Ahb stpd t
clr it; h dd clr it; bt th flyng trn cght hm rnd th
nck, and vclssly as Trksh mts bwstrng thr vctm, h ws
sht ot of th bt, er th crw knw h ws gn. Nxt instnt, th
hvy ey-splc in th rp’s fnl end flw ot of th strk-empty
tb, knckd dwn an orsmn, and smtng th s, dspprd in its
dpths.

Fr an instnt, th trncd bt’s crw std stll; thn trnd. “Th
shp? Grt Gd, whr is th shp?” Sn thy thrgh dm, bwldrng
mdms sw hr sdlng fdng phntm, as in th gss Ft
Mrgn; only th upprmst msts ot of wtr; whl fxd by
infttn, or fdlty, or ft, t thr onc lfty prchs, th
pgn hrpnrs stll mntnd thr snkng lkts on th s.
And nw, cncntrc crcls szd th ln bt itslf, and all its
crw, and ech fltng or, and evry lnc-pl, and spnnng,
anmt and innmt, all rnd and rnd in on vrtx, crrd th
smllst chp of th Pqd ot of sght.

Bt as th lst whlmngs intrmxngly prd thmslvs ovr th
snkn hd of th Indn at th mnmst, lvng a fw inchs of th
erct spr yt vsbl, tgthr wth lng strmng yrds of th flg,
whch clmly undltd, wth irncl cncdngs, ovr th dstryng
bllws thy almst tchd;—at tht instnt, a rd arm and a hmmr
hvrd bckwrdly uplftd in th opn ar, in th act of nlng th
flg fstr and yt fstr t th sbsdng spr. A sky-hwk tht
tntngly hd fllwd th mn-trck dwnwrds frm its ntrl hm
amng th strs, pckng at th flg, and incmmdng Tshtg thr;
ths brd nw chncd t intrcpt its brd flttrng wng btwn
th hmmr and th wd; and smltnsly flng tht ethrl
thrll, th sbmrgd svg bnth, in hs dth-gsp, kpt hs
hmmr frzn thr; and s th brd of hvn, wth archnglc
shrks, and hs imprl bk thrst upwrds, and hs whl cptv
frm fldd in th flg of Ahb, wnt dwn wth hs shp, whch, lk
Stn, wld nt snk t hll tll sh hd drggd a lvng prt of
hvn alng wth hr, and hlmtd hrslf wth it.

Nw smll fwls flw scrmng ovr th yt ywnng glf; a slln
wht srf bt agnst its stp sds; thn all cllpsd, and th
grt shrd of th s rlld on as it rlld fv thsnd yrs ag.


Eplg

“AND I ONLY AM ESCPD ALN T TLL TH” Jb.

Th drm’s dn. Why thn hr ds any on stp frth?—Bcs on
dd srvv th wrck.

It s chncd, tht aftr th Prs’s dspprnc, I ws h whm th
Fts ordnd t tk th plc of Ahb’s bwsmn, whn tht bwsmn
assmd th vcnt pst; th sm, wh, whn on th lst dy th thr
mn wr tssd frm ot of th rckng bt, ws drppd astrn. S,
fltng on th mrgn of th ensng scn, and in fll sght of it,
whn th hlfspnt sctn of th snk shp rchd m, I ws thn, bt
slwly, drwn twrds th clsng vrtx. Whn I rchd it, it hd
sbsdd t a crmy pl. Rnd and rnd, thn, and evr cntrctng
twrds th bttn-lk blck bbbl at th axs of tht slwly
whlng crcl, lk anthr Ixn I dd rvlv. Tll, gnng tht
vtl cntr, th blck bbbl upwrd brst; and nw, lbrtd by
rsn of its cnnng sprng, and, owng t its grt byncy, rsng
wth grt frc, th cffn lf-by sht lngthws frm th s,
fll ovr, and fltd by my sd. Byd up by tht cffn, fr almst
on whl dy and nght, I fltd on a sft and drglk mn. Th
unhrmng shrks, thy gldd by as if wth pdlcks on thr mths;
th svg s-hwks sld wth shthd bks. On th scnd dy, a
sl drw nr, nrr, and pckd m up at lst. It ws th
dvs-crsng Rchl, tht in hr rtrcng srch aftr hr mssng
chldrn, only fnd anthr orphn.




