    Women’s Place in Diplomacy through the French Diplomatic
             Correspondences (Early 17th Century)
                                                Camille Desenclos



      To cite this version:
     Camille Desenclos. Women’s Place in Diplomacy through the French Diplomatic Correspondences (Early
     17th Century). Roberta Anderson, Laura Olivan Santaliestra, et Suna Suner (dir.). Gender and Diplomacy:
     Women and Men in European Embassies from the 15th to the 18th Century, Hollitzer, pp.45-61, 2021,
     9783990128343. ⟨hal-04071983⟩




                                        HAL Id: hal-04071983
                      https://u-picardie.hal.science/hal-04071983v1
                                           Submitted on 27 Sep 2024




    HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive             L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est des-
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-        tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
search documents, whether they are published or not.       tifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant
The documents may come from teaching and research          des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-   français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
vate research centers.                                     privés.


 Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY-ND 4.0 - Attribution - No Derivative Works - International
                                             License
    WOMENʼS PLACE IN DIPLOMACY THROUGH THE FRENCH DIPLOMATIC
         CORRESPONDENCES IN THE EARLY SEVENTEENTH CENTURY


                                        CAMILLE DESENCLOS
                                     (MULHOUSE, UPPER ALSACE)




In the early seventeenth century, while women could occasionally be requested to take part, or even
to lead, some diplomatic negotiations, they seemed to be excluded from the daily practice of French
diplomacy. Official diplomatic offices were indeed reserved for men – only men could be appointed
as ambassadors, residents, agents or even as official informants. No official diplomatic, or even
political, charge could be assigned to a woman. Women were, however, omnipresent at the court:
they were the wives of ambassadors, ministers, princes or kings and participated as such to the court
life. The European sociability relied on them. Moreover, if women appeared to have been mostly
considered as untrustworthy for political matters, some of them could reach the head of the state, like
Marie de Medici1 (1575-1642), the French regent between 1610 and 1617,2 or Isabella Clara Eugenia
(1566-1633), co-sovereign (1598-1621) then governess of the Spanish Netherlands (1621-1633).3
This questions the real position of women, especially of female sovereigns, in the French diplomatic
practice.



1
     French historiography has for a long time been quite critical of Marie de Medici and took up
     various pamphlets from her opponents which represented her as a queen of low intelligence and
     high susceptibility. The biography from Jean-François Dubost redefines her personality and gives
     her back a political place as ruler of the kingdom in the 1610s. See Jean-François Dubost: Marie
     de Médicis: la reine dévoilée. Paris: Payot, 2009.
2
     Marie de Medici's regency ended in 1614 when the majority of the king is proclaimed. The young
     king decided however to nominate his mother as head of the Council. She assumed government
     until April 1617.
3
     When Archduke Albert died in July 1621, the Infanta Isabella lost her status of co-sovereign and
     governed in the name of the Spanish King until her death in 1633. Unfortunately, the Low
     Countries have not aroused much interest from historians, although recent international works
     begin to fill the gap. See Luc Duerloo: Dynasty and Piety: Archduke Albert (1598–1621) and
     Habsburg political culture in an age of religious wars. Farnham: Ashgate, 2012; Cordula van
     Wyhe (ed): Isabel Clara Eugenia: female sovereignty in the Courts of Madrid and Bruxelles.
     Madrid/London: Centro de Estudios Europea Hispanica / Paul Holberton publishing, 2011.


                                                   1
As the major communication tool of early modern diplomacy, correspondence appears to offer a solid
way to overcome this seeming diplomatic inactivity of women
. The permanent diplomatic agent, as a central member of the diplomatic system, had to relate
precisely each event at a foreign court, so that the secretary of state, and the monarch could fully
understand the foreign situation and adapt to it the French foreign policy. Letters were, for them, the
only way to transmit this information and in return receive orders and advice. Thus, letters stand as
reports whose regularity allows a continuous epistolary flow. Diplomatic work was governed by the
frequency of these letters and remained within the male preserve. Writings produced by an embassy
or a residency (letters, reports, even attachments like copies of letters or documents), and on which
we depend to study women were composed by men. This male domination of the writing process
undoubtedly skews our understanding of the diplomatic practice; and the objectivity of their narrative
and analyses has to be questioned. The sources cannot reflect the reality of early modern diplomacy
but only a male-constructed reality which merges the conception of the agents and an adapted
representation of their practice in order to please their sovereign. As women had no place in the
official diplomatic structure, nor in the writing process, they would appear to be almost excluded
from any representation of diplomatic life. In fact, a hundred and seventeen letters only, within a
corpus of more than 15004 , mention women, yet they do reveal various interaction levels within
diplomatic life (the ambassadorʼs wife, another diplomat’s wife, the foreign sovereign's wife, their
own queen).


                     THE AMBASSADOR'S WIFE AS PART OF THE DOMESTIC LIFE


At the beginning of the seventeenth century, the ambassador's wife had no official status in French
diplomacy, nor were they mentioned in their husband's official instructions. They were not even
constrained to follow their husbands abroad. Unlike their men, whose representative duties required
to stay continuously at an assigned foreign court, the wives could move, almost, as often as they
wanted and stay only part of the time with their husbands. Anne Parfait, the wife of Nicolas de
Baugy,5 the French resident to the Imperial Court from 1601 to 1623, returned to France several times,

4
    Semantic analyses have been conducted only in a part of this corpus. These 1500 letters were
    written to the king or secretary of state by the French resident in the Holy Roman Empire between
    1617 and 1624.

5 We do not know much about the private life of French agents like Nicolas de Baugy whose lifetime
  presents to historians three major issues: low-ranking nobility, minor political positions (residents
  and not ambassadors) and a long-time dedication to abroad diplomatic duties (twenty-two years at

                                                   2
mostly in order to give birth,6 while her husband continued at the Imperial Court. The wife of Jean
Hotman, the French resident to the Protestant Union from 1609 to 1614,7 joined her husband in April
1611, two years after his arrival in Düsseldorf.8 The few references to ambassador's wives in their
husband's letters do not allow us to determine whether a case is an exception or the common situation,
but clearly reveal a real separation between private and diplomatic life. As long as both did not
interfere with each other, the diplomatic agents had no reason to write about private matters.9


These examples tend, however, to record some diplomatic uselessness by the ambassadorʼs wife in
the accomplishment of her husbandʼs duties. 1011But, if wives belonged to the private sphere, the


     the Imperial court, four years at the Bruxelles court, four years in the Dutch Republic). Moreover,
     only a few personal papers have been preserved and are mostly about financial matters (Laval,
     Archives départementales de la Mayenne, 6J24). Consequently, we know little about Anne Parfait
     other than she was the daughter of Guillaume Parfait, controller at the kingʼs house, and gave to
     Nicolas de Baugy four children (Bibliothèque nationale de France, Chérin 18, “Baugy”).
6
     Unfortunately we do not know the length of her absences. Baugy mentions only the departures of
     his wife, often in order to ask for permission (cf. Infra).
7
     Because of his work, L'ambassadeur, Jean Hotman is better known than many other French agents
     in the Holy Roman Empire. Nevertheless, most of the historical and biographical studies focus on
     his literary work more than his diplomatic activity. See, for example, Mona Garloff: Irenik,
     Gelehrsamkeit und Politik : Jean Hotman und der europäische Religionskonflikt um 1600.
     Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 2014, which is mostly dedicated to Hotman's irenic attitude
     and literary production.
8
     Louis XIII: Passport to Mme Hotman, Fontainebleau, 18 April 1611. Paris, Bibliothèque nationale
     de France, Français [fr.]4030, fol. 4.
9
     As soon as letters became less official, references to women increase. Most of them can indeed be
     found in private letters between agents or between an agent and a foreign, but friendly, minister.
     Georg-Michel von Lingelsheim, Palatine minister and friend of Étienne de Sainte-Catherine, often
     ended his letters with the following: “Ma femme et enfans vous baisent les mains” (Georg-Michel
     von Lingelsheim: Letter to Étienne de Sainte-Catherine, Heidelberg, 4 May 1620. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 4122, fol. 3).
10
     Camille Desenclos:, Les mots du pouvoir: la communication politique de la France dans le Saint-
     Empire au début de la guerre de Trente Ans (1617-1624)., PhD diss., École nationale des
     chartes/Université Paris-Sorbonne, 2014, t. 1, pp. 114–115.
11
     While Lingelsheim often sends Sainte-Catherine his wife's regards, there are never any reciprocal
     comments from Sainte-Catherine. The French resident himself never speaks about a wife or
     children, unlike other agents whose letters were punctuated by familial evocations.


                                                    3
boundary between domestic and diplomatic life seems to indicate some porosity. Jean Hotman
highlighteds in his work Lʼambassadeur (1603), the importance of a diplomatic agent taking his wife
abroad with him, so that she could watch over his household and thus avoid any behaviour amongst
the domestic staff which might cause prejudice to the kingʼs creditreputation:
         Pour revenir à ses domestiques, nostre ambassadeur ne pouvant tousjours avoir lʼoeil sur eux,
         tant pour sa dignité que pour les occupations de sa charge, le meilleur sera, sʼil peut, mener sa
         femme avec luy, lʼoeil de laquelle arrestera sans doute infinies débauches de ses gens et de
         desordre en sa maison.12
Hotman, however, did not mention any role for the ambassadorʼs wife regarding watching the
behaviour of the diplomatic staff.
Crossover between the private and diplomatic spheres nevertheless punctuated the agentsʼ letters.
Baugy, for example, applied in September 1619,13 and again in December 162014 for leave in order
to escort his pregnant wife to Paris and protect her from the dangers of traveling such a distance As
a diplomatic agent could not leave his diplomatic duties without permission from his king, Baugy had
to mention his private life in his diplomatic letters. Used here as an argument in the request, the
ambassadorʼs wife could also be used as justification in order to cover a fault. In September 1619,
Jean Péricard,
French resident to the Archdukes of Flanders (1616-1624),15 left Bruxelles, without asking or even
warning the king or the secretary of state that a burgherʼs rebellion in Bruxelles might cause him
danger. If Péricard did not left the Spanish Netherlands, he did not stay close to the Archdukes and
failed in his representative duty. Péricard immediately blamed his wife, rather than trying to justify
himself:
         Elles, ma femme et ma fille qui est grosse, et Madame de Cheneveille qui est par deça pour
         affaires, ne mʼayent emmené à Villeworde deux lieues de cette ville, où la pluspart des
         officiers et principales familles sʼestoyent retirez, je me laissay emporter à la foyblesse des
         femmes qui ne prevoyent seureté quʼen mon assistance […] Lʼalarme neantmoins ne pouvoyt


12
     Jean Hotman: L'ambassadeur. [Paris]: n.d., 1603, pp. 32–33.
13
     Nicolas de Baugy: Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux, Francfort, 6 September 1619. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 15929, fol. 373.
14
     Nicolas de Baugy: Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux, Vienna, 12 December 1620. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 15930, fol. 512.
15
     Camille Desenclos, Les mots du pouvoir, t. 1, p. 116–118.


                                                     4
         estre que tres grande comme il a esté en verité et pouvoyt esmouvoir quelque inconvenient
         quʼil a esté bon dʼeviter puisque nul devoir ne nous obligeoit dʼy participer.16


In both Baugy and Péricardʼs correspondence, the womenʼs mentions meet the diplomatic needs
(leave, justification and so on). Women might be outside of the diplomatic sphere but could modify
its course either by their own existence or, sometimes, by a more direct interference in diplomatic
life.
In July 1617, Péricard sent his wife to Paris in order to put down the numerous rumours circulating
against him.17 For several weeks prior to this, he faced up to insinuations made by César de Bourbon,
duke of Vendôme (1594-1665)18 and to direct accusations made by Leonora Galigai (1568-1617),19
Concino Conciniʼs wife, who both reported close contacts between the French agent and Concini.20
Péricardʼs wife, Madeleine Galmet,21 had to prove her husbandʼs fidelity to the French king. Insofar
as Péricard only mentionned his wifeʼs journey to the French court, we cannot determine her exact
participation in her husbandʼs defence: she could have been only carrying Péricardʼs letters or
explaining in detail her husbandʼs actions to the king. The latter hypothesis would imply the exchange
of political information between Péricard and his wife and her participation in, or at least close



16
     Jean Péricard: Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux, Bruxelles, 25 September 1619. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 16132, fol. 228.
17
     Jean Péricard: Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux, Bruxelles, 7 July 1617. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 16131, fol. 98.
18
     Jean Péricard: Letter to Nicolas de Neufville, seigneur de Villeroy, Bruxelles, 24 May 1617. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 16131, fol. 52.
19
     Ernest de Bouteiller and Eugène Heppe: Correspondance politique adressée au magistrat de
     Strasbourg par ses agents à Metz (1594–1683). Paris: Berger-Levrault, 1882, pp. 157.
20
     The dazzling rise of Concino Concini, Marie de Medici's favourite, crystallized hatred from the
     nobility, then from the whole kingdom. On April 24th, 1617, Concini was killed while being
     arrested and Marie de Medici excluded from the royal government: Louis Batiffol: “Le coup d'État
     du 24 avril 1617”, in: Revue historique 95 (1907), pp. 292–308; Hélène Duccini: Concini :
     grandeur et misère du favori de Marie de Médicis. Paris: A. Michel, 1991.
21
     As for Anne Parfait, we know little about Marie Galmet, a daughter of a president of Orléans's
     bureau des finances. She had only one child with Péricard, a daughter who married Baron Poilley.
     See, Madeleine Galmet: Testament, Paris, 16 January 1626. Paris, Archives Nationales,
     ET/CV/267.


                                                    5
observation of the diplomatic practice. Péricard sent her to the French court again in May 1619,22 and
then, in April 1620,23 in order to complain, at both times, about the late payment of Péricardʼs wages
and to request a rise, as life at the Bruxelles court would be more expensive than everywhere else in
the Holy Roman Empire.24
Péricard was, however, the only French agent in the Holy Roman Empire who involved his wife
outside of the domestic sphere. The reception given to his wife in Paris suggests that this involvement,
whose frequency, in Péricardʼs case, was made easier by the geographical proximity of Bruxelles,25
was neither exceptional nor misplaced. Above all, Madeleine Galmetʼs missions were never directly
bound up in diplomatic practice but to the domestic or private sphere. Diplomatic matters such as
passing on sensitive information or collecting new orders belonged to the secretary of the embassy.
But, if domestic and diplomatic matters seemed distinct because Galmetʼs missions concerned
Péricard as a private individual rather than a diplomat, they did, in fact, influence his diplomatic future
and actions. The accusations, which he had to face up to after Conciniʼs death, could have led to his
dismissal.26


               THE AMBASSADORʼS WIFE AS A DIPLOMATIC EXTENSION OF HER HUSBAND




22
     Jean Péricard: Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux, Bruxelles, 8 May 1619. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 16132, fol. 133.
23
     Jean Péricard: Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux, Bruxelles, 3 April 1620. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 16132, fol. 353.
24
     This kind of claim is recurrent in diplomatic letters. A diplomatic charge rarely led to fortune but
     required, on the contrary, being independently wealthy in order to be able to assume the diplomatic
     expenses. In Péricard's case nevertheless, the claims were justified. The wages for French agents
     in the Holy Roman Empire were much lower. Péricard received only 12000 livres (each year),
     while the French ambassador to the Papal court received 42000 livres and the French ambassadors
     in Spain, England and Venezia 18000 livres (Camille Desenclos: Les mots du pouvoir, t. 1, p. 127–
     129).

25 Paris could be reached from Bruxelles in a few days and despite the outbreak of the Thirty Years
    War, roads remained safe, as the armies were fighting further east.
26
   In fact, they already caused some disgrace: Péricard had been demoted from ambassador to
   resident. The personal nature of this sanction is certain: Péricard attributed this demotion as a
   sanction for his supposed links with Concini (Jean Péricard: Letter to Nicolas de Neufville,
   seigneur de Villeroy, Bruxelles, 27 April 1617. Paris, Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 16125,
   fol. 317). Pericard's successor, Nicolas de Baugy, would be sent as ambassador.


                                                     6
In the early modern period, private and public spheres could not be strictly separated. By helping her
husband in personal matters as discussed above, the ambassadorʼs wife experienced a porosity
between the private and public. Court life led her further in to a middle path. As she managed the
household, it fell to her, at her husbandʼs side, to welcome the French noblemen, who travelled
through Bruxelles,27 as well as every extraordinary French ambassador, for whom Péricard had to
organise grand events and banquets at their arrival in order to enhance the importance of their
diplomatic mission and the French king's reputation.28 Thus, when Gaspard III de Coligny, duke of
Chastillon (1584-1646), broke his journey to The Hague at Bruxelles, Madeleine Galmet kept him
company:
         Monsieur de Chastillon a passé en cette ville depuis six jours allant en Holande et mʼayant
         envoyé prier par lʼun des sieurs de luy envoyer ung carrosse pour me venir veoyr, je le feuz à
         lʼinstant trouver en son hostellerye, luy fey offre de mon logis avec tout lʼhonneur que je sçay
         estre deu à sa qualité et à son merite, mais estant pressé de passer il ne le voulut accepter et
         nʼa sejourné icy quʼune apres-disnée et nʼa faict aulcune visite que de nous, ayant pris la peine
         de nous venir veoyr peu apres dans mon carrosse que je luy envoyay. Il passa le reste du jour
         avec ma femme et la baronne de Poilley, ma fille, et moy jusques à sept heures du soir que la
         barque dʼAnvers partoit.29


If the ambassadorʼs wife performed here a social function, her mention in Péricardʼs letter takes on a
diplomatic stance. This account is anything but anecdotal as is shown by the lengthy account the
letter: Péricard wanted to testify that he had taken care, according to his duties, of this high-ranking
French nobleman. His wifeʼs behaviour, thus, gained a diplomatic element, such as at a dinner or in
a coach, which allowed him to both accomplish his duties and to show the quality of his work to the
secretary of state.


Making use of his wife in the diplomatic sphere was not only evidenced by internal French business,
but also over-spilled into the European scene. Péricardʼs wife took part in the main events of the

27
     Every French nobleman had to greet the French ambassador in Bruxelles as representative of the
     king, so that the monarchy can keep watch and control the French nobility, even abroad.
28
     Jean Péricard: Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux, Bruxelles, 11 May 1619. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 16132, fol. 135.
29
     Jean Péricard: Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux, Bruxelles, 7 December 1617. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 16131, fol. 451.


                                                     7
Bruxelles court 30 as she attended the public audiences of the Infanta Isabella. 31 Péricard placed
himself and his family, inside the Court, unlike Baugy who never wrote about such interactions by
either his wife or himself. If the Bruxelles court outshone by its splendour the Imperial court, Baugyʼs
behaviour was caused by a latent hostility between the house of Habsburg and the French king which
prevented him to gain any attention from the Imperial counsellors. However, Baugy did not live out
of the Imperial Court but in its margins, reaching the center of the Court life only when necessary.
But while Baugy did not write about his participation to the Court life, why did Péricard mention the
participation of his wife and daughter to Court events? Once again, the ambassadorʼs wife served as
proof. As the kingʼs representative, the ambassador enjoyed a high position at Court, which had to
be maintained at all costs. The ambassadorʼs wife, as an extension of her husbandʼs person, demanded
the same consideration at Court as that afforded him. Invitations to ballets, comedies, and her place
at Court testified to the quality of the ambassadorʼs integration inside the Bruxelles Court, the
fulfillment of his diplomatic duties and the respect of a foreign sovereign for the kingʼs status and
reputation through the ambassador and his wifeʼs persons.32


Despite the rare references, the diplomatic function of the ambassadorʼs wife was not insignificant.
In May 1622, the chapín (a Spanish overshoe) of Péricardʼs wife was thrown from a window by
another lady of the Court during a public audience with the Infanta. Péricard immediately considered
himself, and, by extension the king, as offended. This case is everything but anecdotal. Péricard wrote
a long and fully detailed letter about this event, 33 then another one, five days later, about its
consequences.34 No details were forgotten by the French resident: the immediate displeasure of the


30
     In February 1620, Péricard related that his wife and daughter, like several other women of the
     court, had taken part in the comedy and ballet which was organised by the Infanta (Jean Péricard:
     Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux, Bruxelles, 29 February 1620. Paris, Bibliothèque
     nationale de France, fr. 16132, fol. 333).
31
     Jean Péricard: Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux, Bruxelles, 12 May 1622. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 17891, fol. 389.
32
     “Demain se jouera et dansera la comedie et le ballet des dames du palais dont ma femme et la
     baronne de Poilley ma fille sont prises de la part de l'Infante” (Jean Péricard: Letter to Pierre
     Brulart, viscount Puisieux, Bruxelles, 29 February 1620. Paris, Bibliothèque nationale de France,
     fr. 16132, fol. 333).
33
     Jean Péricard: Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux, Bruxelles, 12 May 1622. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 17891, fol. 389.
34
     Jean Péricard: Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux, Bruxelles, 15 May 1622. Paris,

                                                   8
Infanta, her promise of punishment, her gift of a new overshoe to Péricardʼs wife. The story can be
followed almost hour by hour. In fact, Péricardʼs diplomatic status prevented the incident from being
regarded as a simple quarrel between two women. His status turned any insult, even a personal one,
into an insult against the French king. Péricard did not develop in his letter the origins and reasons of
this quarrel, they did not matter, only the event itself and its outcomes did. Péricard had to report it
before others informed the French king and turned it into a major diplomatic incident. The quick
management by the Infanta through a Council meeting, corroborates the potential diplomatic extent
of this quarrel. Péricard himself acknowledged that the Infantaʼs response was the result of “le respect
du roi en ma personne [qui] luy estoit si cher”.35 If Péricardʼs wife indirectly took advantage of her
husbandʼs diplomatic protection despite not fulfilling a representative function, its transposition into
action inserted her in to the diplomatic field and made her a passive actor, nay a subject of attention
within the diplomatic ceremonial. Insofar as the ambassadorʼs wife depended on her husbandʼs
person, she took part, by her own presence at court, in the defence of her kingʼs glory and could,
therefore, be considered as a diplomatic and not only a social extension of her husbandʼs person.


In June 1621, as Baugy related in one of his letters,36 the new nuncio, Carlo Caraffa (1584-1644)37
arrived in Vienna. As a new ambassador in a foreign Court, he should be visited by each other foreign
representative. Through his behaviour and the sequence of his visits to the foreign agents, the new
nuncio had to express the nature of the relationship between the Pope and the other European
sovereigns as well as their places within the European hierarchy. When Caraffa arrived in Vienna,
Baugy visited him. The nuncio, however, did not pay a return visit, although he asked twice to visit
Baugyʼs wife, who was constrained by her husband to decline and exposed her political and
diplomatic dependence on her husband. Baugy expressed clearly the reasons of his refusal in a letter
to the French secretary of state. The rules of European diplomacy forced the nuncio to visit him and
not his wife. Any other process would question the French kingʼs status and reputation. The visit
which the nuncio had paid to the Spanish ambassador made the case even more complex, as the


     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 17891, fol. 390v.
35
     Ibidem.
36
     Nicolas de Baugy: Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux. Vienna, 9 June 1621. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 15931, fol. 271.
37
     Johannes Paul Anthieny: Der päbstliche Nuntius Carl Caraffa: ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der
     Deissigjährigen Krieges. Berlin: Nietack, 1869.


                                                    9
relationship between the French and the Spanish diplomacies was rather tense, especially at the
Imperial court.38 By not visiting the French resident, the nuncio would grant the Spanish ambassador
precedence over the French and demonstrated the Popeʼs preference for the Spanish king. As the
Papacy did not want to formally break with the French, the nuncio seized on the pretext of a visit to
the French residentʼs wife. Baugy was fully aware that the nuncio did not really wish to visit his wife
but was using it in order to visit him without expressing it officially. In this way, Baugyʼs wife became
a diplomatic tool, a way to flatter the Spanish diplomacy by according them precedence, without
breaking with the French. Baugy himself called it a pretext: “pour me donner quelque contentement,
il sʼestoit offert de venir ceans souz pretexte de visiter ma femme et quʼaprez il mʼeust aussy veu non
comme ministre du roy mais comme son amy et personne privé”.39 Whatever Baugyʼs displeasure,
the nuncio would not reconsider and visit him. In return, Baugy refused, from that point, to interact
with him.
Beyond the latent hostility between the French and Spanish kings, this quarrel points, once again, to
the diplomatic function of the ambassadorʼs wife as conceived by the diplomatic agents themselves:
she belonged to the private sphere – through her, the nuncio would have visited Baugy as a ʼprivate
personʼ – but was close enough to the diplomatic sphere to intervene and assume a passive function
when needed to serve the diplomatic interests of her sovereign or fill in for her husband. Like Baugyʼs
wife, women did not personally intervene in the diplomatic sphere; they were used, sometimes even
manipulated, used by male agents without any real involvement on their part. It is, however, tricky to
estimate the exact rate of their interaction in the diplomatic field: did they remain only as passive
actresses through their presence at Court or had they to represent and defend more actively, their
king? On the account of her relations with many Court ladies, Madeleine Galmet could be employed
to collect additional information. Such a use was never acknowledged in her husbandʼs letters; but


38
     Quarrels over precedence between the French and Spanish kings had underlaid public ceremonies
     since the sixteenth century. As the French king presented himself as the first of the Christian kings
     and the “elder son of the Catholic Church”, he claimed precedence over the other European
     sovereigns. Since the mid-sixteenth century however, Philipp II of Spain questioned the French
     kingʼs place as he actively would defend more actively the Catholic faith. Furthermore, precedence
     over the French resident would be granted to the Spanish ambassador by the Emperor, as member
     of the same house of Habsburg and would alter the French King's reputation: Alain Tallon:
     L'Europe au XVIe siècle: États et relations internationales. Paris: Presses universitaires de France,
     2010, pp. 130–131.
39
     Nicolas de Baugy: Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux. Vienna, 9 June 1621. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 15931, fol. 271.


                                                    10
perhaps the ambassador protected his wife by only noting her actions anonymously. Neither
hypotheses can be proved nor denied. Several visits to Madeleine Galmet certainly turned into
diplomatic meetings, like in June 1619 that of the Countess of Bucquoy whose husband led the
Imperial armies. During this visit, Péricard took the opportunity to reaffirm the French kingʼs desire
to see the Bohemian troubles settled and to collect new information on the Imperial situation. 40
However, from this point, the discussion was led by Péricard. Madeleine Galmet appeared to have
been put aside as soon as the discussion became diplomatic.


                            WHEN PRIVATE BECOMES PUBLIC: THE QUEEN


         The ambivalence of the womenʼs diplomatic place, private and public, and their role, passive
and/or active, was even bigger for princesses and queens. Although they were undoubtedly public
persons, they were, almost, always referenced for what should belong to the private sphere:41 birth,
marriage, pregnancy, illness, death. These private events were, in fact, the most public in Europe
according to their influence on European diplomatic balance, especially in regard to pregnancies
which would make a succession easier. Through their “actions”, queens took an equal part in the
future of a state and its foreign policy. Each event was thus fully related by ambassadors. They did
not present, however, the princesses or queens as women but only as indirect, almost involuntary,
actresses of European politic and diplomatic life. When Zsuzsanna Karolyi, Bethlen Gaborʼs wife,
died in 1622, Baugy related and analysed immediately the consequences of this opportune death: it
could open the way to a remarriage between Bethlen Gabor, prince of Transylvania (1613-1629) and
the contested king of Hungary (1620-1621), and the daughter of the duke von Jägerndorf, one of the
leaders of the Protestant Union, giving rise to discontent amongst the Hungarians who seemed to be
wearied by their alliance with the Palatine faction.42
The female condition, however, prevented queens from taking an official part in the diplomatic game.


40
     Jean Péricard: Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux, Bruxelles, 11 June 1619. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 15931, fol. 271.
41
     Queens were both subjects and sovereigns. Their marriages created a subjection to their royal
     husbands but transferred to them also a royal status which conferred to each of their actions a
     political value (Fanny Cosandey: La reine de France: symbole et pouvoir XVe–XVIIIe siècles.
     Paris: Gallimard, 2000, pp. 114–116).
42
     Nicolas de Baugy: Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux, Vienna, 1st June 1622. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 15932, fol. 154.


                                                   11
They had to wait for an upgrade of their political status, such as regent or governor, in order to be
considered no more as a woman but as a sovereign. They integrated as such fully into the diplomatic
field and were mentioned in the same way as male sovereigns: about negotiations, audiences, foreign
policy, etc. thus, in the 1610s, Isabella was mentioned in Péricardʼs letters, mainly concerning Court
matters 43 or, as she co-governed with Archduke Albert44 , about joint audiences. During Albertʼs
illness in 1619, the rate of Court and diplomatic references tended to balance out: the Infanta had to
undertake alone the audiences and became thus a full diplomatic actor. After Albertʼs death, this rate
was totally reversed. The references to Court life disappeared or mingled with the diplomatic
references. In the same audience, the Infanta would discuss Court, family and diplomacy:


         Selon la coustume et les ceremonies ordinaires de cette Cour, je donnay hier à lʼInfante les
         bonnes Pasques de la Nativité de Nostre Seigneur et luy repetay en peu de paroles nostre
         attente dʼune finale et tres expresse ordonnance du roy dʼEspagne pour lʼexecution du traicté
         de Madrid dont je ne lʼimportunoy point davantage sçachant sa bonne et sincere intention. Et
         sur ce que je luy diz de bonne sorte et dʼune façon complaisante quʼelle tenoyt lʼequilibre de
         lʼamitié et bonne intelligence entre les deux couronnes et que lʼon sʼen prendroyt à elle si ce
         fascheux affaire la traversoyt, je ne vous sçauroy dignement representer les nouvelles
         asseurances quʼelle mʼa donné que tout sʼacheveroyt au contentement du roy esperant que le
         courrier que Sa Majesté a despeché en Espagne le rapportera tout entiere. Elle sʼest informée
         à lʼaccoustumée de la santé de Sa Majesté, estant tres aise de lʼarrivée de la royne à Paris à
         qui elle a envoyé ce jour dʼhuy deux muletz chargez de diverses quaisses pleines de presens.45


The disappearance of gender-related references to female sovereigns can be observed both in the
ambassadorsʼ and the queensʼ letters. First, no differences between a letter written by a king or by a

43
     “Je ne doibz obmettre les honnestes paroles que l'Infante me dict encor en ma derniere audience
     de l'estime qu'elle faisoit de la boeste que le roy luy a envoyé, laquelle elle me monstra pendue et
     attachée à l'endroict de son cueur avec resolution de la porter jusques à la fin de sa vie. Elle trouve
     la royne trop grasse en son portraict et les yeux trop grans et desereroit bien en avoir ung vrayment
     ressemblant et s'il plaisoit à Sa Majesté envoyer celuy du roy et le sien de leur grandeur” (Jean
     Péricard: Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux, Bruxelles, 13 May 1618. Paris, Bibliothèque
     nationale de France, fr. 16131, fol. 312).
44
     Camille Desenclos, Les mots du pouvoir, t. 1, p. 67–73.
45
     Jean Péricard: Letter to Pierre Brulart, viscount Puisieux, Bruxelles, 27 December 1621. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 16134, fol. 248.


                                                     12
female governor can be noticed in its form. Both letters would have been written by men: each
diplomatic letter was prepared by the secretary of state and written by a clerk. The signature only was
appended by the king or the regent, when it was not counterfeited by a qualified secretary. Anytime,
the writing process remained the same. Secondly, while governing, women were considered, and
considered themselves, as sovereign, not as women. In the Spanish Netherlands, the Infanta kept the
sovereignty over the Spanish Netherlands, even after Archduke Albertʼs death in 1621, despite a
stronger Spanish tutelage. In Marie de Mediciʼs case, the regencyʼs principles prevented an absolute
takeover: the male or female regent was the custodian of the kingdom until the kingʼs majority— the
king remained the true sovereign. Therefore, a triple diplomatic correspondence was set up: the
diplomatic agents wrote, as usual, their weekly reports to the secretary of state but had to split their
correspondence to the royal power. As the monarch and the decision-making power were momentary
split because of the regency, a doubling of royal correspondence, between the king and the regent,
had to be established in order to facilitate the circulation of information.46 However, this doubling
was not always the rule. The diplomatic agents wrote only to the Queen Mother, and to the secretary
of state. As Marie de Medici ensured French internal and foreign policy, she imposed herself as the
sovereign in the diplomatic correspondence and revealed the nebulous nature of power during a
regency:47 functions were never institutionalised and depended on the political structure which had
been decided by the regent. Royal correspondence, however, did not work in the same way. It could
be signed either by the regent or by the king. Marie de Medici ensured, for example, all the
correspondence with agents such as Jean Hotman, 48 resident to the Protestant Union (1609-1614),49

46
     When Catherine de Medici's regency was established, an arrangement had defined this double
     correspondence: any letter to the king should go with a letter to the Queen Mother (Matthieu
     Gellard: Une reine épistolaire: lettres et pouvoir au temps de Catherine de Médicis. Paris: Garnier,
     2014, p. 108).
47
     Fanny Cosandey: La reine de France, p. 318.
48
     Jean Hotman: Letters from the French Court, 1603–1619. Paris, Bibliothèque nationale de France,
     fr. 4030.
49
     This direct correspondence with Hotman appears to be related to his mission in the Jülich-crisis.
     Marie de Medici wanted more probably to be perfectly informed about the negotiations between
     both claimed heirs, than to control the whole French Imperial policy herself. However, this cannot
     be fully confirmed. Only three French agents had been permanently sent to the Holy Roman
     Empire during her regency: Jean Hotman (Protestant Union: 1609–1614), Étienne de Sainte-
     Catherine (Palatine Court: 1612–1620) and Nicolas de Baugy (Imperial Court: 1601–1623). The
     diplomatic papers of Étienne de Sainte-Catherine contain only letters from the secretary of state,
     not from the regent or the king (Paris, Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 4121), and the

                                                    13
or Samuel Spifame, seigneur de Bisseaux, ambassador to the King of England (1610-1624),50 but she
wrote only a few letters to François Savary de Brèves, ambassador in Rome (1607-1614).51 The letters
to Brèves talked merely about secondary business like internal noble cases, i.e. recommendation for
noblemen, support for a request of marital exemption, and so on.52 This epistolary difference seems
to have been caused by the country in which the embassy resided. Unfortunately, the whole royal
correspondence has not been preserved for that time, as this was incumbent on the recipients, in this
case, the agents. The relationship with Rome was probably the most ceremonious but was also rather
peaceful at that time: the secretary of state alone could manage the cases and write official letters on
behalf of the king. For states like the Kingdom of England or the Holy Roman Empire, where the
French diplomacy was involved in the peace negotiations about the Jülich Succession (1609-1614)53,
Marie de Medici needed to arrange for herself information and orders. Her letters thus expressed both
diplomatic and ceremonial needs.
When the kingʼs majority was proclaimed in 1614, the epistolary ratio changed: each letter to the
Queen Mother now went with a letter to the king. The king, moreover, became the primary recipient.
When letters were sent to the Queen Mother at the same time, they referred to the letter to the king.54
Even the length of the letters changed: the letters to the Queen Mother barely exceeded one page,
whereas those to the king spread over several pages. The first letters however were not gutted. The
diplomatic agents outlined, even completed the letter to the king by their letter to the Queen


     diplomatic papers of Nicolas de Baugy appear to be lost.
50
     Samuel Spifame, sieur de Bisseaux: Letters to and from the French Court, 1611–1612. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 15986.
51
     François Savary de Brèves: Letters from the French Court, 1612. Paris, Bibliothèque nationale de
     France, fr. 3792.
52
     Marie de Medici: Letter to François Savary de Brèves, Fontainebleau, 13 June 1612. Paris,
     Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 3792, fol. 44.

53 In 1609, Johann Wilhelm, duke of Jülich-Cleves-Berg died and his only son, from a morganatic
    marriage, was not entitled to succeed him. Two of his nephews claimed for his titles and
    privileges: Albert Frederik, elector of Brandeburg, and Philipp Ludwig, duke of Palatinate-
    Neuburg whose son converted to catholicism in 1613. In November 1614, the conflict is ended
    through a French-English mediation and the treaty of Xanten signed. See Alison Deborah
    Anderson: On the verge of war: International Relations and the Jülich-Kleve Succession Crises
    (1609-1614). Boston: Humanities Press, 1999.
54
   “Madame, je rends comte au roy comme il a pleu à Vostre Majesté me commander de touttes les
   occurences de ceste cour” (François Jouvenel des Ursins: Letter to Marie de Medici, Rom, 23
   December 1614. Paris, Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 18009, fol. 350).


                                                   14
Mother55.The advantages of such a double correspondence nevertheless have to be questioned: the
Queen Mother still sat in the Council; she read the letters to the king as well and was involved in
answering. This double correspondence contributed towards an acknowledgement of the continuity
of Marie de Mediciʼs government56 but with a new status. Because of the kingʼs majority, Marie de
Medici had to give up her role as regent, and had lost her overwhelming power.57 Therefore, letters
had to be written by and to the king. However, by appointing his mother as head of the Council, the
king still entrusted her with royal authority and allowed her, indirectly, to maintain all her diplomatic
correspondence, although under his formal control.


After the “Coup de Majesté” in April 161758, Marie de Medici lost all power and came back to the
social and familial sphere. Her position, as expressed in the diplomatic correspondence, was now the
same as that of Anne of Austria (1601-1666), the young wife of Louis XIII (1610-1643). In January
1620, three letters were sent to Emperor Ferdinand II (1619-1637): one from the king,59 one from the
queen,60 and finally another one from the Queen Mother.61 In this epistolary exchange, both queens

55
     “J'ajousteray seulement qu'ayans tous lesdits princes monstré de croire que accomplissant avec
     Monsieur le duc de Bavieres les mesmes offices que j'ay passé avec eux, cela ayderoit grandement
     à l'effet pour lequel Voz Majestez m'ont renvoyé en Allemagne pour la grande creance qu'il a
     parmy les catoliques, je me destourne de mon chemin exprez pour l'aller trouver à Munich et luy
     declarer les bonnes proceddures et intentions de Voz Majestez pour l'affermissement de la
     tranquillité publique et specialement dans le Saint Empire” (Nicolas de Baugy: Letter to Marie de
     Medici, Augsbourg, 23 January 1615. Paris, Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 15927, fol. 18).
56
     Matthieu Gellard's analyse can be used again for Marie de Medici's case: “La présence dans les
     lettres de Catherine de Médicis de renvois à celles du roi a pour vocation de légitimer son écriture
     en l'articulant à celle du souverain – la lettre du roi est en effet la plus importante, celle qui ne peut
     disparaître tandis que celle de la reine mère n'existe que tant qu'elle-même se maintient au pouvoir
     […] La présence, dans les lettres du roi, de renvois à celles de sa mère légitime à son tour
     l'existence de ces dernières tout en leur laissant une place pour exister puisque la lettre royale ne
     dit pas tout” (Matthieu Gellard: Une reine épistolaire, p. 116).
57
     Fanny Cosandey: La reine de France, p. 319.

58 On April 24th, 1617, Concino Concini, Marie de Medici's favorite, was arrested and killed while
   Marie de Medici was exiled in Blois.
59
   Louis XIII: Letter to Ferdinand II, Paris, 10 January 1620. Vienna, Österreichisches Staatsarchiv,
   Haus-, Hof- und Staatsarchiv, Frankreich, Hofkorrespondenz 3.
60
     Anne of Austria: Letter to Ferdinand II, Paris, 12 January 1620. Vienna, Österreichisches
     Staatsarchiv, Haus-, Hof- und Staatsarchiv, Frankreich, Hofkorrespondenz 3.
61
     Marie de Medici: Letter to Ferdinand II, Angers, 22 January 1620. Vienna, Österreichisches

                                                       15
took no initiative; their letters followed the kingʼs by a couple of days. As a result of her past power,
the content of Marie de Mediciʼs letter was slightly more diplomatic, whereas Anne of Austriaʼs letter
only referred to the kingʼs letter for the diplomatic matter (the answer made to the extraordinary
Imperial ambassador, Wratislaw count of Furstenberg (1584-1631)),62 and ensured the Emperor of
her affection in a familial way.63 Marie de Mediciʼs letter detailed the content of the decision and
expressed her satisfaction with it:


         Nous avons receu la lettre que nous a apporté de vostre part un gentilhomme quʼa despesché
         vers nous le comte de Firstemberg que vous avez envoyé ambassadeur en France et avons esté
         fort contente de ce que le roy nostre tres honnoré sieur et filz sʼest porté à vous promettre le
         secours que lʼestat present des affaires de lʼEmpire desiroit de luy. Nostre absence pour lors
         nous a empeschée de contribuer à la resolution qui en a esté promptement prise, mais nous
         apporterons tout ce qui nous sera possible pour en advancer lʼeffect dʼaussy bon cœur que
         nous prions Dieu vous garder longues années pour la conservation du Saint Empire.64


But if Marie de Mediciʼs letter talked more about the French foreign policy, the Queen Mother did
not credit herself with the decision of rescuing the Emperor. She only, in a polite way, regretted not
having initiated this decision and ensured the Emperor she would spend her time in turning the
decision into reality. That however, did not indicate any new diplomatic activity from the Queen
Mother but was caused by epistolary politeness and European official benevolence between the major
European sovereigns. From then on, Marie de Mediciʼs letters have no intrinsic value. While they


     Staatsarchiv, Haus-, Hof- und Staatsarchiv, Frankreich, Hofkorrespondenz 3.
62
     Camille Desenclos: Les mots du pouvoir, t. 1, p. 443–450.
63
     “Nous remettant entierement à ce que le roy nostre tres honnoré seigneur et espoux escrit à Vostre
     Majesté et aux responces qu'il a faictes au sieur comte de Fustemberg vostre ambassadeur, nous
     l'avons seulement prié de vous asseurer de nostre affection en vostre endroict et du contentement
     que nous avons receu d'apprendre des nouvelles de la santé de Vostre Majesté, desirant
     passionnement qu'elle nous tienne en ses bonnes graces et qu'elle croye de trouver tousjours en
     nous les effectz de la bienveillance à laquelle nous sommes obligez par l'estroite liaison de sang et
     d'amityé que nous avons avec Vostre Majesté” (Anne of Austria: Letter to Ferdinand II, Paris, 12
     January 1620. Vienna, Österreichisches Staatsarchiv, Haus-, Hof- und Staatsarchiv, Frankreich,
     Hofkorrespondenz 3).
64
     Marie de Medici: Letter to Ferdinand II, Angers, 22 January 1620. Vienna, Österreichisches
     Staatsarchiv, Haus-, Hof- und Staatsarchiv, Frankreich, Hofkorrespondenz 3.


                                                    16
were equal to kingʼs letters when she was regent, they became again, like the letters from the queen,
diplomatic tools which existed only in order to support royal decisions.


As queens, women were, in French diplomatic correspondence, deprived of any personal diplomatic
status. They wrote on their own only about social or familial matters and were used as obliging relays
for their sonʼs or husbandʼs decisions. In this regard, their way of designating the king was
meaningful: “le roy nostre tres honnoré seigneur et espoux”65 or “le roy mon fils”66. The mention of
kingship always came first. They did not possess on their own any power and remained the kingʼs
subjects. They benefitted, however, from the kingʼs power in a passive but essential way: in defending
the kingʼs position in Europe. Womenʼs letters tended to confirm the role which the ambassadors
defined in their letters: a passive representative function in the European court society but with some
useful diplomatic impact. In the weekly diplomatic letters and reports, women were so referenced
only when they interfered with diplomatic practice. Diplomatic agents, however, wrote in their letters
only what needed to be known by their masters, and the early modern French diplomacy in the Holy
Roman Empire was, if not an exception, a particular case: because of the complex institutional and
confessional structure of the Empire and the specific issues of Bruxelles and Vienna Courts (in the
context of a remaining hostility with the house of Habsburg), the daily diplomatic practice did not
offer the same patterns as in Rome or even Madrid. The status, the household and even the diplomatic
activity were not as developed and so were the contribution of the ambassadorʼs wife. It matched,
albeit simply, the purpose of the diplomatic activity in the Holy Roman Empire and inserted itself
only on the daily level, not in the written sources as letters and reports were focused on information
more than concrete practice.


                                            BIBLIOGRAPHY

       ARCHIVAL SOURCES


      Archives nationales, ET/CV/267: Testament of Madeleine Galmet, 1626.
      Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 3792: Letters from the French Court to Jacques Savary de



65 Anne of Austria: Letter to Ferdinand II, Paris, 12 January 1620. Vienna, Österreichisches
   Staatsarchiv, Haus-, Hof- und Staatsarchiv, Frankreich, Hofkorrespondenz 3.

66 Marie de Medici: Letter to Ferdinand II, Angers, 22 January 1620. Vienna, Österreichisches
   Staatsarchiv, Haus-, Hof- und Staatsarchiv, Frankreich, Hofkorrespondenz 3.


                                                  17
Brèves, 1612.
Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 4030: Letters from the French Court to Jean Hotman,
1603–1619.
Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 4121–4122: Diplomatic papers of Étienne de Sainte-
Catherine.
Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 15927–15932: Correspondence between the French agents
in the Holy Roman Empire and the French Court, 1622.
Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 15986: Correspondence between the French agent to the
king of England and the French Court, 1611–1612.
Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 16125 and fr.16131–16134: Correspondence between the
French agent in Bruxelles and the French Court, 1600–1624.
Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 17891: Correspondence register of Jean Péricard, French
agent in Bruxelles, 1616–1624.
Bibliothèque nationale de France, fr. 18009: Correspondence between the French agent in
Rome and the French Court, 1614.
Bibliothèque nationale de France, Chérin 18: Genealogical records of the Baugy family.
Österreichisches Staatsarchiv, Haus-, Hof- und Staatsarchiv, Frankreich, Hofkorrespondenz 3:
Correspondence between the French and the Imperial Court, 1610–1710.


 SECONDARY LITERATURE


Anthieny, Johannes Paul: Der päbstliche Nuntius Carl Caraffa: ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der
Deissigjährigen Krieges. Berlin: Nietack, 1869.
Batiffol, Louis: “Le coup dʼÉtat du 24 avril 1617”, in: Revue historique 95 (1907), pp. 292–
308.
Bouteiller, Ernest de and Eugène Heppe: Correspondance politique adressée au magistrat de
Strasbourg par ses agents à Metz (1594–1683). Paris: Berger-Levrault, 1882.
Cosandey, Fanny: La reine de France: symbole et pouvoir XVe-XVIIIe siècles. Paris: Gallimard,
2000.
Desenclos, Camille: Les mots du pouvoir: les relations entre la France et le Saint-Empire au
début de la guerre de Trente Ans (1617-1624), PhD diss., École nationale des chartes /
Université Paris-Sorbonne, 2014.
Dubost, Jean-François: Marie de Médicis: la reine dévoilée. Paris: Payot, 2009.
Duccini, Hélène: Concini: grandeur et misère du favori de Marie de Médicis. Paris: A. Michel,

                                           18
1991.
Duerloo, Luc: Dynasty and Piety: Archduke Albert (1598–1621) and Habsburg Political
Culture in an Age of Religious Wars. Farnham: Ashgate, 2012.
Gellard, Matthieu: Une reine épistolaire: lettres et pouvoir au temps de Catherine de Médicis.
Paris: Garnier, 2014.
Garloff, Mona: Irenik, Gelehrsamkeit und Politik: Jean Hotman und der europäische
Religionskonflikt um 1600. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 2014.
Tallon, Alain: LʼEurope au XVIe siècle: États et relations internationales. Paris: Presses
universitaires de France, 2010.
Wyhe, Cordula van (ed): Isabel Clara Eugenia: female sovereignty in the Courts of Madrid
and Bruxelles. Madrid/London: Centro de Estudios Europea Hispanica / Paul Holberton
publishing, 2011.




                                           19
